Every child has the basic human right to be safe.
PROTECTINGthe Abused & Neglected Child
A Guide for Mandated Reporters
in Recognizing & Reporting
Child Abuse & Neglect

-- 1 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
12
1
1
5
6
9
9
11
11
12
Introduction
● 	Purpose of the Child Abuse Reporting Law
Recognizing Child Abuse and Neglect
● 	What are the legal definitions of Child Abuse and Neglect?
● 	Types of Abuse
● 	What are the signs and symptoms of Child Abuse and Neglect?
Potential Child Abuse and Neglect Situations
● 	Domestic Violence
● 	Corporal Punishment
● 	Unsupervised or “Latchkey” Children
● 	Failure to Obtain Medical Care
● 	Prenatal Substance Abuse
Newborn Safety Act
Reporting Child Abuse and Neglect
● 	Why should I report?
● 	Who must report?
● 	When should I report?
● 	What if I’m not sure I should make a report?
● 	What if the abuse occurred in the past?
● 	Who do I make a report to?
● 	What information will I be asked to provide?
● 	Must I give my name?
● 	Can I be sued for making a report? What happens if someone
knowingly makes a false report?
● 	What if I do not report?
● 	Should I tell the parents I made a report?
Responding to the Child
● 	How should I respond to a child who reports being abused
or neglected?
The Child Protective Services (CPS) Response
● 	What happens after a report is made?
● 	What happens if a report does not meet the definition of child
abuse or neglect?
● 	What services may be provided?
● 	What if a child must be removed from the home?
Questions and Concerns About Reporting Suspected
Child Abuse
● 	Will my name be revealed as the reporter?
● 	What is my responsibility after reporting child abuse or neglect?
● 	Will I receive feedback from CPS?
Legal Authority for CPS Investigation
● 	Release of Records to CPS
● 	Interviewing children
● 	Photographs
CA Resources
Help to Protect Our Children
Table of Contents
Protecting
the Abused
& Neglected
Child
A Guide foR MANdAted RepoRteRs iN ReCoGNiziNG & RepoRtiNG Child Abuse & NeGleCt
6

-- 2 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
Introduction
Every child has the basic human right to be safe. Child abuse and neglect threaten a child’s safety by plac-
ing him/her at risk of physical and emotional injuries and even death. Child abuse and neglect occur in all
cultural, ethnic, occupational, and socioeconomic groups.
While the true extent of child abuse and neglect is not completely known, The National Clearinghouse on
Child Abuse and Neglect estimates that, in 2005, 3.3 million reports were received by CPS agencies in the
United States alleging that children were maltreated by their parents or guardians. Nationally, approximately
1,460 children die each year as a result of maltreatment. During 2006, Washington State CPS received more
than 78,700 reports of child abuse and neglect, and more than 37,000 of them were screened in for investi-
gation or other intervention.
Parents have the fundamental right to raise their children, and our community presumes that parents will
act in their children’s best interest. When parents do not protect children from harm and put them at risk
of abuse or neglect, the community has a responsibility to intervene to protect the health and welfare of
children.
While everyone should be concerned about child abuse and neglect, certain professionals and other indi-
viduals are required by law to report suspected child abuse or neglect. This brochure is designed to serve as
a guide for understanding the child abuse reporting law. For further information, contact the Department
of Social and Health Services, Division of Children and Family Services (DCFS), CPS, or your local law enforce-
ment agency.
Purpose of the Child Abuse Reporting Law
The purpose of the Washington State law, Revised Code of Washington (RCW) Chapter 26.44, is to protect
children who have been non-accidentally injured, sexually exploited, or deprived of the right to minimal
nurture, health, and safety by their parents, custodian, or guardian.
While the State respects the bond between parent/guardian and child, the State does assert the right to
intervene for the general welfare of the child when there is a clear and present danger to the child’s health,
welfare, or safety. The State does not intend to interfere with reasonable parental discipline and child-raising
practices that are not injurious to the child.
It is the intent of the law that comprehensive protective services will be provided for abused, neglected,
exploited, and abandoned children found in Washington State. CPS aims to assist parents or persons legally
responsible for abused children to overcome the problems leading to abuse and neglect, strengthen fami-
lies, and improve the general welfare of abused and neglected children.
“Mandated reporters” are persons or groups of persons who have frequent contact with children and fami-
lies and are required by Washington’s State law to report suspected cases of child abuse and neglect to CPS
or to the appropriate law enforcement agency (RCW 26.44.030). It is the intent of the law that these desig-
nated persons, who are in positions to identify children who are at risk from abuse and neglect, will report
suspected child abuse and neglect so that the need for protective services can be assessed.
Recognizing Child Abuse and Neglect
Washington statute defines child abuse or neglect:
’Abuse or neglect’ means sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, or injury of a child by any person under
circumstances which cause harm to the child’s health, welfare, or safety… or the negligent treatment or
maltreatment of a child by a person responsible for or providing care to the child. (RCW 26.44.020).
Negligence is further defined as:
‘Negligent treatment or maltreatment’ means an act or a failure to act, or the cumulative effects of a
pattern of conduct, behavior, or inaction, that evidences a serious disregard of consequences of such
magnitude as to constitute a clear and present danger to a child’s health, welfare, or safety, including
but not limited to conduct prohibited under RCW 9A.42.100. When considering whether a clear and pres- 1

-- 3 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
ent danger exists, evidence of a parent’s substance abuse as a contributing factor to negligent treatment
or maltreatment shall be given great weight. The fact that siblings share a bedroom is not, in and of
itself, negligent treatment or maltreatment. Poverty, homelessness, or exposure to domestic violence as
defined in RCW 26.50.010 that is perpetrated against someone other than the child does not constitute
negligent treatment or maltreatment in and of itself. (RCW 26.44.020).
Types of Child Abuse
Physical Abuse:
Physical abuse means the non-accidental infliction of physical injury on or physical mistreatment of a child. Physi-
cal abuse includes, but is not limited to, such actions as:
1. 	Throwing, kicking, burning, or cutting a child;
2. 	Striking a child with a closed fist;
3. 	Shaking a child under age three;
4. 	Interfering with a child’s breathing;
5. 	Threatening a child with a deadly weapon;
6. 	Doing any other act that is likely to cause and which does cause bodily harm greater than transient
pain or minor temporary marks or which is injurious to the child’s health, welfare, and safety. (WAC
388-15-009).
Sexual Abuse:
Sexual abuse means committing or allowing to be committed any sexual offense against a child as defined in the
criminal code. The intentional touching, either directly or through the clothing, of the sexual or other intimate
parts of a child or allowing, permitting, compelling, encouraging, aiding, or otherwise causing a child to engage
in touching the sexual or other intimate parts of another for the purpose of gratifying the sexual desire of the
person touching the child, the child, or a third party. A parent or guardian of a child, a person authorized by the
parent or guardian to provide childcare for the child, or a person providing medically recognized services for the
child, may touch a child in the sexual or other intimate parts for the purposes of providing hygiene, child care, and
medical treatment or diagnosis.
Sexual Exploitation:
Sexual exploitation includes, but is not limited to, such actions as allowing, permitting, compelling encouraging,
aiding, or otherwise causing a child to engage in:
1. 	Prostitution;
2. 	Sexually explicit, obscene, or pornographic activity to be photographed, filmed, or electronically
reproduced or transmitted; or
3. 	Sexually explicit, obscene, or pornographic activity as part of a live performance, or for the benefit or
sexual gratification of another person.
Negligent Treatment or Maltreatment:
Negligent treatment or maltreatment means an act or a failure to act, or the cumulative effects of a pattern of
conduct, behavior, or inaction, on the part of a child’s parent, legal custodian, guardian, or caregiver that shows a
serious disregard of the consequences to the child of such magnitude that it creates a clear and present danger to
the child’s health, welfare, or safety. A child does not have to suffer actual damage or physical or emotional harm
to be in circumstances which create a clear and present danger to the child’s health, welfare, or safety. Negligent
treatment or maltreatment includes, but is not limited, to:
1. 	Failure to provide adequate food, shelter, clothing, supervision, or health care necessary for a child’s
health, welfare, or safety. Poverty and/or homelessness do not constitute negligent treatment or mal-
treatment in and of themselves;
2. 	Actions, failures to act, or omissions that result in injury to or that create a substantial risk of injury to
the physical, emotional, and/or cognitive development of a child; or
2
Learn
the signs
of child
abuse &
neglect.

-- 4 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
3. 	The cumulative effects of a pattern of conduct, behavior, or inaction by a parent or guardian in pro-
viding for the physical, emotional, and developmental needs of a child, or the effects of chronic failure
on the part of a parent or guardian to perform basic parental functions, obligations, and duties, when
the result is to cause injury or create a substantial risk of injury to the physical, emotional, and/or cog-
nitive development of a child.
Abandonment:
A parent or guardian abandons a child when the parent or guardian is responsible for the care, education, or sup-
port of a child and:
1. 	Deserts the child in any manner whatsoever with the intent to abandon the child;
2. 	Leaves a child without the means or ability to obtain one or more of the basic necessities of life such
as food, water, shelter, clothing, hygiene, and medically necessary health care; or
3. 	Forgoes for an extended period of time parental rights, functions, duties, and obligations despite an
ability to exercise such rights, duties, and obligations.
Abandonment of a child by a parent may be established by conduct on the part of a parent or guardian that
demonstrates a substantial lack of regard for the rights, duties, and obligations of the parent or guardian
or for the health, welfare, and safety of the child. Criminal activity or incarceration of a parent or guardian
does not constitute abandonment in and of itself, but a pattern of criminal activity or repeated or long-term
incarceration may constitute abandonment of a child.
Recognizing Child Abuse and Neglect: Signs and Symptoms
The first step in helping abused or neglected children is learning to recognize the signs of child abuse and
neglect. The presence of a single sign does not prove child abuse is occurring in a family; however, when
these signs appear repeatedly or in combination, you should take a closer look at the situation and consider
the possibility of child abuse.
The following signs may signal the presence of child abuse or neglect.
● THE CHILD:
 	Shows sudden changes in behavior or school performance.
 	Has not received help for physical or medical problems brought to the parents’ attention.
 	Has learning problems (or difficulty concentrating) that cannot be attributed to specific physical
or psychological causes.
 	Is always watchful, as though preparing for something bad to happen.
 	Lacks adult supervision.
 	Is overly compliant, passive, or withdrawn.
 	Comes to school or other activities early, stays late, or does not want to go home.
● THE PARENT:
 	Shows little concern for the child.
 	Denies the existence of—or blames the child for—the child’s problems in school or
at home.
 	Asks teachers or other caretakers to use harsh physical discipline if the child
misbehaves.
 	Sees the child as entirely bad, worthless, or burdensome.
 	Demands a level of physical or academic performance the child cannot achieve.
 	Looks primarily to the child for care, attention, and satisfaction of emotional needs.
● THE PARENT & CHILD:
 	Rarely touch or look at each other.
 	Consider their relationship entirely negative.
 	State that they do not like each other.
3

-- 5 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
4
Consider the possibility of PHYSICAL ABUSE when:
● THE CHILD:
 	Has unexplained burns, bites, bruises, broken bones, or black eyes.
 	Offers conflicting explanations as to how the injury occurred.
 	Has fading bruises or other marks noticeable after an absence from school.
 	Is frightened of the parents and protests or cries when it is time to go home.
 	Shrinks at the approach of adults.
 	Reports injury by a parent or another adult caregiver.
● THE PARENT OR OTHER ADULT CAREGIVER:
 	Offers conflicting, unconvincing, or no explanation for the child’s injury.
 	Describes the child as “evil,” or in some other very negative way.
 	Uses harsh physical discipline with the child.
 	Has a history of abuse as a child.
Consider the possibility of NEGLECT when:
● THE CHILD:
 	Is frequently absent from school.
 	Begs or steals food or money.
 	Lacks needed medical or dental care, immunizations, or glasses.
 	Is consistently dirty and has severe body odor.
 	Lacks sufficient clothing for the weather.
 	Abuses alcohol or other drugs.
 	States that there is no one at home to provide care.
● THE PARENT OR OTHER ADULT CAREGIVER:
 	Appears to be indifferent to the child.
 	Seems apathetic or depressed.
 	Behaves irrationally or in a bizarre manner.
 	Is abusing alcohol or other drugs.
Consider the possibility of SEXUAL ABUSE when:
● THE CHILD:
 	Has difficulty walking or sitting.
 	Suddenly refuses to change for gym or to participate in physical activities.
 	Reports nightmares or bedwetting.
 	Experiences a sudden change in appetite.
 	Demonstrates bizarre, sophisticated, or unusual sexual knowledge or behavior.
 	Becomes pregnant or contracts a venereal disease, particularly if under age 14.
 	Runs away.
 	Reports sexual abuse by a parent or another adult caregiver.
● THE PARENT OR OTHER ADULT CAREGIVER:
 	Is unduly protective of the child or severely limits the child’s contact with other children, especially of
the opposite sex.
 	Is secretive and isolated.
 	Is jealous or controlling with family members.

-- 6 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
Consider the possibility of EMOTIONAL MALTREATMENT when:
Emotional Maltreatment is not specifically defined in Washington State law. However, emotional maltreat-
ment may occur at the same time with other forms of maltreatment.
● THE CHILD:
 	Shows extremes in behavior, such as overly compliant or demanding behavior, extreme passivity, or
aggression.
 	Is inappropriately acting like an adult (parenting other children, for example) or inappropriately infan-
tile (frequently rocking or head-banging, for example).
 	Is delayed in physical or emotional development.
 	Has attempted suicide.
 	Reports a lack of attachment to the parent.
● THE PARENT OR OTHER ADULT CAREGIVER:
 	Constantly blames, belittles, or berates the child.
 	Is unconcerned about the child and refuses to consider offers of help for the child’s problems.
 	Overtly rejects the child.
Potential Child Abuse and Neglect Situations
Domestic Violence:
There is a high co-occurrence of domestic violence in cases of child abuse and neglect. However, a child’s ex-
posure to domestic violence in and of itself, does not constitute child abuse and neglect. Domestic Violence
is considered child abuse and neglect when it causes harm or creates a clear and present danger of harm to
the child’s health, welfare, or safety.
Corporal Punishment:
“Physical discipline of a child, including the reasonable use of corporal punishment, is not considered abuse
when it is reasonable and moderate and is inflicted by a parent or guardian for the purposes of restraining or
correcting the child. The age, size, and condition of the child, and the location of any inflicted injury shall be
considered in determining whether the bodily harm is reasonable or moderate. Other factors may include
the developmental level of the child and the nature of the child’s misconduct. A parent’s belief that it is nec-
essary to punish a child does not justify or permit the use of excessive, immoderate or unreasonable force
against the child.” (WAC 388-15-009)
“The following actions are presumed unreasonable when used to correct or restrain a child: (1) Throwing,
kicking, burning, or cutting a child; (2) striking a child with a closed fist; (3) shaking a child under age three;
(4) interfering with a child’s breathing; (5) threatening a child with a deadly weapon; or (6) doing any other
act that is likely to cause and which does cause bodily harm greater than transient pain or minor temporary
marks. The age, size, and condition of the child and the location of the injury shall be considered when de-
termining whether the bodily harm is reasonable or moderate. This list is illustrative of unreasonable actions
and is not intended to be exclusive.” (RCW 9A.16.100)
Corporal punishment is not permitted in public schools, foster homes, group homes, and other child-care
facilities.
Unsupervised or “Latchkey” Children:
Washington laws do not set a specific age for when a child legally can stay alone. Age alone is not a very
good indicator of a child’s maturity level. Some very mature 10-year- old children may be ready for self care
while some 15-year-old children may not be ready, due to emotional problems or behavioral difficulties.
Failure to Obtain Medical Care:
Failure of a parent or caregiver to provide needed health care treatment for a condition that, if untreated,
could result in illness, developmental delays, or endangerment can be reported to CPS as suspected medical
neglect. Children with medically diagnosed diseases or disabilities or under the care of a medical practitioner
are at increased risk for medical neglect. 	5

-- 7 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
6
When
children
disclose,
take them
seriously.
Prenatal Substance Abuse
In 2003, Congress enacted the Keeping Children and Families Safe Act, which requires each state to develop
policies and procedures “to address the needs of infants born and identified as being affected by illegal
substance abuse or withdrawal symptoms resulting from prenatal drug exposure.”
In Washington State, health care providers are mandated reporters and are required to notify CPS when
there is reasonable cause to believe a child has been abused or neglected. If a newborn has been identified
as substance exposed or affected, this may indicate child abuse/neglect and should be reported. It is critical
that mandated reporters provide as much information regarding issues/behaviors, risk factors, or positive
supports that were observed during the interaction with the family.
Newborn Safety Act
The Newborn Safety Act is an act relating to the safety of newborn children. The Legislature’s intent in pass-
ing this law was to assure abandonment does not occur and all newborns have an opportunity for adequate
health care and a stable home life. The Legislature intends to increase the likelihood pregnant women will
obtain adequate prenatal care and will provide their newborns with adequate health care during the first
few days of their lives.
This law allows the parent to transfer a newborn (less than 72 hours old) anonymously and without criminal
liability if the transfer to a qualified person is at an appropriate location. A qualified person is defined as “any
person that the parent transferring the newborn reasonably believes is a bona fide employee, volunteer, or
medical staff member of the hospital and who represents to the parent transferring the newborn that he or
she can and will summon appropriate resources to meet the newborn’s immediate needs; or a fire fighter,
volunteer, or emergency medical technician.”
An appropriate location is defined under this legislation as “the emergency department of a hospital
licensed under chapter 70.41 RCW during the hours the hospital is in operation; or a fire station during its
hours of operation and while fire personnel are present.” (RCW 13.34.360)
Reporting Child Abuse and Neglect
Why should I report?
The purpose of mandated reporting is to identify suspected abused and neglected children as soon as pos-
sible so they can be protected from further harm. CPS cannot act until a report is made. Mandated reporters
play a critical role in preventing any future harm to children. Without detection, reporting, and intervention,
a child may die as a result of severe abuse or neglect, or remain a victim for the rest of his/her life.
Reporting should be regarded as a request for an investigation into a suspected incident of abuse or neglect;
a report does not necessarily constitute a proven fact – it is the raising of a question about the condition or
state of a child. Making a report can begin a process that can help parents learn to care for and protect their
own children.
Who must report?
Anyone who has reasonable cause to believe that a child has suffered abuse or neglect can, in good faith,
report. If you are identified as a mandated reporter, you are required by law to report your concerns to the
local Children’s Administration (CA) office, Child Abuse Hotline or law enforcement.
State law RCW 26.44.030 requires the following people to report:
● 	Medical practitioners (licensed health service providers, including: podiatrists, optometrists, chiro-
practors, registered or licensed nurses, dentists, osteopaths, surgeons, physicians and religious healing
practitioners)
● 	Professional school personnel (including, but not limited to, teachers, counselors, administrators,
child care facility personnel and school nurses)

-- 8 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
7
● 	“Social services counselor” (anyone engaged in a professional capacity during the regular course
of employment in encouraging or promoting the health, welfare, support or education of children, or
providing social services to adults or families, including mental health, drug and alcohol treatment,
and domestic violence programs)
● 	Coroners, medical examiners and licensed pathologists
● 	Registered pharmacists
● 	Licensed or certified child care providers or their employees
● 	Department of Social and Health Services employees
● 	Juvenile probation officers
● 	Law enforcement
● 	Department of Corrections employees who become aware of possible child abuse or neglect dur-
ing the course of their employment
● 	Staff of responsible living skills programs or HOPE centers
● 	Staff or volunteers in the Family and Children’s Ombudsman Office
● 	Any adult who resides with a child suspected to have suffered severe abuse
● 	Any supervisor with a nonprofit or for-profit organization which has a reasonable cause to believe
that a child has suffered abuse or neglect caused by a person over whom he or she regularly exer-
cises supervisory authority provided that the person alleged to have caused the abuse or neglect is
employed by, contracted by, or volunteers with the organization and coaches, trains, educates, or
counsels a child or children or regularly has unsupervised access to a child or children as part of the
employment, contract, or voluntary service
When should I report?
If there is reasonable cause to believe that a child has suffered abuse or neglect, the report must be made
at the first opportunity, but in no case longer than 48 hours. The report must include the identity of the ac-
cused, if known.
What if I’m not sure I should make a report?
You should discuss the situation with your local CA office or Child Abuse and Neglect Hotline. If you are in
doubt about what should be reported, it is better to make your concerns known than to remain silent and
possibly allow a child to remain unprotected.
What if the abuse occurred in the past?
The reporting requirement does not apply to abuse or neglect that occurred during childhood if it’s discov-
ered after the child has become an adult. However, if there is reasonable cause to believe other children are
or may be at risk of abuse or neglect by the accused, the requirement does apply.
Who do I make a report to?
CA offices in local communities receive and investigate reports of suspected child abuse and neglect. CPS
Intake staff receive reports either by phone, mail, or in person and assess these reports to determine if the
report meets the legal definition of abuse or neglect, and how dangerous the situation is.
Each school district has child abuse or neglect reporting protocol. Check with your local district to find out
who to report to. Remember, the law requires a mandated reporter to make a report or CAUSE a report to be
made.
CA offers several ways to report abuse: 1-866-EndHarm (1-866-363-4276)
● 	Daytime: Contact a local CA CPS office. A local CPS office can be located on the following link:
https://fortress.wa.gov/dshs/f2ws03apps/caofficespub/offices/general/OfficePick.asp
● 	Nights & Weekends: Call the Child Abuse and Neglect Hotline at 1-866-ENDHARM (1-866-363-
4276). This number is Washington State’s toll-free, 24-hour, 7-day-a-week hotline for reporting sus-
pected child abuse or neglect.
● 	Information about reporting abuse and neglect of children can be located at:
http://www.dshs.wa.gov/ca/safety/abuseReport.asp?2

-- 9 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
8
What information will I be asked to provide?
Reports to CPS or a law enforcement agency MUST contain the following information, if known:
● 	The name, address, and age of the child and parent(s).
● 	The nature and extent of the child abuse or neglect.
● 	Any information about previous incidences of abuse or neglect.
● 	Whether the mother or father is of Indian ancestry.
It is extremely important to provide information about risk and protective factors. This information will assist
the Intake worker in determining whether the situation meets the legal definition of child abuse or neglect
or risk of imminent harm. Examples of this information include:
● 	Extended family members.
● 	Family strengths that can help the parent(s) care for and protect the children.
● 	Parent’s(s’) socioeconomic status.
● 	Parent’s(s’) resources and family strengths.
● 	Previous history of mental health disorder.
● 	History of substance use.
● 	Parent’s(s’) response to interventions, etc.
If a crime has been committed, law enforcement must be notified. The name of the person making the
report is not a requirement; however, mandated reporters must provide their name in order to satisfy their
mandatory reporting requirement.
Must I give my name?
As a mandated reporter, you are required by law to report. When you give your name, it will be documented
that you have met your legal obligation to report suspected child abuse or neglect. This also makes it pos-
sible for CA to contact you later if additional information is needed.
Can I be sued for making a report?
Any person who in good faith makes a report or gives testimony in regard to possible child abuse or neglect
is immune from civil or criminal liability. Any administrator of a hospital or similar institution or licensed phy-
sician taking a child into custody, such as in the instance when a hospital hold is warranted, is also immune
from liability (RCW 26.44.060)
What happens if someone knowingly makes a false report?
The law seeks to prevent reporting that can occur as a result of family or neighborhood disputes. A person
who, intentionally and in bad faith, knowingly makes a false report of alleged abuse or neglect shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the RCW (RCW 9A.20.021).
What if I do not report?
Under Washington state law, mandated reporters who knowingly fail to make a report, or cause a report to
be made, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor (RCW 26.44.080).
Upon receiving a report of alleged child abuse or neglect, the law (RCW 26.44.030) gives CPS access to all
relevant records about a child in the possession of mandated reporters and their employees.
Should I tell the parents I made a report?
The law does not give you a choice about reporting, but you don’t have to tell the parents about your CPS
report. If you choose to inform the parents after you have made the report and CPS has made contact, it’s
important that you be honest. Often parents will respect your honesty, even though they may disagree with
the position you’ve taken. You might explain that you are required by law to report all situations of neglect
or injury to children caused by questionable or other-than-accidental means.

-- 10 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
9
You can describe filing a report of suspected child abuse or neglect as “making a referral to request help
and services for the child and family.” Making a report is a way to protect the child from further harm and to
improve family relationships.
There may be some instances in which you will not want to inform the parents of your report to CPS. These
instances include: a situation when the child’s safety would be jeopardized by the parent’s knowing the child
has disclosed information to you or when a child is in imminent danger and you believe the parent might
run away with the child.
Responding to the Child
How should I respond to a child who reports being abused or neglected?
DO:
 	Remain calm. A child may retract information or stop talking if he/she senses a strong reaction.
 	Find a private place to talk without interruptions.
 	Put the child at ease by sitting near him/her, not behind a desk.
 	Ask permission before touching the child. Touch may be associated with physical or emotional pain in
children who have been physically or sexually abused.
 	Reassure the child that he/she is not in trouble.
 	Use the child’s vocabulary.
 	Let the child know what you will do: “We need to tell (name). He/she knows how to help children and
families.”
 	Support the child: “I’m sorry that happened to you.”
 	Do what you can to make certain the child is safe from further abuse.
DO NOT:
 	Press for details. You do not need to prove abuse or neglect.
 	Ask “why” questions. These questions require children to explain actions that they may or may not
understand.
 	Promise that you will not tell anyone about the child’s disclosure of possible abuse or neglect.
 	Ask leading or suggestive questions.
 	Make angry or critical comments about the alleged perpetrator. The child often knows, loves, or likes
this person.
 	Disclose information indiscriminately, keeping in mind the child’s right to privacy.
 	Make the child feel different or singled out.
 	Investigate a case yourself. Call the police or CPS.
The CPS Response
What happens after a report is made?
When suspected child abuse or neglect is reported, CA Intake staff determines whether the situation de-
scribed meets the legal definition of child abuse or neglect. In order for CPS to intervene, the report must
meet the legal definition of child abuse or neglect, or there is risk of imminent harm to the child.
Referrals that contain sufficient information may be assigned for investigation or other community response.
CPS investigations include the following:
● 	Determining the nature and extent of abuse and neglect.
● 	Evaluating the child’s condition, including danger to the child, the need for medical attention, etc.
● 	Identifying the problems leading to or contributing to abuse or neglect.
● 	Evaluating parental or caretaker responses to the identified problems and the condition of the child
and their willingness to cooperate to protect the child.
● 	Taking appropriate action to protect the child.
● 	Assessing factors which greatly increase the likelihood of future abuse or neglect and the family
strengths that serve to protect the child.

-- 11 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
If a child is of Native American ancestry, CPS staff must follow the requirements of the Indian Child Welfare
Act, state laws, and the WAC.
Reasonable efforts are made to assure the abused or neglected child is protected from further experiences
and conditions that are detrimental to healthy growth and development, and to assure the child will receive
the essentials for well-being and development either in the child’s own home or in appropriate substitute
care.
What happens if a report does not meet the definition of child abuse or neglect?
When CA receives information that does not meet the definition of child abuse or neglect and CA does
not have the authority to investigate. Intake staff document this information in the systems database as an
“Information Only” referral.
If CPS decides not to respond and you disagree with this decision, you may discuss your concerns with the
Intake Supervisor. When a case is not appropriate for CPS, you may consult with the local CA office for sug-
gestions or guidance in dealing with the family.
What services may be provided?
CPS provides services to abused/neglected children and their families without regard to income. Reha-
bilitative services for prevention and treatment of child abuse are provided by the Department of Social
and Health Services and other community resources (there may be a charge for these services). Services to
children and families may include:
● 	Home support specialist services
● 	Day care
● 	Foster family care
● 	Financial and employment assistance
● 	Parent aides
● 	Mental health services, such as counseling, for parents, children, and families
● 	Psychological and psychiatric services
● 	Parenting and child management classes
● 	Self-help groups
● 	Family preservation services
What if a child must be removed from home?
Emergency Situations – Protective Custody Procedures: Law enforcement may take a child into protec-
tive custody without a court order in emergent situations where there is a clear and present danger to a
child’s health, safety, or welfare. Probable cause must exist to believe the child is abused or neglected, and
the child would be injured or could not be taken into custody if it were necessary to first obtain a court or-
der. CPS and law enforcement are authorized to interview children wherever they are located and to photo-
graph a child for the purpose of providing documentary evidence of the child’s physical condition.
Children taken into protective custody are generally placed in shelter care and their parents notified imme-
diately. Unless there is reasonable cause to believe the health, safety, or welfare of the child would be jeopar-
dized or efforts to reunite the parent and child will be hindered, priority placement for a child in shelter care
shall be with any person related to the child, as defined under RCW 74.15.020(2)(a).
If legal action is required, the parents/guardians have the right to proper notice and summons, to be a party
to legal proceedings, and to legal counsel. The child has the right to have a guardian ad litem or counsel ap-
pointed.
CA social workers must identify a child as Native American early in the case activity. Such early identification
is necessary to ensure compliance with requirements of the Indian Child Welfare Act and the involvement of
the tribe in the development of the case plan.
Physicians or hospital administrators may detain a child without the consent of the person legally responsi-
ble for the child, whether or not medical treatment is required, if they have reasonable cause to believe that
releasing the child would place the child in imminent danger. If a physician or hospital administrator makes
10
CA
offers
several
ways to
report
child
abuse &
neglect.

-- 12 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
a decision to detain a child, he/she must notify CPS or law enforcement as soon as possible and in no case
longer than 72 hours.
CPS shall, upon notification, assess the need for the child to remain in protective custody. If the child cannot
be safely returned home, CPS will notify the parents, place the child into temporary shelter care, and file a
petition with the Juvenile Court. A shelter care hearing will be held within 72 hours, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays, to review the need for out-of-home placement.
CPS will also explore less restrictive and voluntary options with parents who are available and able to partici-
pate in planning for the continued safety of their child.
Questions and Concerns About Reporting Suspected Child Abuse
and Neglect
Will my name be revealed as the reporter?
RCW 13.50.100(7)(c) permits (but does not require) CA to delete the name and identifying information of
persons reporting allegations of suspected child abuse or neglect. CA generally does not delete the names
of mandated reporters, but does delete the names of other reporters. However, CA will delete the name of
a mandated reporter if it appears disclosure of the name will create a risk of harm to the reporter or to the
child. Even where a reporter’s name is deleted, a family may be able to identify the reporter. Additionally, if
the case is brought into court or to an administrative hearing, the reporter’s identity may be revealed either
during the judicial/administrative proceedings or earlier, if the juvenile, his or her parents, the juvenile’s at-
torney and the juvenile’s parent’s attorney, requests the information.
What is my responsibility AFTER reporting child abuse or neglect?
Most often, CPS and/or law enforcement will investigate the report independently and may not require
any further assistance from the reporter. Occasionally, court action is necessary, and in some instances, the
reporter may be asked to testify in court regarding his/her personal knowledge of the facts of the case.
Will I receive feedback from CPS?
Mandated reporters may request information about the decision to investigate and receive a brief summary
of CPS activity in response to the referral. CPS may not divulge further information about the child or family
unless there is a continuing service plan and the reporter is a professional helping to treat the child abuse or
neglect issue.
Legal Authority for CPS Investigation
Release of Records to CPS
CPS may request records about a child kept by mandated reporters for review during a CPS investigation.
RCW 26.44.030 (11) grants CPS the authority to access these records.
Interviewing the child without parental consent and outside the presence of the
parents.
RCW 26.44.030 (10) states upon receiving reports of alleged abuse or neglect, CA or law enforcement agency
may interview children. The interviews may be conducted at: school premises, day-care facilities, the child’s
home, or at other suitable locations outside of the presence of parents. Parental notification of the interview
must occur at the earliest possible point in the investigation that will not jeopardize the safety or protection
of the child or the course of the investigation.
Prior to beginning the interview, CA or law enforcement agency shall determine whether the child wishes
a third party to be present for the interview and, if so, shall make reasonable efforts to accommodate the
child’s wishes. Unless the child objects, CA or law enforcement agency shall make reasonable efforts to
include a third party in any interview so long as the presence of the third party will not jeopardize the course
of the investigation.
11

-- 13 of 16 --

A Guide for
Mandated
Reporters
c o m m u n i t y p a r t n e r s h i p s • w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r
Photographs
Washington law allows the CPS worker to take photographs of a child for the purpose of documenting the
physical condition of the child (RCW 26.44.050).
CA Resources
● 	Medical Consultation Network
CPS, law enforcement, prosecuting attorneys, Washington State Attorney General’s Office, and health
care providers can access expert medical consultation on cases of child abuse or neglect.
Contact Child Protection Medical Consultant’s at: 206.987.2194
After Hours: 206.987.2000
The University of Washington contracts with CA to offer this service through a statewide network of
practicing physicians. Training on issues of child abuse or neglect is also available.
● 	Child Protection Teams (CPT)
CPS has CPTs in every community who volunteer to staff cases, review issues, and assist in treatment
planning for child victims and their families.
● 	Family Team Decision Making (FTDM)
FTDMs are held whenever a decision needs to be made about where a child should live. The meetings
are facilitated by trained social workers within CA and are attended by biological parents, extended
family members, caregivers, community members, service providers and social workers. FTDMs are
designed to build a “team” of individuals which will work together to increase child safety and create a
network of support for the child and the adults who care for the child.
For Families and Youth
● 	Families and Youth in Conflict
Families who are in conflict or who are experiencing problems with at-risk youth or a child who may
be in need of services may request Family Reconciliation Services (FRS) from CA. The purpose of FRS
is to preserve, strengthen, and help families. The range of services are provided to develop skills and
supports within families to maintain the family as a unit and prevent out-of-home placement of ado-
lescents. FRS is free, voluntary, and family-focused.
Help to Protect Our Children
Abuse and neglect place children at great risk of physical and
emotional injuries and even death.
Take the following steps to help:
● 	Know the signs of child abuse and neglect (see page 2).
● 	When children have the courage to tell you about abuse or neglect, take them seriously.
● 	When you suspect or know of incidents of child abuse or neglect,
contact your local CPS office or your local law enforcement agency.
● 	You may also contact:
1.866.EndHarm (1.866.363.4276)
This toll-free, statewide number is available 24 hours a day.
Hearing impaired inquiries may be directed to:
TDD: 360.902.7906 (Weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
TTY Callers: 1.800.624.6186 to place a direct TTY call.
12

-- 14 of 16 --

PROTECTING
 
the Abused & Neglected Child
t o r e p o r t c h i l d a b u s e & n e g l e c t c a l l : 1 - 8 6 6 - e n d h a r m
PHOTOGRAPHIC DISCLAIMER: The images in this document are purchased stock photo images which are meant to be representative
of our clients and the individuals who provide services. The individuals appearing in the photographs are models only and the use of their likeness
in no way implies that they are victims or perpetrators of child abuse and neglect or that they are recipients of DSHS services.

-- 15 of 16 --

DSHS 22-163 (Rev. 11/08)
END1-866-363-4276
Washington State Department of Social and Health Services
DSHS TOLL FREE
1-866 -
Voice/TTY Accessible
CHILDREN’S ADMINISTRATION

-- 16 of 16 --

