I am, I am by the ballot for the House. Yeah. Yeah. You know, 20 years ago, I look like Hillary Clinton because I, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was never. About you. Now? Yeah. You never waiting on that? Okay. We can get it started once again. I don't think the first part of class recorded. I apologize anyway, anyone watching late. Night. Uh. Okay. Uh, just since the last slide, we didn't go over. Regarding the professional identity counselor stuff, is that, um, there? This is just for information about licensure. When you get that, if you want to look into that. And this is the website for the contact. Um, by also someone. So this is one of the links where you can find a supervisor someday that's post-graduation. But I also wanted to let you all know that the Washington Mental Health Counselors Association is another good organization to join. That specific just for Washington is not associated with the ACA. But I talked to a couple of you about the fact that they have their conference this May, um, right here in SeaTac. So that's a, uh, really good local one to go to if you're looking to, to go to a conference. Um, I'm not sure they have a student rate, but I'm guessing they do typically, uh, typically a student rate is offered, which is significantly less. So take advantage of that. Um. I think they haven't had one in quite a long a while, so I think they only offer them every few years. So that is one more opportunity for you. Okay. So we're going to go into chapter one and talk about ethics. So the the chapter start out by asking like assuming that you are or that we are all ethical and moral people, which is why we need to study things. So I just wondered, you know, what comes up for you when I ask that question? And I think it's something that you think is required, and that is a topic for sustainable. Uh, uh, not everybody it the same way. And they know that we can provide for them and make a decision. So, um, I think that, um. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Good. Yeah. That's a great, uh. Any others? Yeah. That's good. Okay, so there's a lot I feel like I'm talking a lot this week, but we will get into some, like, case studies and stuff. But just to give you kind of an overview of some definitions, um, legal standards are that we'll talk about like sometimes there's, uh, legal absolute and sometimes I won't even, sometimes I'll say, I'm not sure we'll need to check like the legal fees, but those are kind of the minimum behavior that a society will tolerate. Right. But that's what our, uh, state or the federal laws have said. Okay, this is these are the requirements that, um, to professional counselors in this situation need to follow. And then ethical standards typically are defined by a, um, by the profession. Right. And so that's what the ACA code of ethics is. It's like this is the minimum behavior that other counselors to tolerate. So, uh, counselor or your clients can say you can report counselors to the board if they feel like they're not following either those things, the laws or the ethical standards of the profession. And then but best practice is something we'll talk about, too. And that is kind of what would be the, the, uh, ideal for counselor practice, right. Or something to strive for or, you know, those high ethical, um, uh, virtues and code and, uh, and, um. Codes that are not just codes but become part of that. So, um, ideal for counselor practice and so kind of thinking about, um, maybe not. It wouldn't be, uh, oh, counselors might, it might be a little bit different, but it also is like, okay, what is the best practice? It might be different if it's from counselor to counselors. What. But kind of going beyond just the minimum requirements. And then some other definitions. We'll talk about our personal values. So this is influenced by family and culture and community and beliefs. And there's some variety here on your personal values. And then professional values are defined by the group. So counseling like you said AC starts by talking about professional values. Right. And then virtue ethics. Um, our character traits of an individual where principle ethics are agreed upon assumptions by members of a professional group. So part of this class is kind of introducing you to okay, this is what our profession values. This is kind of the history of the profession and how they define what counselors have said. These are the things that are important. And again, this part of our identity as a counselor. Um, when we think about counseling practice and kind of going back into like best practice versus following the laws, this is this picture is in your book. And I do think it's kind of a good, um, thing to kind of go back to that when you, um, having ethical dilemmas or things that you are trying to decide in your practice. It is kind of like the core is is who you are, right? If you think about your core, like has to be strong. Um, we our hope is to develop flexible character. Right. But who are you as individuals to have courage to act on convictions? And, um, also some people internally to, to balance the different challenges that come up with decision making, self awareness, um, things that really are internal moral principles and virtues that some of that comes from your identity as a counselor, some of that is just kind of core of who you are, and then you're balancing those things in your decision to intimate conversation. Supervision might never work in isolation. Um, getting like professional development, reading articles, talking to people in the field, having a conversation, and then also balancing, of course, your own understanding and research. And you know what's written down in laws, code of ethics and your system policies. So that might be, you know, your organization. So often I say, well, talk to your supervisor because your organization may have a, a policy around this beyond what's stipulated and for example, the ACA code of ethics. So personal values apply broadly, of course, to both the personal and professional functioning of counselors. And they serve to help us know what is good or right behavior. Um, and of course, like we said, they are influenced. But one of the, uh, influenced by the culture that we're in. But one of the challenges that we have in counseling is you guys are already aware of that. We're tend to not impose our values. So there's a case example, I think the first one in the chapter of, um, a counselor who's challenged to be like, oh my goodness, I'm working with a client who really is different and like, opposes my beliefs, you know, and and that will happen, you know, that you have may have different political values or even, you know, things that are offensive to you. And how do you handle that as a clinician? It was one of the challenges. Um, okay. So thinking about professional values before we kind of go into counseling, here are some other professions. And so just kind of think broadly. Um. Talk with your partner about one of these. So maybe I will just have about what comes to mind. You can even Google it. If you look at the US Army professional values and there will be something. So let me get, uh, just like a minute to. And maybe if the, um, front of the room can take like the for the last four and the back of the room can kind of take the first three or so, 3 or 4, and then we'll come back together. So people says like the profession of landscaping. Well, what does the profession, uh, the Red cross that you probably come up in your mind, but just chat with a partner so they can get a sense of what this might be. The professional values that. You. Know, I, I. Hear. You say that. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. So we need that money. So if I did that need to. Go. Into the real wrap up. Right. Yeah. I know. Um, okay. I hear a little shout out I'm sure we could spend more time on. This, um. But the US Army guys are really found professional. Maybe. Yeah, this is pretty good. Um, what about the Red cross? That's one that I know that more than. 30. Good. Yeah. What about. And. I think you that. You write good. Um. What about call me and I just that what a lot of work that doesn't make it easy. Yeah. Just creativity. Creativity. Yeah. Sustainability. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And sustainable products. Yeah. Um, what about interior design? Yeah. Uh, integrity and honesty. Um, that's the first thing that came to mind. Yeah. Right back inside the, uh, uh, customer guard the like ability. And we thank you for your time and respect to figure out their idea. Of who you that you're working individually up and over time. What about landscape? Making things with knives. Uh, I mean, I am of the Asian Pacific. Reservation. Yeah. Okay. And the history system in our civic education. Yeah. Good. So you can see, like, the reason people go into these things or something. Maybe they drive into these fields, right? That might align with themselves. But, um, and groups kind of do have they, do they have values that they say okay. You're going to be part of our company or part of our organization. This is this is who we are, right? And so counseling has that too. Um, does anyone. Is anybody coming from a second career that they had professional values from a different career? I don't know about that one. Um, I think some of the insurance up around it. I think about what I think about. Yeah I believe. So. We don't trade everything for your. Health and safety. And you know how we treat students. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. I used to work here and about to use a holiday to reduce the cost as much as possible. For efficiency. And I'm saving money. Yeah. So in counseling, these are what the ACA defined. And we'll have it'll be interesting to see if there's been any changes. I wouldn't think there would be in these like core professional values. Um, that the preamble starts off with it's enhancing human development across the lifespan. So again, you're already seeing that human development is coming out again honoring diversity. So cultural competency and multicultural values, um, again embracing a multicultural approach, promoting social justice, safeguarding the integrity of the counselor kind relationship and practicing competently and ethically. Are the things defined as professional values in our code of ethics? Um, any surprises there? Don't see. Me? Um, okay. And then ethics kind of broadly again, is this discipline within the within philosophy that's concerned with human heart conduct and decision making? Um, it is it refers to conduct which is good or right for counselors as a professional group. So, uh, it's it's, uh, it's kind of helping us detail what are the right behaviors. And they've actually been codified in this big document, the ACA Code of Ethics. Um, and it should guide our professional behavior that, uh, we're signing off in, uh, you know, license and things like that, that we are going to be following professional business counselors. And theories of ethics, uh, have been around for a long time, and they're used to help make decisions. So there's, um, ethical decision models, um, to help us work through contemplating. Okay, what's the next best step in this ethical challenge that I'm facing? Uh, it basically answers that question. What should I do? You know, when I'm faced with, you know, what to do about a client? Who should I disclose or not? What's happening with them? Should I, um, you know, how do I, uh, treat, like, bring in family members who do? How do I? There's all kinds of questions that will kind of face this. And so this is so again why they're important that helping us decide what kind of an appropriate kind of action is ethical. Um, they help enable ethical, uh, resolution to dilemmas. Um, and so again, we must read and understand that could have pandemics as kind of our primary and the, um. Document that we are looking at to help decide, but. Um, and even though we can have good intention, intention to violate an ethical principle or a law, we can get into big trouble, that we can have our licenses revoked or, you know, be sued or all kinds of things. So it's always, um, when you make a decision, it's actually helpful to refer back to the ethical. Code of ethics to say, well, the act of ethics says this. Um, and so that's why I made the decision like that. So. And so again, kind of more broadly, they've existed for a long time. And then the principle ethics are also defined in the ACA code. And those are autonomy and not non Maleficent's beneficence justice fidelity and veracity. So those are the six that we're kind of going to dive into a little bit deeper. They allow us to uh, think of these are words that kind of have a lot of nuance and meaning to them. And so those are the words you're going to choose when to kind of dive deeper in later in the semester. And um, so to get us started today, I want you guys to look at, um, the, the words as they're defined in our textbook on pages 12 and 13 and review the case of Gabriela concerning principle ethics, and think about which ethical codes come into play. Um, and then if you get through those two questions, you can think about other ways that might apply. But I'll go around and, um, we should define all the principles, but I'll give you one that I want to be able to, like, explain that, uh, so that we can kind of talk about all of them and you can start getting an understanding of kind of the meaning and how they might play into a case. So I'll give you some time. You can get into groups again. That can be, um, you know, 3 or 4 people. Um, define the principles and review the case on page. Um, in the case of Gabriella. Um. It is such a start. Thank you. Okay. Yeah. Gabriella, did you guys see the case in capital 18? Page 13. Okay. I must have. Okay. Okay, great. So, yeah, you guys can get started, and, uh, I'll go around and give you a principle or two that you'll talk to the class about to. Um. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, I grabbed the old buttons. I needed that do more than. I thought. But I can see 500 and. 50. But. Not one. Hundred percent. Yeah, like. Oh, yeah. Oh, you mean how's it one? Oh, yeah. I mean, I don't. Know. It's. You. Wouldn't believe. In you. Know and I promise. You. But I don't know what you're. Talking. About. Not even close. Go. Are you okay? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's the only thing. I if you like. Come with me. Or do you like me? Oh, you better not. You. Don't see the point. That I did. And I encourage you not to read the discussion. I mean, everyone says it tells you the answer. But if you have, you can add to it. You're much smarter than the text. So. That's. The point. Which is why there are a lot of people. Which? Is. Why I say I love you, I love. You. I love you. I mean, that's how you know. That's what's happening here. You don't even know. What? The others say like. I'm not sure, you know. Yeah. That's because. The other one is here with other people. But in this case, I. Feel like you. And I know what that looks like. I don't. Know why I'm. Saying that. In some sense. But yeah, I. Think I believe. In. God. I don't, I don't. Think so. I think. That's what it is about what you can do. Yeah. Exactly. What I'm. Going to do with this? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. And these. Are the. Negatives and. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well. I think I think a. Lot of. Them. When. They're going. To upset. But I think I'm going to. Do you know. Why not. Yeah. You know. And I'm. Not I'm not alone. In that order. Um, I know that it was like. A good. Idea. Yeah, that's how it goes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know what? I. Mean. And I. Like that. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah, yeah. How about what do you want to do? For him. In that situation. So. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I. Mean, I think we. Have. Everybody. I really. Just like the offer. You know, I don't. Know who will be more interested. In how you. Like them. But we'll see. Three. Years old. Yeah. But then you're sorry. Oh my God. Oh. Yeah. Oh. Yeah. Well, you know, you can kind of see where I. Am wondering if you would. Like us to like you. Know. Like this. Yeah. You have the. You know, I would like to think that it was harder. Than some. Of you are. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know you live here. I know, yeah yeah yeah. Oh, yeah. Because. I think. You are right here every day, so I. Feel very. Oh. Really? Uh, so I think. She would love you, I think. If you give me your phone. And I would. I. Would love. To. Hear from you. Yeah, I. Hear. What you're saying. That's really. What they just like but not open. Yeah. So. You really. Want to keep it? Yeah, yeah. Okay, let's come back together and see what you all have come up with as you consider this. And I know I am just talking to a couple groups, I know that there's a lot of. I know this and also like. But what about this thing about, um, we will get into like knowing more about the laws around this and the ethics around this and the things we would need to figure out. But thinking about these different principles, specifically, how do they come into play in this scenario from what you can tell? So I think I so I don't remember who I was saying, but why don't we just go through all six of them? And if I said, can you talk about these ones like speak up and define the principle and then talk about how you, what you guys talked about in your, uh, discussion about how it might apply to this. Okay. So the first step is autonomy. Yeah. Okay. Go ahead. So we talked about like every time we explained the we want to do within. Um, and so can talk about, um, the situation and we have to step in and talk about this. This is a task that you have, uh, in the current situation. Yeah. Um, and, um, even approaching the subject of this one in relation to the decision to change them at whatever time you update, you first. Uh, yeah. So what is it? I mean, you guys. Like. Yeah. You know, the Salvation Army of San Francisco, they have. Yeah. I haven't had time to be able to say no. If you say stop. Uh, put it back together again. Yeah. Okay. What about 9/11? Um, so, um, um, like. He he he worked. With me for 40. That's what he was trying to achieve. What he. But. Isn't that interesting? This is. And this might be. They might have different conclusions or contention. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But either way, it's. Just like. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. Those questions are just as important in the process of coming to understand that. Okay. Anyone else have some. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Um. Vanessa. Okay. Yeah. Um, I mean, so when a person is effectively, um, working in a way of thinking about society's benefits. And so if they if. It was challenging because you need a few more details. Um, like, you know, if there's a situation where you have your boyfriend, she has other girls that been and would like to cater according to the system. Um, actually, at that place in the news report, it became about the importance of like that in advance. But if you shared something that, um, you wanted to me, I would have to like, translate like, before. So I think the more people that are getting that focus on benefiting. You know. What? I mean. But I think we're approaching a pretty similar ride in that there should be more questions. Yeah. One thing for me is I feel like it's beneficence, which is why I do like the system or the art form or ideology that tends to heat up too much for justice. Um, and that's where I have a little bit of a hard time. Yeah. Did you say that? I didn't say that. Exactly. Yeah. Um, where, uh, just, uh. You guys over here? Yeah. Um, we we left, um, um, just this, um, in the center of for, um, nothing like the clients are doing the crossword and, like, wanting to make sure that they're, like, working collaboratively to come up with a plan that they both feel like, comfortable with. Um, and they feel like people from both sides in that, that, you know, the client is getting a say. So maybe it's like three options, a different route that you can take. When it came to the Grand Prix, um, and asking her what she worked for for the agency. I feel like she gave a voice. Mhm. That's great. Yeah. Thinking about just giving. Yeah. It's like, uh. That's a great like parenting, right? Like give your kids options. Like you can go to they have or you know. Those are just uh. Yeah. Giving options is always nice. So, um, from the time general's. Come to talk about. Uh, and. Other. Things is one thing. Um. I got to pay respects and get involved and give special credit to someone special and treating them differently than you, because you have a long term relationship and you don't want to think you know us hard enough to make a decision. What do you think? I mean, Very discriminatory practices. And I would say that you're more likely to be harsh on certain populations. You have to be aware if you actually. And fidelity just a little bit for just. Yeah. Because what I feel, for example, because she is key. Yeah. My love for her justice is, I think is most important because the protection that means to someone, someone who is a counselor is actually gave because she is already for money, which is to show something can trust somebody. It's kind of like for the, for the, um, for the counselor is it just is to put up the scale. But how is it that I feel that way? You just need to protect her because she really needs. Uh huh. Yeah. And by law, she's a vulnerable population because you're under a certain age. And then there's justice for children. Uh. Fidelity Municipality. Okay. Yeah, I think a few of you get to have it. Yeah. Uh, so I don't think it is like, uh, volunteer work. So I think you know all this. Trust me. But I have to share that with you. Is like, uh, he does that trust. So, going back to. Work. I heard that you didn't know that yet, but they're putting together and then figuring out, like, what is the best report to do with you, but it's like you can volunteer to work. This is what I promised you. But, um, you have to make it into the informed consent document that you guys are doing right. Um, yeah, exactly. Did you guys have anything to add? I think we can say that. That is. That is how I think we should be thinking about this. You know, we've built up this trust in our relationship, and, uh, and yet our duty as counselor is to report in situations like this, you know, start that relationship, for example, gathering. Um, and so bringing that to the client, you know, uh, um, collaborating in partnership, keeping them, uh, in uniform and to, uh, to hear them. Um, and how do we know how can we work together to meet those ethical duties, but also about, you know, still maintain and strengthen the trust? Yeah. More good. Okay. And then we want to be truthful and transparent and, uh, really think the scenario as you just kind of still have my answer. Oh, they overlap sometimes as we see. Yeah. But, um, but just really, really reinforcing that. At the moment, she's really upset. You don't want anyone to know, but then have to lean back on the consent and then obviously profusely apologizing. But, um, Peter actually brought up a great, um, way to go for possibly with, um, Danielle in this scenario. Uh, that would be appropriate. You can then obviously make a repair, possibly if you go to the forest seemingly at that point of being like, hey, yeah, I know this sucks, blah blah, blah, but would you like to be a part of going forward with this, um, reporting this story? Yeah. Yeah. I think you disclosed it. That's great. I like how several of you have thought about, like, maybe there's more than one way to go about it. You know, can we give some options? And then if we have to do something the client prefers, we didn't do. Yeah. Okay. Well. Great job. Any other thoughts about any of these or. All right. So yeah. Kelly and then. Yeah. Well, the fact that, uh, you know, the number eight that you have reported, but if she's licensed under age group, that exactly does work. Yeah, that's a lot of it as well. Yeah, that's important to mention that that balance that we would happily say it's right there. I thought it was a lot less than the one. I think that's something. I really thought about it. I just like to work with myself. But, um, I do think in the long run, it's kind of like, uh, you can kind of like the theme of what? Do you like what you have. You know, it's a lot of fun if you kind of like through the network each year, like, you know, like the contest or, you know, challenge in some ways like that. But I do feel like my counselor. Like you feel like that, you know, this is what I see these online going to be like when I presented as a black person again, like not being like, this is what I have to do today that's not working with her. And then also wondering like, get to a point they have to before you of course do like some significant harm to happen that you tell their plan like, hey, I can't let you in on. That. So yeah. So make sure you think about that so that they. Yeah. If they're on. You know who is really into it. Especially if it is the point where you can meet your or you can discuss with them with that same session. Sometimes that depends on how much information you get. And it is okay to say, I need to control my blood. Um, yeah. Sometimes you want me to find that there are some people. Telling you the other day, in the morning I had. A conversation and my 20 minutes recommend that. You. Some places were. Planning for and ended up with. Do you? Recommend that as a direct. Question. How do you. That is the point, right? That's a good point. Yeah. We'll get into like, uh, it's a little like age of consent for the. Uh, so that, uh, was accomplished and make sure that that a lot in program. Um, but it's certainly consideration. So that. To keep in mind. Who are you? Why? Am I the question about come up with. Sorry. What's that? Actually. What's that? So? How do you do that? I'm always like this, I just mean. You have too many things on your mind. Okay. Um, yeah. So why code of ethics again? Like, it helps us all have again, kind of a similar, uh, the same starting point. Help us to have accountability. It helps us to refer back to something. It helps to protect, um, the profession from the government by, um, you know, allowing the profession to regulate itself, basically, you know, we come up with a lot of lot of, like, rules that the government then doesn't have to force upon us. Um, promote stability and safety, like people know what to expect, right? When they say when they're going into counseling, they're like, okay, especially if they've done it before. Like, I know what to expect here. Um. Yeah. And just to serve as a catalyst for ongoing improvement of practice. As we can see, there's a new paramedics coming up. So here are some other examples of ethical codes. Of course the ACA um ethical standards. There's also the Arc has a code of ethics. That's the um Christian counseling arc, the American Association of Christian Counselors. So that's more specific Christian counseling. Um, there's guidelines for counseling supervisors. There's the MFT. That's marriage and family therapy. Um, there's another one. American Mental Health Counselors Association and ethical stands for school Counselors. Um, the MFT counseling. So you can see there's a lot the Canadian counseling code. The main one that we work under is the ACA code. And so that's kind of the one, um, that we want you to know, but in your papers, I do, you know, have that question of like, where do these principles show up in other codes? So you can use these for others to kind of look at that. So when you actually look at the code, um, it is. Did you guys find it in your text? It's near the end. It's like 400 and. It's appendix A, so page 135 37. Sorry all the way to 469. So it's quite long. I mean it's I would I wouldn't take it all in one chunk either. I would read it but just like kind of go through it. And as you go through this class, um, we'll go be studying different sections. Um, so, you know, read the section that we're on for that week. And, um, and just point, I would say just like highlighting things that stand out or questions that you have or like, what does this mean? Um, just so that you are familiar with it, but you can see how it starts out, um, like we've talked about with professional values and also professional, um, uh, principles. So ethical principles. So those are kind of in the preamble. And then they get into the specifics. And these are a section, a few. Uh, uh, you can see like I said, we were actually one of the first ones to come up with, um, counseling technology and social media. So it is in there as of 2014, probably really 13. It was written. So there's been a lot of changes. Right. And so it'll be interesting to see what our profession comes up with. Um, and if there's other things, uh, but there's ethical codes around supervision and research and publication around assessment. Um, and then, uh, relationships with other professionals. And then the next few weeks we really talk about confidentiality and the counseling relationship. So and then even how to resolve ethical dilemmas. So um, principle ethics like we've talked about, refer to the professionally agreed upon obligations that are always considered in ethical decision making. That's what we just talked about. And then virtue ethics, we're moving a little bit now into um character traits are virtues. So they assume that professional ethics involve more than just, um, moral actions, but actually who you are as a person. And so, um, that is something that I think is, you know, really important for us to consider and comes up right. As you're going through our program, this question of who am I? Should I be? What does that mean? How much control do I have about this? And, you know, I think a lot of times you see, in our, um, society, we get tied up in maybe like, you know, which side of the aisle are you on or like what, what do you believe about whatever fill in the blank issue, you know, gun control or school choice or whatever, but that the question of character virtue really comes into play almost for everyone. Right. And thinking about like, what character virtues are important to me. What does that mean to me? How does that play out? And maybe my actions and my beliefs. So, um, one of the reasons I like this class is it does challenge us to kind of look at that stuff, right? And think about who should I be? It's also something that comes up in counseling, right? Like when people are faced with an ethical decision, one of the questions you can talk to them about is like, well, what what are your values about? Like, who is it for you? What is it that you believe in? You know what's important. You know what? Uh, virtues. Do you want to live out in your life? So not just from a Christian perspective necessarily, but everybody has this, right? Like what is important to you? So, um, and then. Yeah. Virtue ethics assess to consider virtue over emotion dictates. And um, also and this is this little thing we're going to watch talks about how people have different strengths of character. And um, they've done tests. We've talked about this a little bit when we talked about positive psychology about, you know, Wiccan virtues are important to different people. And how do you can you develop virtues over time if they are important to you? So we're going to take this is just a this is kind of a positive psychology. You have it. I'm sorry. Okay. Here. I think this is. Giving. Natural language. And. It's just a signal. And. Okay. These days. But anyway. So. Yeah. Any thoughts about that? You know, how does that come into play when we are considering ethical decisions? Um, you know, it's kind of. But, you know, who are we looking? Yeah. It'll be interesting to watch. Thank you for that. Um, it's really just again, the picture came out when you, uh. You are the council. I think you got that clothes, which is? We absolutely. Two different people came together. We don't know anything about each other. And we trying to communicate with the women in this club to try to find the connection between what we like or any how we pause and how we like making our will. Um, I will say non-verbal connection of anything else. And this is very unique. That's why I think it came to me from the characters, like who you are, and to find you need to be in a very strong, funny school for this result, which is, um, to meet another person with his values and to know that if we are both different. Um, that's that's kind of unique. Yeah. I mean, you know. Yeah, there's, you know, I just encourage you all to think about, you know, what character strengths are important to you or the things that you want to focus on this semester. So there's a free character strengths test that I just want to share with. You. You like it? Yeah. What? Do you think of that? Um. Interesting. Yeah. I think that's an interesting thing. He said there are things you can do to actually to change a character to. I mean, you have to work on the and the important with us. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. I was trained in the. Okay. Yeah. Anyway, one thing they talk a lot about is particularly in Western culture, the emphasis has to be on like, what am I wearing? Those things like, how do I do, like, what am I going to sell? Like, you have to be careful with how you present that 20% of in time. The professionals tend to be like they're part of natural consumption. So I think that we have like a deficit, um, mentality. Um, yeah. And heavy implication is accentuated. Yeah. It tends to requirement for resources that elevate your body very often. Yeah. Thank you, thank you. Um, um, I think this is a reminder of, like, a really complex mindset for, like, traits that, um, like strengths and weaknesses that you and others counselors because, uh, I don't want to give us up. [INAUDIBLE]. Because, um, yeah, there's like, the different strengths, but then it's not just like, oh, well, but you don't have that strength. And it's like, it's good. We all have, you know, people occasionally speaking into their lives and like, oh, you have this with another person does, but you don't. And the fact that you can grow focus it or those like you can do it, bring those of you, you know, just like you have these but not those. And then another person. But that's not really I. Think. Yeah. So I encourage you all to um, to look at those if you want and we'll, uh, we'll kind of choose, um, but look at some of these ethical codes throughout the semester. As we look at some of that, we get into the actual code of ethics and how they're reflective. Um, yeah. The oh, and I, I did I if any of you are interested, I did find the other books these are too great like, um, integration books that kind of have to do with it. This one is like it's more counseling supervision focused and it's called Developing Clinicians of Character. And it's, um, I really like her perspective. So we'll talk about that. And then this is a book I just came across. She's a she has her doctorate from Duke on medieval, um, scholarship and poetry in contemplative writing. And so it's kind of a deep book, but it looks at like medieval understandings of some of these words, which I thought is really interesting. Um, just from, uh, if you're like, you want to if you like that kind of thing, it's, um, it talks about virtues and vices and how historically we've, uh, um, well, yeah, how we thought about those and kind of not in and out of popularity over the years. But anyway, uh, the final thing that we'll talk about today is legal issues. So of course, I we'll get more into details about this. But counselor practices are always affected by the law. And we must be able to recognize and know how to seek legal advice. Um, so again, having community, having supervisors, having even a lawyer to be able to reach out to you if you ever need to, to ask legal questions is important. Um, and is the kind of minimum requirement. So it's important that we know about what the laws are. Um, these are again, we've talked about this, but consultation, supervision, getting professional development, continuing education wise and the code of ethics and your system policies within your organization are all support structures to help guide you in making ethical decisions. Um, kind of uh, uh, some other like directory services, of course, you're first kind of person to ask, is your directory nicer if you have, uh, a legal question or like, what is this? Maybe your supervisor can help you. Yes. Yeah, actually, if you have this is another benefit of having liability insurance. But they do have a hotline that insurance companies can call and talk to an attorney for free. And, uh, agencies should if. You work for an agency? Um, usually you don't have to pay for legal advice because usually the agency is required to have or has some connection with a lawyer. So, um. Yeah. Okay. And then finally your book. I know we're at 930, so I'm going to stop talking him. Um, but you guys look at one more thing before you go. But your book at the end of chapter one has a, um, steps in making an ethical decision, a model for you. So it is, um, important to keep in mind, of course, culture and your emotions. But this kind of takes, uh, you through step seven of an ethical decision model. First is to identify the problem and decide is it a legal or clinical issue? To involve your client in the decision making process. So like you guys actually came up on your own with that a lot of in your comments with this, of course, you're always thinking about building the relationship, and usually involving your client can help you do that and review the ethical codes. Consider principles and virtues. Uh, not just what to do, but who you want to be in this situation, turning into your feelings. So this isn't to be ignored. A lot of you come with some strong intuition when you get into this field. Um, and recognizing also like you have feared, you have counter transference. Is this person reminding you of someone? Could you be and, um, should you be making the decision? Because maybe you are being triggered in some way. That's really an important right, uh, thing to keep in mind and consult with colleagues, consider the context, culture and such. Um, are there ramifications and then for families and communities and then you make a decision that it's not just like, oh, there's a problem, let's make a decision. You go through these questions, so I'm going to give you guys and just you can use the rest of this time to kind of think through this ethical decision model and um, choose one of the cases we already did, the one on page six, right? This that's when we did care was page six. So um, or 13. Sorry. Thank you. Is it 13 was the one we already did. Okay. So, um, why do we not do 13 but do the other like, choose one and, um, yeah, just to work through. We don't we don't even have to come back together, but just spend a few minutes, you know, I don't know, 15 minutes at least chatting about things, working through that model, thinking about the what is the primary concern here? What would I need to know, you know, looking at this model to get to that decision point. Yeah. And again, if you can don't look ahead with yourself. So yeah you're working groups. Um, I'll come around and check in and. Yeah. Well you guys feel like you've exhausted all you are exhausted in that scenario. You're free to go. So thank you. And. I think you have.