You. Know. Yeah. So. Just to make sure. I. Mean. You know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I said that. Oh. Yeah. Mhm. You know I don't know. If you. Guys have the time. I. Have the opportunity to play in. The paper. Yeah. Yeah. Good job. I hope you like it. I hope to. Be. Able to. Work together. Yeah. Yeah. I know. All right. I don't, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. And. I was like. Yeah. Well, I mean, you know. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh. You know. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Thank. You for. Your time. Okay. Uh. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I think I would like to tell them. Yes. For a. Well, let's talk about the continuation of treatment. What is it? Well it's continuation. It's the one. So it's talking about continuation treatment. You know. What what is in that scope of consideration. Because if I go on vacation, if you're having a crisis, just call. Or if you just call because I consider yeah, that's just the crisis, right? Like we ended up right. You know what? Else has. Not. Happened yet. If something happens, you know you have to. Have a. Plan prior to. Okay. So. No. Other place for you to go out there, right. So. So it's a plan. You have to know this also make it. Okay. Because I think you like illness. Like that's. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. So at the highest level it's having because of this person. Yeah. And here's our state during times of crisis even. The people who think that, you know, the. Answer is yes. Having a crisis. Right, right. Right. Yeah. Thank you. Okay. Yeah. So I. Mean, I said you. Know, we took a very. I do. And why am I so in your. Heart isn't it? Yes. Yes yes yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes, yes. What do. You say? Well, uh. Yes yes yes yes yes. Yeah. All right. Now. Let's look at it together so we can have already talked about the first one avoiding harm. Right. We don't act to avoid react to avoid harm. Um, it's always research participants, and we don't impose our values. Um, this next section, termination and the first. What stood out to you guys about this section six and eight, 11 and 12, actually. Well, from the play 11. When can we terminate or offer? Yes. Um, so there's no question. But, uh, many of these really lingering, uh, differences between like, uh, we because we don't like the certain policy values and different things. But if we're not committed, yes. We're not completely defensive area like, uh, maybe sort of, you know, specialized in this thing and you're not. And then we, you know, try to specialize in it. Was that okay? That was. Yeah, that's a good question. This is okay. So this week I'm curious to see what they do in these next um, this next round. But it says that if we have that confidence um, uh, so if councilors lack the confidence to be professional assistance to clients, they avoid entering or continuing counseling relationships. Um, counselors are knowledgeable about culturally and clinically appropriate referral sources and suggest these alternatives if they decline the suggested referrals, counselors discontinue the relationship. So offering referrals if you do lack confidence in an area is appropriate. And we have to seek training like this. Next, when is we refrain from, uh, referring current or prospective clients solely based on personally held values, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors? Uh, because again, respecting diversity and seeking training in areas, uh, where we are at risk of an opposing, um, value. So again, like being aware of your bias in where, where you might impose beliefs and, you know, always be talking about that. I think that's what it looks like being supervision fit training. Talk about how to have other counselors dealt with this kind of a thing. Um, but certainly there is room for termination and referral, uh, if we are not providing assistance. So that's a pretty broad, you know. Yeah. Just their joy. Um, example, if you are not, um, if you're not specialized like me or if, uh, but one of the things like Google comes in the conversation. Yeah. Like after you referred them out or you would prefer to seek training or is it okay to, you know, it's okay to leave and you should leave the expertise to other counselors if that's not your specialty area, we cannot be, you know, and except for the the further you go, you know, the more you have to specialize. And you can you can say, oh, this is great. These are the clients. I think, you know, this is what I specialize in. And you can't discriminate against them. I mean, what they say about the value of cultural differences, things like that. So that's the kind of thing we need to get trained. With that. Yeah. Yeah. Is there a case where your approach based off of cultural or or other things because the same with harm. So I'm like curious as to like, do we just try and or training and do all this other stuff in between sessions and when you're potentially creating a risk for harm, like I'm confused as far as the timeline goes, yeah, it's important to be seeking supervision and consultation within that to figure out why. And, you know, there is you can't discriminate based on like even before we see them, but also that distinction of if you're going to start taking someone as a counselor. Yeah. Feel like you have the resources to help them, you know, be able to get those, you know, from your supervisor. Yeah. Um, yeah. Yes. Let's go from what you were saying before. I'm going online and I'm a counselor, and they know, counselor, and we think that they specialize in an issue. And I like this guy. So and I reached out to this guy and have to tell you something. He couldn't even though he specializes in this. You like that? You really think? No, I don't think you have any sense of humor. I mean, I don't need to disclose that. And he has room for you, you know, in. General. And it's okay to specialize like they do. Say it says. But. Right. You kind of you have to hold those two in, in and intensify them and we'll look at you. Yeah. So. It's. Your gender. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Inclusive. Yeah. I don't have the appropriate type but I because I know this talks a lot about the protection of the client, but we were talking a little bit further. Yeah. And like where it might be other people helping us out where I don't know, I haven't read this entire thing and, um, but I did search through and I didn't seem to think. Is there a separate thing? Yeah. There you go. Uh, like that we have the right to, if we ask. So if a counselor is at risk, it is a reason for referral. Okay. Um, I don't know if it's in the ones I just gave you about. I know I talked about that. You say that if there is, uh, risk for the for the bad commission, either from the client or from the client, some of the client, and that is it. Yeah. So, like, for example, if we if I were to prove LGBTQ community and I'm seeing someone and they're extremely homophobic, that's causing harm to me emotionally but not for, you know, would that be grounds for me to be like, hey, actually, this person talks about the community that I belong to and about all the time. That's the problem of it. Like, would that be appropriate to the business of him, to your to your emotions, to. Yeah. Like they're causing this by their homophobia that face first viewing and in a thing you know, does that qualify as harm or did that feel like physical threat or it's typically like not values that, you know. So that is a space that it could be it could be tricky. Right. Um, like super misogynistic or what. Like that. Right. The very hard. Right. Yeah, I've done it, but I haven't had to see them multiple times like I'm done or I'm like their first and last meeting, you know, handing you off just on the right, you know. Yeah. But. Right. Yeah. That's that's kind of it. Yeah. Living with the tension of having a client that has really different views on you. But even our friendships. Yeah. Now if they are threatening physically or, you know, really attracted to you or something and they're kinda doing inappropriate stuff and things like, yeah, then that becomes something that they can not clear about. But then it has to do with their perspective. You get like, yeah, at what point is right. Yeah, yeah. And there's also this like we have to also be also screening for um impairments. So there is that like if it's causing emotional problems for ourselves then seeking help and also limiting terminating professional responsibility so that it could be a problem to that, you know. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. So I'm curious kind of like as you say, is there a definition somewhere in Ethics of Heart because it sounds like there might be a, there might be an argument. He said that harm for us is physical, whereas for a client it could be because of all of what we're saying. Right? Because none of us are going to like, uh, hopefully physically threaten our client. But the reverse could be said, right. So if we're somehow violating ethics by harm, I just I know it seems kind of vague. Yeah, it is an interesting place because we are and we get into the informed consent stuff later, but we are actually considered a, um, great. Let's look at the terminology. He. You just want anything from the home like we are. Um, they're hiring us to be an advocate for them on some level. Right. They are. Like we're responsible for safeguarding our client's welfare. And so we have a fiduciary relationship that says looking for that we are acting on their benefit. So that chapter four step, um, and so that's why it's a little different like what they're expected versus but we're right. We're expected to be for their the for their benefit. They're not expected to do that for us. And so it does put a lot of pressure on them. Yeah. To do them well right. Um so I am hearing is that there are different definitions of harm for us versus the client. What's happening? Yeah, I don't want to say that. Okay, maybe the answer is. What is it that there is? There are different kinds of money. Right. Right. Yeah. So I think that it's important to talk about that, because certainly if it gets us to a place that we're not affected with that quite often. Yeah. That's why I asked if there is a definition of harm within it. Yeah. Yeah. And even this process of like, figuring your internship, like, what culture do I associate with? Well, you know, what is a good fit for me? You know, and not that we can't, you know, be in a place that stretches us to. But, you know, if somebody points out, um, some services that are, you know, geared towards, you know. Yeah, I think I could, um. Okay. So, yeah, we'll keep talking about these things. Boundaries of competence. We only practice within the boundaries of our competence. So, you know, that is right again. Multicultural competencies are expected for everyone. But, um, we've also practice within what we're trained and licensed to do. But, um, we only practice in specialty areas once we've gotten training and supervision. Um. So. Yeah. All right. So we have a couple of examples here that. Yeah. Uh. Pretty well let's see. All right. So let's look at a couple examples. So this example Raphael Council and the juvenile court system is designed to work with a young man who has problems relating to authority figures. This client constantly ridicules and insults police administrators and other authority figures or can mean refs. After making several unsuccessful attempts to develop rapport with the client and after consulting with his supervisor. That's good. Now, if you are determined that he's not able to establish a therapeutic for this man with the permission, he refers the client to another counselor who has a record of success in working with challenging, um, people who have difficulty relating to authority figures. So what do you guys think? Is that an appropriate referral? Inappropriate for a pretty picture. Well, um, I have not been. Able to see him for many years. They no longer need assistance, or their medications are not benefiting, particularly for him. But that doesn't mean that they don't treat them. Right. So you would say yes and you would disagree. All right. You can always be ahead of appropriate referral. Um, you want to avoid harm. And and again specialization is required. This guy has a lack of confidence in this area. So that's good. I think, uh, definitely there's a conflict in this first semester of internship. He tells the site supervisor that he's been seeing an interracial couple the last few weeks, but feels a bit uncomfortable because he was raised with the interracial marriage is wrong. So that's incorrect. So he definitely. Should get some training in that, right? So that's a personal value that might differ. Um. So the possible action is at. So an awareness is good right. Is bringing that to supervision. And so he could learn by asking to have you know the A session to have the supervisor present or um go to work some. Counseling you. So again, we refrain from counseling or referring solely on person health values to folks. All right. This is a really great case study, if you like to look at it. Um, let me get through these next slides for so we get through them and then I and then we can go back and maybe we'll see if we have like how much time it might bring us to the end. But I want to make sure we get at least to chapter three. And I give you a little bit of information about the, uh, informed consent stuff for next week. I think next week we'll talk more about that chapter. There's not a lot doesn't there's not a whole lot in that chapter. But just like figuring out what is informed consent. Uh, but just to kind of finish off this discussion. Um, there's several you know, your text talks about this course of several cases within the Carson profession of not denying counseling services to someone based on a sexual orientation. Um, so referrals must be based on competency, not values. So, um, referrals the last resort, but, you know, kind of some of these discussion point, uh, sometimes clients might benefit from other clinicians who have backgrounds in working, you know, more with this population, but that isn't a reason to prefer someone up there. It's not even the reason that they have a different sex or not only the focus of treatment. Um. Yeah. So that's been. Clear. And then the other thing that comes up that I wanted to mention in your text is that it takes up accreditation. Uh, there was a, um, discussion in the literature between Smith and Hagedorn and, uh, ourselves and. Yeah, so and Hagedorn and, uh, the setting up, which I think is, is not the same. And they went back and forth about should pay credit credits like good accreditation to religious institutions if they have, uh, statement about gender and things like that. And so, um, there's a so they, you know, those are kind of interesting to fostering. First of all, if you're interested. But counselors must not deny that any group receiving competent counseling services based on differences of sexual identity, gender, race, religious values. There's a connotation of any distinction of distinction. So, um, yeah, that whole discussion of like the right to exercise religion personally and in groups that faith institutions was affirmed. Uh, and also, uh, you know, no, obviously no, um, denying groups. So those articles, interesting to read. Um. I talked about this, but consult with colleague literacy for of ethics journal articles. Uh, this work exclusion and Embrace is something that was referred to in some of this discussion about, um, how to balance, like, religious identity and Catholic identity. And, uh, I this is he talks, um, about, uh, the the dangers of otherness and intergroup strife and, and dangers of exclusion and this challenge to be distinct and yet belong. And it's all really deep. He comes from, uh, Croatia, I think, um, where he was a religious minority during the Balkan Wars. And so he's had a lot of experience with, like, the extremes of exclusion. Um, and talks about the importance of embrace. So one of the things I like that he talks about is giving the importance of like an ear, like the importance of listening to others, that just this requires a voice like you have to be able to allow people to speak, but you also have to have someone that hears you. So a lot of people is allowing for that space. I guess, you know, when you're thinking about this challenge of sitting with somebody who has very different opinions than you, like, recognize that you are, um, promoting justice in providing an ear for people that. To. So, um. Yeah, this idea of double vision that, um, that we're behind your own values, but also, uh, have a high level, uh, differentiation between myself and others. Um, so those are some things to think about. So in that light, we can look at this case study, um, on page 75 and imagine this with your client and identify your beliefs and opinions about what you think would be best for Amber. Um, which values should you be aware of and identify cultural identities for Amber? So spend some time thinking about your own beliefs and what personal values come up for you when you read this case study? You know. The. You know you don't. Want me discussing it there? Yes. Yeah. So that you can find the best way to share your biases. No, no, no. I mean, okay, so let's get you there. I found myself. Yes. So. What happened? I. Haven't. Heard from. You. Uh. I know, you know. I forgot. It's. All right. I know, yeah. Uh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like I said, you know. Some. Of the things you do. Yeah. And. How do. You how do. You. How do. You think of. Something. Like this. Website. You know what? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. That. Is what? I. Was. Thinking. I. Hope. So. I hope you're all. Right. I don't. Know. Why? I didn't want to. Hurt. You. I love you. And I know it's important. To you. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. I knew that I. Was. Like. Oh. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. And that's what. I like. Ah. You know, I was with him. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I. Think that's. Because he knows that I'm. Kind of. Like you. Know. So I was. Like. Oh, my. God. Okay, you know what it's like, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Because that's. What? It. Is that. It's a. You. Can. Write it like that. I have no. Idea. I know, you better. I mean that. Doesn't mean that you know what you're talking about. Listen. To me. Like. I said. I don't really know what. It looked like. You don't know? What? You're talking about? Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. I do. And if I tell you that, it's. All right. Have you guys had a chance to talk about the case? Yeah, yeah. All right, so what is it? What what what came up in your discussions about this? You got a different reaction somewhere. In that room. What was the client? What was this? What are you saying? It's not my fault. Yes, this is where I just have a question. Yeah, so this is a discussion. But your sister, you know, her religious beliefs, um, to be found in, uh, holistic approach. But, uh, since she believes in the church's teachings. And that has to do with what is making me feel conflicted. Will be appropriate for a school counselor to help, or for a plant who is in no position to assist. Yes. Uh, I think especially if that client was wanting to have a pastor, you know, with that information, you know that this is something that the counselor would have a lot of knowledge about. So working with a pastor or saying, you know, I have to have some serious about with the church. Yeah. And do I have what I thought I might say is that doing what? There's plenty to do a little research on some of the some like maybe figure out what kind of church she goes to. I'm assuming it's Christianity because she needs a church in that temple, and not everybody that says what kind of church Catholic was during it. You know, what police do they hold? Yeah. You know, not to just say things like, let's just any pastor needs to go with them. Like, there's a lot of. Right? Even with a Christian. Right, about what people believe about all kinds of things. And so helping clients connect to their community is usually more impactful than say, oh, yeah, there's a church down the road. And then like, yeah, that's it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, we were saying that as well. But like he could use them outside research. And also it's an opportunity for, for for building for uh for talking about if he's comfortable about does that. Are you feeling? Yeah. That's like a huge opportunity for him to have performed with him before, I think. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I mean, so. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, because it's 2 to 3. What do you think? Uh, maybe you can edit it with the disability if you're. If you've got something. To. Sort of a surprise. You know, if you're not careful, that might be okay. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. So how could you maybe. What would be an appropriate way to, like, lean into. Okay. This is her focus. Uh, she found you while not exhibiting heartbreak. Okay. Right. What can you tell us? I think it's, um, really very helpful, but you don't have to come to me with this information. Just one word about. It at that point, and we're about to deny it, and then, like, actually, basically, um. Yeah, creating a safe place for her to be able to. Uh huh. Okay. So creating space for, for the post process, which is important for me and also, like you said, urgent or you've been recently having. Yeah. And, um, you know, taking the time to do, like, really come up with a draft, like, everything that you probably want your, your church's teaching. You know, follow your desires and be allowed to have that. You should have that knowledge of, um, maybe friends that you want out of the club. Yeah. I, um, I will be going for a little bit different way, uh, considering a it's sort of interesting, you know. Yeah, yeah, a lot of interest, a lot of, uh, desire I would say, um, to, to do something interesting and measure the self esteem which holds about an independency and a will to go for the medical questions about, uh, okay. This is how but how would you feel about it? You know, and I think is everything. Was she afraid she could bring it out and the scene of it enough that I should have probably done that? Oh, I don't want to do that because I don't feel comfortable with it. And maybe this all of our, um, you know, worries that the counselors will be gone through the very easy the medical. There are some questions and, uh, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's a good. It's a good avenue as well. Right. And all of these things are kind of putting that, uh, empowering her to gather the resources, gather the imaginary space, even to think about. Things and create a sexual education opportunity. And, like, you know, the idea of this is. Yeah, yeah. You know, it's like validating out of this is really. Yeah. Thank you for recognizing and thinking about that. That is right now, um, I also immediately assumed that she was referring to sex and that you specifically not talking about numbers, but I realized, like, oh, yeah, something I brought to like, sexuality or never mind something that she talked about on the way or whatever, but, um, so but and keeping in mind, like some people might not kiss or touch until marriage or like. Yeah, you have to, you know, if you're Muslim, you have like your first touch their hands, like everyone's watching you, you know, like, um, I think that I'm assuming that it's, you know, like my culture that I could grow. And then I'm like, oh, she must be talking about having sex with. Yeah, but no, it could be a handful. It could be a kiss. So I think that was interesting that we all kind of like, wait, yeah, what are they talking about? Right. I was like, the target age of consent and, like, where you live. And then we're like, okay, you know, we have we have our own experiences in this area, right? Like, what would that mean for, um, you know, what? The people that I have with them. Right. With me, um. Yeah. You know, like, just the partners and all of you with your children when I say this word. There's just so many functions within your definition within a religion like this. You know, we're not exactly the same. Like I was. Last year. Coming through. But it's. Just you. Know. And the only that's. I don't I don't. Think. It's really. I. Think. Yeah. I think it's good that you come back. With that can. Help you back and then. Um. Ask you those questions. Yeah. Well, good. So I think, you know, the point here is, like, the field has, uh, said, you know, we need to honor people's religious background and, you know, also be open to the right, whether challenging it, but also like honoring that a lot of us open about it, maybe. But you need a pastor that he's just interested in that like within the church because that can be really helpful. Often, you know, I think pastors going to have to do everything you so recognize, like there are reasons to want. Might be client. Okay. Utilize this. Right. Mhm. Uh we we talked about these steps in ethical decision making last time. But again as we are you know continue to just go back to these, you know, if there are challenges and ethical decisions identify the problem and all of your code. Review the codes, consider principles. Um turn into your feelings, consult with colleagues. I think, you know, it's helpful to have kind of a decision making, um, step by step through what you go through. And, and this question of like, how do we balance genuineness, which is also something that we should be displaying with not imposing our values in your text as addressed this to the icons, those values will influence the counseling process in lots of ways. I mean, even, you know, the PowerPoint will be diagnosed or the theory that you're utilizing. I mean, there's there's all come with some, um, values. And so recognize that, you know, kind of own that, but also, you know, balance that with this call that we have to, to really empower the client to make their decisions and to come alongside them to bring in their, their culture into figuring out for that direction. And so sometimes, you know, recognizing that even your theory, you know, your approach might not be the best fit for somebody. Um, I think what to recognize. So. Uh, this week's six are so also, um, the professional disposition competencies that you get evaluated on. I just wanted to point these out that these are three that kind of come up may that we can think about in today's discussion. Uh, they'll evaluate you on multicultural, um, competency is bringing that uh, like internal demonstrate awareness, appreciation and respect for, uh, differences, um, congruence and genuineness also. So like just that I think I've also been congruent and genuine. Can you be present and true to yourself and emotionally stable, demonstrate emotional stability and self-control in relationships to supervisors and clients. So these are part of those professional disposition competencies that get assessed by your supervisors every semester in clinical training. Um, and these are input references for just this section here. Okay. Any any more questions about chapter three pretty quickly we probably we won't have time to do our chapter four, like I said, but I did want to get to, um, talking just a little overview of the assignment about creating a disclosure statement. Um, but any questions that were about to. Come. So you don't. Do that. You know, whatever. Even. Yeah. So again, I put in a special thing to work with you. I know what it's like to work both to work with children. And so although you can't discriminate, they are a child. You can say, I don't have choice. I know that that can be tricky. Like. That and like, children are, you know, a population that requires we have you on a, you know, a hoodie that you provide as. Well, but, um, you don't have to get trained in all areas if there's a big area that any county in the state of Maine learn about, but you have to be exposed to or not. So. You know, you. Got to get why should say that? What kind of student is primarily. Sufficient. For you or not enough? Competent in a way. What? Although, you know, you can say I'm open to doing it. What? You know what? Yes, I know all these things are always hard to to talk about because they're like, yes and yes. That's so kind of like long time topics. You can say you can specialize in something, therefore narrowing down the population. You. Yes, but you cannot say I don't specialize in that. So for example, do use kids. Yeah, I can't do I say I like psychology, psychology today my my profile I specialize in adults. Don't specialize in kids. Yeah I can't do that. Advertise that right. Yeah okay. But you can wait. If someone's talking to you, say, oh, do you see kids? And you say, like you see all the time. People say, oh, I work with people 13 older or 21. No, I'm just wanting to like, you know, from the client's perspective, if you, like, had this issue, but yet you don't stated on like your thing because you're supposed to accept everybody, you know, they come to you like, oh, I actually don't specialize in that. It's just kind of like a waste of time, you know? Yeah. So yeah. Is that an easier way to like, say, hey, I don't specialize in this without saying I can't take you. Uh, I'm thinking how it's like. Yeah, yeah. So I notice that a lot of counselors want to be, like a 15 year old offer. Like, just click here for you and, you know, you're both on the same page. Would that be a time that would be appropriate to say that? And like, oh, I think he was saying kind of tell them, you know, I'm open to it. But children, it's something I heard that. Yeah. See, um, is that like a safe space that you can say things like that and it's not. I mean, I don't know, clients want you to be. Yeah, you know who you are. And and they want to see somebody that is a good fit for them. Okay. So that is a basically I say, oh, this is my parents here. Yeah. I work for you. I work with the population because I feel that not everybody. Yeah. So yeah, that's that's a great way to do also in kind of in your disclosure that you're showing that who you are and that they're hired. So. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So ask for that. Kind of like the balance of not saying a flat out see that we're just saying no. And a blanket statement really neatly turning out the request for a consultation. It's more like giving them the space and then educating that why wouldn't be a good fit for them potentially. And then kind of there you go with your potential referral. But if they are just like, no, I want to you, you're kind of like, okay, unless, unless there is a very specific yeah, that you're like, no, I will not be right. Yeah. Like if you don't treat eating disorders, how would you know that? They think that they might be. The kind of like educating them to a point where they can see why I did that, rather than just kind of feeling like, yeah, and you can have specialties, you know, specializing. And they really like that. They. But that word of like discriminating is different than this name. Yeah. Good questions. I know guys keep wrestling with it. I think the develop language around this as you deployed in the field, and one of the ways to do that is to look at some um, consent forms. So informed consent forms. And so, um, these are. Uh, so they, they are, you know, required to have there are specific written consent treatment that we must get from clients to hire before you hire for counseling services. Um, and it, you know, secures the legal and ethical obligations, demonstrates quite time, autonomy and self-determination that they know what they're getting into. Um, and informs them about how counseling works and how they're, uh, likely to benefit from the therapeutic process. So these contracts are usually called disclosure statements, and they disclose to clients the nature of the counseling relationship. They do serve as legal contacts because you and I both signed them. Um, but it can be difficult. Typically it's about like how much information that provider uh, because it can, you know, like when you go to the doctor's office, how or how often to read something. But if it's. Sure. And it's kind of interesting really think I read it right. Like if it tells you about your doctor and your background, like maybe you read it. Um, but if it's too long, then it can just be like, okay, this is a legal document at this time. So, um. Using language that clients will understand, um is also an important consideration. Children under 13 have some parents like them, but, uh, it's so important to, um, to put things in words that people understand. Um, and it's an ongoing process orally and in written form. So to you, there might be things that you talk about orally to get permission. And we'll talk a little bit about that more. But if people want specific Christian integration, you should get in front of that. If you're doing a specific technique like the MDR, you should get consent to do that. Um, there's lots of reasons. Um, so the consent form that, uh, you guys are working on for next week is not do this this Saturday is, uh, like, uh, template for a letter for you guys to work on, um, for, um, as a professional tasks. But then after that, you're going to work on making an informed consent and should include these things. Um, and I also want you to look at page 98 about hipa requirements. Those basically have to do with number nine to like 13 records and actively participate in ongoing campaign plan. Um, there are some examples on discovery, but they don't all have the they don't have all these pieces. So um, yeah, just be aware of that. But there is an example of this. So I was going to ask you, but I could look at those and see what's missing. But we can do that. Yes. This may be a stupid question, but for for that assignment. Yeah. For areas where we have gaps like our qualifications are we just fill it in. Yeah. Just fill it in and you can say you're you are a counseling student, right. If you're under supervision. And you said, yeah, okay, say that you're okay and that I know that you're in the program, you know, but um, but yeah, yeah, there will be gaps. You have to make that. That's totally fine. If you're not doing internship, then yeah. None of you have a site yet or no where you're going to end up. Um, but just do it as an exercise, like a professional, so that you can fill in the gaps later. Okay. All right. So we'll work on this more next week. Um, I think we can wrap up this week if you guys want to spend some time looking at them. You're welcome to, but we will make some time to do that next time as well. I just wanted to point that out, but these are the things that need to be included. Um, any questions about the assignment that's due this week or. And yes, can we write it targeted to a specific like the actual letter, or do I need something to the like? You can write it. You can make it a writing go. Right. Yeah. You're right. Thank you. Yeah. Okay. All right. Uh, good work today. Um, yeah, I'm doing each other type of thing. Um, it's always a good practice to have a list. Okay. That's a whole page. Because it's not, uh, I was thinking maybe it was a discussion, but I don't think it is. If it's not a discussion post. Okay. Um, but it's not. It's not required. So you don't have to have a cover page. I always think it's good practice to always have a page on and then. Yeah, do that. Um, I will not mark it off if you do not have. Any. Yeah. And you don't have to include your resume. Um. It's just a 2 to 3 paragraph letter that you're drafting. Okay. All right. Thanks, guys. I'll see you next week. Uh, around.