Well, we're going to jump right in to class. Did everyone find parking and those that are looking pretty good for the early spring? You paid for them. Yeah, they were like, I, um. So I was like, there's no further information. I was like, no, you know, I'm glad you got it. I think the best person it's going to be, um, something we keep talking about because it used to be lots of fun. But now that we have more than one program going on at the same time, things like that, sometimes that is a challenge. Um, okay. Well, we are shifting. For those of us that were at the fair, I know our minds might still be in that space. Uh, so I did want to just, um, start with seeing if you have any questions. I know that there isn't a part of everyone that thinks we're here, and we just had that. Any thoughts or questions or feedback? Uh, yeah. Just great to have a bunch of places there and talk to the person that might be out there. Yeah, good. I'm glad to hear that. It was so helpful. I do always wonder that, like, it's just this is one thing, like, now that we have internet, like, again, virtually. This is a magical day. Yeah, that was like, super helpful to have that. Oh yeah. Yeah. Oh my goodness. I feel like I'm here for all. This would be good. I cannot take it because you know that that is good. Yeah yeah yeah yeah, it was really good. Good. I'm glad to hear that. That's good. And there's a couple of people that weren't here. So if you, you know, want to talk to anybody that wasn't here, just happy to make those connections. Just let me know how I can be helpful. Now if you start to apply and it's like, let me just see if. You have any, you know. What you have to give. Us. And um, yeah. So yeah, the next step is start by interviewing them. And then once you have got an offer and you have accepted the offer, then within the next seven. Okay. So then you say this is where I'm going. And we signed an agreement. Basically it's a new site. You have to go through those forms. But if it's a site that was here tonight, I think everybody here tonight is already a approved site. So you just signed that, um, select your supervisor and then you do the professional practice agreement. Yeah. Um, I would like to ask something very difficult. And I think this question is very stressing me out. For example, um, um, I got myself a little, um, the comfort training for, um, you know, I think that, like, he he came and said, one go to sunrise is so cool because there's so many, um, people who, like, open 24 hours in a couple of hours. And they were stressed out, which is, uh, I agree with about everything that I've been thinking, but, um, I think this is what's happening when you go. Not enough hours. I, um, can you just give a little bit about it? Yeah. Yes. There are, it's so it's different every year. And so, um, sometimes students have a harder time getting ours. Um, but they all. Maybe this is the time of year they're all kind of running to the race right there, trying to get to the end point. And if you don't reach ours by April, then, uh, and some students kind of play out, and then you take a one credit continuation course over the summer to finish up. So, uh, some programs even have you just sign up for a full year of internship. You just have to remember the minimum requirement is two semesters. And so if you know, it's really hard to predict if some of the sites will have not enough clients or especially in private practice. Um, the community mental health, I think you said at least that's in my system. That's one of the reasons some of the smaller sites or. Sometimes they have less offerings and sometimes they come back. And that one company that we work with, you love, it's not like you get taken. Or if you just take on the. Yeah, but it's it's okay to continue. And usually that that's not a problem. It's not a problem. And uh, the other requirement is two semesters of internship. So you can early but. Then if you're not finished with the 600 hours, then you go into December with just a one credit class. You still have to pay one credit, but it's not a full three point class and there's no assignments associated with the class. It's just that you continue in supervision and you're still an intern. Um. Obviously we have a lot of, uh, hours, like, if they they could finish later for the sequel. But what about. I mean, if they can't finish, I can't finish because they need to be also. Yeah, I think in waiting, they still are waiting. And then they're working for free. Okay. So. Right. Yeah. There's pros and cons of other sites, but you're going to get a great you know you're gonna learn so much. So it's exciting. Anything else. All right. Well, you have to keep me awake today. Since now I've been running just like you all. Yeah. Okay, so just to kind of review from last week and, and touch base, we're going to touch base on finishing, uh, this conversation. And then we'll go into the two chapters that we, uh, that you requested this week, specifically the, um, uh, Cultural and Cultural Capital chapter, chapter three. So we talked about different kind of ethics last time, um, Heather's professional ethics. But we like, agreed on assumptions are beliefs shared by the profession. And that's the one where you guys each took one and kind of talked about it and looked at it, applied to a case. Um, and then there's, uh, professional values that they also use, analyzes that they read. And I believe that maybe scientific and maybe join them. Um, and then there's personal values and, uh, virtue, which virtue ethics that are more unique to you as individuals. So I just wanted to take a little bit of time, um, to finish this conversation, because I want you both to recognize the personal qualities you bring into this field that are really valuable. And, um, and that's why we had I had you take the character test to kind of just see, okay, what are some maybe things that I'm, that I that are important to me and maybe have given the reason I am pursuing a degree like this or that I want to exemplify or that will come out in my work. So, um, these are the ones that are just for review. These are the ones that are kind of professional for our field ethics that they say, uh, these are all things that a counselor should strive to, um, to grow in, to be have to have this as a, as an, as an ethic. And we'll talk about how there are there is evidence that we can actually grow in these areas. And today we're actually going to talk, uh, because it relates to, I think, the chapter three a little bit more on the justice one. So every week we'll go a little like push into these a little bit more social justice later. Um, okay. And then the virtue ethics again looks at character who's not, um, who should I be just as a clinician but as a person? So then who do you want to be as a person? And so this is these are some of the ones that came up, um, that, that uh, character strengths survey. Um, uh, this is some of the things they said. So did you guys do some of you take that. Is that. Yeah. Okay. And any like surprises to you or does it kind of align. Does it make sense to. Yeah I took it again actually. See I haven't taken it in a while. Um, and I always think it's also interesting the ones that are like less strength and then I think, okay, maybe I can throw in humor or exist or something. You know, there's not as like a mascot for me. So anyway, I just wanted you guys to take a couple minutes to think about this, um, to to consider the results and how I think about how those character strengths will be an asset in your role as a counselor. So the first task is like, think individually about this. Try to remember, okay, what were some of the strengths and how does that maybe relate? How can I make me a stronger counselor? Um, yeah. Specifically related to the field. And then, uh, share with a partner, um, about, uh, one thing you could focus on to grow that virtue, or it can help. So just to make sure it just came up for me. Um, this is maybe something I want to strive to do. More. Growing more. Um, so kind of individual exercise. Uh, we'll just have a few minutes to let you have some quiet time after all the talking. Maybe that's what you need right now. And, um, then we'll share with a partner and that. Yeah. Because. To. Show. Us. But. It is not. Suitable for me. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I was kind of. Like that. But I. Been. Looking. For. Something that, you know, like I was. It's going to be I don't know, I, I have. No. Idea. What you. Like. Yeah. Yeah. I know. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I guess. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I know that. You know, like. I. Hear some. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Me too. Like you know I know. I. Know. Listen. You. Know. You can do it. But. I. Don't know. If. I can. Use. It so well, I. Guess you could. Do something. You don't know as little, right? So, you know, I don't. Even know. You know. If. You. Look at this. I know, I. Know. I know, I. Know. I know, I know, I know exactly how they look. Like. They tell us. That something that I think. That. We look like that. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Everybody got a chance to share. Yeah. You think you really keep talking about this has a great deal, but you have your own. You know, this is a little bit crazy. Everybody comes into can. Anybody learn something new about a friend? Or anything you want to say? Okay. Well, we are, uh. Um, yeah. Bent in different ways. Um, I think it's really fun. It's really fun to work with people, too, that have different strengths. I brings me energy when I work with someone who has a lot of zest. Uh, yeah. Like, perseverance can really help you get through things, you know? That's sweet. Um, yeah. I just say funny things on the side because it's about zest. Yeah, yeah. We just. I know you and I thought this is. This is like a zen. Zen, okay? Like a lemon, like. And I was like, I said, so I said, oh, yeah. Like, I probably need to be work with this to be chill. And actually when we translate this is actually open this, uh, and you've got to believe in God says you don't gotta work. It is great. You know, we all have different strengths. And so I think that can also, you know, help. Um, you know, people work together better if they recognize each other. Anyway, hopefully that will up. So we're gonna talk a little bit more about culture, which I know is always embedded in every class. I it is a big focus of our, um, of our field and increase like it has over the years. It didn't used to be and then it is and you know, I think I have been flow but culture has is uh is a value of the, of uh, feel to be um, culturally competent or, um, culturally humble and to approach people with curiosity. So I know you guys have had a lot of on this already, but, uh, there are some unique things and it has to do with ethics. So, um, ACA code does talk a lot about honoring diversity and embracing culture. So, um, yeah, because it needs to be a place that everyone feels welcome. Right? That space that we have for people. So to come into our office, everyone is welcome, um, to be curious and recognize that we are different than them, every single person that comes into our office. And so we need to think about, okay, what do I need to learn from this person and who am I? You know, you don't want to let go of who you are. Uh, that could be a mistake, too, to just, you know, be so, um, good at being open to others that you don't know who you are yourself. So that balance is really important. Um, so the ACA part of us, it takes that we must take an active role in attempting to understand kind of our cultural backgrounds. Um, and this is also something and I think that said this, too, that you can overly focus on it, too, like, you can have so much of our culture that it's like sometimes people are like, no, that's not that's not why I'm here. I think we get to where I'm talking about. But so it is always should be in the back of our minds, like, help me understand who you are. And they may not even ever think about themselves as having much of, you know, their culture, but, um, that can be an area, uh, for exploration for sure. Um, to respect the diversity of clients, trainees, research participants. So it goes beyond our clients, but also with those we work with, those we supervise. Um, yeah. And again, our sections require that we pay attention to the rest of our clients. They also recognize that there is a power relationship, right? When someone comes to you is very vulnerable. They they're often, you know, um, wanting something from the relationship, but they recognize that you have something that's a skill set and knowledge that they are coming to you for. Right? And that it's you in a power relationship. And the ethics code recognizes that. But we need to be aware that, um, that there is, uh, some authority, you know, we have the power to diagnose with the power sometimes to sign off on documents they need. Um, we have a, you know, just inherently in that custom role that, that comes with that. So we need to not abuse that power, especially in areas of cultural difference. Um, not to, you know, say that and something that is something that culture is, um, is something that we could build power over. So, um, yeah, it's required that cultural competency is, uh, required in all areas. And if you look at the AC code, it just happens. It's over. It's all over. This isn't even all of them, but I have two slides here that are just, um, highlighted in different standards where you'll see diversity and culture come up a lot. So again, you can see that this is a high value in our, in our. Yeah. Um, so. Let's see. Is there anything that stands out, even if you can really quite see these things? But it might be, you know, good for this exercise as you're reading through the ACA Code of Ethics, you know, um, recognize and see every time it talks about culture and to explore cultures to minimize bias, bias, respect, diversity. Um, again, like this is in research, um, support networks hold various meetings. Right. We can come with a lot of assumptions, uh, when it comes to culture, if we're not aware of that, we can then, um, not allow for the opportunity for it to really, uh, be as helpful as we'd like to be. Um, we also need to not impose our values. So inherently in that we need to know what our values are. That's part of the exercise to kind of know where you're coming from. Know that what you believe, know what your strengths are, but not to impose those as like expectations for your client. Um, yeah. How might that happen? Can you do something come to mind like, and we'll talk about lots of examples today. But, uh, if anything, when you guys read over these things, if anything come up for you or initial thoughts about things that need to be do that, that maybe even expecting that thinking that we're doing that. Yeah. Might go from you just kind of like an assumption, like, you know, an email conversation. I don't know, for example, that they're a heterosexual company. Uh huh. You know, um, so stuff like that. Yeah, yeah. Assumptions about relationships. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yeah. You know, um, skills, like assuming that that you that, um, you know, like, figuring out, like, if they're trying to deliver. Uh huh. Good. Yeah. So jumping in between iterations before, um, thinking, oh, this could be the most helpful thing for you. Maybe that's not the character that you like. Hey, I think, you know, uh, uh, that that the most, uh, what we've learned coming from the Western. Uh, yeah. I mean, uh. Oh, this is gonna work for this person. You know, whatever it is, it's like, maybe it's, uh, coming from a certain goal, and it's like we're trying to, uh, help them become more assertive or otherwise like that. How how do we balance that? Like an assumption, like, oh, you know, you seem to be very active with your your mom or dad or something, you know, a parent and it gets more individualistic, this society, but their culture is not good. Yeah. That that assumption of individualism and autonomy and that's it doesn't connect with a lot of, you know, convergence of expert, um, uh, when it comes to information about like who experiences that, it's not because, um, because of her experience. And so I think maybe there is a need for to get something to consider inside, because that's what makes you feel good. Yeah, that's a big one that we're not always aware of that. Oh, I can relate to you. And you're just like, you know, that's going to tell your story and like pausing and not assuming that you're saying. Hey, you guys are already thinking there are a lot of great things. Um, it even comes up in like, and we'll talk about gifts later in the semester, but like, uh, I like this about our code that it even recognizes, even though it says, you know, that there are challenges in accepting gifts. And usually we shouldn't accept gifts. Recognizing gifts, giving gifts, giving. Um, sometimes it's really important in a culture, and, um, and kids understand. Okay, what what what does this mean? And how do I recognize that this might be, um, a really important thing. So, um, sensitivity around meaning we should not condone or engage in discrimination. So you see all these things even as, um, you know, they're also in the ethical codes for cancer educators that we actively, uh, try to recruit and retain a diverse student body. And that's one of the things that's that's another excuse to not have the diversity in our images that look like. And, um. Yeah. And how do you talk about this to your text mentions it, but like, how do you, um, every university has like a, uh, you know, kind of a culture, you know, but also be open to, um, so how do you do that around, um, cultural humility. So again, I think I mentioned this last semester, but there is, I feel like this term humility. I see more and more, yes, competence. But can we really achieve confidence so that cultural humility is coming out in the literature a lot more to have, like a humble, um, you know, uh, curious approach, recognizing that you don't know everything, but also know you do know that, you know, you you guys are getting a lot of good education and a lot of knowledge and not to, uh, this minute diminish that you. You are prepared to offer her psychoeducation diagnosis and theory. Um, and, uh, you know, all kinds of interventions. But in terms of culture, to remain humble and curious about who is this person that's in front of me that's such an essential part of our work. So this can be manifested in our willingness to seek consultation, to get continuing education, to make referrals. Sometimes when it's not a population we know enough about. Um, but your most important resource is a client asking questions and asking things in a way that allows them to feel open to share with you. And it's a skill set, right, to figure out how to do that. Um, sometimes I myself and I myself, you know, you must apologize if I missed something or, you know, and that's okay to, like, be willing to say, to do anything. Thinking. Ever since last week when we met, I think I said something and actually, it didn't, you know, go over well, you know, that's okay. Like that actually shows that humility and sorry after the correction, you know, just like painting and painting in our work. Um, and then this I'm pretty sure that you guys have talked about this last semester, but being colorblind, you know, I think sometimes there's, uh, uh, people that are early in figuring out how to, to, to be competent. We'll just say I'm colorblind. Everyone's the same. I don't recognize any differences. And that can be offensive, too, right. Because actually the differences are really interesting. Important. And. Yeah. Um, so appreciating and respect versus just kind of an attitude of I don't, I don't care much about your culture. And supposedly you can see how that would be awesome, but that. Uh, the dressing model, a special model. I think these are really helpful. Uh, just remember these in assignments. You have to do that. Have to do it. Even in your case studies, when you get to clinical training, there's a section on, um, culture, you know, just think about, like, oh, I'm working with somebody in the dominant culture that doesn't seem to have a lot here. Like there's a lot to think about. You know, their background, their age, their socio socioeconomic status. You know, a lot of things, um, that can go into. And culture. You're the beginning of that chapter kind of talks about the the history of, um, the impact of cultural diversity on counseling and how in the 60 in the early years, it was it was largely ignored. And then in the 60s, with the rise of civil rights and women's movement. So this kind of increased awareness and equity issues or, um, differences and then, uh, growing concerns, you can just see kind of the progression in the 80s. It was kind of we're seeing this like this specialty focused, and now it's become more like the ever new center 70s confidently. And the 2000 is really a shift to social justice and advocacy. And so even a call on counselors to look for opportunities to advocate and promote social justice. So if you think it's the next slide. Uh, maybe it's coming up. Um, there are ACA, um, um, ACA website and I'll link to them on another page, but I'll mention it here. There are like listed competencies and articles in, um, in both these areas and social justice and advocacy that are important to look at. And uh, and out of that comes kind of what they talked about in the chapter, which is attitudes and beliefs, knowledge and skills regarding cultural competencies. So and then your Beth has examples. Uh, these are good like, oh emulate things like good examples or like oh this is a this is not a great example. How could they do it better. So we'll look at some of those um, some of those examples. But attitudes and beliefs includes awareness of social identities group statuses, power, privilege um strengths limitations those kind of things. Um, knowledge means developing the knowledge to decrease assumptions and assumptions of increased understandings of the world view. And then skills are some of the things we probably need to think about and talk about the most, like reflexive capabilities for critical thinking, broaching, um, uh, those kind of things with curiosity and then actions, those, uh, advocating for change. So there's an example, um, uh, of the case of Molly who started here. So we're seeing another minority client and, um, recognized that individual counseling wouldn't be the best things or could be helpful. But also, he really advocated for that client to have other opportunities to connect with students. So in this example, I'm about to create, um, uh, groups like for the whole fourth grade or whatever it is, whatever they teach them and talk to the teacher with the students permission about doing some education for the whole grade, about the minority students culture. So, um, those are some skills that are important to recognize. Sometimes we want to there are ways we can advocate for a client can actually change. Often in private practice there's less of that. But sometimes there are like things you can actually do, you know, how do you like, um, you know, you're having you're not getting, um, the requirements that you need for your permission. I can maybe advocate for you as well. So sometimes we have those opportunities. So I thought we'd look at this case of Mali together just as kind of a discussion. And then we'll look at a couple of videos and then we'll look at the cases. So in this case, Marlene, a white high school counselor, is conducting a group for non-college bound seniors. Um, and the topic is preparing for life after graduation. And the whole group is talking. Um, pretty actively. It sounds like, uh, that says, uh, in terms of, um, backgrounds, some girls who are white and black, and then one girl who is Latino and is discussion turned to the advantages of living at home versus moving up into an apartment and being dependent. And as she read and, uh, Marlene, the therapist recognized that, uh, she was being fed by Consuela. Says, um, girl, uh, one of the girls in the in the group was very hired. And the intervention that Marlene um, made in an effort to drop her aim was to say, Consuela, isn't it more of an expectation? And, um, Latin families that Latino families that girls will continue to live at home until they marry. So I just wanted to pose that to you as a, as a discussion to you. Like, what do you think of that intervention? Um, with that. Yeah. What do you think of that movement and what are some challenges they face? Is that a good way to draw her up? So you're setting up this assumption about isn't like this assumption about instead of asking the question. Yeah, yeah. You know, she's like, you know, letting families at the same time. Uh huh. So assumption and. Yeah. Okay, okay. You wanna. So what would be a what would you ask? What would be a better response if, you know, just one person was really quiet? I mean, that might be for all kinds of reasons, but one might be a way to draw someone out if you're aware that, okay, maybe someone maybe in the counselor's therapy, maybe she's uncomfortable with this conversation. How do I make this up? Yeah, maybe ask me, like a discussion board. Okay, first ask a specific question about and be curious. Yeah. I mean, I would think you maybe just want to broach it with, like what? What would you like to do after graduation instead of posing like, what are your plans? Because you may be I don't know what the heck I'm doing still, except when you're on that I do on this honor. I try to just make it a very open, broad question. Just a square. Yeah. Free tautology. Like uh huh. So make it even broader so that she's willing to. She has a lot of direction. She becomes a group. Yeah. Uh huh. Yeah. Yeah. Oh. Oh, thank you so. Much for your question. What is it like your three year, um, 12 year plan? Um, so that she has an opportunity to create issues, right? Yeah. And maybe even within your means. Can you give her the opportunity to go through this conversation? Is. Going to drive her out, but not with this. Um, um, but, um, I think you have a very sensitive. And I love the word broaching this process in a soft way. Yeah. Go ahead, Michael. Or it might just be something I talk to her after group. Yeah. If she's uncomfortable talking about it, why would I make her simpler self out in there? Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's another good that especially if you're kind of if there's not a lot of time left and you know, you know that you know that you can bring to light that she might like, you know, um, and like, I don't know anything but yeah, yeah, I like that. Especially the one on one. You know, you don't want to point out too much, but also like, figure out how to have a job. Okay. And it shows that you're aware, you know, that you're recognizing her, which can mean good. Okay. Let's watch a couple of these little video examples you keep talking about this week. Um, exposure to both. But and like, oh, that could have been better examples. Sorry, I don't know why. But. Okay, so what stood out to you? What did that mean for you? Where where do you live? Yeah, you can feel that very different because that was the as well how she said, you know, she was in the neighborhood absolutely different. And uh, also I don't know where he's from. It's like, yeah, I mean, you know, you could feel if you they are so respectful of the adults and probably all the perspectives. And she's. Yeah, you are the old you 21 but they know. Yeah. The different culture which is to us assumption. Again you are the open to anyone. And how would you feel that is for me is straight away. I will be run away from this comes a lot because I know she feels like excuse me. Yeah, I don't know, I don't know. It is like she's not really interesting about with you. And I go. I'm sorry. Yeah. And it was very, like invalidating. Like she came and like, opened the door for him and she's like, well, you should be able to make decisions. Oh, yeah. Sorry. I'm here. I have to go from here. Yeah, I know what you think. It was like. Yeah. For her, they're like, oh my God, I need a parent of this person to make decisions that you are taking into consideration the family here. Yeah. The family. I hate having value system. Right. My parents don't want me to this. But this is what I want to do. I do it this way. You know it is for that. Yeah. So again, what would be like, a better approach if I had this kind of simple curiosity? This is the typical problem, this notion of observational at the beginning. When you feel like validating this like she she made assumptions but she's not afraid. Point. Yeah. Really this assumption was like, oh yeah. She's just like, I'm just not sure if this is validating his belief. Yeah. I think, you know, it's reflecting back. Yeah. His basic skills. Right. Mhm. Hmm. I wonder does anybody has anybody watch TV at this point. Um. Huh? And. Maybe person. What do you guys think? So this person is very self aware. Like she's going to talk about culture. She's going to challenges. You don't always get that. But what do you think. What do you think. You. Thank you. Um. I feel like if she becomes. This validates what she's already said, and the counselor knows he doesn't. At least that's kind of what I would see as a humble way to say. I, I don't know for the fact that I have some training, and it would help, you know, if you can help me understand, but certainly to identify and say, yeah, I have. Yeah. Yeah. So recognize kind of repeat back and forth as it have gone. I was going to say that it was like, uh, you need to know valuable to thank her for what she said over and over again. How valuable we have this conversation right now. And, you know, and just to lay the groundwork of, like, I'm so glad we're talking about this. And I would love to continue to explore this with you and your team at the High Point athletic department. What do you think about. That. Yeah. And I already saw, if you're honest in the reflection of feelings, you know. Okay, so I think I think it was actually very similar to YouTube. Yeah. Did you notice any other skills or technique that I'm just curious, which is that this is like an actor, I guess, or is this actually really real and tangible? I'm not 100% sure. I haven't read the fine print. Yeah. See? Um, I think that, uh, even, like, there is a little bit of back and forth around, uh, generalization. And you're right. And you can see also the kind of like her culture in the 1990s. Like, I love that you could say that. Like, yes, I've worked with African Americans and, um, but I to work with you and I thought that like individualization of personhood, uh, like, you know. Um. I see her. She was not just, uh, what could race like? Uh, so I really appreciate that she added something in there for her to kind of see mine without committing to. Yeah, that's how I think. Yeah. Uh. What I thought was interesting is while the client has left the counselor and which maybe the client doesn't care, but I mean, she arguably sells the white. I see that and I think, yes, I have noticed. Yeah. You think that I think that you feel your best satisfaction. I just thought it was important that she was establishing that the client became the therapy expert. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Making sure that it does. There's an owner is respected that does help shape that what you feel like. And how are we going to. I love it. I was thinking about the sophomore year of meeting in Berkeley with the black community. Surely he was open to expressing concern, and it was like she had such like a focus on the point of like, we will get with even like Michigan State that I don't have. That means I can participate in another group. Just like that was what? Was interesting, you know, because we don't have the time to express that concern. I like that the counselor didn't just focus on the persona sensory thing and rather showing that, yes, he would like that. Yeah, she left that option on the table even if she knows she, like, needs another hour to finish her internship. You know why she did? Yeah. That pressure. There's all kinds of pressure sometimes, you know, financially otherwise. Yeah. I think that I just kind of go on is that I think I appreciated that she didn't immediately jump to, like, let's find you a different bit of this. Yeah. Like, well, what if you get, you know, you're really the trustee of your own destinies. Yeah. And so it wasn't like an immediate, like, let's find you support so we can give this a chance. Or I can also help, you know, like, we'll find a country either way. But it didn't feel like she was immediately like, okay, well, great. Then I will be it. She was like, well, we can and we can. Yeah, yeah. And if you notice, she kind of came around like she was like taking me a lot to get to this point. You know, I just kind of like patient advocate is basically like sitting with the uncomfort is a big thing. And I just thought the way that the counselor kind of held your question. Yeah. We answered you can make her feel bad for saying those things. Um, and then, like I said, like to offer. I'm happy to do this and shared experience like, yeah, um, I thought all that was like it was making the client, like, don't want to say anything. And it really gave her the challenge to be like, maybe I can just facility as well. You know, they could have something to offer me here. So. Yeah, that was good. Yeah. Thank you for that. Like when I first started to, I had a lot of clients that I felt like you are comfortable in. I looked so young. I was so young. And I think that can be a conversation you have to see. Like it's different. This this kind of it's okay to help. Like allowed, like to say like when they say, how old are you? You don't have to respond. But you can say, oh yeah, that's how you feel, right? And, you know, use some of the same skills. I said, totally, okay. So I have a feeling the answer is it it just depends. But my question is, you know, at what point are we supposed to, like, self-reflect and, you know, come to the realization of maybe I'm not the best counselor for this opinion. Like maybe they would benefit from, you know, um, African-American counselor or someone that is more knowledgeable with this culture than I am. Is that like, is there an appropriate time to do that or you? It just depends on the situation. You know, like, I appreciate that the counselor wasn't immediately like, I'm not that person, but I feel like if she had more session that maybe she would realize that, that she's not meeting the client where the client needs to be met and that maybe they aren't the right person for that. Yeah, that's a really important distinction, because there are times when referrals are perfect because you go out of specialty, especially when it gets right. If the person that's your office next door is really, you know, skilled and, um, you know, has a special to that client a lot of times, you know, I mean, but you also have to be, again, willing to learn and grow. So usually that's in the client. Not always, but clearly that was. The follow. Up at the time. Yeah. Yeah okay. Yeah I would like to see this a little bit differently with you uh, for example for competency because from my culture, if I would be sitting there and, uh, like the Russian will be coming to me. And I will say, this is about you. And if I work with this, for example, it was about you. I will be to that way. There will be stand up now, because the Russian culture, you know that the only competency you have to be on the I, I work, I'm good for that because this is the first step for Russian culture to know that you doing what you're doing. You got all of this, like degrees, everything. I trust you because they will they will up the perspective. And that's what I see here. And a very, um, resonate me because, oh my God, you don't know that some people do. You have to say yes, yes I am. This is my theory. This is right. Yes. Some people want to. Yeah, yeah. Because this that they will trust you this, this level. And they say okay. No one. Good. Yes. Um, yes. You make it okay to ask them, but let me see your license. Yes. Um, I like to say that, uh, I choose from the people when I call my brothers. Uh, in the spirit of who you are. How how did you get to be able to counsel properly, culturally, uh, and to record came out because you need to be so easily. Let me go. Um. And so how am I to feel? Um, how do you handle those situations where for a culture, you may not feel like it is the best space, but we believe that, you know, he's like that. And, um. Yeah, that's a good point. Yeah, I know when we were talking, when just researching, I was talking about specializations like that. That isn't necessarily culture. Right. So depending on, you know, where the where the comments, you know, we are getting to that a little bit later. So I don't want to, but we will kind of come back. It's kind of a yeah, it is true. You're right. We need to be ready to cancel. Okay. Yeah. But there are situations but yeah okay. So but yeah. Cultural. And I think a key distinction in that little guy is that who who brings up a threat. Because if it's us, then that's I would say it's legally on us if it's declining, like, for example, on fish, if this event says, you know, I would like to see my counselor. I don't feel like we're legally liable. She's choosing the industry, right? Yeah. The client can always be right. We need to not abandon. We need to not discriminate. We need to be prepared, to be curious and learn. Right? That needs to be our posture. Okay, good. So I do think that the role play, the, um, there are three here that are kind of curious to look at. SEO is on page and in the pages 6969 um, Jack is on um, 68 and then 74. So look at that. They magically appear. Um, yeah. So choose to find a partner, and she already had a group of three and spend some time, um, so, you know, just read over them quickly. They're pretty they're pretty quick reads. Uh, so, um, like, here, it's just a paragraph here. You don't have to read the discussion. And then we'll play with each other a little bit. So one of you be the clinician and one of you be the client and see how would you respond. Because I think having some practice. Uh, even in classes can help you. Like, help you formulate some of the words. So, um, take turns, you know, choose a case study that you're the counselor, and then choose a different one where you're the, um, client and, um, and go and expand some. Yeah. Do it twice. Basically be the counselor one and then make appointments, but use different case studies. So I think if I said okay, so you can choose among those there's a three. But I thought we might be helpful to look at. I think so. So yeah. Role play with each other. Yeah I know. That. That's a good one. Yeah. It's just I don't know. Yeah. Okay. Probably not. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Uh. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, sure. Oh. Oh. Oh. Oh one. All right. I already I enjoyed it. And then maybe you. Should. Consider. Doing. Something. Like. That. Is there anything you know? Yeah. I mean, I think. Yeah, yeah. I think. So. You know. So. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I guess. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. I don't like that kind of. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Uh. Yeah. We do like. That. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. Okay. So. Yeah. Yeah yeah. I'm good. Yeah yeah yeah. Uh 20 000, yeah. Oh, yeah. It's. Just like. The organization. In a certain way too many people. Willing. To say. That because. They certainly. I mean, I think. How excited are you? Hey, I want to. I want to be part of that. Is, uh. Yeah. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. Yeah. You know how how about. What you do, you know? Yeah, I think it's. Like, more about like. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Okay. You know what you want. To know if you like. What do you. Think I'm going to do? No. No, no. Oh! Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh. Yeah. Right. You want that? You are this. What do you. See yourself? What happened? I. Really thought. He was using. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't. Know. Maybe just a. Tiny bit. Easier. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Okay. You. Um. That right know? Yeah. I, I you know that my life is alive. So let's get. Out of. Here. Yeah. Yeah, I. Don't know, I. Don't really. Know. What it is. I don't know. I. Guess. I. Just. All right. You know that. I. Know. You guys have to read look like that? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I like you guys. And everybody's good. So all the reasons that you like, like, have, like, uh, like ethical things because, like, I seem to be more like on a different, like, kind of like a different lifestyle. Yeah. Her responses or her direction that she was I think transition seemed more in line with what people are on. Yeah. That's exactly. Yeah, exactly. I put like just awareness. Uh, yeah. So so, you know, attitudes and beliefs. Yeah. Um, I thought the age. The age. Yeah. Yeah. She was has some assumptions of like, um, of, you know what, maybe what should happen because she has, uh, parents that age or something to. Yeah. Relates more to the kids then so they high but yeah she I didn't see anything. Super late in the show, but just that she was leaning towards this curiosity. Not that it wouldn't be a bad thing to explore, like, oh, do you have a point in my head? That's a bad thing. But doing it in a way that was serious. Anybody have any craft that came out of these mysteries? And one thing that we acknowledge with, like, how ironic it is that there's like so much stereotyping in Hollywood, like women is like as they were trying to get resources at the appropriate time, is trying to get other via computers, I guess. So we're like, that was kind of ironic that, like, you're typing so heavily and then ask yourself, so I feel like it's interesting. Yeah. So you guys will be like the next generation counselor. So that's a great that like, how could this how is this going to happen. Yeah I mean this is a 2024 publication. Yeah. It's pretty unique okay. Yeah. It's very specific. Yeah. It's like any other thoughts about it's the same service. So. Should. We pick up a question. Um, in the last one, uh, the case of a company that they've been brought in by somebody else, you don't have to be there. But they kind of drug there against their will, and they don't think that the presenting problem is a problem. Uh, do you just take the hour to talk about whatever they would like to talk about, or do you kind of figure on the issue and try to figure out if this is actually a problem? Uh, I think that in roleplaying it was like like I guess we talked, you know, obviously we went in the direction of like, let's talk about her relationship with their daughter more so than focusing on the retirement plan. But, um, what would you just ask them what they want to talk about then? I mean, that's a good point. Yeah. And there are, you know, a friend that is kind to of us is right. If there is a especially if there's like a, uh, if it's a mandated time, they have to talk about something that you think that there is in that. And our ethical code is that, you know, goals are pretty collaborative. So you can't just amplify like, this is it whole thing. So working with the client with what they said, that if it's kind of art, right. And you can have that tell you about it, you know, and and you can bring that up over. Do you think your client here. Would appreciate. So if you take that back home, what do you guys think? What would you say anything else. Some of them are just kind of documenting this. Okay. Yeah. Okay. So I got an excuse. Okay. But how quickly can you became, like, advocating for it? Like in the case of, uh, you know, like. But, um. Yeah, I mean, um, where, like, of course, I think one of the, the great thing about this is like, well, what resources you have access to and but then on the other side, you have the emotional. I have to feel like I can do it. And so is that like like when do you want to like what is more important to address. Yeah. Yeah, that's a good question. What were your thoughts on that. Like what what were you trying to hold it to. I think I wanted the client to feel empathy. Yeah. Um, as more than just like, uh, like, you know, all these issues because it appears that way. But at the same time, I. What? I want them to know how they can participate with me. Uh, I think the resources that they have access to. Um, and so I guess twofold, I want to just be like. Yeah. And, uh, yeah. So you're kind of wrestling like, what's the role of our company? Whether I should. I could think of wrestling. Um, yeah. But it's great. You know, um, you know, like other people, like, you know, responses and. Situations. But like, in my world, like, lack of resources in the case of, like, okay, assessing the situation and assessing resources, uh, bring in resources then unfortunately aggressively, uh, repeating really because there's. No advice. It's like the bucket list, which is, you know, uh, I was thinking, like a perception of the worst of the messages. Isn't that what is there anything, like anything that you start with in session? Mhm. Yeah. I think you guys are talking about the great things that that is one of the most important things. So I know you have like safety concerns. Right. So doing that assessment either going to need and connecting to sometimes that's way more important. And they can't really get to the feeling feeling hurt until needs are met or in danger. So doing safety is always kind of part of our job. Um, sometimes like uh, sound, I know, like a room resources I can give clients, which is really fun and that kind of make you and I think that. Would be helpful. Um, and I think the other thing to to like, I hear you guys wrestling with this, but you want to stay in your lane, right? And we are bound sometimes by, uh, you know, confidentiality and things like that, that it might be someone else is going to be more that active advocate for you. There are ways to advocate for bringing awareness. And when you have resources, it's who have you thought of things other than even like maybe the phone call where, you know, I spent the day, you know, you want to know that? Yeah. It does depend on this. I mean, some of my clients work with, um, you know. How much we have and, you know, and then there's resources that they do have direct access to how the practices feel about. So, uh, I think you should call that. So it becomes kind of on the population side. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I think that was a big issue for me, that I thought of this scenario as being the necessity to be aware of resources for, like, compulsive behavior. Um, you know, like if you're, for example, like that just offered to slide out of that. And then it felt like I. Would. Bring that up like. That type. And so I want to like, I think particularly like with that, uh. That historically have been pretty bad. I was definitely also there. Yeah. Good point. And I think he's using the lanes like okay, another resource that you need to know that, you know, whether it's a concession or, you know, whatever it is certainly to be aware of that. Right. So there's this. Thank you for that way. Yeah. Good. Good considerations. Okay. Um, I was going to try to do one little bit more, one more section, but it is kind of our dinner break. Um, well, I'll just at least end with this. I want to just point out these. This is what I mentioned earlier. Uh, these these are both through the ACA network website. So this is advocacy competencies, um, that they've endorsed. Uh, so here, this might help you think through some of those things, like, and if you like, use uh, if you look at the verbs, it is a lot of expectation to identify, to recognize, to share, to train. Um, so those are the kind of things help clients gain access potentially, or create a plan, you know, so we need to, uh, have, have like our, our resources that we, um, know about that we can point our clients to. So and then multicultural and social justice cookies like we've kind of talked about self-awareness, uh, um, attitudes, beliefs, knowledge, skills come up over and over again and then action. Um, and they break against a client worldview counselor. Uh, self awareness. Um, and the counseling relationship. And so they really break down into those four areas. Uh, that mentions thinking about attitudes, beliefs, um, knowledge skills and action and then passive advocacy. So anyway, those are available. They are, um, there's a lot of things, you know, we'll talk about that. So, um, yeah. And then when we come back, we'll talk briefly about, uh, the, the justice piece of this and what that looks like from both an ethical perspective, but also from the Christian character, because it does. Uh, this is, um, from Watson's book about developing connections of character and to connect it to connection that connects, uh, these things and also talks about disciplines to grow them. So you can you think about that? How do we actually grow, uh, virtue or ethic of justice in our work? All right. I'll let you guys break, get some food. Uh, yeah. Come back at 805 ish. Exactly that. Oh, yeah, that has to.