If it makes sense. If I understand things right, you're kind of in a transition right now. Uh, you're moving from being married to, uh, you've divorced. Now the divorce is final. Yes. That's for you're single mom? Yes. Two sons. Yes. Okay. And you're kind of moving into the last year of the 30 somethings. Yes, yes I have. And then you indicated it's in your family of origin. There's four children. Mhm. And you're the oldest. Yes I am. There's three girls and one going to two girls and into boys, two girls and two boys. The two oldest are girls. Are girls in the last two years. Okay. Yeah. Well, um, coming in today. Did you have any ideas what you wanted to talk about today? Was there any issues or anything going on in your life right now that's challenging for you? Um, every day is challenging, actually. Um, nothing really pressing or anything like that. It's just, um, this last couple of weeks, I've had conversations with family members and friends, and this overlying theme of amusement park keeps coming up with your choice of rides that you would choose to ride on. You have people that ride the Merry-Go-Round. They have people that about the roller coaster. And we've been talking in that terms, and it's really amazing how my mother told me about this about a couple of weeks ago, and I've been using it so much the last two weeks, talking with my friends and just her and just it's really amazing how it's real true. So this is like a metaphor for that. Yeah. Kind of what we were saying is that you you can exist in life or you can live life. Those people that go on merry go round, just go around and around and around and around is nice. I mean, there's no fear. There's no challenges just existing going around. But then you have those people like me, then like roller coasters and you know that they're scary. You know, you got that that moment where it's going to, you know, make you close your eyes. It was, why did I do this? But yet you kind of expect it in you. You kind of thrive on it. And each time you go on a roller coaster is not the same as different. Even though you know the terms of coming, something else can be a little different. Get more people on less people on this, beat it up or slow it down, you know. And you know, it's more like living well, are you right now on the roller coaster? I'm going back on for more rides. Oh my. I give it up, I keep riding. Yeah. Uh, are you more up or more down these days? Up up up up. Definitely. I mean, I have a scale from 1 to 10 with one is at the top. And everyone, let's make it ten at the top, ten at the 19.5, even though I'm not very up there. Yeah. So these are really good days for you. Yes they are. Yeah. Yeah. I'd like to see if I could understand you a little bit more. And maybe if I could ask you a couple of questions, it might help me to do that. That if I understand it, you're the oldest. Yes, I am, uh, yeah. Your your sister's one year younger. Can you go back to when you were 12? I looked at one of the forms you checked out, and you saw yourself amongst your siblings as being one who is the hardest worker. Mhm. Got the best grades in school, helps around the house the most. Was the most obedient. Tried to please others. Was considerate. The best athlete had a high aspirations. Mhm. You sound a lot like an oldest child to me. Yeah. You're right. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. Definitely. And definitely that was, that's that's true. That's sort of the way you've carried on into your adult life too. Yes I aspiration. Yes. Trying to please others, trying to do what's right. Yes. Yes that's a big one. Yeah definitely.