Evaluation of the Dawson College Shooting Psychological Intervention:
Moving Toward a Multimodal Extensive Plan
Monique Se´guin and Nadia Chawky
Universite´ du Que´bec en Outaouais and McGill University
Alain Lesage, Richard Boyer, and Ste´phane Guay
Universite´ de Montre´al and Centre de Recherche Fernand-
Seguin de l’Hoˆpital Louis-H. Lafontaine, Montre´al, Que´bec,
Canada
Pierre Bleau
McGill University
Paule Miquelon
Universite´ du Que´bec a` Trois-Rivie`res
Nadia Szkrumelak and Warren Steiner
McGill University
Denise Roy
Centre de Recherche Fernand-Seguin de l’Hoˆpital Louis-H.
Lafontaine, Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada
In 2006, following the shooting at Dawson College, the authorities implemented an intervention plan.
This provided an opportunity to analyze the responses to services offered, and afforded a learning
opportunity, which led to the proposal of an extensive multimodal short- and long-term psychological
plan for future needs. Both quantitative and qualitative data were gathered 18 months after the event,
involving the participation of 948 students and staff. Mental health problems and the perception of
services offered after the shooting were investigated, using standardized measures. Second, focus groups
and individual interviews were conducted among a subgroup of participants (support team members;
teachers and employees; students and parents) and permitted to gather data on services received and
services required. Individual report of events, the extent of psychological impact and services offered and
received were analyzed in terms of the following dimensions: intervention philosophy, training, ongoing
offer of services and finally, detection and outreach. A significant incidence of disorders and a high rate
of exacerbation of preexisting mental disorders were observed within the 18 months following the
shooting. Postimmediate and short-term intervention appeared adequate, but the long-term collective
vision toward community support and availability of mental health services were lacking. Lessons
learned from this evaluation and other school shootings suggest that preparedness and long-term
community responses are often overlooked. A multimodal extensive plan is proposed based on a
theoretical model from which interventions strategies could be drawn.
Keywords: posttraumatic intervention, school shooting, trauma, PTSD, mental health
In the last decade, the psychological intervention plans follow-
ing disasters, including school emergency plans for a critical
incident, have been developed at local, national, and international
levels to offer support to survivors. The number of psychological
first-aid programs is on the rise and targets specific disasters:
disaster-related trauma; complex trauma; exposure to violence;
traumatic loss; nonspecific mass trauma; organizational crisis
management, and so forth (Jaycox et al., 2006; Hutchins & Wang,
2008). These include the International Crisis Response Network
(ICRN) developed by the International School Psychology Associ-
ation (Jimerson, Brock, & Pletcher, 2005), the National Organization
for Victim Assistance (NOVA), the Community Crisis Response
Team Protocol (Young, 2002), the Intervention, known as BASIC ID
and BASIC Ph (Lahad, 1997), as well as the Psychological First Aid
This article was published Online First April 30, 2012.
Monique Se´guin and Nadia Chawky, Department of Psychology,
Universite´ du Que´bec en Outaouais, Gatineau, Que´bec, Canada, and
McGill Group on Suicide Studies, McGill University, Montre´al, Que´-
bec, Canada; Alain Lesage and Richard Boyer, Department of Psychi-
atry, Universite´ de Montre´al and Centre de Recherche Fernand-Seguin
de l’Hoˆ pital Louis-H. Lafontaine, Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada; Ste´phane
Guay, Centre de Recherche Fernand-Seguin de l’Hoˆ pital Louis-H.
Lafontaine, and E´ cole de Criminologie, Universite´ de Montre´al, Mon-
tre´al, Que´bec, Canada; Pierre Bleau, Department of Psychiatry, McGill
University, Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada; Paule Miquelon, Department of
Psychology, Universite´ du Que´bec a` Trois-Rivie`res, Montre´al, Que´bec,
Canada; Nadia Szkrumelak and Warren Steiner, Department of Psychi-
atry, McGill University Health Centre, McGill University; Denise Roy,
Centre de Recherche Fernand-Seguin de l’Hoˆ pital Louis-H. Lafontaine,
Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada.
This project was supported financially by the Ministry of Justice of Quebec.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Mo-
nique Se´guin, Universite´ du Que´bec en Outaouais, De´partement de
Psychoe´ducation et de Psychologie, C-2821, Pavillon Alexandre-Tache´,
283, Boulevard Alexandre-Tache´, C.P. 1250 Succ Hull, Gatineau,
(Que´bec) J8X 3X7. E-mail: monique.seguin@uqo.ca
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy 	© 2012 American Psychological Association
2013, Vol. 5, No. 3, 268 –276 	1942-9681/13/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0027745
268

-- 1 of 9 --

(PFA) Field Operations Guide developed by the National Child Trau-
matic Stress Network of the National Center for PTSD (Vernberg et
al., 2008). In Quebec, the 1989 shooting of 22 young women at the
E´ cole Polytechnique de Montre´al prompted the development of a
psychosocial approach to public security (Martel & Brunet, 2006).
Despite the fact that each program has a different and specific
emphasis, they share a common foundation: (1) they are based on
theories of stress, coping, adaptation, and resilience after exposure
to a traumatic event; (2) the programs are applicable and can be
implemented in almost any environment (school, community, or
other); (3) the programs are adapted to different types of clientele
and the different developmental stages of life, even though there
are specific indications for children, teenagers, and adults; and (4)
the programs are sensitive to different cultural contexts, allowing
for flexible and adapted interventions (Pynoos et al., 2008).
Another shared resemblance of the posttrauma and postcritical
incident plans is that they are based on a medical model for
emergency intervention. As such, psychological interventions are
planned for the identification and emergency interventions of acute
symptomatology, which, more often, requires quick short-term
interventions. Most of the emergency psychological plans focus on
the identification and detection of difficulties in the realm of stress,
acute stress, and posttraumatic stress disorders, and offer long lists
of intervention activities to implement at different times in the first
weeks or months of the critical incident. Only a few programs
systematically include detection and active identification of indi-
viduals who may have developed other mental health disorders,
such as affective disorders, substance abuse disorders, and so forth.
Some more recent models are now characterized by key prin-
ciples instead of prescribed actions. From this perspective, Hobfoll
et al. (2007) suggested that the state of knowledge points to basic
principles for interventions following a violent and traumatic
event, which they called evidence-informed principles. Five key
principles should be at the center of crisis planning: promoting a
sense of safety; calming; promoting a sense of self and community
efficacy; connectedness; and hope. On a public-health level, a
sense of safety is established by bringing people to a safe place and
making it clear that the environment is safe, and, by extension, safe
from rumors and other interpersonal factors that may increase the
perception of a threat. Promotion of calming in the initial stages is
important. Some level of stress and anxiety is normal and is a
healthy response in the initial stage; most individuals will return to
a more manageable level of emotions within days or weeks. In
some cases, some individuals will continue to have heightened
levels of anxiety, which will need to be addressed. Treatments
targeted to calming the extreme emotions associated with trauma
are suggested at this phase, such as relaxation, stress inoculation
training, problem-focused coping, and so forth (Hobfoll, 2007).
Promoting a sense of self-efficacy in the belief of a positive
outcome through self-regulation of thoughts, emotions and behav-
iors (Carver & Scheier, 1998), and collective efficacy, creates a
sense of belonging and connectedness. From this perspective,
Hawdon and Ryan (2011) found a heightened sense of solidarity
after the Virginia Tech shooting and argued that emotionally
intense collective events focused on tragedy promote solidarity
and create communities. If elevated social support facilitates well-
being, it is important to keep in mind that change will occur in the
social support system, which might wear out over time, leaving
some individuals especially vulnerable (Kaniasty & Norris, 1993).
Lastly, instilling hope is critical because mass trauma is accom-
panied by a “shattered world vision” (Janoff–Bulman, 1992).
Despite the relatively wide distribution of posttrauma programs,
they were not validated empirically. This is understandable, since
the methodological challenges are enormous, and it is unlikely that
clinical trials could eventually be conducted in situations of mass
trauma. Still there is no evidence base for a specific “best practice”
global program, or for each of the psychological or psychoeduca-
tional interventions suggested for these programs. Recent findings
concerning the use of psychological debriefing have left the field
of trauma intervention with no specific framework for postimme-
diate disaster psychological intervention (Hobfoll et al., 2007).
This void prompted suggestions by an international expert
panel, which has made recommendations on screening, outreach
and intervention for mental health, and substance abuse needs
following disasters and mass violence (Gibson et al., 2006). Al-
though there is a consensus on the short-term model and interven-
tion needed during the first phases of intervention, there has been
much less discussion about long-term interventions, and about the
presence or emergence of psychological difficulties other than
PTSD after a critical incident.
Lessons Learned From Recent School Shootings
Newly published systematic data collection and analysis after
the school shootings at Virginia Tech offers other perspectives on
the recently implemented intervention plan. Wang and Hutchins
(2010) conducted an analysis of the crisis management imple-
mented at Virginia Tech using six phases of analysis: 1. signal
detection that involves recognizing and responding to the existence
of early crisis indications; 2. preparation of a systematic plan
management; 3. actions to contain the impact of the crisis; 4.
recovery promoting procedures to resume normal activities; 5.
learning involves critical reflection on the crisis experience; and 6.
reanalysis that generates change and restructuring (Mitroff, 2005).
The results from this analysis suggest that difficulties were impor-
tant during in the first two phases. It appears that the lack of
detection and preparedness were most critical and resulted even-
tually in a state-wide policy change with regard to medical report-
ing, gun policy, and emergency notification procedures (Wang &
Hutchins, 2010).
Since the shooting at Virginia Tech in 2007, a number of articles
have been published reflecting on lessons learned from the inter-
vention plan implemented. The conclusions usually suggest the
importance of preventive measures, such as the necessity of iden-
tifying potential shooters before the act (Greenberg, 2011); the
need to support public health preparedness for a mass casualty
incident (Armstrong & Frykberg, 2011); and the importance of
evaluating the impact of the event on psychological functioning. In
fact, a number of studies have evaluated different dimensions of
mental health, such as short-term levels of distress (Vicary &
Frley, 2010), or the impact of maladaptive coping and general
psychological distress for vulnerable students (Littleton et al.,
2011), or different aspect of posttraumatic symptoms. Grills-
Taquechel, Littleton, & Axsom, (2011) have found that those
severely exposed to the shooting bore a greater belief in the lack of
control and self-worth.
Most of the studies have examined one part of the process of the
intervention plan by focusing either on the organizational level or
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
269	DAWSON COLLEGE SHOOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTION

-- 2 of 9 --

on the outcome on mental health issues. No single study evaluated
the whole process including the implementation of the intervention
plan, the short- or long-term outcome for students and faculty
members, and the implication for health prevention, and so forth.
The purpose of our study is to analyze the complete process of the
intervention plan, including short- and long-term effects of a
school shooting. Our aim is to discuss the lessons learned from the
services offered at Dawson College in the aftermath of the shoot-
ing of September 2006. The “de facto” intervention plan imple-
mented after the shooting offered the opportunity to: (1) analyze
the mental health status of the college community 18 months after
the shooting; (2) take into account the experiences and perceptions
of the intervention plan offered; and (3) suggest, based on the
lessons learned, a comprehensive multimodal intervention protocol
for future postcritical situations.
Method
Evaluation of the Services Offered at Dawson College
In the first few weeks of September 2006, a shooting took place
at Dawson College, which resulted in the death of two people and
the physical injury of 17 students. In the aftermath of this tragedy,
the population, health and social services, justice and school sec-
tors, and government rallied together to offer psychological and
clinical services to the community of students, parents, and staff of
the college. One year after the event, the Que´bec government
announced an evaluation of the Emergency Psychological Inter-
vention Plan. A case study research design using qualitative and
quantitative methodology was implemented 18 months afterward
among the students and employees who were at Dawson College
on September 13, 2006.
The first arm is the evaluation of psychological impact and
individual services involved a survey of the 10,000 students and
employees, 948 agreed to answer a questionnaire, either computer-
assisted in a room set up for this purpose at the college (28%) or
on a secure Web site (72%). The questionnaires evaluated lifetime
and postincident mental disorders and health perception and use of
services. The questionnaires were adapted from those used in 2002
by Statistics Canada in the Canadian Community Health Survey,
Cycle 1.2 on Mental Health and Well-being (CCHS 1.2).
The second arm of the evaluation gathered and analyzed data
qualitatively (Mayer & Ouellet, 1991) with focus groups and
individual interviews conducted with students, employees, admin-
istrative personnel, parents of students, and caregivers, in order to
first assess their appreciation and evaluation of the psychological
and the clinical services offered at the college in the aftermath of
the shooting. The second objective was to allow the participants to
voice, in hindsight, what types of psychological and clinical ser-
vices would have been required. The interviews were recorded and
then transcribed verbatim. The individual interviews lasted an
average of 1 hour while the group interviews took 2 hours. Ques-
tions involved their assessment of services received, satisfaction
and perception of the services accessed, and services that would
have been needed and why. The comments were coded by theme
and subsequently analyzed. The key players’ descriptions of events
were recorded. The verbatim transcription of every focus group
and individual interviews were analyzed and contrasted in the four
different dimensions of the crisis management plan—intervention
philosophy; training; ongoing offer of services; and detection and
outreach—in order to delineate the principles and impact of the
psychological intervention plan (Contandriopoulos Champagne,
Denis, & Avargues, 2000). Table 1 summarizes the themes that
emerged during the focus groups.
Finally, the third arm of this research project is the development
of the multimodal plan. By triangulating all the results from the
survey on the psychological impact and the “de facto” plan, unmet
needs emerged with potential recommendations for future plans.
The project had received the approval of the research ethics
committees at Dawson College, the McGill University Health
Centre, and the Fernand-Seguin Research Centre of the Louis-H.
Lafontaine Hospital affiliated with the University of Montre´al.
Results
First Arm: Evaluation of Mental Disorders, Health
Perception, and Use of Services
The vast majority of respondents (79%) were present at the
college during the shooting. More than one third of the respondents
said they witnessed someone being wounded or killed by the
shooter; 50% heard gunshots; and 52% hid with other people (the
respondents may have experienced more than one of these situa-
tions). After the shooting, approximately 18% of the respondents
developed a mental disorder for the first time in their life. The
incidence of episodes of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was
observed among 1.8% of the participants, major depression among
5%, alcohol dependency among 5%, and social phobia among 3%
of the participants. Moreover, an additional 12% of the respon-
dents, having already experienced mental disorders in their life-
time before the shooting, continued to experience the presence of
disorders in the 18 months following the shooting. The greater and
the closer the exposure was to the event, the greater the risk was
of developing a mental disorder. Taking into account comorbidity
of disorders in some individuals, this total of 30% of respondents
who suffered from one of the mental disorders in the aftermath of
the mass violent incident is actually twice as many as the number
observed in the 2002 Canadian general population survey on
mental health and well-being conducted with similar question-
naires.
More than 80% of those having consulted at least one resource
felt they had received at least one satisfactory service, but close to
half said they would have needed additional service. Among the
additional services required, information and psychotherapy/
counseling were cited most frequently. The majority of people
presenting a mental disorder after the shooting did not consult
professional services, but this was no different from the search for
support in the 2002 mental health and well-being survey popula-
tion reporting a mental disorder. The reason cited most often for
that was acceptability (the problem will go away by itself), even
though this was clearly not the case after 18 months for many
respondents based on the 30% prevalence of PTSD, affective and
anxiety disorders, and substance abuse disorders.
Accessibility to services was identified by 14% of the respon-
dents, as a reason explaining why their need for support was not
met. The majority of students and employees with psychological
wounds did not consult professionals, but evidence from the sur-
vey suggests that they used the Internet as a resource to inform
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
270 	SE´ GUIN ET AL.

-- 3 of 9 --

Table 1
Description of Objectives and Tasks of the Multimodal Intervention Plan
Period 	Period I (preimpact) 	Period II (impact) 	Period III (postimmediate)
Period IV (first weeks
posttrauma)
Period V (long-term
vigilance)
Conceptual
models
Healthy workplace model and
prevention of violence
Emergency intervention and posttraumatic
treatment models
Crisis/trauma intervention model as well
as the enhancing of resilience in the
community
Crisis intervention and resiliency
models
Maintaining a healthy
environment
depends on a
holistic approach to
both physical and
mental health
Objective 	To enhance resilience among
individuals
The interventions during the first moments
after the shooting are generally
coordinated with emergency services
(police, medical emergency services,
etc.) and their goal is to ensure
immediate medical help for the
wounded, securing the premises, etc.
To ensure the identification of individuals/
subgroups recognized at higher risk of
psychological difficulties and plan the
follow-up
To target people with acute stress,
posttraumatic stress disorder
and problems in functioning in
order to increase empowerment
and resilience in the community
It relies upon the
ability of the
community-at-large
to accommodate
the increased needs
for people with
mental disorders in
schools and the
workplace
To prevent violence
To prevent mental disorders
and substance abuse
To act on psychosocial factors
present in the work
organization
To prepare a multimodal
intervention plan (see task
below)
Task 	(1) Training personnel for
logistical and psychosocial
needs
(1) Helping people in danger 	(1) Organizing informational activities of
re-appropriation and return to school
(1) Providing psychosocial
education, in class
(1) Preventing
violence
(2) Updating emergency
protocols regularly
(2) Making them feel safe 	(2) Providing information on the signs and
symptoms associated with the risk of
posttraumatic stress disorder,
depression, etc.
(2) Providing accessibility of
screening tools on the Web site
(2) Identifying risk
factors in the
workplace
environment
(3) Ensuring, with local and
regional authorities, that they
have access to the necessary
material (psychological
intervention kits)
(3) Securing the premises 	(3) Promoting the presence of
psychological services
(2) Maintaining psychological
services within the school
(3) Planning the
therapeutic
management of
common mental
health disorders
(4) Maintaining links with their
partners who will have to
intervene in the event that an
emergency plan is set in
motion
(4) Filling practical needs 	(4) Encouraging people to consult services (2) Allowing easy and immediate
access to support
(5) Maintaining a healthy
school and workplace
environment
(5) Dealing with the surge of people
converging on the school and local
hospitals to receive help or obtain
information about a loved one
(5) Developing support 	(3) Providing accessibility to
specialized mental health
services must also be planned
for in order to be able to refer
people with more complex
problems
(6) Providing psychological support
(Orange Code)
(6) Providing information and referral
services for parents, families and loved
ones
(7) Providing online consultation tools,
information about symptoms and
services
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
271
DAWSON COLLEGE SHOOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTION

-- 4 of 9 --

themselves on mental health issues and services. In that sense, the
majority would therefore have been willing to consult if there had
been a link between the Web sites and mental health services,
facilitating the expressed wish to receive psychotherapy/
counseling.
Second Arm: Evaluation of the Experiences and
Perceptions of the Intervention Plan
Intervention philosophy. 	The intervention plan imple-
mented at Dawson College after the shooting of September 13,
although created in an ad hoc manner, was based upon a theoretical
framework focusing on posttraumatic intervention, crisis interven-
tion, and resilience. In the first moments of the shooting, while
police authorities were searching for other potential shooters inside
the college and were evacuating the school and helping with
medical emergencies, the first psychosocial crisis team clinicians
were waiting outside the school for permission from authorities to
go in the school and help with psychological interventions. This
authorization never came, since the school was treated and pro-
tected as a crime scene, which created resentment between the
interveners and the authorities, because one group believed that
they were not able to do their work. However, when the students
were asked about what they needed at that moment, they all had
but one objective—to get home to their families, illustrating the
need for safety as being the first principle of a trauma-based
intervention strategy suggested by Hobfoll et al. (2007). These
conflicted ideas of what should be the best intervention, even if it
demonstrates willingness by everyone to help, are examples of a
lack of a shared common intervention philosophy.
Another example of conflicted ideas has to do with restoring a
sense of self-efficacy versus collective efficacy. The crisis inter-
vention team relied on the students’ and employees’ capacity for
resilience as a major variable in their recovery. Taking these
factors into consideration, a number of interventions were put into
place: the preparation of the college for the return of the employ-
ees, and then the students several days later (as quickly as possible
in order to reestablish a support structure); the reappropriation of
the campus by the college population; the presence of numerous
mental health professionals on site to support anyone requiring
intervention; the possibility of meeting with mental health profes-
sionals upon request in the days and weeks after classes resumed;
and the planning of rituals and commemorations, to name a few.
Throughout these activities of reintegration on campus and the
return to school, a culture of collective resilience emerged that
provided strength to the campus community, as well as the sense
that they had the ability to overcome adversity.
In the days and weeks after the return to the college, the
students and employees were invited to consult mental health
professionals on the premises. Because the lack of space did not
allow closed offices to be available for everyone, during the
first week, mental health professionals were set-up in the library
and received “patients” in semiopen cubicles. It was felt that
this setup set a tone of openness to the consultation and en-
couraged an attitude of nondramatization and normalization to
the consultation process, which would have been perceived as
natural under the circumstances. While some people understood
this approach and were comfortable with this arrangement,
others felt too exposed, and that they had little or no privacy.
Some people chose not to consult, concerned with the lack of
confidentiality. Others, especially teachers and employees,
were concerned about taking the place of students who may
have needed protection and support more than they did. For
some teachers, as well as for other employees who wanted to be
perceived by students as potential sources of support, it was felt
that having to consult mental health professionals in the same
place as students undermined or discredited this role. Therefore,
two core values were at odds: normalization associated with the
request for support, and wanting to maintain a supportive role
for the students. This example illustrates the potential problems
that can arise when services are offered using a single mode of
intervention even in the immediate aftermath of the event.
Training of mental health professionals. 	During the period
of reappropriation of the college, several mental health profession-
als were solicited to offer consultations to the Dawson College
community. This approach was intended to foster timely interven-
tions to address emerging problems. However, not all mental
health professionals had training or expertise in posttraumatic or
crisis intervention. Conducting interviews in such a context may be
different from what they do in their usual practice. In crisis
situations, mental health professionals must be more active and
directive, and must target their diagnostic evaluations toward the
detection of specific risk factors. A number of students and com-
munity members felt that the clinicians seemed too tired, and were
unable to give the proper counseling. It is possible that several
professionals, without the proper training, felt overwhelmed in
these first weeks, which may explain why some respondents indi-
cated that the engagement in treatment was not met.
Ongoing offer of services. 	Gradually, according to reduced
requests for support, the mental health professionals still at the
college moved from cubicles to enclosed offices; some re-
mained on the premises for 6 months following the shooting.
These mental health professionals were less visible, and there-
fore not as sought out. In this context, their presence became of
secondary importance. This illustrates the difficulties of con-
tinuous accessibility to services specialized in mental health.
The regular presence of professionals trained in detecting and
treating common mental health disorders (like depression/
adaptation difficulties, substance abuse, and anxiety disorders)
in the school and workplace should encourage students to adopt
the habit of consulting when necessary. This habit would not
have to be developed only during critical situations. As reported
mainly by students and parents, many of them recognized the
need for help and consultation only months, and even 2 years,
following the event. In many cases, the disorders were not
temporary, and the need for support that was clearly identifiable
in the first days, even in the first months, was still present, 18
months after the event, hence the importance of having ongoing
services and long-term outreach activities. Moreover, detection
activities in an outreach mode would have allowed some people
to be referred to mental health services. As well, unknown to
mental health professionals, there was extensive use of the
Internet; more than 14% of students and employees sought and
received information on mental health issues by visiting various
Web sites (Roy et al., 2010; Boyer et al., 2010). However, the
Internet was not used by mental health professionals to follow
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
272 	SE´ GUIN ET AL.

-- 5 of 9 --

up providing confidential detection tools or offer consultation
services.
Detection of individuals in need and the importance of out-
reach activities. 	The philosophy of the crisis intervention team
relied on the capacity for resilience of the college community and
on their ability to express their needs and to request psychological
help. There were very few detection, identification, and outreach
activities. It would probably have been preferable to develop
detection activities specifically for the groups at risk, that is,
systematic detection activities for individuals who were directly
exposed to the shooting, as well as education and psychosocial
education based on theoretical knowledge such as information
about mental disorders and the efficacy of psychotherapy. These
activities might have been beneficial and would have fostered a
greater capacity for detection by teachers, friends, parents, and so
forth, as well as self-detection. Consequently, this would have
encouraged the community to make greater use of the psycholog-
ical services offered. Lastly, along the same lines, the lack of
structured, specific outreach philosophy did not ensure compre-
hensive follow-up and case management for vulnerable students
and especially wounded students and their families. It should be
noted, however, that numerous interventions were made infor-
mally, either by a teacher toward a student, or a manager toward a
student or staff member. In some cases, formal and structured
interventions were offered by mental health professionals. It is
therefore necessary to set up a formal and extensive mental health
program of prevention and intervention in a school or workplace
community in preparation and following a disaster like mass
violent incidents.
Third Arm: Implications for Practice
Comprehensive multimodal intervention protocol for future
postcritical situations. 	Based on the lessons learned through the
evaluation of the psychological impact and intervention plan ob-
served at Dawson, we suggested a multimodal intervention plan
for future postcritical situations (Se´guin et al., 2010). In essence,
this protocol suggests that interventions should be based on clear
theoretical models, which should guide the choices of interven-
tions. Any intervention must be guided by a theoretical framework,
which allows justifying a model of intervention. In the case of a
long-term intervention plan dealing with a violent and traumatic
event, no single theoretical model can support and orient actions
over a long period. By combining theoretical models, we can better
conceptualize the needs for each phase in the intervention process
(see Figure 1). As the people’s needs evolve, it is appropriate to
adopt different theoretical models in order to better respond to the
needs of the population at risk. Over time, the actions to be taken
and the people responsible for these interventions will change.
Since there is no “one-size-fits-all” model, events, context, and
environmental variables should be considered in the development
of any trauma-based intervention model and should be based on
evidence-informed literature (Hobfoll et al., 2007).
Period I (Pre-impact). 	This period is based on a healthy
workplace model that enhances resilience among individuals and
prevents the development violence, of new cases of mental disor-
ders and substance abuse by acting on psychosocial factors present
in the work organization that a school represents, decreasing
stigma associated with mental disorders/substance abuse and con-
sulting facilitated within the work environment (Institute of Health
Economics & Mental Health Commission of Canada, 2008).
Period II (impact). 	Emergency intervention and posttrau-
matic treatment models must take precedence during this period,
and the goal is to ensure immediate medical help for the wounded,
securing the premises, and so forth. Care for the victims and their
loved ones must be a priority. During this period, hospitals often
experience a surge, consisting of the arrival of victims and family
members and friends seeking information about their loved ones.
Hospitals must include a plan to provide psychological support to
those who will learn of the death or precarious health status of a
loved one in their emergency medical protocols (Code Orange).
This plan must also provide care for psychologically traumatized
people who will show up. Families, visitors, and onlookers must be
separated into subgroups and helped accordingly.
Period III (postimmediate). 	During the days following the
impact, a crisis/trauma intervention model, as well as the enhanc-
ing of resilience in the community, must guide actions. Most
individuals will have sufficient capacities to overcome this adver-
sity, but some will need support. One must ensure that individuals
recognized as presenting a higher risk of psychological trauma are
identified and implement all activities to assure engagement in
services and their follow-up activities (International Crisis Re-
sponse Network, ICRN). This model, developed by the Interna-
tional School Psychology Association (Jimerson et al., 2005), aims
for the reappropriation of premises, the return to school, the
identification of subgroups at risk, and so forth.
Figure 1. 	Multimodal plan: A sequential process over time with interventions specific to each phase.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
273	DAWSON COLLEGE SHOOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTION

-- 6 of 9 --

Based on evidence gathered during the Dawson College study,
it seems that the risk of psychological trauma increases with
proximity to violence (Boyer et al., 2010; Roy et al., 2010). As
well, the individuals who had previously experienced mental
health problems were more at risk of being affected. It may
therefore be necessary to develop interventions specifically for the
specific groups. The primary group shall be considered psycho-
logically wounded and in need of active outreach and long-term
case management: 1) people wounded physically, as well as the
families, friends, and loved ones of those wounded or killed; and
2) people who were present at the college and directly exposed to
the violence (direct witnesses). The secondary group shall be
considered with lower resilience or at higher risk, and systemati-
cally identified and outreached: 1) people with preexisting mental
health disorders as well as those at risk for suicidal or aggressive
behaviors who are not included in the primary groups; and 2)
people exposed by virtue of their positions at the college either
through therapeutic relationships, or administrative or support
implications (e.g., those who participated in the physical clean-up
of the premises after the incident). The tertiary group at similar risk
as the general population shall be outreached as in the good
practice preimpact environments suggested above, namely, people
not falling in the preceding groups, on the premises, but not
directly exposed (indirect witnesses).
After the period of impact, the repercussions of the events
become more real, it becomes more pressing to identify people
who maintain temporary stress reactions days following a violent
and traumatic event.
Period IV (the first weeks posttrauma). 	During this period,
interventions are proactive and their goal is to screen for individ-
uals with acute disorders. Psychosocial education, which gives
better understanding of the various aspects of mental health, must
be set up and maintained regularly. These activities can be carried
out in classes or staff meetings (for employees) allowing for small
group discussions, fostering literacy on mental health problems
and possibly helping individuals identify that they need help.
Screening tools on the college’s Web site can also prove to be
effective not only with students, but also with employees. These
electronic screening tools can be linked to a mental health profes-
sional that can then refer vulnerable people to the appropriate
services.
Period V (period of long-term vigilance). 	Period V refers
to the long term, which extends into the months and years
following the event. It relies upon the ability of the community-
at-large to better accommodate the needs of people with mental
disorders in schools and the workplace. Maintaining a healthy
environment depends on a holistic approach to both physical
and mental health, identification of risk factors in the workplace
environment (Ve´zina, Bourbonnais, Brisson, & Trudel, 2004;
BNQ, 2008) and the therapeutic management of common men-
tal health disorders according to the chronic disease model
(Institute of Health Economics & Mental Health Commission of
Canada, 2008). It moves toward the good workplace practices
suggested to preimpact.
Discussion
Lessons learned from this evaluation and other school shootings
suggest that preparedness and long-term community responses are
often overlooked. Based on results obtained during the focus
groups, the individual interviews and the answers on the question-
naires about their health perceptions of need of services, the
community pointed to difficulties in the preimpact/impact, and the
long-term period.
The preimpact period points to the difficulties in identifying
students and/or community members who are vulnerable and in
implementing an atmosphere of healthy mental health workplace/
environment. The presence of ongoing activities such as mental
health literacy and accessibility of consultation may help members
of communities to identify their own vulnerability and seek help
when experiencing mental health difficulties, especially in situa-
tions of traumatic experiences. Therefore, these habits of seeking
help would not need to be learned during a crisis period, which is
often an objective in most intervention plans. Another example
underscored in the coroners’ investigation identified the presence
of Internet messages, aggressive behaviors and the purchase of
firearms by the shooter (Coroner’s Office, 2009). Again, the im-
portance of a national mental health program promoting a sound
mental health environment could help in the detection of vulner-
able individuals.
The difficulties during the impact period were mostly based on
the lack of a common intervention model, which opposes the needs
of security services (police), the needs of clinicians to help with
psychological emergency, and the needs of the Dawson commu-
nity who wanted to “go home.” Shared common intervention
conceptualization could help identify the choice of interventions
and subgroups to target for interventions.
Difficulties in the long-term period suggest that mental health
difficulties have been underestimated. The most common problem
observed was that the identification of chronic difficulties, such as
affective disorders, addictive disorders, and violent behaviors,
were often overlooked. A balanced psychological intervention
program promotes a feeling of empowerment, and, although it
relies on the resilience of students and employees, it does not
assume that, in time, all members of the community will heal. It is
necessary to maintain a positive outlook regarding resilience, but
also to recognize that individual vulnerabilities may be present as
well. Psychosocial education and a watchful attitude can foster
ongoing screening activities and social networking initiatives, as
well as the self-screening of vulnerable students and staff. It will
be necessary to adapt these interventions since different types of
mental health problems may changes from acute to more chronic
difficulties with time. Appropriate training and the competencies
of the mental health professionals will ensure their ability to
screen, identify, evaluate, and appropriately intervene with the
groups at risk.
Limitations
There are numbers of limitations. First, the recall biases or
imprecise information (Beskow, Runeson, & Asgard, 1990; Bur-
gess, Pirkis, Morton, & Croke, 2000) are among the limitations of
assessing psychopathology and life events. Nevertheless, studies
show (Lin, Ensel, & Lai, 1997) that the recall error usually
reflected underreporting rather than overreporting, and the extent
of recall errors tends to be greater for chronic and routine changes
and less for personal and family experience. We recognize that our
findings are based on a small sample which may not be represen-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
274 	SE´ GUIN ET AL.

-- 7 of 9 --

tative of the Dawson population. It is difficult to assess the needs
of those who did not participate in the study.
Conclusion
Posttraumatic programs must move toward a shift in paradigm
to become multimodal and comprehensive. In suicide prevention,
rare empirically evidenced effective populational programs are
indeed multilayered (Knox et al., 2010). It must be rooted in the
community’s capacity— beyond immediate emergency psychoso-
cial response—to detect, identify, and respond to common mental
health disorders. This paradigm shift must include various psycho-
logical interventions, with built-in flexibility during the period of
detection and intervention for acute disorders, as well as for
chronic disorders, which may exacerbate or be perpetuated over a
longer period of time. Crisis management plans should be based on
common shared theoretical models of support and mental health
wellness, instead of offering long checklists of targeted interven-
tions for different specific periods of interventions. Thus, this
common vision will necessitate a shared understanding of mental
health issues and interventions, and require well-trained mental
health and community interveners.
References
Armstrong, J., & Frykberg, E. (2011). Lessons from the response to the
Virginia Tech shootings. Disaster Medicine and Public Health Pre-
paredness, 1, 7– 8. doi:10.1097/DMP.0b013e3181514969
Beskow, J., Runeson, B., & Asgard, U. (1990). Psychological autopsies:
Methods and ethics. Suicide Life Threatening Behavior, 20, 307–323.
Boyer, R., Lesage, A., Guay, S., Bleau, P., Se´guin, M., Steiner,
W., . . . Chawky, N. (2010). Report on a study conducted with students
and staff of Dawson College on the psychological impact of the incident
and the search for support. Second of four reports presented to the
Ministe`re de la Justice du Que´bec on the evaluation of the psychological
impact and intervention after the shooting at Dawson College on Sep-
tember 13, 2006. ISBN-978 –2-922577– 89-1. Available at http://
www.hlhl.qc.ca/dawsonproject.html#reports
Burgess, P., Pirkis, J., Morton, J., & Croke, E. (2000). Lessons from a
comprehensive clinical audit of users of psychiatric services who com-
mitted suicide. Psychiatric Services, 51, 1555–1560. doi:10.1176/
appi.ps.51.12.1555
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On self-regulation of behavior.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Contandriopoulos, A. P., Champagne, F., Denis, J. L., & Avargues, M. C.
(2000). Evaluation in the health sector: Concepts and methods. Revue
E´ pide´miologique de Sante´ Publique, 48, 517–539.
Gibson, E. L., Ruzek, J., Naturale, A., Watson, P., Bryant, R., Rynearson,
T., . . . Hamblen, J. (2006). Intervention for individuals after mass vio-
lence and disaster: Recommendations from the Roundtable on Screening
and Assessment, Outreach and Intervention for Mental Health and
Substance Abuse Needs Following Disasters and Mass Violence. Jour-
nal of Trauma Practice, 5, 1–28. doi:10.1300/J189v05n04_01
Government of Que´bec. Bureau de Normalisation du Que´bec. (2008).
Standard BNQ 9700-800/2008. Prevention, Promotion and Organisa-
tional Practices Contributing to Health in the Workplace. ISBN 978-2-
551-23735. Available at http://www.bnq.qc.ca/en/index.html
Government of Que´bec. Bureau du Coroner. (2008). Rapport du coroner
suite a` la fusillade au Colle`ge Dawson. Rapport et recommandations.
Dossier 133713, 133714. Accessible online at http://www.coroner.gouv
.qc.ca/index.php/id/rechercher_recommandations
Greenberg, S. (2011). Active shooters on college campuses: Conflicting
advice, roles of the individual and first responder, and the need to
maintain perspective. Disaster Medicine and Public Health Prepared-
ness, 1, 57– 61. doi:10.1097/DMP.0b013e318149f492
Grills–Taquechel, A., Littleton, H., & Axsom, D. (2011). Social support,
world assumptions and exposure as predictors of anxiety and quality of
life following a mass trauma. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 498 –
506. doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2010.12.003
Hawdon, J., & Ryan, J. (2011). Social relations that generate and sustain
solidarity after a mass tragedy. Social Forces, 89, 1363–1384. doi:
10.1093/sf/89.4.1363
Hobfoll, S., Watson, P., Bell, C., Bryant, R., Brymer, M., Friedman,
M., . . . Ursano, R. (2007). Five essential elements of immediate and
mid-term mass trauma intervention: Empirical evidence. Psychiatry, 70,
283–315. doi:10.1521/psyc.2007.70.4.283
Hutchins, H., & Wang, J. (2008). Organizational crisis management and
human resource development: A review of the literature and implica-
tions to HRD research and practice. Advances in Developing Human
Resources, 10, 310 –330. doi:10.1177/1523422308316183
Institute of Health Economics, Alberta Health Services & Mental Health
Commission of Canada. (2008). Consensus statement on depression in
adults. How to improve prevention, diagnosis and treatment. Accessible
online at www.ihe.ca. ISBN 978 –1-897443– 43-9
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a new psychol-
ogy of trauma. New York, NY: Free Press.
Jaycox, L., McCaffrey, D., Eiseman, B., Aronoff, J., Shelly, G., Collins, R.,
& Marshall, G. (2006). Impact of a school-based dating violence pre-
vention program among Latino teens: Randomized controlled effective-
ness trial. Journal of Adolescent Health, 39, 694 –704. doi:10.1016/
j.jadohealth.2006.05.002
Jimerson, S. R., Brock, S. E., & Pletcher, S. W. (2005). An integrated
model of school crisis preparedness and intervention. School Psychology
International, 26, 275–296. doi:10.1177/0143034305055974
Kaniasty, K., & Norris, F. H. (1993). A test of the social support deteri-
oration model in the context of natural disaster. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 64, 395– 408. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.64.3.395
Knox, K. L., Litts, D. A., Talcott, W. G., Feig, J. C., & Caine, E. D. (2003).
Risk of suicide and related adverse outcomes after exposure to a suicide
prevention programme in the US Air Force: Cohort study. British
Medical Journal, 327, 1–5. doi:10.1136/bmj.327.7428.1376
Lahad, M. (1997). “Basic ph: The story of coping resources.” In M. Lahad
& A. Cohen (Eds) Community stress prevention, (Vols 1 and 2, pp.
117–143). Kiryat Shmona, Israel: Community Stress Prevention Center.
Lin, N., Ensel, W., & Lai, W. (1997). Construction and use of the life
history calendar: Reliability and validity recall data. In I. H. Gotlib & B.
Wheaton (Eds), Stress and adversity over the life course. Trajectories
and turning points. (pp. 178 –204). New York, NY: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511527623.013
Littleton, H., Axsom, D., & Grills-Taquechel, A. E. (2011). Longitudinal
evaluation of the relationship between maladaptive trauma coping and
distress: Examination following the mass shooting at Virginia Tech.
Anxiety, Stress & Coping: An International Journal, 24, 273–290. doi:
10.1080/10615806.2010.500722
Martel, C., & Brunet, A. (2006). L’intervention psychosociale lors de
sinistres. In M. Se´guin, A. Brunet, & L. Leblanc, Intervention en
situation de crise et en contexte traumatique (pp. 1712–1706). Montre´al,
Que´bec, Canada: Chenelie`re Education, Gae´tan Morin Ed.
Mayer, R., & Ouellet, F. (1991). Me´thodologie de recherche pour les
intervenants sociaux. Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada: Gae´tan Morin Ed.
Mitroff, I. (2010). Why some companies emerge stronger and better from
a crisis. New York, NY: AMACOM.
Pynoos, R. S., Fairbank, J. A., Steinberg, A. M., Amaya–Jackson, L.,
Gerrity, E., Mount, M. L., & Maze, J. (2008). The National Traumatic
Stress Network: Collaborating to Improve the Standard of Care. Profes-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
275	DAWSON COLLEGE SHOOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTION

-- 8 of 9 --

sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 39, 389 –395. doi:10.1037/
a0012551
Roy, D., Lesage, A., Se´guin, M., Chawky, N., Boyer, R., Guay,
S., . . . Miquelon, P. (2010). Evaluation of the emergency psychological
intervention plan. First of four reports presented to the Ministe`re de la
Justice du Que´bec on the evaluation of the psychological impact and
intervention after the shooting at Dawson College on September 13,
2006. September 2010. ISBN-978 –2-922577– 87-7. Available at http://
www.hlhl.qc.ca/dawsonproject.html#reports
Schmeidler, J., & Laraque, D. (2007). Children who lost a parent as a result
of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001: Registry construction and
population description. Death Studies, 31, 87–100. doi:10.1080/
07481180600995263
Se´guin, M., Chawky, N., Guay, S., Szkrumelak, N., Lesage, A., Bleau,
P., . . . Roy, D. (2010). SECUR: Plan multimodal d’intervention psy-
chologique en cas de fusillade en milieu scolaire. Troisie`me de 4
rapports de´pose´s au Ministe`re de la Justice du Que´bec sur l’e´valuation
de l’impact psychologique et de l’intervention psychologique suite a` la
fusillade au Colle`ge Dawson le 13 septembre 2006. ISBN-978 –2-
922577–90-7. Retrieved from http://www.hlhl.qc.ca/publications/centre-
de-recherche-fernand-seguin/etudes.html
Vernberg, E. M., Steingerg, A. M., Jacobs, A. K., Brymer, M. J., Watson,
P. J., Osofsky, J. D., . . . Ruzek, J. I. (2008). Innovation in disaster
mental health: Psychological first aid. Professional Psychology: Re-
search and Practice, 39, 381–388. doi:10.1037/a0012663
Ve´zina, M., Bourbonnais, R., Brisson, C., & Trudel, L. (2004). Workplace
prevention and promotion strategies. Healthcare Papers, 5, 32– 44.
Vicary, A., & Fraley, C. (2010). Student reactions to the shootings at
Virginia Tech and Northern Illinois University: Does sharing grief
support over the Internet affect recovery? Personality and Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 36, 1555–1563. doi:10.1177/0146167210384880
Wang, J., & Hutchins, H. (2010). Crisis management in higher education:
What have we learned from Virginia Tech? Advances in Developing
Human Resources, 12, 552–572. doi:10.1177/1523422310394433
Young, M. (2002). The community crisis response team: The National and
Organization for Victim Assistance protocol. In S. E. Brock, P. J.
Lazarus, & S. R. Jmerson (Eds.) Best practices in school crisis preven-
tion and intervention (pp. 333–354). Bethesda, MD: National Associa-
tion of School Psychologists.
Received June 9, 2011
Revision received November 15, 2011
Accepted December 28, 2011 
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
276 	SE´ GUIN ET AL.

-- 9 of 9 --

