99
PREVIEW
This chapter provides an overview of the fundamental skills for effective crisis
intervention work. The skills discussed here focus on Ivey et al.’s (2022) microskills
hierarchy. At the heart of this hierarchy is the basic listening sequence, an interrelated
set of skills that not only foster the development of rapport with clients but also aid in
the identification of interventions to help achieve a successful resolution to the client’s
crisis state. Examples of the skills in use as well as practice exercises to foster individual
skill development are provided.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
4.1 Apply essential crisis intervention microskills.
4.2 Identify basic attending skills including eye contact, body position, vocal tone,
and use of silence.
4.3 Identify the basic listening sequence including asking open and closed questions
and reflecting skills.
4.4 Describe basic deescalation skills to help clients regulate emotions.
ESSENTIAL CRISIS INTERVENTION MICROSKILLS
Learning Objective 4.1 Apply essential crisis intervention microskills.
A reasonable question at this point is, “What is the difference between basic counseling
skills and crisis counseling skills?” Simply put, the difference is less about what the
counselor does or the techniques and strategies employed and more about contextual
application, or where and in what situation skills are applied. The essential foundational
skills necessary for effective crisis intervention work are indeed the basic tools on
4 	Essential Crisis Intervention Skills
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry*
C H A P T E R
* Special thanks to Joseph “Chip” Cooper for his outstanding contributions to the first two editions of this
chapter.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 99	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 99 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 1 of 24 --

100 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
which the success of interventions may depend, whether the counselor is doing crisis
or traditional counseling. It is important to stress that these skills will help create the
counselor–client relational conditions necessary for positive change (i.e., therapeutic
alliance). The skills covered in this chapter are basic counseling skills applied to crisis
situations, and these basic skills form the foundation for the use of more advanced
counseling skills. For example, just as is the case in traditional counseling, when
working with clients in crisis, it is essential to listen, be empathic, and respond skillfully.
Counselors also must make sure the information received from the client is accurate to
create an appropriate treatment plan or referral for the client.
That said, a primary difference in crisis and traditional counseling is that crisis
counseling is time-limited or at least limited to the time required to stabilize the
crisis! situation. That may take a single session required to hospitalize an actively
suicidal client or several brief sessions in the field when helping someone cope with the
ramifications of a natural disaster. Thus, crisis counseling tends to be more directive than
traditional counseling (depending on the theoretical approach used) and can involve
information giving, probing questions, and even direct or indirect confrontations.
Finally, the focus is on the immediate issue that is causing the instability for the client
so the counselor must differentiate immediate issues (risk) that are the priority from
longer-term issues that may be documented for postcrisis therapy.
These basic skills provide the client with alliance-building constructs such
as empathic understanding, genuineness, and acceptance and greatly facilitate the
development of a safe therapeutic environment. These basic skills also aid in establishing
rapport and developing an effective therapeutic alliance with the client. Rapport can
be understood as a harmonious or empathetic relationship. In crisis intervention work,
the development of rapport starts with the initial contact and continues throughout
the process. The crisis counselor’s primary concern should be fostering this rapport to
develop a cohesive and supportive relationship with the client. How crisis counselors
conduct themselves is crucial, as this may be the client’s first encounter with a counselor
and this interaction may either encourage or discourage the client from seeking
counseling in the future or from following up when a proposed crisis plan is developed.
The crisis counselor’s ability to gain a client’s trust is paramount in a crisis intervention
since the counselor must ask the client sensitive questions to gather information for
referrals or crisis planning.
As noted earlier, the skills covered in this chapter focus on Ivey et al.’s (2022)
microskills hierarchy—a set of verbal and behavioral responses that facilitate the process
of counseling and alliance formation, regardless of the crisis counselor’s theoretical
orientation. For some, this chapter may be a review of the basic skills taught in a skills
course, while for others it may be the first consideration of these skills. Either way, it is
always important to continuously be aware of and apply effective skills, since doing so
is the hallmark of effective crisis counseling.
Ivey et al. (2022) present these skills as a hierarchy that is organized in a systematic
framework. At the bottom of the hierarchy are the basic attending skills, such as patterns
of eye contact, body position, vocal tone, and silence. A bit farther up the skills hierarchy
is the basic listening sequence, which includes asking open and closed questions, using
reflecting skills, and summarizing. In this chapter, each of these basic skills is reviewed,
along with practical examples of the skills in use.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 100	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 100 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 2 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	101
ATTENDING SKILLS
Learning Objective 4.2 Identify basic attending skills including eye contact, body
position, vocal tone, and use of silence.
Good communication involves more than just verbal content; crisis counselors
communicate with more than just words. Most meaningful communication takes place
nonverbally. The next time you engage someone in conversation, take a moment to
pay attention to all the nonverbal cues your partner is giving you. What does the facial
expression say to you? What is conveyed by the eyes? Does your partner have a closed
or open body stance? Although important in social relationships, these attending skills
are even more important in the counseling relationship. Bedi (2006) surveyed clients
who received counseling and asked them to identify the specific counselor behaviors
that most helped to form a working alliance. Following validation and education,
clients ranked nonverbal gestures, presentation, and body language as the next most
important alliance-building factors. These nonverbal attending behaviors communicate
a counselor’s interest, warmth, and understanding to the client; they include eye contact,
body position, tone of voice (vocal tone), and silence.
Eye Contact
Maintaining good eye contact is how a crisis counselor conveys interest, confidence,
and involvement in the client’s story (Egan & Reese, 2019). Through eye contact,
clients know a counselor is focusing on them and fully committed to the helping
process. Moreover, for those clients who have difficulty with closeness, making eye
contact can be an important vehicle of change. However, good eye contact is not the
same as staring your client down. There should be natural breaks in eye contact; eye
contact should be more of an ebb and flow as you collect your thoughts and listen to
the client’s story.
In addition, it is essential to be sensitive to differences in how eye contact is
traditionally expressed across cultures. For example, whereas direct eye contact is usually
interpreted as a sign of interest in the White culture, some Asian and Native American
groups believe direct eye contact is a sign of disrespect (Hays & Erford, 2023). Some
Black clients may maintain greater eye contact when talking and less eye contact when
listening, and many Black men will not look directly into the eyes of an authority figure
because in the Black cultural context avoiding eye contact shows respect for authority
figures (e.g., parents, teachers, older people).
For clients who are overly fragile or under much stress and pressure, direct eye
contact may increase their level of anxiety. For example, imagine counseling a client in
crisis, a 20-year-old college student who states she was sexually assaulted last night. As
she tells you what happened, you notice she stares down at the floor and often avoids
your eye contact. Should you confront her on her lack of eye contact and ask her to look
at you directly when she speaks? Of course not. Her lack of eye contact is probably due
to her feelings of shame and anxiety and is serving an emotion-regulation function.
In a crisis, especially if a client is feeling overwhelmed or ashamed or is experiencing
paranoia, be aware that a client who avoids your eyes is probably doing so as a protective
mechanism. This reaction is normal in a crisis.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 101	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 101 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 3 of 24 --

102 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
So how do you determine how much eye contact to maintain with a client?
Unfortunately, no universal rule or criterion exists for what is considered either
appropriate or inappropriate eye contact. As already noted, eye contact varies among
cultures and is influenced by the intensity of emotions involved in the crisis situation.
A good guideline to follow is to maintain a moderate amount of eye contact while
monitoring your client’s level of comfort and to adjust your eye contact accordingly
(Young, 2017). Also, it is helpful for you to become aware of your own attending
behavior so you can understand how this behavior may affect the counseling
relationship. Professional counselors must be particularly aware of their use of eye
contact during crisis counseling sessions. It is important to use eye contact and other
nonverbal attending behaviors to reduce anxiety and deescalate anger and agitation.
Complete Activities 4.1 and 4.2 to gain a deeper understanding of your own attending
behaviors.
Form pairs. One person takes the role of listener, while
the other takes the role of speaker and is to talk about
anything of interest for about 5 minutes. During this
time, the listener should maintain eye contact with
the speaker as would occur normally in everyday con-
versation. After 5 minutes, each pair should process
the experience. What feedback does the speaker have
regarding the listener’s level of eye contact? Was it
too much? Darting? Too little? Empathic? What was
most comfortable? Based on the feedback, do the
exercise again, but this time have the listener try to
incorporate some of the feedback received about level
of eye contact. Process the activity again, and then
switch roles.
ACTIVITY 4.1
Body Position
As with eye contact, your body position should convey to the client your interest and
involvement. Face the client and adopt an open, relaxed, and attentive body posture, as
this will assist in putting your client at ease. Counselors should not cross arms and legs
and should not sit behind a desk or other barrier. In addition, Egan and Reese (2019) rec-
ommend that the counselor lean slightly toward the client, as this communicates that the
counselor is listening to the client and interested in what the client has to say. Slouching
in a chair or leaning away from the client may be perceived by the client as lack of interest
or boredom.
The physical distance between counselor and client should also be taken into
consideration; getting too close can be overwhelming and uncomfortable, whereas
being too distant can make the counselor appear aloof and may be awkward for the
client. Although in Western cultures the average physical distance for conversation
is typically 2 to 4 feet, this comfort zone will vary from client to client (Young,
2017). When in doubt,!you could let the client arrange the chairs at a distance that
feels comfortable. However, keep in mind that this option is not always desirable.
For example, in a crisis setting, you may be faced with a client who is paranoid or
experiencing homicidal or suicidal ideation. Would you want to be within hitting
or kicking distance of this client? Also, it would not be a good idea to have this
client sitting between you and the door. Use your best judgment. By considering
body position, you can create a safe environment for both you and your client. Your
safety should always be a priority. You should never do anything that makes you
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 102	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 102 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 4 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	103
Vocal Tone
Have you ever had an experience when you are engaged in conversation with some-
one and find yourself becoming increasingly anxious and tense, regardless of the
topic? The next time this happens, pay attention to your partner’s tone of voice,
for you may be unconsciously responding to the emotional tone conveyed in your
partner’s voice. Emotions are frequently conveyed via tone of voice. The pitch,
pacing, and volume can all influence how a client responds emotionally to a crisis
counselor.
There is much to be said for a calm and soothing voice in times of distress, espe-
cially when the client is in a crisis. Do not underestimate the power of this attribute; your
control and calmness may be among the greatest benefits to your client in crisis. Your
voice can do much to help create a soothing and emotion-regulating atmosphere for the
client. Learn to use your voice as a therapeutic tool. For example, if your client is overly
agitated, it is often helpful to speak more slowly and in a soothing tone, as this will help
your client to slow things down and begin to focus.
Also be aware of your own internal process and how your tone of voice is conveying
your own emotional state when working with a client in crisis. It is not uncommon for
your own rate of speech to increase when you hear something that causes you to feel
anxious, such as a client who discloses homicidal ideation to you. If your client is agitated
and using pressured speech and your speech also begins to race, your rate of speech
could exacerbate your client’s state.
To convey a sense of empathic understanding, it can be helpful to emphasize
specific words used by your client. This technique of giving increased vocal emphasis to
certain words or short phrases is called verbal underlining (Ivey et al., 2022). For example,
consider the difference between “You were very hurt by your husband’s actions” and
“You were very hurt by your husband’s actions.” In the latter comment, the counselor
places the emphasis on the word very to help reflect the intensity of the client’s experience.
Again, modulate your voice tone to comfort clients and deescalate the anxiety, anger,
or agitation clients in crisis might feel. Now complete Activity 4.3, which considers the
vocal subtleties in the spoken word.
This activity will help you become aware of how your
clients might perceive your overall pattern of nonverbal
communication. Begin by forming pairs. One person
will be the communicator and will face the other
person, who will serve as the mirror. For the next
5!minutes, the communicator can talk about anything
and, throughout this time, the mirror is to nonverbally
mirror each gesture, facial expression, eye contact, and
movement of the communicator. It is important that
the mirror not attempt to interpret the message that
is being sent by the communicator but just to mirror
the perceived nonverbal communication. At the end
of 5 minutes, each pair should process the experience.
What was it like to see your nonverbal communication
mirrored back to you? Did you learn anything about
how you come across to others? Is there anything you
would want to change or do more of? Switch roles and
process the activity again.
ACTIVITY 4.2
feel uncomfortable or jeopardizes your physical safety. Use your body posture and
physical space to comfort clients and deescalate the anxiety, anger, or agitation a client
in crisis might feel.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 103	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 103 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 5 of 24 --

104 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Silence
Beginning crisis counselors often have difficulty using silence with clients. They want
to keep talking to fill in any lapses or void in the session, usually to mollify their own
anxiety and discomfort with a client in crisis. Or worse, counselors will engage in a
monologue or resort to lecturing or teaching the client. However, constantly interven-
ing or throwing a barrage of questions at a client in crisis can feel overwhelming and
intrusive to a client who is already feeling overwhelmed. Clients in crisis need space to
think, sort out their thoughts, and process what is happening. The counselor needs that
time as well. This point cannot be overemphasized: Silence is important for both clients
and professional counselors. It is essential for crisis counselors to develop comfort with
silent pauses.
Many beginning counselors are afraid to use silence because they believe silence
conveys their incompetence as a counselor. However, the opposite is true. Silence, if used
appropriately and at the right time, can convey acceptance and empathic understanding.
In essence, the message of silence is “I am here for you if you need me, yet I respect
your need to take your time with this.” Review Case Study 4.1, which looks at the use
of silence in a crisis interview.
In small groups, assign one person to be the speaker.
Instruct the speaker to talk in a normal tone of voice
for a few minutes about anything of interest. Have the
other group members close their eyes as they listen to
the speaker, paying close attention to the tone of voice,
pacing, volume, and so on. After 2 or 3 minutes, stop
and have the listeners give feedback on the speaker’s
voice. What was their reaction to the tone, volume,
accent, rate of speech, and other characteristics? After
this processing, repeat the activity, but this time have
the speaker make changes in voice tone, volume, or
pacing to deliberately create different reactions. How
did the listeners respond to the changes in vocal
qualities? What were the listeners’ emotional responses
to the various vocal qualities? Finally, have the listeners
imagine themselves as a client in crisis. What types of
vocal qualities would they prefer to hear?
ACTIVITY 4.3
CASE STUDY 4.1
Using Silence in Counseling
The following exchange between Aden and the counselor illustrates how important
silence can be in a crisis. Aden is an adult who presented to counseling with severe
symptoms of depression, suicidal ideation, and an attempted suicide yesterday with an
overdose of sleeping pills.
A"#$: 	I just want to die. All of the emotional pain, sadness, and
humiliation. I just had another miscarriage, my third one,
and I’m almost certain I’ll never have children. (Pauses for
15 seconds to think) On top of that, my partner is growing more
distant too, and I worry they might leave me for someone to
have a family with.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 104	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 104 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 6 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	105
Egan and Reese (2019) developed a conceptual framework for active nonverbal
listening using the acronym SOLER, which helps counselors remember key nonverbal
techniques that convey that they are physically and psychologically present with clients:
SOLER
S: → 	Squarely face the client. Sitting facing the client gives the impres-
sion of attentiveness and engagement.
O: → Adopt an open posture. An open posture can show that you are
available to listen, whereas crossed hands or legs can convey
unavailability. Appropriate posture includes sitting with your
hands either by your side or resting on your lap if you are writing.
L: → 	Lean (slightly) toward your client to convey your interest in
and engagement with them.
E: → 	Make eye contact. Maintain appropriate and culturally sensitive
eye contact to convey your interest and engagement.
R: → 	Stay relaxed. Try to be relaxed and natural with your client. This
helps put them at ease. Fidgeting or maintaining a rigid stance
can convey the impression you are not comfortable with your
client.
C%&$'#(%): 	So, you’re also feeling worried about how this is going to impact
your marriage and whether your partner will want to be with you.
A"#$: 	(Silence for 30 seconds as she looks down and to the right) Yes, but
I realize that if my partner truly cared for me, they would not
leave. I think maybe they’re just as hurt and in as much pain
as I am. It’s my own insecurities, really. (Pauses for 15 more
seconds) And if my partner did want to leave, then maybe
they’re not the right person for me to be with. Maybe I deserve
better than that.
C%&$'#(%): 	(Silence for 20 seconds as the counselor gathers her thoughts) So,
a couple of things are at work here. First, your partner’s
behavior could represent grieving, and your insecurities may
have distorted how you’ve been making sense of that grieving
behavior. And second, you realize that what’s important for
you is to be with someone who truly and genuinely cares for
you and is committed to the marriage.
Discussion Questions
1. How effective was the counselor’s use of silence?
2. What alternative responses may have also been helpful?
3. Put yourself in the position of the client. What would you have been thinking to
yourself during the periods of silence?
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.1
In this SAMHSA training seg-
ment, crisis workers knock on the
door of a couple who have been
impacted by a natural disaster.
The role play shows essential
attending skills such as rapport
building and empathy to create a
trusting relationship. What SOLER
techniques and attending skills
were used to create this trust?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jRPkSFhzM2U
Watch from 02:47 to 05:59
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 105	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 105 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 7 of 24 --

106 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
SOLER techniques help convey a counselor’s genuineness and respect toward the client
and put the client at ease. When applying SOLER, reflect on the extent to which your
posture communicates availability and openness to your client, and adjust accordingly.
Observe yourself on video during counseling role plays. Remember to relax!
THE BASIC LISTENING SEQUENCE
Learning Objective 4.3 Identify the basic listening sequence including asking open
and closed questions and reflecting skills.
The basic listening sequence represents a set of interrelated skills used to achieve three
overarching goals: (1) to obtain an overall summary and understanding of the client’s
presenting issue; (2) to identify the key facts of the client’s situation; and (3) to identify
the core emotions and feelings the client is experiencing (Ivey et al., 2022). In short, these
skills allow you to understand the structure of your client’s story. Using these skills, you
will not only convey empathy, respect, warmth, and congruence to your client but also
lay the foundation for your understanding of the client’s issues and the development of
subsequent interventions to help achieve a successful resolution to a crisis state.
The basic listening sequence involves the ability to ask open and closed questions
as well as the reflecting skills—paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, and summarizing. An
explanation and overview of these skills, examples of each skill in use, and some brief
exercises to help you practice these basic listening skills follow. But first, read Voices
from the Field 4.1.
Joseph “Chip” Cooper
Crisis intervention requires us to be both reflective
and active in our interventions, and it is important to
know when to use each. Here is an example of the
need to be active: I once had a client in crisis who set
her shirt on fire while sitting in the waiting room as
I was getting her file and preparing for the session.
This was not a time to reflect and listen! We put out
the fire; made sure she was not injured; and then
actively assessed suicidal/homicidal intent and safety
issues and developed a plan of action, which called
for her to be hospitalized. I had to take an active and
directive role in ensuring her safety. Crisis counseling
often requires us to be quick on our feet, explore
alternatives, and actively assist our clients in dealing
with their problems.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 4.1
Reflective and Active Interventions
Asking Open and Closed Questions
Questioning is a primary skill that allows crisis counselors to gather important and
specific information about clients. Questions allow counselors to make an accurate
assessment of their clients’ issues and to guide and focus clients so they can make the
most effective use of the counseling session. However, the use of questioning can be a
double-edged sword. Used inappropriately, questioning can impede communication
and block client disclosure. Drilling clients with questions can give too much control to
the crisis counselor. Moreover, bombarding clients with questions could confuse and
frustrate them as well as increase their level of anxiety.
Crisis counselors do not want counseling sessions to sound like an interrogation,
although many of the initial intake questions are used to gather information and are
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 106	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 106 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 8 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	107
therefore necessary in crisis intervention. Counselors must be careful to appropriately
pace the questions to guard against increasing clients’ stress levels. Thus, crisis counselors
need to be aware of how to use questions appropriately and pay close attention to the
types of questions used to gather information. The two types of questions, open and
closed questions, are examined next.
OPEN QUESTIONS 	Open questions usually elicit fuller and more meaningful responses
by encouraging the client to talk at greater length. Open questions typically begin with
what, how, could, would, or why and are useful to help begin an interview, elaborate the
client’s story, and bring out specific details (Ivey et al., 2022). With open questions,
the!client can choose the content and direction of the session and take more control. The
following guidelines illustrate the use of open questions for crisis workers:
1. To begin the interview: “What would you like to talk about today?” “How can I be
of help to you today?” “Tell me why you’ve come in today.”
2. To elicit details: “Give me an example.” “What do you mean by ‘just give up’?”
“What do you usually do when you’re feeling down?”
3. To enrich and deepen: “Tell me more.” “What were your feelings when that
happened?” “What else is important for me to know?” “In what ways does that help?”
4. Focus on plans: “What are some things you can do to stay safe?” “Who are some
people you can call when you feel this way again?” “How will you make that happen?”
Finally, be careful when using why questions and “leading” questions. Questions
that begin with why often cause the client to intellectualize and can lead to a discussion
of reasons. In addition, why questions can cause the client to become defensive, feel
criticized, or feel “put on the spot.” When this happens, it is not uncommon for the client
to become more guarded and to shut down.
For example, think back to a time when you were younger and your parents asked
the question, “Why did you do that?” How did you feel and what was your reaction?
Take a moment to consider the following: “Why do you hate yourself?” versus “You say
you hate yourself. Help me understand that.” Which of these approaches would you
prefer your counselor to use?
In addition to making clients become more defensive, why questions can also lead
clients to feel more hopeless and despondent, as in this example:
C%&$'#(%): 	Why do you continue to go back to a man who abuses you?
C(*#$+: 	I know, I know. It sounds pathetic.
C%&$'#(%): 	What draws you back to your partner? (An alternative open question)
Another roadblock to the use of effective questions involves leading questions.
Leading questions often contain a hidden agenda because the answer or expectation
is already imbedded within the question. Although well intentioned, these types of
questions place too much power in the hands of the crisis counselor and tend to push
the client in a preconceived direction. Here are a couple of examples of leading questions:
“You did not really want to kill yourself, did you?” or “Don’t you think you will feel
better if you stop drinking?” Guard against the use of these types of questions. Crisis
counselors want to hear a client’s story as the client understands and experiences it. Open
questions allow the counselor the opportunity to achieve this end without imposing
values and expectations on the client. Next, complete Think About It 4.1.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 107	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 107 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 9 of 24 --

108 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Think about your questioning skills. How can you use
open and closed questions effectively in your work
with clients during and outside of a crisis? Self-monitor
conversations with friends, colleagues, students, and
clients. What types of questioning techniques do you
use, and in what proportion? How can you improve?
THINK ABOUT IT 4.1
CLOSED QUESTIONS 	Closed questions can be used when crisis counselors need to
obtain very specific, concrete information and get all the facts straight. Such questions
typically either elicit a yes/no response or provide specific factual information, such as
the number of drinks a client consumes in a week or the age at which the client began
experiencing symptoms. In contrast to longer-term counseling, where information is
gathered more slowly and the treatment plan develops over many weeks, crisis
counseling often requires quick and focused responses. Thus, closed questions are very
useful and in fact necessary in crisis counseling because the counselor must gather
specific information to aid in the prompt assessment of the problem and development
of a plan of action (James & Gilliland, 2017). Here are some examples of closed questions:
“Are you thinking of killing yourself?”
“When did these symptoms begin?”
“Do you have a family member or friend to call on when you are feeling over-
whelmed?”
“How old were you when this traumatic event occurred?”
As seen in the above examples, closed questions are good for obtaining the necessary
details to aid in assessment and intervention when a client is in crisis. It is not unusual
for crisis sessions to integrate many closed questions for gathering pertinent information
related to the crisis. It is important to obtain the details needed for an assessment before
pursuing more open-ended answers since a counselor is never sure how much time one
will have with a client. At the same time, crisis counselors should still guard against the
overuse of closed questions, which can cause clients to shut down and simply wait for
the next question to answer.
Many agencies require the completion of a crisis intake form that includes questions
that a client is required to answer. One way to approach such questions and concurrently
get more information from the client on the presenting issue(s) is to use a question-tree
format. This format ensures that a crisis counselor asks the (surface) questions required
for the crisis intake as well as follow-up questions that may provide insight into the
client’s issue that would contribute to a more effective crisis plan. Using this format,
the!counselor asks the client a required closed question first, then proceeds with specific
follow-up questions that are dependent on the unique situation of the client and allow
for more detail. For example:
C%&$'#(%) (I$*+*,( Q&#'+*%$): 	When did you first start using cocaine?
C(*#$+: 	When I was 15 years old.
C%&$'#(%) (F%((%--U. Q&#'+*%$): 	Tell me what was happening in your life
when you were 15 years old, when you
first started using.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 108	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 108 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 10 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	109
There is a category of closed questions that is similar to leading questions and
should not be used. Referred to as negative interrogatives (James & Gilliland, 2017), they
are closed questions that are used in a subtle way to coerce the client into agreeing with
you. Questions that begin with don’t, doesn’t, isn’t, shouldn’t, aren’t, and wouldn’t often
suggest a command for the client to do something. For example, “Shouldn’t you stay
away from her?” or “Isn’t it a good idea to stop drinking?” imply the client should agree
with the crisis counselor and do something different. For counselors who want to work
collaboratively with clients, a better way to ask this question would be as follows: “You
stated earlier that one of the problems that brought you in today is your drinking. Would
you like some information on how I can be of help to you with that?” Next, review Case
Study 4.2, which shows how open and closed questions can be fluently integrated.
CASE STUDY 4.2
Effective Use of Open and Closed Questions during an Interview
The following dialogue provides a brief example of how the crisis counselor uses a
blend of open and closed questions to obtain important information about Dakota, who
just discovered a partner is having an affair and is planning on leaving the relationship.
Dakota presented with substantial suicidal ideation.
D,/%+,: 	I’ve gotten to where I can’t even sleep at night. My mind just
races, and I can’t stop thinking about everything.
C%&$'#(%): 	Tell me more about some of the thoughts you have been
having as you lay in bed unable to sleep. (Open question to
facilitate exploration and information gathering)
D,/%+,: 	That I will never be in a happy relationship again. That my
partner never really cared about me and just used me. That
this pain will never stop. I wonder how I can get my life back
together on my own.
C%&$'#(%): 	You wonder if you will find peace again without your
partner and want so much for this pain to go away. (Empathic
paraphrase) What are some of the feelings you have been
experiencing? (Open question)
D,/%+,: 	Mainly down, angry, and depressed. Like I said, I’ve been
thinking of checking out—ending it all. I feel this tremendous
pain inside my chest, very hurt and sad, I guess. I feel like my
partner never really cared about me and is just so selfish.
C%&$'#(%): 	You’re feeling very hurt and betrayed. When did you begin
experiencing these symptoms? (Closed question to identify
timeline of symptoms)
D,/%+,: 	I would say about 3 months ago, when I found out about the
affair, but they have gotten much worse over the last month.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 109	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 109 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 11 of 24 --

110 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
As Case Study 4.2 demonstrates, the crisis counselor began with open questions to
encourage exploration and to help identify the client’s thoughts (e.g., “I will never be in
a happy relationship again”) and feelings (e.g., anger, grief, and hurt) associated with
the breakup of the relationship. The crisis counselor then moved to closed
questions to obtain more specific information regarding the duration of the
symptoms and the counseling experience.
OPEN VERSUS CLOSED QUESTIONS 	As mentioned earlier, in crisis interven-
tion work, crisis counselors often need to use closed questions to quickly
identify and bring out specific details to seek the resolution of the crisis
state. However, they can often obtain the same information by asking open
questions, so counselors should try to refrain from moving too quickly into
a closed questioning approach unless they are unable to obtain the infor-
mation otherwise.
Consider the examples of closed questions and their open question
counterparts in Table 4.1. Notice in the examples in the table that you can
probably get all you need to know, and much more, by a subtle change in
the wording of your questions to make them more open in nature. Now
complete Activity 4.4 for some additional practice.
C%&$'#(%): 	You say they have gotten worse over the last month. What
do you make of that? (Open question to identify client’s
understanding of the progressing symptoms)
D,/%+,: 	Well, when I first found out about the affair, I would talk a lot
with my friends and family, but I felt like they were getting
sick of hearing me complain all the time. So lately I have just
been trying to tough it out and deal with it on my own.
C%&$'#(%): 	And is this the first time you’ve sought counseling for this?
D,/%+,: 	Yes.
Discussion Questions
1. How effective was the counselor’s use of open and closed questions?
2. What alternative responses by the counselor might also have been helpful?
3. Put yourself in the position of the client. What counselor responses would have
elicited even better or more informative responses by the client?
Take a moment to practice changing these questions
from closed to open questions.
1. Why did you quit your job?
2. Do you think you should stop using drugs?
3. Do you get 8 hours of sleep a night?
4. Did you feel angry with them?
5. Don’t you think there are other ways for you to
cope with your anger?
ACTIVITY 4.4
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.2
In this SAMHSA training
segment, crisis workers assist a
couple who have been impacted
by a natural disaster. The role
play shows effective use of
open questions and other basic
skills. What other questions
or counseling skills could you
integrate into the session?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jRPkSFhzM2U
Watch from 06:00 to 08:05
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 110	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 110 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 12 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	111
Reflecting Skills
Reflecting skills are a set of interventions used to help stimulate clients’ exploration of
their thoughts and feelings related to the presenting problems. At the most basic level,
reflecting skills are a form of active listening that conveys to the client your interest in
and understanding of what the client may be struggling with. Thus, reflecting skills
allow counselors to convey empathy, genuineness, and acceptance to clients, which in
turn facilitates the creation of a sense of safety. Moreover, reflecting skills stimulate a
deeper exploration and understanding of the problem so that the client can examine the
issues more objectively. The reflecting skills covered here are paraphrasing, restating,
reflecting feelings, and summarizing.
PARAPHRASING 	When counselors paraphrase, they feed back to the client the essence
of what the client just said. By paraphrasing, the counselor reflects the content and
thoughts of the client’s message. In other words, the crisis counselor is mirroring back
to the client, in a nonjudgmental way, an accurate understanding of the client’s
communication and the implied meaning of that communication. Thus, paraphrasing is
a reflecting skill used to convey empathic understanding and to facilitate the exploration
and clarification of the client’s problems (Ivey et al., 2022).
It is important for counselors to be sure the paraphrased information is accurate
by checking with the client. Some clients in crisis may not feel they can refute what is
being said, or their crisis state may impede their ability to completely follow the session.
However, paraphrasing gives these clients permission to approve or disapprove of the
accuracy of the paraphrase and its implied meaning, thereby increasing their control.
In crisis counseling, adding, “Is that correct” or “Did I hear you right” allows for both
accuracy and for clients to gain some control over situations where they may not have
held control. When the counselor paraphrases the client’s information inaccurately and
does not seek affirmation by the client, the counselor may define the actual primary
presenting problem inaccurately, which in turn may change the direction of the session
and/or interfere with the development of the most appropriate treatment plan for the
client. The importance of verifying understanding is compounded when the client needs
the counselor to use a more directive approach due to the severity of the crisis.
Closed 	Open
Were you afraid? 	What feelings did you experience?
Are you concerned about what you will do if
your partner returns?
How do you think you may react if your
partner returns?
Do you see your drinking as a problem? 	What concerns do you have about your
drinking?
Have you thought about hurting yourself? 	Tell me how you thought about hurting
yourself?
Do you need help? 	What help do you need?
Were you angry or sad? 	How did you feel?
TABLE 4.1 Open versus Closed Questions
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 111	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 111 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 13 of 24 --

112 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Young (2017) proposed that reflecting skills are important because
they provide the counselor with a way to do the following:
1. Communicate empathy.
2. Give feedback that enables the client to confirm or reject the impres-
sion being given.
3. Stimulate further exploration of what the client has been experiencing.
4. Capture important aspects of the client’s story that may have been
overlooked or covert. (pp. 123–124)
Thus, paraphrasing, if used appropriately, is a powerful therapeutic
tool. Appropriate use means crisis counselors must develop the ability to
take the essence of the client’s statement and reflect back those thoughts and
facts in their own words. When the counselor uses paraphrasing accurately,
the client will continue to explore and elaborate. On the other hand, the
counselor should not parrot back to the client what has been said. Parroting
back would be a simple word-for-word restatement, not a paraphrase.
Consider this example:
C (*#$+ : 	I feel so put down and disrespected by my partner. He is just
like my father in a lot of ways. He was verbally abusive and
full of anger. I never really felt important to him. Why do I let
him treat me this way?
C %&$'#(%) : 	You feel put down and disrespected by him. Is that correct?
As you can see from the above paraphrase, the crisis worker simply parrots back
what the client has said, which adds little and keeps the focus superficial. A better
response would be:
C %&$'#(%) : 	Although you are trying to understand this pattern of hurt and
disappointment that you’ve experienced from the important
men in your life, it sounds like you’re blaming yourself for
this. Am I hearing that correctly?
To develop your paraphrasing skills, you may find it helpful to first identify the
key words or content that captures the essence of your client’s concern. Once you have
the key content in mind, try to translate it into your own words. Examples of a client’s
statements, the possible key themes or words, and the resulting paraphrase follow.
EXAMPLE 1
Client: 	I’m so fed up with them. I try and try to get through to them, and they
just shut me out.
Possible key themes or words: 	fed up, being shut out, failed efforts to connect
Paraphrase: 	You are at your wit’s end with this. Despite your efforts to connect,
you come up against a closed door. Is that correct?
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.3
In this video, the counselor
demonstrates an effective use of
a paraphrase in crisis counseling
by adding the stem, “Is that
accurate?” This stem allows for
both a check for accuracy and
for clients to gain some control
over situations. Practice add-
ing this stem in some informal
conversations and track the
response from the recipients.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 112	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 112 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 14 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	113
EXAMPLE 2
Client: 	Exactly, and that’s why I’ve been thinking about leaving the relationship.
I know I deserve much better, but I just keep going back. I can’t seem to make that
first move.
Possible key themes or words: 	leaving the relationship, being stuck, hesitation, self-
worth
Paraphrase: 	Although a part of you knows this is not the way you want to live
your life, it is still difficult to break out of this cycle. Is that right?
Think about the following client statements and try to
identify the key themes or words. Then, based on these
key themes or words, develop a paraphrase of your
client’s statement.
1. “I don’t know what to do with my life. I hate
my job and everything seems so meaningless.
I can barely muster the energy to get out of bed
in the morning. Sometimes I just want to sleep
for days.”
2. “I’m still in shock that my partner is having an
affair. I really can’t believe it. I thought we had
the perfect marriage. How could I have been so
stupid to not see this was happening? I feel like
such a fool.”
3. “I can’t tell if I am coming or going. I can’t
sleep, I have nightmares, and I feel like a zombie
throughout the day. I am so tense my body
aches. No matter what I do, it just keeps getting
worse.”
ACTIVITY 4.5
As you can see from these examples, identifying the key words or themes can aid in
your ability to develop accurate paraphrases that convey the essence of your client’s
meaning without coming across as superficial. Complete Activity 4.5 to practice your
paraphrasing skills.
RESTATING 	Often restatements can be confused with the skill of paraphrasing. In crisis
counseling, the skill of restatements is intended to focus or direct the priority of the
crisis and include the client’s exact words. A client may be in such emotional turmoil
that many themes may emerge in the session. The counselor should understand the
priority is first on risk issues followed by the issues that led to the risk. The underlying
issues would be secondary for crisis work and the focus of long-term counseling goals
once the primary risk is identified and addressed.
For example, a crisis counselor may be working with a client who is suicidal due
to an estrangement. Risk assessment (suicidal ideation) would be the primary focus
in crisis work. In these situations, the counselor may need to direct the focus of the
session. A restatement may be short, perhaps a single word or brief phrase to focus on
the priority.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 113	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 113 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 15 of 24 --

114 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
For instance, consider the following:
C(*#$+: 	I have not been able to sleep or concentrate ever since my
parent found out I was gay and kicked me out of the house.
I just do not see a future for me and have been having
thoughts of wanting to die.
This statement has many issues to be explored: the revelation, the estrangement, the
change in baseline functioning, and the desire to die. In crisis work, the restatement
would be a short phrase of the client’s exact words, “wanting to die,” to direct the session
on the risk assessment.
Restatement: Your life has changed dramatically, and you want to die.
REFLECTING FEELINGS 	A wealth of research attests to the usefulness of accessing and
working with feelings and emotions in counseling (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 2006).
Naming and identifying a client’s feelings can serve several important functions
(Young, 2017). By reflecting feelings, a crisis counselor can help the client become aware
of the emotions experienced in relation to the issue at hand. This awareness can increase
the client’s level of self-awareness and deepen self-disclosure. In addition, reflecting
feelings can have a positive impact on the therapeutic relationship, and research has
shown the quality of the therapeutic relationship to be one of the strongest predictors of
counseling outcomes (Horvath et al., 2012). Moreover, it is not necessarily the specific
theoretical approach of the counselor but the strength of the therapeutic relationship
that is associated with the successful achievement of a client’s counseling goals.
The therapeutic relationship should be characterized by an experience of mutual
liking, trust, and respect between the client and the counselor. In addition, counselor
qualities such as accurate empathy, unconditional positive regard, and genuineness
greatly contribute to the development of the helping relationship. Thus, the reflecting
skills play an important role in the development of this vital working alliance by
conveying these “relationship enhancers” to a client (Young, 2017). As with paraphrasing,
reflecting feelings can promote the development of accurate empathy and help to create
a safe environment for the client. Also, verifying the accuracy of the reflected feelings—
for example, by adding “is that correct” or “did I hear you right”—ensures accuracy
and enables clients to gain some control over situations where they may not have felt in
control. Now read Voices from the Field 4.2.
Joseph “Chip” Cooper
Clients often come to counseling in crisis. They may be
feeling overwhelmed, confused, think they are going
“crazy,” or, in more serious cases, feeling suicidal or
homicidal. In these situations, our own anxiety might lead
us to become overly directive, give unwanted advice, or
drill clients with questions. However, I have found doing
the opposite is the key. In other words, using reflecting
skills in these situations can go a long way to help a client
become more emotionally regulated. Simple paraphrases,
reflecting feelings, and even silence can help the client
to feel understood, accepted, and safe. And clients are
more likely to take the risk of changing and developing
a healthy plan of action when they feel safe.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 4.2
Reflecting Your Way through a Crisis
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 114	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 114 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 16 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	115
To reflect feelings, a crisis counselor must be able to recognize and put words to
those feeling states observed in the client. What is the best way to practice reflecting
feelings? One way is to work on becoming more aware of your own feelings and being
able to accurately name them. Doing so will help you accurately recognize and name
the feelings clients may be experiencing. For example, when people are asked, “How
are you feeling right now?” the most common responses are “fine,” “good,” and “okay.”
Notice, however, that these responses do not reflect feelings and do not provide any
understanding of what a person may actually be feeling.
It is important to be able to not only correctly identify and name the core feelings
we all experience as humans (e.g., anger, sadness, fear, surprise, joy, love, disgust)
but also accurately recognize and name our moment-to-moment feeling states that
represent the finer shadings of those core emotions. For example, some of the finer
shadings of the word anger are irritated, bitter, enraged, frustrated, and furious. By
increasing your feelings awareness and feelings word vocabulary, you will be able
to identify and respond to a client’s feelings more easily and correctly. Again, due
to the nature of individuals in crises, it is important to confirm the accuracy of your
reflections.
How does a counselor identify a client’s feelings, especially if these feelings are not
explicitly stated? When clients do not state their feelings directly, counselors may still be
able to infer these feelings either from the context of a client’s communication or from
the client’s nonverbal behaviors (e.g., facial expression, posture). Thus, it is important
to attend to not only what is being said but also how it is being communicated. The
following practical tips will aid you in identifying and reflecting a client’s feelings (Evans
et al., 2017; Ivey et al., 2022):
1. To aid in identifying a client’s feelings:
a. Pay attention to the affective component of the client’s communication.
b. Pay attention to the client’s behavior (e.g., posture, tone of voice, facial
expression).
c. Use a broad range of words to correctly identify the client’s emotions.
d. Silently name the client’s feeling(s) to yourself.
2. To aid in reflecting feelings to a client:
a. Use an appropriate introductory phrase: “Sounds like!.!.!.!” “Looks like!.!.!.!”
“You feel!.!.!.!” “It seems!.!.!.!.”
b. Add a feeling word or emotional label to the stem: “Sounds like you’re angry.”
c. Add a context or brief paraphrase to help anchor or broaden the reflection. This
context should add the link or meaning for the perceived feeling: “Sounds like
you’re angry at your parents’ refusal to put you in their will.”
d. Pay attention to the tense. Present tense reflections can often be more powerful
than past tense reflections: “You feel angry” versus “You felt angry.”
e. Do not repeat the client’s exact words (parroting).
f. Reflect mixed emotions: “You’re feeling both angry and hurt about your parents’
behavior toward you.”
g. Check out the accuracy of the reflection of feeling with the client: “Am I hearing
you correctly? Is that close? Have I got that right?”
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 115	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 115 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 17 of 24 --

116 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Consider the following example:
C(*#$+: 	I just sit around the house wondering what to do. We used
to spend time with my partner’s friends, but they know that
we’re no longer together. So, there is no one for me to really
spend time with. I really miss them, and my own friends seem
so busy. I would hate to burden them with all my problems.
C%&$'#(%): 	You’re feeling both sad and lonely right now, and you’re
concerned you may be just another burden on your own
friends. Is that about right? (Reflection of feeling with check for
accuracy)
C(*#$+: 	Yes, I don’t want to bring everyone down with all my
problems.
There is one last point to consider when reflecting feelings. Whereas in traditional
psychotherapy the focus is often on uncovering feeling after feeling by attempting to
unearth a core issue, in crisis intervention work, the task is quite different. Thus, guard
against going too far with uncovering feelings, as this could exacerbate the client’s crisis
state with overwhelming emotions. Strive for a balance of skills to build rapport, and
when you do reflect feelings, be sure to keep the focus directly related to the client’s
presenting concerns (James & Gilliland, 2017). Complete Activity 4.6, which gives you
an opportunity to practice identifying feelings so you can develop accurate reflections
of feelings. Then complete Think About It 4.2.
Take a moment to read each of the following vignettes
and identify the feelings embedded within the client’s
communications. Once you have identified the feelings,
come up with your own reflection of feelings.
1. “I don’t know what to do. My partner keeps
working late into the night, and I feel like I never
get to see them. When we do get some time
together, they are moody and reserved. To make
matters worse, I saw a charge on our credit card
statement to a local hotel. I think they are having
an affair.”
2. “Ever since I was mugged, I’ve been having a
hard time. Because of the nightmares, I can’t
sleep at night, and I’m exhausted all day. On top
of that, I’m panicky and nervous all the time.
I worry I might be losing my mind.”
3. “I can’t believe what my father did. He stole all
the money from the trust fund my grandmother
had willed to my brother and me. I’ve been call-
ing him day and night, and he won’t return my
calls. I might have to get a lawyer, but I don’t
know how I’m going to afford it. Why would he
do this to us?”
ACTIVITY 4.6
Think about your skills in identifying and reflecting
feelings. How skilled are you at identifying your feelings
and the feelings of friends, colleagues, and clients?
How skilled are you at reflecting those feelings? Self-
monitor conversations you have over the next week and
practice identifying and reflecting the feelings of others.
THINK ABOUT IT 4.2
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 116	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 116 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 18 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	117
SUMMARIZING 	The final skill in the basic listening sequence is summarizing, a process
through which a crisis counselor can begin to put together the key themes, feelings, and
issues that the client has presented. By distilling the key issues and themes and reflecting
this back to the client, counselors can begin to help clients make sense of what may have
originally seemed to be an overwhelming and confusing experience. In addition, when
clients are feeling overwhelmed and are flooded with anxiety, they will often go on
tangents in many directions, making it difficult for the crisis counselor to keep up. When
this occurs, brief summaries are often a useful tool to help refocus the client and reintroduce
some structure into the session, which will help modulate the client’s (and the counselor’s)
anxiety. Thus, a summary not only is used to end a session or to begin a new session by
recapping the previous session, but it also can be used periodically throughout the session,
helping to keep a focus and put together the pertinent issues at hand for the client.
So, when should a crisis counselor summarize? Although much will depend on
the client and the content being discussed, Evans et al. (2017) offered a number of useful
suggestions to help determine when a summary is in order: (1) when your client is
rambling, confused, or overly lengthy in comments; (2) when your client presents a
number of unrelated ideas; (3) when you need to provide direction to the interview;
(4) when you are ready to move the client from one phase of the interview to the next;
(5) when you want to end the interview; and (6) when a summary of the prior interview
will provide you an opening to the current interview.
When summarizing, you do not have to report back to the client every single
disclosed detail. This would, of course, require a prodigious memory. The key is to
capture the important elements, content, feelings, and issues and to reflect these back
to the client in a concise manner. The following three types of summaries are particularly
relevant to crisis intervention counseling:
1. Focusing summaries are often used at the beginning of the session to pull together
prior information the client has given and to provide a focus to the session. “Last
time we met you were having trouble sleeping, having nightmares and feeling
panicky throughout the day. We identified some coping skills and relaxation
exercises for you to use. Tell me how these have worked for you so far.”
2. Signal summaries are used to signal to the client that you have captured the essence
of the topic and that the session can move on to the next area of concern. Signal
summaries help to provide both structure and direction to the session. “So before
we move on, let me make sure I understand things correctly. You discovered your
partner is having an affair!.!.!.!.”
3. Planning summaries help provide closure and are used to recap the progress, plans,
and any recommendations or agreements made. Such summaries are good for
ending the session on a positive note and for providing a sense of direction for
the client. “Let’s take a look at what we’ve covered today. Ever since you were
mugged, you’ve been having panic attacks and nightmares. We covered some
coping techniques and relaxation exercises for you to practice between now and
the next time we meet!.!.!.!.” (Young, 2017, pp. 161–163)
So, to put it all together, here is one more example of a summary statement: “Let
me see if I understand you correctly. Yesterday you found out your son has been using
cocaine for the last 6 months and has stolen money from you on several occasions. You
are experiencing a mixture of feelings, especially shock and anger, and you are worried
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 117	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 117 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 19 of 24 --

118 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
he might turn out to be an addict like your parent was. However, you are determined
to do all you can to not let that happen. How about discussing some possible directions
we can go in from here?” Note that this summary captures the key issues and feelings
without being too wordy and offers a transition for the counselor and client to begin
identifying some action steps to take. Case Study 4.3 provides an example of reflecting
skills in practice.
CASE STUDY 4.3
Integrating Paraphrasing, Reflected Feelings, and Summarizing
The following dialogue between Beck and the crisis counselor demonstrates the skills of
paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, and summarizing:
B#0/: 	I really thought things were going well with my partner, so it
came as a complete shock when I found out about the affair.
C%&$'#(%): 	You were really blindsided by this. (Paraphrase)
B#0/: 	Exactly! And I’ve been trying to push away the pain, but I can’t
seem to stop thinking about it. Sometimes I just want to strangle
them for putting me through this. Other times I want to die!
C%&$'#(%): 	Even though you want so much for the pain to go away, it
is still there, especially your hurt and anger. Is that right?
(Paraphrase with a reflection of feeling)
B#0/: 	Yes, and sometimes I can’t tell which is worse, my anger or
just the hurt I’m going through. I sometimes lie in bed at night
and wish something terrible would happen to my ex. I’m not
saying I want to kill them or anything, but I just want my ex to
suffer like I’m suffering.
C%&$'#(%): 	And this reflects the intensity of your grief right now, wanting
to see your ex suffer, too. (Reflection of feeling)
B#0/: 	Very true.
C%&$'#(%): 	So, in essence, you never expected something like this to
happen to you, and it has been difficult for you to tough it out
and to push away the pain, grief, and anger that you have been
feeling. Is that about right? (Summary with check for accuracy)
Discussion Questions
1. How effective was the counselor’s use of paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, and
summarizing?
2. What alternative responses may also have been helpful?
3. Put yourself in the position of the client. What counselor responses would have
elicited even better or more informative responses by the client?
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 118	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 118 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 20 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	119
DEESCALATING CLIENT EMOTIONS
Learning Objective 4.4 Describe basic deescalation skills to help clients regulate
emotions.
There are four primary objectives when counseling agitated clients: safety, client
emotion management to regain control, avoidance of physical restraint, and avoidance
of escalating coercive interventions. Richmond et al. (2012) reviewed the literature on
verbal deescalation of agitated patients and suggested the following guidelines for
environment, people, and preparedness:
• Physical space should be designed for safety.
• Staff should be appropriate for the job.
• Staff must be adequately trained.
• An adequate number of trained staff must be available.
• Objective scales should be used to assess agitation (pp. 18–20)
Richmond et al. (2012) also determined that 10 domains of deescalation exist
that help practitioners in their care of agitated clients. These domains and the key
recommendations associated with them appear in Table 4.2.
Domain 	Recommendations
Domain 1: Respect personal space. 	Respect the client’s and your personal space.
Domain 2: Do not be provocative. 	Avoid iatrogenic (body language) escalation.
Domain 3: Establish verbal
contact.
Have only one person verbally interact with the client.
Introduce yourself to the client and provide orientation
and reassurance.
Domain 4: Be concise. 	Be concise and keep it simple. Repetition is essential to
deescalation.
Domain 5: Identify wants and
feelings.
Use free information to identify wants and feelings.
Domain 6: Listen closely to what
the client is saying.
Use active listening.
Domain 7: Agree or agree to
disagree.
Domain 8: Lay down the law and
set clear limits.
Establish basic working conditions. Limit setting must be
reasonable and done in a respectful manner. Coach the
client in how to stay in control.
Domain 9: Offer choices and
optimism.
Offer choices. Broach the subject of medications. Be
optimistic and provide hope.
Domain 10: Debrief the client and
staff.
Debrief the client. Debrief the staff.
Source: Based on Richmond et al. (2012).
TABLE 4.2 The Domains of Deescalation and Associated Recommendations
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 119	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 119 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 21 of 24 --

120 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Types of Aggression
It is important to remember that the association between agitation and aggression is
not fully understood in causal terms (Nordstrom & Allen, 2007). Richmond et al. (2012)
summarized four different types of aggression and suggested that each type required a
different style of intervention: (1) instrumental aggression, (2) fear-driven aggression,
(3) irritable aggression based on boundary violations, and (4) irritable aggression based
on chronic anger. Instrumental aggression is generally used by people who have learned
that they can get their way through threats or actual violence. So, if a client makes an
overt threat, unspecified counteroffers should be used. For example:
C(*#$+: 	If I don’t get what I want, I’m gonna hurt someone bad.
(Might be countered with . . . )
C%&$'#(%): 	That is not a good idea.
C(*#$+: 	Why not?
C%&$'#(%): 	Let’s not find out. Now, you were saying that!.!.!.!
In fear-driven aggression, the client is on the defensive and may behave aggressively
to protect against being hurt. In such situations, the counselor should give the client
plenty of personal space, three to four times the normal space, and match the client’s
pace and rhythm until the client is fully focusing on the content of the discussion rather
than the internal state of fear. For example:
C(*#$+: 	I’m so angry! I’m so angry!!
C%&$'#(%): 	I can help you calm down and fix things. I can help you calm
down and fix things.
Irritable aggression stems from two causes: boundary violations and chronic anger.
Irritable aggression based on boundary violations is usually displayed by individuals who
have experienced some humiliation or interpersonal violation and are trying to put
their world back into some semblance of order. For example, a close friend may have
betrayed the client and the client is struggling to regain self-integrity and self-esteem
while perceiving that life and other individuals are unfair. Usually, the best approach
in this instance is to agree with the client that anger is a justifiable emotion, in principle,
but that the resolution to the problem cannot occur while enraged. For example, “I want
to know more about your situation and help you, but I can’t until you get control over
your emotions so we can talk about it and figure out what to do and what not to do.”
Finally, irritable aggression based on chronic anger is displayed by clients who are angry
at the world and seem to be looking for ready excuses to “lose it.” Their behavior is
characterized by erratic and unrealistic demands aimed at relieving the pressure they
allow to build up. They create fear and confusion through feigned or real attacks. When
interacting with an escalated, chronically aggressive client, it is essential not to appear
defensive or startled but to respond in an emotionless manner, repetitively offering choices
and options for resolving or deescalating the situation. Let the client know that when they
are willing to cooperate, you are more than willing to work with the client. Set firm limits
but be prepared to engage in physical restraint, if required. Unfortunately, chronically
aggressive patients often push the limits by doing the opposite of what you have asked.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 120	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 120 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 22 of 24 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	121
Handling Aggression
The National Association of Social Workers (NASW; 2017) notes that reasoning with
angry, out-of-control people is not likely possible. In such cases, deescalation becomes the
primary goal. Reasoning and problem solving are possible only after deescalation occurs.
Deescalation requires the counselor to remain calm, even when one is frightened and angry.
Professional counselors are well advised to practice deescalation interventions repeatedly
until they become automatic. NASW provides recommendations on a practitioner’s
physical stance and verbal interventions when faced with an aggressive client.
Regarding physical stance:
1. Never turn your back!.!.!.!
2. Always be at the same eye level!.!.!.!
3. Allow extra physical space!.!.!.!
4. Do not stand full front to client. Stand at an angle so you can sidestep away if
needed.
5. Do not maintain constant eye contact.
6. Do not point or shake your finger.
7. DO NOT smile. This could look like mockery or anxiety.
8. Do not touch!.!.!.!physical contact [is easily misinterpreted] as hostile or threatening.
9. Keep hands out of your pockets, up and available to protect yourself!.!.!.!
10. Don’t be defensive, judgmental!.!.!.!or parental!.!.!.!. (pp. 1–2)
Regarding verbal deescalation interventions:
1. !.!.!.![C]almly bring the level of arousal down!.!.!.!
2. Do not get loud or!.!.!.!yell!.!.!.!Wait until [they] take a breath; then talk. Speak calmly
at an average volume.
3. Respond selectively; answer all informational questions [but]!.!.!.!DO NOT answer
abusive questions.
4. Explain limits and rules in an authoritative, firm, but always respectful tone. Give
choices!.!.!.!
5. Empathize with feelings but not with the behavior!.!.!.!
6. Suggest alternative behaviors where appropriate!.!.!.!
7. Give the consequences of inappropriate behavior without threats
or anger.
8. Represent external controls as institutional rather than personal.
9. If you assess that de-escalation is not working, STOP! You will know
within 2 or 3 minutes!.!.!.!Tell the person to leave, escort [them] to the
door, call for help, or leave!.!.!.!and call the police. (p. 2)
Defusing Through Reflection
Finally, at a more basic level, when reflecting feelings, a useful way to help
defuse a client in an emotional crisis state is to also reflect the client’s stated,
or unstated, need or goal that is implied within the context of their narrative.
Because of the interpretive aspects, checking for accuracy is also important
with this skill. The formula for this would be: “You feel ________ because
________ and you want (or need) ________.” For example:
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.4
Although this training video
reenactment is made for law
enforcement, it demomstrates
excellent use of deescalation
techniques to effectively inter-
vene in a mental health crisis.
As part of a crisis response
team, can you identify the
steps that were effective in
this intervention?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=JERkZoWGLWQ
Watch from 00:00 to 04:49
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 121	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 121 	06/04/23 7:39 PM	06/04/23 7:39 PM

-- 23 of 24 --

122 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
C!"#$%: 	Every time I do something for her, it’s not good enough and she
puts me down. (Yelling) It’s all I can do to keep from killing her!
C&'$(#!&): 	You’re feeling so angry and hurt right now because she puts you
down, and you really want to be more respected and valued in
your relationship. Is that correct?
Here is another example:
C!"#$%: 	(Sobbing, holding herself, and rocking and shaking) I can’t take
it anymore. After my husband and daughter were killed in
the car accident, everything just fell apart for me. I just think
maybe I should be dead too.
C&'$(#!&): 	You’re feeling so much pain and grief because of the loss of your
family, and you want so much to find your own peace now.
Is that how you feel?
Deescalation is about transferring calmness to the client and showing genuine
interest in what the client has to say. Be respectful, set clear limits, and trust that you have
supplied the conditions that allow the client to want to respond positively. If the client
possesses a weapon, do not be a hero and try to deescalate the situation; simply comply
(NASW, 2017). In a crisis, the above interventions can go a long way to helping your
client feel safe with you, to diffuse overwhelming emotions, and to set the groundwork
to begin working on a plan of action.
SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed the basic counseling
skills used in crisis intervention work. Using
these skills will help counselors develop a
relationship with clients and create a safe
therapeutic environment. Nonverbal attending
behaviors such as appropriate eye contact, body
position, and tone of voice communicate interest,
warmth, and understanding to the client. Be sure
to face the client and adopt an open, relaxed,
and attentive body posture while maintaining
culturally appropriate eye contact. Tone of voice
should be steady and clear and should be used
to convey a sense of safety, warmth, and security
for the client.
The skills covered in the basic listening
sequence include asking open and closed
questions, paraphrasing, restating, reflecting
feelings, and summarizing. The basic listening
sequence enables counselors to gather important
information about the client’s issues and to
develop trust and rapport. This allows the
crisis counselor to begin the collaborative
process of determining a plan of action for the
client. Open and closed questions are used to
gather information, to aid in assessment, and
to provide focus and direction to the session.
Paraphrasing is used to mirror back to the
client, in a nonjudgmental way and in one’s own
words, an accurate understanding of the client’s
communication. A restatement is intended
to focus or direct the priority of the crisis and
include the client’s exact words. Reflecting
feelings is used to convey an understanding of the
client’s emotional experience. In crisis situations,
the use of these skills should be checked for
accuracy. Summarizing puts together the pieces,
helping the client make sense of what may have
originally seemed to be an overwhelming and
confusing experience. Summarizing can also
be used to keep the session focused, to provide
direction to the interview, and to provide closure
to the session by reviewing the progress, plans,
and any recommendations/agreements made.
By using these skills appropriately, you create
the necessary conditions for positive change.
Four primary objectives when counseling
agitated clients include safety, client emotion
management to regain control, avoidance of
physical restraint, and avoidance of escalating
coercive interventions.
M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 122	M04_Jackson_4_78918.indd 122 	10/04/23 6:15 PM	10/04/23 6:15 PM

-- 24 of 24 --

