1	Hori a, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2018-224935
Case report
Enhancement of PTSD treatment through social
support in Idobata-Nagaya community housing after
Fukushima’s triple disaster
arinobu Hori,1,2 tomohiro Morita,3 Izumi Yoshida,4 Masaharu tsubokura3,5
Novel treatment (new drug/intervention; established drug/procedure in new situation)
To cite: Hori a, Morita t,
Yoshida I, et al. BMJ Case
Rep published online First:
[please include Day Month
Year]. doi:10.1136/bcr-2018-
224935
1
Department of psychiatry, Hori
Mental Clinic, Fukushima, Japan
2
Department of Disaster and
Comprehensive Medicine,
Fukushima Medical University
school of Medicine, Fukushima,
Japan
3
Internal Medicine, soma
Central Hospital, Fukushima,
Japan
4semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary
5
Department of public Health,
Fukushima Medical University
school of Medicine, Fukushima,
Japan
Correspondence to
Dr arinobu Hori,
arinobu.h@gmail. com
accepted 31 May 2018
Summary
Cognitive–behavioural therapy is a first-line treatment
for post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsD), but it is difficult
to implement in disaster settings. We report the case of
an 80-year-old Japanese woman, who was diagnosed
with ptsD after the 2011 triple disaster (earthquake,
tsunami and nuclear plant accident) in Fukushima. Her
recovery was greatly enhanced by the social support
she received while living in Idobata-Nagaya community
housing, established by soma city in Fukushima,
where residents could naturally discuss their traumatic
experiences. Habituation to traumatic memories and
processing of cognitive aspects of the psychological
trauma, which are therapeutic mechanisms of trauma-
focused psychotherapies, spontaneously occurred in this
setting. the details of this case support the effectiveness
of Idobata Nagaya as a provider of psychological first
aid, an evidence-informed approach to assist children,
adolescents, adults and families in the aftermath of a
disaster.
BaCkground
In most clinical situations involving post-traumatic
stress 	disorder 	(PTSD), 	cognitive–behavioural
therapy (CBT) is the standard treatment. 1 2
However, CBT has several requirements. The ther-
apies that comprise CBT incur costs for time,
labour and therapists’ expertise, and address the
psychological pain of patients remembering trau-
matic memories. Therefore, it is difficult to adapt
CBT as an intervention to many situations, espe-
cially those with limited resources, such as postdi-
saster settings.
Psychological first aid (PFA) is a trusted mental-
health approach used worldwide to prevent
PTSD after a disaster. 3–5 Although PFA is not a
specific therapeutic method for PTSD, it has
been endorsed as an early response for persons
affected by disasters and major traumatic events. 3
It is supported mainly because it does not incur
large costs or consume the resources of local
clinical facilities. The central objective of PFA
after a disaster is to provide practical assistance
for coping with difficult living situations, such as
ensuring physical safety and restoring connections
among people. 3–5 However, little information is
available concerning how to provide PFA to survi-
vors of traumatic events after a disaster.
Among the many health-related impacts of the
Great East-Japan Earthquake and tsunami, followed
by the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant
accident on 11 March 2011, radiation exposure
was a major public health concern. However, the
disasters’ effects were not limited to those caused
by radiation exposure. Psychiatric disorders, espe-
cially PTSD, were prevalent in the disaster-affected
areas.6 7 After the disaster, the number of persons
suffering from acute stress disorder or PTSD who
visited psychiatric outpatient clinics increased in
2011, but returned to predisaster levels in 2012. 8
As resources were limited, we speculate that many
individuals did not consult doctors even if they
experienced symptoms. 8 9
Soma city is located 40–50 km north of the
collapsed nuclear power plant. It was severely
damaged by the nuclear disaster as well as the earth-
quake and subsequent tsunami. Although many
residents lost their houses and family members,
some were too old to rebuild their daily lives by
themselves. Therefore, Soma’s local government
built community housing called Idobata Nagaya,
which consisted of 5 buildings and 58 private living
areas. In addition to providing housing, it was
intended to strengthen the emotional ties among
the disaster survivors residing in the community. To
create a new community among the older residents,
lunch was served and residents spent approximately
3 hours together in the dining room daily. Thus, the
community residence functioned as a provider of
PFA for the disaster survivors.
Here, we report the case of an 80-year-old
Japanese woman, who was diagnosed with PTSD
after Fukushima’s triple disaster. Her recovery was
greatly enhanced by the social support she received
as a resident of Idobata Nagaya. The details of this
case support the effectiveness of Idobata Nagaya as
a provider of PFA.
CaSe preSenTaTion
This case concerns an 80-year-old Japanese woman
who visited the clinic 5 years after the disaster,
suspecting that she had dementia; ‘forgetfulness’
was her main complaint.
This woman was born in a village near the Pacif-
ic-coast fishery. She was married with two children;
her husband passed away at a young age, so she
worked for manufacturing industry. After retiring
from her job, she helped her parents with their
on 25 February 2026 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2018-224935 on 19 June 2018. Downloaded from

-- 1 of 4 --

2 	Hori a, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2018-224935
novel treatment (new drug/intervention; established drug/procedure in new situation)
fishing business and continued to live alone. Her medical history
was unremarkable.
In the village where her parents lived, the damage from the
tsunami was severe; 14 relatives, including her older brother and
sister and her brother’s son were lost, but she was able to escape
from the tsunami by driving a car by herself. Her two children
were alive. More than 50 people died in the village, which orig-
inally had 573 residents. She looked for her older sister’s body
until she found the corpse 40 days after the disaster. Moreover,
this woman was asked by the police to view the bodies of more
than 10 deceased individuals to confirm their identities.
The woman lived alone in an old house that had collapsed due
to the earthquake, so she moved into temporary housing. She
moved to Idobata Nagaya after it opened in May 2013. As all
the residents had experienced the tsunami, they enthusiastically
discussed their traumatic memories and listened intently to the
others’ stories daily during lunchtime. Parties were hosted there
two times a week, a dance class was held once a week and nurses
and doctors visited monthly. Even though she did not have any
relatives nor old friends in Idobata Nagaya, she was well adapted
and very satisfied with her life there.
In the autumn of 2016, a female resident of the commu-
nity residence began to exhibit symptoms of Alzheimer’s-type
dementia. She sometimes became delusional and accused other
residents of stealing her belongings. Our patient who was also
accused and called a thief by this woman was shocked and
became very sad and angry because she felt as if she was losing
her honourable position as a faithful member in Idobata Nagaya.
Her symptoms of forgetfulness started after this episode.
While driving her car, the woman noticed that she was driving in
a different direction from her intended destination, and that she
had driven through a red light. She became preoccupied with the
idea that she might also have dementia. She decided to visit our
clinic for her first consult.
inveSTigaTionS
Our patient’s score on the Post-traumatic Diagnostic Scale (PDS)
was 19 points. 10
differenTial diagnoSiS
Alzheimer’s-type dementia.
TreaTmenT
At her first visit to the clinic, no signs of dementia were
confirmed. The woman’s chief complaint of ‘forgetfulness’ was
judged a dissociative symptom of PTSD. Other PTSD symptoms,
such as re-experiencing the traumatic event, avoidance and
hyperarousal were noted. 1
We hypothesised that our patient’s PTSD symptoms were
more severe when she first moved to Idobata Nagaya, but they
improved due to a well-supported life at Idobata Nagaya and
her joining in conversations with other survivors there. After our
patient became involved in the conflict with the female resident
with dementia, she experienced symptoms of relapse and coinci-
dently sought help at our clinic.
We prescribed an selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
(sertraline 25 mg) as a medical intervention, provided psycholog-
ical education about PTSD (including its dissociative symptoms),
and told our patient she did not have dementia, which contrib-
uted to the improvement of her symptoms. 1 11 12
We recommended that she take specific psychotherapies for
PTSD such as prolonged exposure therapy, but she refused our
recommendations with a facial expression of strong fear.
ouTCome and follow-up
Subsequently, the woman’s symptoms improved dramatically,
and there were no more episodes of ‘driving without noticing
red lights’. She took the SSRI for almost 3 months.
When we visited Idobata Nagaya for a follow-up investigation
in the autumn of 2017, the woman’s PDS score had decreased
by 18 points to 1. 10
diSCuSSion
Among the interventions used to prevent the development of
PTSD after disasters, PFA is a trusted mental-health approach
worldwide; however, little information is available about
providing PFA for individuals with PTSD.
We examined the case of a patient who underwent a serious
traumatic experience after the Fukushima disasters. Although
the patient had been experiencing PTSD symptoms for five and
one-half years prior to visiting our clinic, a very good clinical
outcome was observed despite the short medical intervention.
A possible reason was that the stable environment provided by
Idobata Nagaya was conducive to the establishment of warm
mutual relationships with other survivors and supporters, and to
the prevention of isolation. These factors are essential compo-
nents of PFA: attempt to provide ‘safety and comfort’, ‘practical
assistance’ and ‘connections with social support’. 3–5 Moreover,
exposure to traumatic memories was spontaneous among the
residents, and their discussions about them were considerate
and thorough. These discussions might have fostered their
habituation to traumatic memories and the processing of cogni-
tive aspects of psychological trauma, which are therapeutic
mechanisms of CBT in the treatment of PTSD. 13 14 It is likely
that this inadvertent therapy became possible due to the close
ties between the residents. The entire community had experi-
enced earthquakes and tsunamis and had lived connected lives.
Although the evidence is still evolving, it appears that early inter-
ventions that reconnect victims with their families, social support
systems and known resources might be most effective in facili-
tating recovery.3–5 15 The approach used by Soma city to develop
Idobata Nagaya was congruent with the principles and practices
recommended by PFA after a disaster. In contrast, Morita et al
reported a case of alcohol use disorder due to social isolation
after the nuclear disaster in Fukushima.16 Hence, we emphasise
the importance of emotional ties among disaster survivors in the
improvement of their mental health.
The patient did not have dementia but was experiencing disso-
ciative symptoms, which are common in PTSD. 1 The patient
misinterpreted her dissociative symptoms as signs of dementia,
and her anxiety about having dementia motivated her to seek
professional consultation. Our present report has shown that
such a clinical course is possible in older adults with PTSD. The
patient had PTSD symptoms (re-experiencing the traumatic
event, avoidance and hyperarousal) for several years, but they
were confirmed only through clinical interviews, and were not a
motivating factor for seeking consultation.1
We made three interventions, namely, giving her an expla-
nation that she did not have dementia, psychoeducation for
PTSD and the prescribing of sertraline 25 mg. Among these
three interventions, we have an impression that her learning
that she did not have dementia played the most important
part. When she visited our clinic, she had become psycholog-
ically dependent on Idobata Nagaya. Therefore, the fear that
she might be forced to leave there because of dementia or a
bad reputation was enormous. Our explanation likely relieved
this fear. Compared with this explanation about not having
on 25 February 2026 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2018-224935 on 19 June 2018. Downloaded from

-- 2 of 4 --

3	Hori a, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2018-224935
novel treatment (new drug/intervention; established drug/procedure in new situation)
dementia, how psychoeducation on PTSD contributed for her
recovery is difficult to evaluate. Because there has been strong
ignorance and prejudice related to psychiatric disorders in the
rural areas, the concept of PTSD and dissociative symptoms
were unfamiliar to her as well as all the other residents. There-
fore, the psychoeducation may not have been fully under-
stood. For the 3 months when she was taking the SSRI, she
showed recovery. However, it is difficult to estimate precisely
how the psychotropic drug contributed, because there are
many confounding factors. Furthermore, the period she took
the medication was not long enough and she was taking the
minimum dosage.
This study has some limitations. The biggest problem is that
our case report is lacking any comparisons. This patient might
have three other scenarios. The first scenario is that she might
have continued to live alone after the disaster and would have
recovered from PTSD just with the passage of time. The second
scenario is that she could have resided in the community housing
but not join in the conversations with others about traumatic
memories. Even without the discussions about the earthquake,
tsunami and losses, she could possibly recover from the trauma
only with the supportive environment at Idobata Nagaya. The
third scenario concerns what would happen if she had been
receiving any specific CBTs for PTSD.
Our patient did not receive any specific psychotherapies from
mental health professionals. We think it is possible that she
would show better recovery with CBT for PTSD. The strong
fear she showed when explaining to her the exposure techniques
indicated that she still maintained some vulnerability to her
traumatic memories, which might have led to an overadapta-
tion to, and strong psychological dependence on, the commu-
nity housing. Her psychiatric symptoms tended to be easily
influenced by the atmosphere of Idobata Nagaya and her social
position there. Specific CBTs were supposed to improve that
tendency.
The questions proposed in the previous two paragraphs were
difficult to answer. Therefore, we could just describe them as
limitations of our study. The rapidity of response, inherent chaos
and danger, and limited resources have made it challenging to
conduct studies on the effectiveness of various interventions
immediately after a disaster.3 The accumulation of experiences
from individual cases similar to the one described in this report
is important for the development of PTSD interventions that are
more sophisticated.
Contributors all the authors have approved the manuscript and agree with
submission. aH treated the patient and drafted the manuscript, and tM and IY made
significant contributions to the manuscript. Mt designed the study and revised the
manuscript.
funding the authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing interests None declared.
patient consent obtained.
provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open access this is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. see: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by- nc/4. 0/
© BMJ publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article)
2018. all rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise expressly
granted.
RefeReNces
1 american psychiatric association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5). arlington, Va: american psychiatric publishing, 2013.
2 Lee DJ, schnitzlein CW, Wolf Jp, et al. psychotherapy versus pharmacotherapy for
posttraumatic stress disorder: systemic review and meta-analyses to determine first-
line treatments. Depress Anxiety 2016;33:792–806.
3 edward MK, Davis rB. psychological first aid. In: stoddard FJ, pandya a, Katz CL, eds.
Disaster psychiatry: readiness, evaluation, and treatment. Washington DC: american
psychiatric publishing, 2012.
4 National Child traumatic stress Network/National Center for ptsD. Psychological first
aid: field operations guide. (accessed 5 Jan 2018).
5 World Health organization. Psychological first aid: guide for field workers. Geneva:
World Health organization, 2018. (accessed 5 Jan 2018).
6 Yabe H, suzuki Y, Mashiko H, et al. psychological distress after the Great east Japan
earthquake and Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear power plant accident: results of a mental
health and lifestyle survey through the Fukushima Health Management survey in
FY2011 and FY2012. Fukushima J Med Sci 2014;60:57–67.
7 tsujiuchi t, Yamaguchi M, Masuda K, et al. High prevalence of post-traumatic stress
symptoms in relation to social factors in affected population one year after the
Fukushima Nuclear Disaster. PLoS One 2016;11:e0151807.
8 Hori a, Hoshino H, Miura I, et al. psychiatric outpatients after the 3.11 complex
disaster in Fukushima, Japan. Ann Glob Health 2016;82:798–805.
9 Matsumoto K, sakuma a, Ueda I, et al. psychological trauma after the Great east
Japan earthquake. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2016;70:318–31.
10 Foa eB, Cashman L, Jaycox L, et al. the validation of a self-report measure of
posttraumatic stress disorder: the posttraumatic diagnostic scale. Psychol Assess
1997;9:445–51.
11 Hoskins M, pearce J, Bethell a, et al. pharmacotherapy for post-traumatic stress
disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry 2015;206:93–100.
12 Cooper J, Carty J, Creamer M. pharmacotherapy for posttraumatic stress
disorder: empirical review and clinical recommendations. Aust N Z J Psychiatry
2005;39:674–82.
13 Foa eB, Kozak MJ. emotional processing of fear: exposure to corrective information.
Psychol Bull 1986;99:20–35.
14 resick p, schoicke M. Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: a treatment
manual. Newbury park, Ca: sage, 1996.
15 Hobfoll se, Watson p, Bell CC, et al. Five essential elements of immediate and mid-
term mass trauma intervention: empirical evidence. Psychiatry 2007;70:221–42.
16 Morita t, tanimoto t, Hori a, et al. alcohol use disorder due to social isolation after a
nuclear disaster in Fukushima. BMJ Case Rep 2015;2015:bcr2015209971.
learning points
► The present case suggests that community housing might
contribute to the improved mental health of disaster survivors
by providing opportunities to establish mutual trust in
other residents. Although community housing cannot be a
substitute for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) treatment,
such as cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT), they can
provide residents with a strong sense of safety and unity.
► CBT is a standardised approach to PTSD with strong
evidence of its effectiveness, but it is difficult to implement in
postdisaster settings.
► The patient mistook her dissociative symptoms of PTSD for
symptoms of dementia and her misunderstanding motivated
her to seek professional help at our clinic. Although she had
symptoms of re-experiencing the traumatic event, avoidance
and hyperarousal for five and one-half years, they were
not a motivating factor in her decision to seek professional
consultation.
on 25 February 2026 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2018-224935 on 19 June 2018. Downloaded from

-- 3 of 4 --

4 	Hori a, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2018-224935
novel treatment (new drug/intervention; established drug/procedure in new situation)
Copyright 2018 BMJ publishing Group. all rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case reports today and you can:
► submit as many cases as you like
► enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
► access all the published articles
► re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
on 25 February 2026 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2018-224935 on 19 June 2018. Downloaded from

-- 4 of 4 --

