163
PREVIEW
Suicide and homicide are viewed as preventable global public health problems. Suicides
and homicides have a mental health impact on family members, friends, coworkers,
neighbors, and members of extended social networks, and even the professional
community struggles with the implications of these preventable deaths. Nonsuicidal
self-injury (NSSI) has always been a concern, but only recently has it received a similar
clinical focus and formal assessment to suicide and homicide. Even after inclusion in
the DSM-5-TR, assessment of NSSI occurs less frequently or is more targeted in certain
populations, like adolescents or persons diagnosed with borderline personality disorder.
However, an NSSI assessment should also be part of all suicide risk assessments and is
now required as a standard of care. Whether intervening before suicide, NSSI, or homicide
(prevention), while occurring (intervention), or after it has occurred (postvention),
professional counselors play a vital role in society’s response to helping those in need of
violence-free coping strategies, intervention based on sound practices, or, if necessary,
the best and most productive short-term and long-term response to survivors of suicide
or homicide. This chapter is explicitly for crisis counselors to learn how to be effective in
responding to members of their communities touched by suicide, NSSI, and homicide.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
6.1 Describe the prevalence and rates of suicide, homicide, and NSSI.
6.2 Describe risk factors, protective factors, and warning signs of suicide.
6.3 Distinguish between acute and chronic suicidal risk.
6.4 Describe how counselors assess a client’s suicidal risk as no, low, moderate, or high.
6.5 Describe effective questions and assessment strategies for suicide intervention.
6.6 Describe appropriate treatment planning and care management with a suicidal
client, including a safety plan, outpatient and inpatient treatment, and postvention.
6.7 Describe assessments and treatment for NSSI, including the use of a Q-tree.
6.8 Describe threat assessment and treatment options for intervention with people
who are homicidal or are threats to others.
6 Risk Assessment and Intervention:
Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury,
and Homicide
Judith Harrington, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford*
C H A P T E R
*We thank Charlotte Daughhetee for her contributions to previous editions of this chapter.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 163	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 163 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 1 of 87 --

164 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
PREVALENCE AND RATES OF SUICIDE, HOMICIDE, AND
NONSUICIDAL SELF-INJURY
Learning Objective 6.1 Describe the prevalence and rates of suicide, homicide,
and NSSI.
Clinicians and epidemiologists alike watch closely the rates and prevalence of suicide
and homicide to monitor the presence of conditions that may increase risk factors for
certain populations. (Nonsuicidal self-injury historically was not included in these
prevalence reports and more research needs to be conducted.) Counselors should know
what the terms prevalence and rate mean to interpret how members of certain at-risk
groups might require more attentive care:
• Prevalence is a nominal figure that states how many lives were lost to suicide (or
any other type of malady). For example, the prevalence of suicide in County RST
was 75 persons, contrasted with County XYZ, which lost 33 persons.
• Rate or crude rate is a value explaining data that has been interpreted by leveling
the playing field, so to speak; in other words, if all members of a population (or
an age group, gender, or ethnic group) were divided into groups of 100,000, the
rate would indicate how many people died per 100,000 people (sometimes called
per capita). For example, County RST, a very populated county, lost 75 persons to
suicide or homicide, but its rate was 10.9 per 100,000, or 10.9. County XYZ, a small,
sparsely populated county, lost 16 persons to suicide or homicide, but its rate was
19.7 per 100,000, or 19.7. Due to the common denominator of 100,000, the higher
rate for County XYZ is considered more alarming, even though the prevalence of
suicide was smaller in the rural county.
Epidemiologists also study the causes of death and the rankings of these causes, and
they track the rates of suicide and homicide, as rates provide a more uniform view for
analysis to which prevention efforts may be targeted. For example, the suicide rate for
Americans age 65 years and older is approximately 18 in 100,000, but the prevalence
is lower than in other groups because the population number (or size of this group)
of older persons is smaller. A rate of 18 in 100,000 is considered alarming because it is
higher than the national overall rate. For suicide, the national rate is 14.5 per 100,000.
Professionals want to learn why persons in each group are more prone to die by suicide
or homicide. Youth have a lower rate of death than older Americans; however, suicide!is
ranked as the second leading cause of death ranking among youth, and homicide is the
sixth and third leading cause of death among 0 to 14-year-olds and 15 to 24-year-olds,
respectively (Drapeau & McIntosh, 2020; World Life Expectancy, 2020). Cause of death
ranking is often illustrated in chart form listing the 10 highest prevalence of deaths per
cause (e.g., heart disease, malignancies, respiratory disease, liver disease, unintentional
injury).
Drapeau and McIntosh (2020) reported an estimated 1,124,125 annual suicide
attempts in the United States or 25 suicide attempts for every suicide. Cerel et al. (2014)
estimated that for every suicide, 147 individuals (survivors) are connected to the person
who died by suicide (6.6 million annually). When examining the vast effects of those
affected by suicides, mental health professionals must be prepared to serve the high
numbers of survivors.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 164	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 164 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 2 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	165
Suicide is a public health problem that all crisis counselors, regardless of setting,
must learn to assess and treat because of its prevalence in society. In the United States
in 2020, suicide claimed 45,979 lives, with about one person dying from suicide every
11.1 minutes (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2022a). Consider these
data:
• In 2020 in the United States, 12.2 million adults experienced thoughts of suicide
(CDC, 2022a).
• In 2020 in the United States, 3.2 million people planned to attempt suicide (CDC,
2022a).
• In 2020 in the United States, 1.2 million persons attempted and survived a suicide
(CDC, 2022a).
• Though suicide happens in all age groups and is the 10th leading cause of death
across all age brackets, it is the ninth leading cause of death in the United States
among persons age 10–64, and the second leading cause of death for youth age
10–14 and adults age 25–34 (CDC, 2022a).
• Men die from suicide at a ratio of 3.6 for every 1 loss of life to suicide among women
(American Association of Suicidology [AAS], 2021).
• Women attempt suicide more often than men, at a ratio of 3:1; men die more often
than women, mainly because of more lethal means (AAS, 2021).
• The impact of suicide loss has staggering personal and economic impact on
individuals and communities. The CDC (2022a) estimated an annual cost of
$70!billion in the United States from lifetime medical and work-related expenses
due to suicide attempts and suicide deaths.
• AAS (2021) estimated that 135 individuals are exposed to or affected by each suicide
death, which is 6.9 million persons annually in the United States.
• The rates of suicide per 100,000 persons across the United States ranged from
6.2 per 100,000 (Washington, DC) to 29.4 per 100,000 (Wyoming) (Drapeau &
McIntosh, 2020).
• Suicide rates have been increasing. From 2014 to 2019, the rates per 100,000 persons
climbed respectively from 13.4, 13.8, 13.9, 14.5, to 14.8, with a slight decrease in
2019, to 14.5.
Furthermore, more than 1.2 million nonfatal suicide attempts occurred in the United
States in 2020, sometimes resulting in permanent injury or disabling conditions and
sometimes imperiling a concerned person who tried to prevent the suicide from hap-
pening (CDC, 2022a).
For a worldwide analysis of suicide deaths and homicide deaths, consult the World
Health Organization (WHO, 2021c) and the World Population Review (2022). The num-
ber of suicides worldwide in 2019 was 703,000 (WHO, 2021c) and the number of homi-
cides globally in 2017 was 464,000 (World Population Review, 2022).
Nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI) behaviors are less often reported in the literature and
often not the focus of a risk assessment unless it is the presenting problem. This does
not mean the prevalence of NSSI is not occurring at alarming rates. NSSI is reported to
occur among 13–17% of American adolescents and young adults (Swannell et al., 2014).
Furthermore, NSSI relates to other mental health issues including depression, anxiety,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and suicidal risk. The recent inclusion of NSSI
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 165	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 165 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 3 of 87 --

166 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
behaviors in the fifth edition, text revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2022) reveals the need
for a thorough risk assessment that includes NSSI behaviors.
Effective risk prevention requires input from multiple systems and increased
involvement from governments; the professions of mental health, public health, and
medical health; law enforcement; schools, universities, and other institutions of learning;
the media; and community leaders. Effective risk assessment also begins with the ability
of the crisis counselor to initiate and ask direct questions about risk assessment. If the
crisis worker does not bring up any of these issues or feels uncomfortable bringing these
issues up, the client may not feel comfortable bringing up risk issues. The first step to
providing a competent risk assessment is to be aware of comfortability in asking about
risk assessment. Activity 6.1 provides structured practice in asking clients about suicide.
You can also use the same activity to practice assessing NSSI and homicidal risk.
Form a group in which participants stand in two lines
facing each other. At the direction of a leader, the
participants in line 1 ask their partners in line 2, “Are
you having thoughts of suicide?” The members of line
1 should then move to the right (or circle to the other
end of the line if they are at the far-right end of the line)
and ask the next partner the same question. Continue
doing this until all line 1 members have asked everyone
in line 2 the same question. Then repeat the activity, but
this time, every member of line 2 now asks members
in line 1, “Are you having thoughts of suicide?” After
the exercise, discuss together as a group the following
questions:
• Which role did you prefer: being the person
asked or being the person doing the asking?
Explain.
• Why do you think it is important to practice
asking the question, “Are you having thoughts
of suicide?”
• How do you feel about using the word suicide
or about looking someone in the eye and asking
directly about suicide?
• What are some other equally direct and
nonjudgmental ways that you could ask about
someone’s intention to self-injure?
• What has been your experience with suicide, both
personally and professionally? Consider what you
do and do not know about working with a client
in a suicidal crisis or emergency. What more do
you need to know before you work with a client
who is suicidal? What personal attitudes, values,
opinions, or views do you have about suicide?
ACTIVITY 6.1
Suicide Terminology
The use of terminology is important when discussing suicide since the language chosen
could reflect personal attitudes and affect those impacted by suicide. For example, the
phrase “committed suicide,” although once common, is less acceptable as it implies a
negative perspective of the person. Compare the phrase to “committed adultery” or
“committed murder,” as they often carry a negative view of the person who participated
in or “committed” the act. If we define a person solely by the label of a mental illness,
we diminish the whole person.
In comparison to other types of medical deaths, we often refer to the cause of
death rather than placing responsibility on the person, such as “cancer-related death”
or “died of cancer.” Following these guidelines, language such as “died by suicide,”
“suicide death,” or “took their own life” are more acceptable phrases as they offer a
more humanistic approach to those grieving the death of a suicide and those who may
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 166	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 166 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 4 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	167
have attempted or taken their own life. Terminology now considered unacceptable has
been used for decades by professionals, so be patient and use this as a time to provide
educational guidance to those in the field who may still use what now is viewed as
unacceptable terminology. Professional literature will still include what is now viewed
as unacceptable language. Try using the examples in Table 6.1 of “acceptable language”
in place of what is now viewed as “unacceptable language” around suicide.
Many individuals are impacted by the loss of a loved one from suicide, so it is
essential to understand correct terminology when referring to those impacted by suicide
and with other professionals. Primary victims are the individuals who took their own life
or died by suicide. Attempt survivors are those persons who have attempted to take their
own life but did not die. Survivors are loved ones affected by the loss of a person who
died by suicide.
RISK FACTORS, PROTECTIVE FACTORS, AND WARNING SIGNS
Learning Objective 6.2 Describe risk factors, protective factors, and warning signs
of suicide.
Most often, counselors attempting to provide a thorough risk assessment for suicide
will assess and report only on the risk factors of a client experiencing thoughts of
suicide or who has attempted suicide. Although this is an essential part of the suicide
assessment, protective factors are just as clinically essential to explore because they
offer insights into what is actually protecting or preventing the individual from taking
their life. So specifically ask, “What has kept you from following through on taking
your life?”
Counselors should discern these protective factors from the overall assessment and
build them into the care management aspect of treatment. If a counselor only focuses
on the risk factors and does not integrate the protective factors, the level of risk and
lethality may not be accurate. Risk and protective factors are individualized and depend
on unique client circumstances. Therefore, no single risk or protective factor can be used
across clients to indicate certain lethality and risk. Rather, the entire assessment profile
helps a counselor determine the most effective client care management action.
Risk Factors
Risk factors increase the likelihood of a person experiencing suicidal thoughts or
behaviors. Risk factors are often seen as the absence of something (e.g., supports,
medication compliance, medical wellness, loss of loved ones) but may include underlying
Acceptable Language 	Language to Avoid
Died by/of suicide 	Committed/Completed suicide
Suicide death 	Successful attempt
Suicide attempt (attempt suicide) 	Unsuccessful attempt
Person experiencing suicidal thoughts or behaviors 	Suicide attempter
TABLE 6.1 Acceptable Language to Describe Suicide and Language to Avoid
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 167	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 167 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 5 of 87 --

168 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
meaning-related factors (e.g., feelings of guilt/shame, abandonment, being a burden)
that often increase risk lethality.
Many special groups have a heightened risk for suicide. These include Native
Americans; members of the military or veterans; first responders; older persons; persons
with life-threatening depression and/or bipolar disorder; victims of bullying; and youth
who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning, and other (LGBTQ+). For these
groups, suicide death rates are higher than average for the population. It is important to
note that a certain group does not have traits that make them more suicidal; rather, other
external determinants elevate the risk that members of some groups may become self-
violent. These factors may include marginalization, trauma events or complex trauma,
poverty, and exposure to self-violence or violence, among other factors.
Although agencies and clinicians may have different ways to inquire about risk
factors, for the following discussion, risk factors are placed into three main categories:
health factors, environmental factors, and historical factors. These categories may have
some factors in common.
HEALTH FACTORS 	Health factors include medical or mental health concerns. Often,
physical illnesses such as a terminal disease may also affect a person emotionally and
existentially. Thus, such illnesses may become complex risk factors. For example, an
individual with cancer may not be able to work, may become dependent on others, and
this may affect their family (e.g., financially or via role changes). In addition, the
individual may perceive they have become a burden to family members for their care,
which may be a significant change from their previous role of taking care of others.
Therefore, it is important that counselors understand not only the surface risk factor
(medical diagnosis) but also other factors that may complicate the risk (e.g., financial,
job status, perception of being a burden on others, independence).
Some mental health concerns may also impact the risk for an individual. Often
when the client is not able to think through rational situations or is impulsive, a higher
risk of acting on suicidal thoughts exists. Mood disorders, schizophrenia, anxiety
disorders, substance use, and certain personality disorders may also present a higher
risk for suicidal behaviors.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 	Environmental factors can include cultural, behavioral,
and personality issues. Cultural issues include, but are not limited to, those relating to
race/ethnicity, gender identity, socioeconomic status, political affiliation, religious/
spiritual affiliation, sexual orientation/identity, age, and sex. Other environmental
factors may include, but are not limited to:
• Hopelessness
• Impulsive or aggressive tendencies
• Family history of suicide
• Recent job or financial loss
• Recent loss of relationship
• Perceived rejection associated with personal meaning
• Access to lethal means
• Lack of social support and sense of isolation
• Stigma associated with asking for help
• Lack of health care, especially mental health and substance use disorder treatment
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 168	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 168 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 6 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	169
• Cultural and religious beliefs, such as the belief that suicide is a noble resolution
of a personal dilemma
• Exposure to others who have died by suicide (in real life or via the media)
• Ability to be a part of one’s personal rescue plan from past suicide thoughts/
behaviors
HISTORICAL FACTORS 	Historical factors are unique to the client’s life and include, but
are not limited to, history of trauma or abuse, abandonment of social supports, family-
of-origin risk factors, previous suicide attempts, family history of suicide, or humiliating
past events that are still causing pain for the client.
Protective Factors
Protective factors make a client less likely to engage in suicidal behavior. Protective
factors can also promote resilience and ensure connectedness with others during diffi-
cult times, thereby making suicidal behaviors less likely. Often, the factors listed as risk
factors for some clients may also be protective factors. For example, a client’s religious
beliefs may be the reason the client is not following through on the plan to die by suicide.
Consider this statement made by a client, “I have not followed through because I do
not believe I would be joined with my other family members in heaven.” A counselor
would not say, “Yes, according to your beliefs, you may not go to heaven.” Rather, a
counselor may respond, “It sounds like being with your family after death is important
to you. Tell me more about your religious/spiritual beliefs and the importance of being
reunited with loved ones.”
Another protective factor may be a single mother who says, “I have
not acted on my suicidal thoughts because I would hate for the father of our
children, who has been abusive to me, to be given custody and abuse the
kids. I cannot do that to my children.” Her desire to make sure her children
are cared for is a protective factor. A counselor would not reply with, “Yes,
that would be quite selfish to have your children experience the abuse you
did because you decided to kill yourself.” Rather, a response to support
the protective factor may be, “It sounds like you do not want your children
to experience the same abuse from their father that you did, and you are
concerned that if you took your own life, they would not be cared for the
way you want to take care of them. Tell me more about your children and
what you want for them.”
Other protective factors include, but are not limited to:
• Hopefulness
• Restricted access to highly lethal means of suicide
• Strong connections to family, friends, social, and community supports
• Skills in problem solving, conflict resolution, handling problems in a nonviolent
way, and lack of impulsivity in past situations
• Ability to see alternatives, limited cognitive distortions, and less impulsivity
• Cultural or religious beliefs that discourage suicide and support self-preservation
• Medication compliance
• History of ability to solve problems and create solutions
• History of demonstrating skills for handling emotional crises
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6. 1
In this video, a counselor works
with Hannah (age 15), who has
a history with suicide ideation.
The segment focuses on
protective factors and family
supports. What other protective
factors can assist clients in
not following through on their
thoughts of taking their life?
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 169	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 169 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 7 of 87 --

170 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Expression of concrete and detailed future plans
• Family commitments, such as raising children or caring for siblings
• Willingness to sign a no-harm contract
• Being resilient in past situations
• Having a sense of purpose or meaning
Warning Signs
Warning signs may be present prior to death by suicide but not recalled until after the
fact. Survivors may experience guilt in not intervening in the suicide, which may cause
more complicated grief issues. Other clients may not present with warning signs at all.
Often, individuals who do not present with warning signs are those who truly want to
die and do not want any intervention. In addition, some warning signs may be normal
behavior for the person who died and therefore may not be seen as a warning sign by
family, friends, and counselors.
Some warning signs may fall into risk factors. Aside from assessment of risk,
counselors should be aware of various warning signs that a client may present
and provide psychoeducation and information to family members and friends (as
appropriate), such as including possible things to look for when they know their loved
one has indicated they are experiencing thoughts of suicide. The following are common
warning signs of suicide that may lead to acute suicidal thoughts or behaviors requiring
immediate intervention (Rudd et al., 2006).
• Talking about wanting to die
• Researching methods of dying, preparations, or rehearsal of taking one’s own life
• Talking about feeling hopeless or having no purpose; self-hate statements
• Talking about feeling trapped or being in unbearable pain
• Talking about being a burden to others; recent hospital discharge
• Increasing use of alcohol or drugs
• Acting anxious, agitated, impulsive, or reckless, especially if this is not the norm
• Sleeping too little or too much
• Withdrawing or feeling isolated
• Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge
• Displaying extreme mood swings
• Cognitive, behavioral, or mood changes
ACUTE VERSUS CHRONIC SUICIDE RISK
Learning Objective 6.3 Distinguish between acute and chronic suicidal risk.
Acute suicidal risk is defined as an individual who reports or presents with a desire
to die in a foreseeable time frame—usually 24 hours or less—with statements about a
specific plan, intent, means, and method (Kleespies, 2000). Some counselors may allow
for a longer time period, but there is still a specific time frame. For example, a client
who has been experiencing chronic and complex grief may state, “I just cannot get over
my mother’s death. On Mother’s Day this year, I plan to end it all so I can be with my
mother.” It would still be appropriate to consider this as an acute risk situation and to
take appropriate measures to start the preventative suicidal assessment and intervention.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 170	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 170 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 8 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	171
Acute crisis refers to situations that require immediate professional intervention.
For example, Jobes (2016) concluded there is a strong relationship between acute risk
and acute crisis events, such as personal failures that may impact core meaning or
situations that are perceived as humiliating to the client. Any recent events need to be
assessed to determine whether the client perceives the events as humiliating. These
acute crises alone may increase the suicidal risk and lethality to a high level, resulting
in immediate and imminent risk. Examples include demotions at work, a relationship
breakup, legal situations, discovering a betrayal, foreclosure or encountering adverse
financial situations, educational failure, and medical issues that may be perceived to
cause a financial burden on family members. Often, a humiliating event can cause an
individual to not think clearly and, combined with impulsive personalities, can trigger
suicidal behaviors.
Chronic suicidal risk is often connected with long-term patterns of relationship
difficulties, interpersonal conflicts, poor decision making in various aspects of life,
and repetitive destructive patterns causing life situation difficulties. These chronic
risk situations may be associated with chronic suicidal thoughts and possibly chronic
behaviors, but individuals may have less specific plans and less lethal intent or means.
Thoughts of suicide may last over long periods of time and may not appear as imminent
or immediate. Chronic risk must be assessed for the possible emergence of active or
acute risk.
Individuals with chronic risk can be described as having “markers” of a potential
suicide risk that is not currently imminent. In other words, individuals may present with
some identifiers of persons who could become acutely suicidal but are not currently in
imminent danger. Just as with other medical diagnoses, the client in your office with a
family history of cancer (a risk factor) may not ever be stricken with cancer. A person
who is chronically in suicide risk may thus have markers or risk factors for potential
suicide, but there is a chance the person will never attempt suicide. Chronic risk should
be observed closely for the possible emergence of active or acute risk. A few of these
chronic markers might include the following:
• Being from a high-risk suicidal group
• Diagnoses including but not limited to mood disorders (depression or bipolar
disorder), anxiety, eating disorder, thought disorder, substance use disorder or
some personality disorders
• History of trauma, abuse, violence, self-injury, previous hospitalizations, low self-
esteem, high self-hate, tolerance and acceptance toward suicide, oppression related
to sexual orientation, perfectionism, divorced parents, family history of suicide
attempts or fatalities, and other factors
In summary, chronic risk suggests the presence of longer-term potential of
suicidality, but with less specificity of intent or plans (e.g., means or methods) to carry out
an imminent attempt. The counselor has more time to help the client mitigate, manage,
or resolve psychological pain (and the need to end the pain), can be less directive,
and may not resort to immediate protection such as hospitalization as a treatment
strategy. The counselor will instead reassess suicidality regularly, manage safety, and
attempt to stabilize long-term risk with effective counseling. Table 6.2 provides further
differentiation between the acute and chronic risk categories.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 171	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 171 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 9 of 87 --

172 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
LEVEL OF SUICIDAL RISK
Learning Objective 6.4 Describe how counselors assess a client’s suicidal risk as no,
low, moderate, or high.
The gathering of information regarding risk factors, protective factors, warning signs,
and acute versus chronic risk will likely render a decision connected with lethality. Most
counselors assess a client’s suicidal risk on a continuum of low, moderate, or high:
• Low suicidal risk includes the presence of suicidal ideation/behaviors or infrequent
thoughts without a plan and means to carry out the plan.
• Moderate suicidal risk includes serious thoughts and desire to die with ideas of a
plan and means, often no access, some existence of social support, but also some
risk factors.
• High suicidal risk includes details of a plan and means to carry out the plan,
presence of risk factors, and absence of protective factors including support.
Although many scales indicate low, moderate, and high, there should also be a note if
there is no (or none) suicidal risk detected. Indicating “no or none” is a best practice
and allows you and other referring counselors to have a better comparison of suicidal
thoughts and behaviors over time.
Table 6.3 presents a sample rubric from an AAS-accredited crisis center utilized
for crisis calls and distance counseling to assess the level of suicidal risk of callers
Acute Risk 	Chronic Risk
Descriptors 	Emergent, urgent, imminent
behavioral indicators and
warning signs; could lessen
and possibly become chronic
More long-running risk, grounded in risk
factors; could be precrisis state, in crisis, or
transcrisis; may or may not become acute
Time frame for
potential attempt
Hours, 24 hours to perhaps
a few days
Days, weeks, months, years
Ambivalence 	Little to none; believes death
is the answer to ending the
pain
Some to considerable ambivalence
(e.g., 50-50); wants to live as much as
seeking death to end pain
Clinical response 	Clinician advised to get
help for client immediately,
arrange heightened
vigilance, not let the client
remain alone, provide
emergency intervention, and
use directive style
Clinician advised to monitor risk frequently
and regularly, be aware that hospitalization
may not be required unless risk becomes
acute, develop and maintain therapeutic
alliance, perhaps meet more frequently,
prepare a safety plan, provide support,
and help the client develop coping skills,
problem-solving skills, and life skills
Likely trigger or
precipitant*
A sudden or recent event,
loss, humiliation, defeat,
embarrassment, trapped
feeling
Likely to be relationship based; risk can rise
to acute with a sudden or recent event,
loss, humiliation, or defeat
* See Jobes (2016) for additional information.
TABLE 6.2 Acute Risk versus Chronic Risk
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 172	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 172 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 10 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	173
Indicators/
Risk Levels 	None
Very low
risk
Mild/
low risk
Moderate
risk
Severe/
high risk
Extremely
high risk
Method(s)
Considered
None 	Vague, no
plan
Pills, slash
wrist
Drugs,
alcohol, car
wreck, some
specifics
Gun, hanging,
jumping; some
specifics
In progress;
gun, hanging,
jumping; very
specific—knows
how, when,
where
Suicidal Plans 	None 	None 	None 	Some but no
clear intent
Developed
plan with
considerable
detail
Well-thought-
out, lethal plans
Availability
of Means
None 	No plan; no
availability of
means
Not
available—will
have to get
Available but
not close by
Available—has
close by
Has in hand or in
progress
Suicidal
Behavior
None 	No current
ideation;
may report
past ideation
Ideation 	Threat 	Attempt low
lethal
Attempt high
lethal
When
Attempt is
Planned
None 	No attempt
planned
48 hours or
more
24 to 48
hours
24 to 18 hours 	Presently (in
progress) or
within 24 hours
Previous
Suicide
Attempt(s)
None 	None 	None 	Yes (1–5
years ago)
Yes (3 months
to 1 year ago)
Yes (3 months
ago or less)
Feelings of
Loneliness
None 	Hardly ever 	Sometimes,
support sys-
tem present
Usually, some
support
system
Always, lim-
ited support
system
Always, no sup-
port system
Hope/
Level of
Ambivalence
Hope-
ful
Hopeful;
readily
acknowledges
desire to live
Some hope,
aware of
some desire
to live
Hope and
some desire
to live pres-
ent, but
inconsistent
or limited
Little or no
hope for
future; does
acknowl-
edge some
ambivalence
No hope; does
not consciously
acknowledge any
ambivalence
Intoxication
(Use of
Alcohol or
Drugs)
None 	Has not
been drink-
ing or using
drugs
Limited use of
alcohol
Limited use
of alcohol or
drugs; his-
tory of sub-
stance abuse
treatment
Intoxicated,
mixing drugs
and alcohol
Mixing drugs
and alcohol
and evidence of
intoxication
Chance of
Intervention
Has
clear
sup-
ports
Others
present
Others
expected
Others
expected or
available
Others
available
No one nearby;
isolated
Source: Based on the Crisis Center, Birmingham, Alabama.
TABLE 6.3 Suicide Assessment Form – Checklist for Assessing Emergency Risk for Suicide
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 173	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 173 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 11 of 87 --

174 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
experiencing suicidal thoughts. Law enforcement “hostage negotiators” also use
variations of this guide for crisis response teams.
In addition, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (NSPL; 2007) recommends
following a rubric of assessing suicide risk based on the individual’s desire, capability
to attempt, and intent to die or attempt suicide.
Suicidal desire is indicated by:
• Desire to harm self or others
• Psychological pain such as hopelessness, helplessness, or feeling trapped
• Perceiving oneself to be a burden on others
Suicidal capability is evidenced by:
• History of suicide attempts
• Exposure to someone else’s death by suicide
• History of or even current violent behaviors toward oneself or others
• Having the means to hurt oneself or others
• Current intoxication or excessive substance use
• Recent dramatic mood changes or loss of orientation to reality
• Extreme agitation, rage, increased anxiety, decreased sleep, and recent acts or
threats of aggression
Suicidal intent is reflected by
• Attempt in progress
• Plan with a known method to hurt oneself or others
• Preparatory behaviors (e.g., giving away possessions, finalizing one’s business
affairs, saying goodbye [perhaps cryptically], counting pills, reading up on how to
use the method, loading and reloading the gun, rehearsing the method) and stated
intent to die
Now see the various scenarios in Case Study 6.1, which asks readers to assess potentially
suicidal cases.
CASE STUDY 6.1
Potentially Suicidal Cases
After reading the following brief potentially suicidal cases, indicate the risk factors
(health, environmental, historical), protective factors, warning signs, and other relevant
information and indicate whether you believe the suicidal risk is acute or chronic or no,
low, moderate, or high risk.
Case A
Kelson is a 22-year-old who has recently spent 27 months in a conflict zone. Kelson
is headed home for an extended furlough and fidgets and is agitated on the 18-hour
plane ride home. Kelson arrives home to discover their former partner is now involved
with a high school friend. In addition, Kelson’s dad has remarried a woman whom
Kelson has never met. The marriage occurred when Kelson had been deployed for just 4
months. Kelson’s new stepmother has moved into the house where Kelson lived before
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 174	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 174 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 12 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	175
deployment. Kelson’s younger brother, in the meantime, graduated from high school
and is now in college two states away. Kelson goes on a drinking binge the first night
home and gets into a scuffle at the bar. As a soldier, Kelson knows how to use firearms.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case B
Devon is a Black college student who has learned to cope by “doing more.” If having
one part-time job is good, then two part-time jobs are better. Devon is prone to getting
overinvolved in extracurricular activities, thinking that overachievement will lead
to being selected for preferred groups and clubs in college. Devon has been seeing a
counselor due to lack of focus on class. In addition, Devon’s grades are not quite good
enough to meet the requirements of Devon’s desired activities. Devon’s counselor asked
about depression. Devon was bullied as a teenager by others who mocked Devon’s
physical features, and admitted to lifelong gruff treatment by a step-father. Devon is
bright and likeable but does not possess that self-view. Devon cannot explain all the
crying and self-pity because of all the hard work to “keep it together.” Devon feels like
a burden to everyone and has daydreamed about taking a bunch of pills.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case C
Charles is a White, 77-year-old retiree. During retirement, he plays a lot of tennis and
spends time at his hunting cabin with friends. One of his long-time tennis buddies of over
30 years died suddenly from a heart attack on the tennis court only minutes after Charles
had left the club. In addition, Charles’s wife has been diagnosed with lymphoma and
is undergoing treatment. While she is doing well despite the fatigue of the treatments,
he is very worried about the possibility of her death before his own, and since his adult
children have busy lives and reside in another region, he is primarily the sole caregiver
for his wife. Together, they have decided to not get out and socialize as much as they
had formerly, and they seem to be more socially isolated, except for Charles’s occasional
tennis matches. On a recent visit to his physician, the doctor became worried and asked
him if he was thinking of suicide.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 175	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 175 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 13 of 87 --

176 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case D
Jessie is a 34-year-old Native American who has struggled with substance use for many
years. Because Jessie feels that drinking is a gesture of loyalty to friends, abstaining
or understanding the risks of chemical dependence is difficult. Jessie’s father died by
suicide when Jessie was 16 years old; as the oldest child, Jessie became the head of the
family. Last night, Jessie got a second drunk-driving charge so is in a panic about the
shame and embarrassment that this will bring on the family. Jessie told a friend about
going to the cliffs to “fly with the eagles.”
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case E
Sandy is a 47-year-old White man who has just finalized a divorce from his third partner.
For most of his life, he has placed a high premium on having a relationship with a
partner, yet his commitments and marriages have seemed rushed and not very thought
out, according to some friends and relatives. Sandy is devastated when things do not go
well, and his pattern of relationships has been somewhat chaotic and often conflicted.
Similarly, he has seen several counselors over the years. Sandy’s current counselor, in
talking to his most recent prior counselor, learned that he has never attempted suicide
actively but has often talked about wanting to die “if it happened.” Sandy is not sure
how he would do it because he is afraid. He is an adult survivor of childhood sexual
abuse. He is an active member of his church and does not think it would be “okay” to
attempt suicide.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 176	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 176 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 14 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	177
The field has produced a variety of acronyms to assist counselors in recalling risk
and protective factors and warning signs during suicide assessments. These should not
serve to replace a formal model and Q-tree (which we discuss next) but may be helpful in
gathering information on risk and protective factors. The following is not an exhaustive
list but provides examples:
• IS PATH WARM (Juhnke et al., 2003): Ideation, Substances, Purpose, Anxiety,
Trapped, Hopelessness, Withdrawal, Anger, Reckless, and Mood
• SIMPLE STEPS (McGlothlin, 2008): S—Are you Suicidal?, I—Ideation, M—
Means, P— Perturbation, L—Loss, E—Earlier attempts, S—Substance abuse,
T—Troubleshooting the client’s problem-solving ability, E—Emotion (hopeless,
hapless, worthless, loneliness, depression), P—Parents or family history/exposure,
S—Stress and life events
• MAN THIS ISN’T FAIR (Sankaranarayanan, 2007): M—Mental issues (depression,
anxiety, agitation, guilt, shame, delusions), A—Attempts at self-destruction, N—
No positive support from family/peers, T—Triggering stressors, H—Hopelessness,
I—Ideas and intent, S—Substance abuse, I—Illness/chronic pain, S—Suicide in
family history, N’T—(suicide) Note, F—Final arrangements/saying goodbye/
giving away possessions, A—Access to means, I— Isolation, R—Recent psychiatric
hospitalization
The above is only a guide to the factors that may affect risk and lethality.
There is no set number of indicators someone may have to determine lethality,
and a single indicator may not constitute higher risk. In other situations, an
individual may have many indicators but may not be high in lethality. In
still others, a few indicators together may be essential enough to qualify for
high risk. For example, if a client says they have a plan and means, have no
hope, and will follow through on their plan without seeking intervention,
then the individual may certainly have a high suicidal risk. There are many
assessments in the field that can be used to quantify the variables connected
with suicide.
EFFECTIVE QUESTIONS AND ASSESSMENT STRATEGIES
FOR SUICIDE INTERVENTION
Learning Objective 6.5 Describe effective questions and assessment strategies for
suicide intervention.
A suicide risk assessment should always begin at the first session in counseling, and it
should be the main assessment goal in any crisis. The counseling field has a plethora
of assessments and models for assessing suicide risk. A standard of care in our
profession is to not only provide a risk assessment of every person, regardless of the
client’s presenting problem, but also have a framework (model) upon which to base
the assessment. Although the profession does not dictate a specific suicide assessment
to use, it is a standard of care to use effective risk assessment to practice ethically and
reduce negligence.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6.2
In this video, a counselor
works with a person who has
thoughts of wanting to take
his life. What are the risks and
warning signs and how would
you assess his level of lethality?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=A-m_aIQfXZA
Watch from 00:00 to 12:05
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 177	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 177 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 15 of 87 --

178 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
An effective suicide risk assessment relies heavily on clinical judgment and
interpretation of available facts, indicators, evidence of past behaviors, rating of current
mood and symptoms, and consideration of all these data against the backdrop of the
field’s knowledge of risk factors, protective factors, epidemiology, and causative factors
that are known to increase the risk of suicidal death. Regardless of the model used, there
are a set of questions that should be integrated to weigh the risk and protective factors
and make a sound clinical impression of lethality to provide a treatment plan.
Question-Tree Approach for Suicide Assessment: Essential Questions
Regardless of the assessment used, certain questions should be part of the suicide
assessment. Depending on the answers, follow-up questions should be asked for a
comprehensive assessment. If a counselor only stays with a surface question and does not
follow up with additional questions, the assessment is not complete and the treatment
plan may be ineffective or inaccurate, leading the counselor to an incorrect lethality
level. Using a question-tree (Q-tree) approach allows the counselor to weigh the risk
and protective factors and formulate the most appropriate plan for a client experiencing
suicidal thoughts or behaviors (see Figure 6.1).
Notice that the risk and protective factors are included in the Q-tree. In addition,
some indicators may be difficult to assess by a question. Desire to die may not, by itself,
indicate an individual’s risk level. Rather, the counselor must assess how capable the
client is to follow through on the desire. Capability is defined by a sense of fearlessness
and impulsivity to follow through on a specific plan and the means available to follow
through on the plan to die or attempt suicide. Neither desire nor capability
predict active behaviors toward seeking death as strongly as intent (Kalafat
et al., 2005). Strong intent to die may lead to reduced motivation or reasons
for living and can result in a more lethal method selection.
The recommendations issued by the NSPL (2007) include exploring
buffers, which are like protective factors to lessen suicidal risk. These may
include (1) immediate supports, (2) social supports, (3) hopefulness and
future plans, (4) engaging in the therapeutic process, (5) desire to live, (6)
core values and beliefs that conflict with suicide, and (7) a sense of meaning/
purpose.
TRIAGE APPROACH 	While using any suicide assessment or Q-tree,
counselors must also be observant and use the TRIAGE approach.
Counselors should observe a client’s affective factors (e.g., nonverbals such as
being withdrawn, uncooperative, distant, disinterested in taking part in a
plan), behavioral factors (e.g., how likely a client is to act on their thoughts or
follow through on a plan to stay alive), and cognitive factors (e.g., Does a
client seem rigid in their thought process or open to exploring the situation
and options for life? Are thoughts distorted?). In addition, developmental
factors (e.g., the perception of death as related to a client’s understanding of
death by age, cognitive level, or developmental abilities and limitations) and
environmental factors (e.g., various cultural values important to the individual)
should be gathered and documented.!See Chapter 1 for more details.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6.3
In this video, a group of
university friends meet to talk
with a peer who has shown
some warning signs of suicide.
The questions asked by the
one friend are an excellent
demonstration of many of the
question tree assessments that
can be utilized in assessing
risk level of suicide thoughts
and behaviors. The group also
puts together a safety plan and
generates resources for the
friend. What specific question
tree questions were used? What
risk level would you report for
this client? What other safety
planning elements may be
helpful for the friend?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=QHQzpDU55oE
Watch from 02:40 to 13:40
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 178	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 178 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 16 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	179
FIGURE 6.1 	Sample Q-tree for Suicidal Assessment.
Do you have a plan for how
you would attempt suicide?
Do you have a way (means)
to carry out the plan?
What is the plan? 	Have you acted on the plan
(rehearsed it, or made plans to
follow through)?
Have you used this
plan in the past?
Yes
Have you acted on the plan? 	If that plan does not result in
your death, is there another
plan and means?
Have you used this
plan and means in the
past?
Yes
Have you had any past
suicidal attempts?
Yes
Yes	
Do you have a mental health
diagnosis (whether you agree or
disagree)?
Do you have a family member with a
history of a substance use disorder
or mood disorder (e.g., major
depressive disorder, bipolar disorder,
or other mood disorder)?
Do you have a family history of
suicide? (Family means any perception
of family and does not have to be
related by blood.) For children and
teens, has a friend attempted suicide
or died by suicide?
Can you commit to working on a
plan to keep you alive?
Suicidal Assessment Questions
Do you want to die?
Do you have hope that
things will get better?
Do you have a social support
system?
Has an issue occurred that
has not been resolved?
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 179	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 179 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 17 of 87 --

180 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Suicide Lethality Assessments
Many assessments are available in the field and used as frameworks by crisis counselors
in lethality assessment. It is a standard of care to integrate at least one model into your
practice to provide documentation for each client. Regardless of the model selected, the
Q-tree discussed above should be integrated into any of these models. Some models will
indicate a section within the model for gathering risk and protective factors, although the
Q-tree or essential questions are not written into the model. The following assessments
provide a sampling from the field.
BECK SCALE FOR SUICIDE IDEATION 	The Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (BSI) is a self-
report instrument requiring 10 minutes to administer that evaluates a client’s thoughts,
plans, and intentions to die by suicide. The 21 items are administered by the counselor
using a rating scale that includes items such as “I have made plans to die by suicide”
and “I have access to lethal means.” The instrument requires specific, detailed recall of
suicidal experiences, such as “I was XX% sure I would die by suicide” and “I have only
felt suicidal (number of) times.”
CHRONOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF SUICIDE EVENTS 	The Chronological Assessment of
Suicide Events (CASE) model was developed by a former emergency department (ED)
doctor who observed firsthand the high prevalence of suicide risk and suggested there
was a window of opportunity where professionals could intervene when a client was
discharged from psychiatric admission to the ED or psychiatric hospitalization. His
concern was with the high demands on ED medical professionals and being able to bet-
ter assess suicidal risk. The CASE method focused on the immediate factors of the cli-
ent’s suicidal risk—the conditions immediately prior to the psychiatric emergency (6–8
weeks buildup or a pileup of distress), the influences prior to 6–8 weeks of buildup
(e.g., long-ago exposure to suicide, family history of suicide, traumatic events)—and
concludes with questions about the “now” of suicidal feelings and pending days ahead.
The approach emphasizes five sets of question-asking:
1. Shame attenuation (i.e., normalizing feelings of psychological suffering and the
immediate issues the client has experienced)
2. Behavioral incident specificity (e.g., “Where is the weapon?”, “And then what did
you do?”, “And after that, what did you do?”, “Who knows about your plans?”)
3. Gentle assumption (e.g., “How have you thought of killing yourself?” rather than
“Have you ever thought about killing yourself?”)
4. Symptom amplification (e.g., “How much time do you spend thinking about
suicide in a 24-hour period?”)
5. Denial of the specific (e.g., asking clients if they have considered other methods—
this will not give clients the idea of having more options)
COLLABORATIVE ASSESSMENT FOR MANAGING SUICIDE 	Jobes (2016) developed an
assessment that combines the interview with the written instrument tool. Collaborative
Assessment for Managing Suicide (CAMS) is evidence and theory based and requires
close collaboration with the client to understand the details of the suicidal risk. CAMS
integrates safety and treatment planning and has been integrated into a 4-hour online
training. It can be found at http://www.empathosresources.com (Empathos, 2015).
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 180	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 180 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 18 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	181
COLUMBIA-SUICIDE SEVERITY RATING SCALE (C-SSRS) 	The Columbia-Suicide Severity
Rating Scale (C-SSRS; Posner et al., 2011) includes detailed categories of suicide ideation,
intensity of ideation, and suicidal behavior to assess lethality of suicide. The scale has
been adapted and developed for various populations (e.g., general population, schools,
and first responders) and has suggested actions coded as red, yellow, and green based
on the responses of the individual.
MINI-MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION (MMSE) 	The Mini-Mental Status Examination
(MMSE) is a brief (10- to 15-minute), quantitative measure to assess cognitive
impairment for those age 18–85 years, is available in over 70 languages, and is
recommended as a screening tool for depressed individuals (Folstein et al., 2016). The
MMSE demonstrated score validity and reliability in psychiatric, neurologic, geriatric,
and other medical populations. It is used to evaluate five areas of mental status:
orientation, registration, attention and calculation, recall, and language. The maximum
score is 30, and a score of 23 or lower demonstrates a level of cognitive impairment
indicating a referral for a more intensive cognitive evaluation. Orientation, place, and
recall are not impacted by level of education and are important to assess prior to
administering the examination. If only assessing for orientation, place, and recall, a
total maximum score is 17. The MMSE is attributed to the following descriptors that are
frequently referred to in many client charts:
• Oriented *3 (person, place, time)
• Oriented *4 (person, place, time, situation/event)
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE SUICIDE IDEATION INVENTORY 	Positive and Negative Suicide
Ideation Inventory (PANSI) is a 20-item self-report measure of positive and negative
thoughts related to suicide. It contains statements such as “I am in control of my life”
and “I think about killing myself,” to which clients respond on a 1- to 5-point Likert-
type response scale. This instrument is intended to be used as a screening tool for adults
and high school students.
SUICIDE ASSESSMENT FIVE-STEP EVALUATION AND TRIAGE 	The Suicide Assessment
Five-Step Evaluation and Triage (SAFE-T) can be used by mental health professionals
during the initial contact with a person experiencing thoughts of suicide. The five-
step assessment includes identification of risk and protective factors; conducting an
inquiry about suicidality (implementing a Q-tree); determining level of risk and
selecting an appropriate intervention; and documenting the process, including a
follow-up plan.
TASK MODEL OF CRISIS ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION 	The task model of crisis
assessment and intervention (see Table 6.4!and Chapter 1; see also Jackson-Cherry,
2018) can be integrated for a suicide assessment and focuses on four important areas of
crisis assessment leading to a more effective and appropriate four-task intervention plan
for individuals in virtually every type of crisis, regardless of setting. Assessment of
safety/stabilization; biopsychosocial/spiritual elements; clarification of the problem(s);
and coping skills, resources, and supports are essential first steps toward more accu-
rately defining the actual crisis situation.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 181	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 181 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 19 of 87 --

182 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
TREATMENT PLANNING AND CARE MANAGEMENT WITH A
SUICIDAL CLIENT
Learning Objective 6.6 Describe appropriate treatment planning and care
management with a suicidal client, including a safety plan, outpatient and inpatient
treatment, and postvention.
After assessing a client’s acute or chronic risk and determining the level of risk, many mental
health professionals might again ask, “Now what do I do?” Assessment is only part of the
intervention process. Rudd et al. (2004) and Jobes (2016), among others, provide qualified
step-by-step recommendations for appropriate treatment planning and responding. Just as
all treatment plans for clients seeking counseling for any condition are customized to meet
their needs, the same is true for clients at risk for suicide. The assessment process yields
valuable information to assist with the design of appropriate treatment interventions. This
section reviews several ideas for counselors to consider, beginning perhaps with the most
important intervention of all: the development of a customized safety plan.
Safety Plan
Developing a safety plan with the client is an industry standard and expectation, but
many mental health professionals were trained prior to the emergence of research
and data to write a “no-harm contract.” Based on research, best-practice thinking,
examination of the potential for false security regarding liability, and more evolved
legal, ethical, and clinical reasoning about how much a suicidal client might be able to
“agree” to such a “contract,” the no-harm contract has been replaced with professional
and empirical preference for the safety plan.
Even seasoned practitioners who are reluctant to do away with the no-harm
contract should be advised that not only is it ill-advised but it is also in contradiction
to many more modern insights about safety planning, and they could run the risk of
increasing liability if using no-harm contracts even in conjunction with safety plans.
Liability for knowing what to do in the case of a suicidal crisis is clearly the burden
of responsibility on the professional and not the client, who would be potentially
Level I: Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks
Assessment Task 1: Safety, Stabilization, and Risk
Assessment Task 2: A Holistic Biopsychosocial/Spiritual Assessment Approach (Integrate Q-Tree)
Assessment Task 3: Clarification of the Problem(s)
Assessment Task 4: Coping Skills, Resources, and Supports
Level II: Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks
Intervention Task 1: Normalize and Educate
Intervention Task 2: Exploration of Options
Intervention Task 3: Develop a Plan and Obtain a Commitment
Intervention Task 4: Documentation, Follow-up, and Referral
Source: Jackson-Cherry (2018)
TABLE 6.4 The Task Model of Crisis Assessment and Intervention
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 182	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 182 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 20 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	183
considered not “competent” to direct treatment decisions if incapacitated with life-
threatening depression or multiple symptoms of any diagnosis. Many acutely at-risk
suicidal clients are not in a psychiatrically oriented or lucid condition to shoulder the
burden of knowing enough about suicide or safety planning. Therefore, the attempt of
the clinician to contract with the temporarily disabled client increases the counselor’s
liability through the use of a no-harm contract.
While some authors have referred to safety plans by varying nomenclature (such
as crisis response plan and self-care plan), the NSPL’s Standards, Training, and Practices
Committee recommends the term safety plan.
We would always use the term “safety plan”!.!.!.!other terms [crisis response
plan or self-care plan] are too vague and do not explicitly reference the fact
that keeping the individual safe is the primary goal in developing a plan—
vagueness is not good. In addition, we would never reference a “safety plan”
without explicitly stating the avoidance of anything that resembles a “no
harm contract”—so would attempt to eliminate any confusion at the outset.
(G. Murphy, personal communication, September 22, 2010)
Stanley and Brown (2009) have written extensively about the components of a
safety plan and recommend that clients ask the following questions:
1. When should I use the plan?
2. What can I do to calm/comfort myself if I am feeling suicidal?
3. What are my reasons for living?
4. Who can I talk to?
5. Who can I talk to if I need professional assistance?
6. How can I make my environment safe?
7. What should I do if I am still not feeling safe?
Stanley and Brown addressed not only what should be included in safety planning but
also how to talk through its use with clients. They are widely considered the field’s
experts on safety planning, and practitioners should explore their resources and seek
training in their Safety Planning Intervention.
A comprehensive safety plan addresses specific behavioral actions, determined
in concert with the client, and includes several key focal points including means
restriction, self-soothing options, self-care options, family involvement options, resource
development, and crisis response options (M. Gould & D. Jobes, personal communication,
November 10, 2010), in addition to the recommendations that Stanley and Brown (2009)
suggested.
One essential component of safety planning is addressing means restriction
(Coombs et al., 2010; Mann et al., 2005). Since firearms are the most frequently used
method with which to attempt suicide in the United States—and the most lethal with
the least amount of time for active rescue or intervention—counselors developing safety
plans should include a focus on means removal. It is best to engage a safety partner to
assist with means removal to guarantee the means restriction more fully, rather than
counting on the client to do so.
An example of a safety plan is presented in Table 6.5, written with samples of
specific behavioral actions.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 183	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 183 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 21 of 87 --

184 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
A well-facilitated assessment will encourage a client to trust the counselor and
provide detailed information, which will allow the counselor to understand when,
how, and under what conditions the client becomes vulnerable to suicide. For example,
if a client reveals they want to end their life, particularly when experiencing conflict
with a!partner, the treatment plan might recommend couples counseling and conflict-
resolution skills building. If an isolated 80-year-old widower reports being desperately
vulnerable between the hours of 5:00 and 8:00 p.m. each day when imagining all the
neighbors having dinner with their loved ones, a treatment plan should increase social
support during that period of vulnerability.
I will . . . (List specific behaviors such as the examples listed below). Customize the plan with
your client.
1. Remove gun and ammunition from house, car, truck, cabin, barn.
(Note to counselor: Means restriction)
2. Fill doctor’s prescriptions weekly (not a month at a time).
(Note to counselor: Means restriction)
3. Take my dog to play in the park.
(Note to counselor: Soothing feelings of distress)
4. Call a friend.
(Note to counselor: Soothing feelings of distress)
5. Eat three meals a day.
(Note to counselor: Self-care)
6. Drink nonalcoholic and noncaffeinated beverages.
(Note to counselor: Self-care)
7. Avoid lonely times by going to my sister’s.
(Note to counselor: Family support)
8. Spend the night at my cousin’s house.
(Note to counselor: Family support)
9. Go to a community support group for persons who have bipolar disorder.
(Note to counselor: Using resources)
10. Call my sponsor or go to a meeting.
(Note to counselor: Using resources)
11. Call 988 or contact https://988lifeline.org
(Note to counselor: Crisis or emergency support)
12. Go to my primary care physician, psychiatrist, or the ED.
(Note to counselor: Crisis or emergency support)
List the names and reliable phone numbers of several people that the counselor can call or who
can call the counselor in the event of an escalating situation:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Note: Specific behavioral ideas should be written in the affirmative. For example, in Item #6, instead of
“Don’t drink alcoholic or ca#einated beverages,” restate it in the affirmative “Drink nonalcoholic and
nonca#einated beverages.”
TABLE 6.5 An Example of a Multimodal Safety Plan with Specific Behaviors
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 184	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 184 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 22 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	185
Safety plans should always involve resources, actions, and coping
mechanisms that the client is able and willing to put into place, that are
specific to the situation, and that are written with clear behaviorally specific
verbiage. In the examples provided in Table 6.5, note that there are behavioral
recommendations for means restriction, self-soothing, self-care, family
support, use of community resources, and crisis response options.
Outpatient and Inpatient Treatment Decisions
and Management
Changes in the health care insurance industry and managed care have
severely reduced the amount of hospitalized care that at-risk persons may
obtain, even when suicidal risk remains high. However, when a client is in
immediate risk to self, the decision for hospitalization may be required to keep the per-
son safe. States and counties within states differ as to the process for involuntary and
voluntary hospitalizations, and it is essential that clinicians understand the laws and
policies in the state and county where their clients live. It is better to know what to do
prior to a crisis for both the clinician and the client.
Voluntary hospitalization is preferred over involuntary hospitalization as it allows
the client (and supports) to be part of the decision-making process. In many states, when
a person voluntarily seeks hospitalization, they may have more control in their discharge.
Although this may be preferred, voluntary hospitalization may leave the crisis worker
with an uneasiness of not knowing whether the client followed through with this plan.
When clients and families agree to voluntary hospitalization, the crisis counselor should
obtain a release of information and gain as much information as possible as to where
the client will be seeking admission so they can follow up. A well-being check can be
requested if there is any thought the client (or guardians) did not follow through. The well-
being check is a request of law enforcement to check on the “well-being” of the individual.
Since well-being checks do not fall in the priority of most law enforcement priority calls,
these checks may be at the discretion of the law enforcement officer. An involuntary
hospitalization may follow a voluntary decision that is not followed through by the client.
Involuntary hospitalization differs from state to state, whereas some states require
courts to mandate the commitment of an individual; others allow licensed professionals
to initiate an emergency petition for involuntary hospitalization; some states integrate
mobile crisis teams or crisis intervention teams, while others rely on a community service
board that would make the final assessment and determination based on the clinicians’
observations. The crisis counselors should also establish professional relationships with
community service officers in their jurisdiction and become familiar with protocols. In
these situations, once a client is involuntarily hospitalized, the client will likely not have
further contact with the crisis counselor, and clients will be discharged to outpatient
mental health counselors.
Partial hospitalizations are often referred to as a step down from a hospitalization
when a person may need additional or more intense support than outpatient mental
health. For some this may be residential support in the evening when risk is higher. For
others, like children, partial hospitalization may be scheduled during the day where they
are able to continue their schoolwork and access mental health services and be discharged
to parents in the evening. Medical stabilization and pharmacological intervention are
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6.4
In this video, toward the end
of a risk assessment session,
a counselor develops a
collaborative safety plan with
a 15-year-old client. What
important components were
listed in the safety plan?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jd7PM9HFDO4
Watch from 00:00 to 07:26
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 185	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 185 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 23 of 87 --

186 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
the goals of hospital mental health administrators, and discharge planning begins at
admission. No matter how difficult, uncomfortable, or disruptive a hospitalization is
for clients, it does save lives. Discharge planning and collaboration is essential between
hospital personnel and outpatient counselors to eradicate the high window of risk for
suicide after discharge.
CRISIS FOLLOW-UP CONTACT 	The follow-up with a client who is at risk for suicide is
critical practice (Murphy, 2010). Follow-up as a clinical standard is a form of active
postvention that is postventive, preventive, and interventive. Follow-ups may include
regularly scheduled phone calls, letters, or notes, and even texting or e-mailing, or they
may include memoranda of agreements with provider organizations (e.g., between
agencies or practices and hospital EDs).
Data about follow-up assessments with crisis center callers is very encouraging
in that callers who sought out suicide intervention assistance from centers are very
positive and motivated to reduce ambivalence about wanting to die. Clinicians may
direct family care team members to obtain helpful booklets from agencies such as the
Feeling Blue Suicide Prevention Council (https://www.givepulse.com/group/2786-Feeling-
Blue-Suicide-Prevention-Council?) to assist family members following a suicide attempt.
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration also has several
“after an attempt” resource booklets for medical providers, attempters, and family
members of attempters that can be obtained at https://store.samhsa.gov/product/A-Guide-
for-Taking-Care-of-Your-Family-Member-After-Treatment-in-the-Emergency-Department/
sma18-4357eng.
DOCUMENTATION OF LETHALITY 	It is important that the counselor notes what a client
reports and how they present. Not asking does not mean a client is not suicidal. It
means the standard of care was not met sufficiently. How a client presents is also
important documentation. Is the client agreeable to a plan? Are they more distant today
than other sessions? Do statements made by the client and how the client is behaving
conflict? Do they appear disoriented? Does the client have distorted thoughts?
A common risk statement should show that a verbal assessment was made as well as an
observation of nonverbal behaviors: “The client does not report or present with current
suicidal or homicidal thoughts and behaviors. The client denies a history of suicidal
behaviors or hospitalizations for psychiatric concerns.” This statement implies that the
counselor has asked the appropriate questions and the client has been evaluated based
on their behavioral presentation. This documentation should also be extended to NSSI
and homicide risk assessments. Now read Voices from the Field 6.1.
Amanda Evans
A common theme that I noticed when working at an
inpatient psychiatric unit as a graduate student was
helping professionals struggling to assist patients in
crisis who performed at lower cognitive functioning.
I can specifically remember several clients who were
misunderstood by the hospital staff due to their level of
cognitive functioning and were subsequently provided
more restrictive care. It is very important as a counselor
to be mindful that just because a client is an adult does
not mean that the client can manage the responsibilities
or cognitive complexity of adulthood. A patient who
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.1
Crisis Intervention with Clients Who Have Low Cognitive Functioning
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 186	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 186 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 24 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	187
Postvention
In recent years, postvention has grown to include the care practices that practitioners
provide to persons who have survived a suicide attempt. Postvention with attempt
survivors can include ongoing stabilization, long-term therapy, and improvement of
help-seeking skills and overall self-care, with a goal of long-term improvements in
quality of life and functioning.
Historically, postvention has been the type of care provided to survivors of suicide
loss. Survivors of suicide or homicide loss can develop protracted symptoms of grief,
depression, anxiety, PTSD, longer and more complicated grief and bereavement; more
demands on medical and mental health services; and greater potential for lost time
at work and at school. Survivors of suicide loss also have an elevated risk for suicide
attempts. The remainder of this section focuses on survivors of suicide loss.
BEREAVEMENT AND OTHER ISSUES 	Bereavement from both suicide and homicide can
remain complicated for many years. The DSM-5-TR (American Psychiatric Association,
2022) added a diagnosis of prolonged grief disorder; arguably, many survivors of suicide
or homicide loss might be at risk for this diagnosis due to the vexing circumstances
compared to other types of loss.
Given the prevailing prevalence of suicide in the United States, a conservative
estimate of persons who become newly bereaved due to the loss of a loved one by suicide
numbers over 275,000 per year (Suicide Awareness Voices of Education, 2022). The job of
bereavement counselors is an important one, due both to the large number of survivors
of suicide loss in the population and the misperceptions and myths about suicide both
before and after death. Survivors of suicide loss often report feeling misunderstood,
stigmatized, and marginalized. They are prone to bereavement and sorrow, complicated
grief, and posttraumatic symptoms (Harrington, 2011). Their bereavement may be
punctuated by the complexities of believing that their loved one “rationally chose”
death, as contrasted with viewing suicide as a multifactorial process of debilitation and
vulnerability (Survivors of Loved Ones’ Suicides, 2006). They may have lost a child, a
appears to be 50 years old may in fact function cognitively
as an adolescent or as a child. This can be challenging in
a hospital setting when clients in crisis require immediate,
effective, and appropriate medical attention.
Oftentimes, patients who were lower functioning
were expected to cope and manage in the same
way as their higher-functioning peers. This included
maintaining personal hygiene, medication compliance,
following the unit’s rules, and establishing appropriate
boundaries with their peers. In addition, I noted
counselors who provided treatment to these clients
struggled with gathering intake information and
establishing aftercare goals. This difficulty in serving
lower-functioning patients was most evident in the
staff’s attempt to deescalate crises. In my opinion,
clients who are lower functioning are commonly
misinterpreted by helping professionals, leading to
unnecessary rapid escalation in crisis situations, physical
restraints, and possibly medical restraints.
Based on my personal experiences, I want to
encourage counselors-in-training to consider alternative
methods to communicate with clients in crisis. When
patients who have low cognitive functioning are in
crisis, expecting mature, rational decision making may
be unrealistic; however, helping clients to express
themselves, calm down, or self-soothe is ideal. In
addition to talking through a crisis, working with
individuals using pictures, schedules, sign language,
silence, or techniques specific to the client’s needs
can be very helpful in deescalating a crisis. At times,
competent care requires stepping outside of the box
and using alternative interventions to best assist clients.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 187	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 187 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 25 of 87 --

188 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
sibling, or a partner within a cloud of unknown circumstances, such as losses or defeats
that resulted in acute suicide risk, such as a bad business deal, a negative performance
evaluation at work, or an act of infidelity that they could not work through, to name a few.
The circumstances surrounding the immediate scene of a suicide may include the
involvement of law enforcement, investigators treating the scene as a murder, potential
arrest warrants being issued, and limited or potentially gruff communication with
personnel such as coroners or first responders, possibly punctuated with yellow crime
scene tape. Of course, many survivors report exemplary conduct on the part of these
professionals, and so it is not a universal problem, but for some survivors of suicide loss,
the circumstances surrounding the immediate scene complicate the grieving process.
Adults and children alike are often witnesses to the actual suicide, they may
discover the body, or they might be involved in clean-up. Many family-related and
religious complications can ensue, with conflicts possible among stepfamily, family-of-
origin, or in-law family members who may disagree about stating the cause of death
openly to their communities. Sometimes the suicide may be like one domino in a row
of dominoes that continue to fall. For example, consider the scenario in which a middle-
aged person dies from suicide, leaving financial problems that result in foreclosure
or bankruptcy for the surviving family members, leaving college-age children unable
to continue their schooling, and a partner/parent who must reenter the workforce or
sell the house. The suicide can become one crisis of many in a sequence of events, not
unlike the ABC-X model of crises (Hill, 1949, 1958) or the Double ABC-X model of crises
(McCubbin & Patterson, 1982).
Counselors providing postvention grief services to survivors of loss should
become familiar with complicated bereavement and mourning, learn about counseling
techniques and countenance directly related to working with suicide loss, and especially
be aware of the feelings of helplessness, sense of responsibility, and internalized guilt
that the bereft feel after a suicide. Many family members have knowledge of their loved
one’s struggles and may have assisted in ways that in fact prolonged the life of their
loved one. Yet the traumatic circumstances, the stigma or belief that it was a rational
choice, or the complicated mourning leave survivors clinging to a sense of guilt-framed
attribution of responsibility.
FRAMEWORK TO INTERVENE WITH SURVIVORS 	Whether working with an individual or
with a group, there are common factors to take into consideration that may be unique to
those grieving the loss due to suicide: (1) prevention of further suicides, (2) reconstructing
the “why,” (3) commemorating the positive, (4) saying goodbye, and (5) an assessment
of guilt/shame and absolution of guilt. The main priority throughout the time with
survivors is to assess and prevent further additional suicidal behaviors. Often, suicide
survivors have no closure and may not know why their loved one decided to take their
own life. It is unlike the grief process during which a person is grieving the loss of a
loved one with a known cause (e.g., terminal illness, accident).
In suicide cases, survivors often are stuck in the “why.” Questions such as “Why
did he not come to me for help?” and “Why did she take her own life?” are things
that keep a survivor progressing through healthy grief work. Counselors may need
to normalize the repetition of these questions and reconstruct the why to understand
what the underlying meaning of these “why” questions is for the survivors. Meaning
may relate to the perception of being a “bad” parent, grieving the loss of a role of being
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 188	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 188 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 26 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	189
a family member, or could uncover some hidden guilt in not being present when they
now believe they could have assisted in suicide prevention.
Connected with being stuck in the “why,” survivors are unable to have closure and
move on with their own lives through letting go or saying goodbye. Counselors, when
reconstructing the “why,” will often help clients work toward moving on in their own
life while still remembering the loved one lost. Similar to staying stuck in the cognitive
“why,” survivors may experience a range of emotions, including anger, sadness,
confusion, numbness, and guilt (to name a few) toward their loved one. Being stuck in
one emotion can also prevent survivors from moving on and healing in grief work and
may lead to negative feelings toward their loved one. Being able to commemorate a
positive trait or attribute can allow a survivor to start working through the loss.
Finally, in suicide cases, there may be a degree of guilt by the survivor, thinking
they could have done something to prevent the suicide. In many cases, survivors can
recall the warning signs of the loved one. However, these warning signs are often
only evident after the fact and could not have predicted a suicide. Therefore, it may be
important for survivors to know that whatever the situation or relationship leading up to
the suicide, it was ultimately the decision of the loved one to take their own life—offering
absolution of guilt. Having these aspects built into the grief process can help survivors
move into healthy grieving.
When working with family and friends, it is imperative to determine who may
have found the body. Often, a family member may not be forthcoming if they found the
body. The human senses (visual, hearing, touch, or smell) connected with the suicide
may trigger flashbacks for this individual; therefore, the individual who found the body
should be a priority in counseling.
Counselors should become familiar with how to find suicide bereavement
groups that exist in many localities around the country by visiting either the American
Foundation for Suicide Prevention or the American Association of Suicidology websites
for comprehensive listings. While survivors of suicide loss often report that they speak
the same language, a language that other bereft persons do not fully understand, not
all survivors will think that a group is the best option for them. Other suggestions
for therapeutic responses that counselors can recommend include bibliotherapy and
Internet resources, psychoeducation, family guidance, survivor outreach, cyber groups
or chatrooms, survivor conferences, and activism, with activism marking a full circle
from postvention to prevention.
Suicide bereavement counselors might provide psychoeducational insights to
survivors of suicide loss. For example, the counselor may provide insight that experts do
not believe that suicide is a “rational choice,” that intent looks very much like a “choice”
when clinically they are very different, that suicide was not done to punish the survivors
but rather to end the pain or to alleviate the burden that the decedent perceives they were
(often a mistaken perspective). Counselors should be prepared to support survivors of
loss when survivors encounter misinformation, myths, stigma, and judgments about the
type of death that occurred. Some people, even well-meaning friends, say hurtful and
untrue things, such as “I can’t believe he would do such a selfish and hostile thing to
you” or “How tragic that she committed this sin; she’ll surely go to hell.”
Finally, some counselors become crisis advisors to employers, agencies, schools,
faith-based groups, and communities. These professionals should be familiar with the
national resources available for responsible communication with the media following
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 189	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 189 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 27 of 87 --

190 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
a suicidal death. All the prominent national suicidological organizations have such
resources available on their websites for distribution to decision makers, spokespersons,
and even media representatives to use the public news forum responsibly, prevent
suicide contagion, and avoid glorifying suicide or misrepresenting knowledge about it.
Now complete Activity 6.2.
ACTIVITY 6.2
Think about how society sometimes normalizes
language that is violent or self-harming. Have
you ever heard friends in casual conversation use
phrases to describe their exasperation like “That’s
enough to make me wanna kill myself” or “I’m just
going to shoot myself if he doesn’t quit teasing
me”? Perhaps you have seen seemingly humorous
references 	to 	suicide 	in 	unexpected 	places.
For example, a restaurant may have a dessert called
“Suicide by Chocolate” or a corporate trainer may
talk about “career suicide.”
Public messaging is a powerful tool in promoting
initiatives that are clinically responsible and in the
interests of public health. It is unacceptable to refer to
a fatal suicide attempt as “successful.” Only prevention
can be considered successful.
How we unwittingly toss around the words and
concepts of suicide says something to the public. We
may unconsciously promote stigma and even set up
barriers for the public to learn and to trust that help
is available. They will not have to worry about being
crazy, a quitter, a loser, or a sinner if they understand
that health care professionals know that self-directed
violence is the result of involuntary and debilitating
attempts to end psychological pain. To be more
empowered and enlightened is to use language that
is nonjudgmental and inviting to persons who may be
struggling to be help-seeking.
What will you do the next time you hear a
so-called humorous reference to suicide? How would
you entertain the idea that generally people do not often
joke about other life-threatening illnesses, such as cancer,
cardiac arrest, or diabetes? We do not see “Cancer by
Chocolate” on menus. People do not say “she cancered”
herself. What small individual act of suicide prevention
advocacy will you do when you have the opportunity?
NONSUICIDAL SELF-INJURY
Learning Objective 6.7 Describe assessments and treatment for NSSI, including the
use of a Q-tree.
The DSM-5-TR added suicidal behavior and nonsuicidal self-injury into the “other
conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention” section. The inclusion of NSSI
should improve documentation of these behaviors to determine risk factors for suicidal
ideation and actions and provide more effective treatment planning options. NSSI is
the intentional, self-inflicted, immediate destruction of body tissue, without suicidal
intent, that is not viewed as culturally acceptable behavior. Self-injurious behaviors can
be performed on any part of the body but often injuries are done to the hands, wrists,
stomach, and thighs. The severity of NSSI can range from superficial wounds to long-
term disfigurement. In one study, 33% of people who reported engaging in self-injurious
behaviors reported they should have sought medical attention; however, only 6.5% in the
same study reported receiving medical attention for their wounds. Although the most
common NSSI behavior continues to be reported as cutting, other common behaviors or
methods of NSSI include, but are not limited to:
• Burning
• Skin picking
• Hair pulling
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 190	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 190 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 28 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	191
• Banging or hitting the head or other body parts
• Rubbing objects into the skin
• Skin erasing or carving
• Interfering with wound healing
• Bone breaking
Most of the literature suggests that NSSI increases substantially in early adolescence
and decreases during late adolescence and early adulthood (Plener et al., 2015) with
more incidents of NSSI behaviors by females (Fox, 2015). Considering the prevalence of
self-injury among adolescents, the likelihood that counselors and medical professionals
will encounter NSSI is quite high. Historically, NSSI has been viewed as not linked
with suicidal intent, but most clinicians and researchers suggest that NSSI is a strong
predictor of future suicidal behavior. Scott et al. (2015) estimated that suicide attempts
increased fourfold for those who previously engaged in NSSI and suggested that both
suicide ideation and NSSI are known risk factors for suicidal behavior with increased
predictive risk for suicide attempts.
Assessments and Q-Tree
The high correlation of NSSI and future suicide attempts prompted the DSM-5-TR
(American Psychiatric Association, 2022) to add suicidal behavior and NSSI into section
2, “other conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention.” Furthermore, it is a
standard of care to integrate an NSSI assessment as part of all suicide risk assessments.
It is essential to understand the intentions of those who participate in NSSI to properly
assess intent, implement the most effective treatment strategy, or appropriately refer to
additional care. Every intake should have an NSSI assessment in addition to the suicide
and homicide risk assessment, even if NSSI is not a presenting issue. It would be better
to include a standard NSSI question than not ask and live with the consequences after
the fact. This could entail simply including the following:
• “Have you ever engaged in any nonsuicidal self-injurious behaviors?”
✓ If no, proceed to a suicidal risk assessment
✓ If yes, complete the NSSI assessment
Kruzan and Whitlock (2019) adapted the transtheoretical model (TTM) of behavior
change proposed by Prochaska and DiClemente to assess motivation for change. TTM
integrates the following while assessing motivation of change: (1) precontemplation
(with no intent to stop NSSI); (2) contemplation (intent to stop NSSI within 6 months);
(3) preparation (intention of taking steps to stop NSSI within next month); (4) action
(currently taking steps to stop NSSI); (5) maintenance (steps have been taken for more
than 6 months); and (6) termination (cessation of NSSI for over 3 years).
We have integrated a Q-tree into the TTM as an example for crisis counselors to
assess and identify a timeline of NSSI, risk factors, and motivation for change (protective
factors) to provide referral for treatment.
Have you self-injured in the last 6 months?
If YES (to the 6-month question), is self-injury something you would like to stop?
• If yes, have you taken steps to stop NSSI?
✓ If yes, explore ACTION STAGE and ACTION PLANNING
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 191	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 191 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 29 of 87 --

192 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• If no, do you plan to take steps to stop NSSI?
✓ If no, client is in the PRECONTEMPLATION STAGE (consider psychoedu-
cation)
✓ If yes, client is in the PREPARATION STAGE (explore ideas and establish
plan)
If NO (to the 6-month question), have you self-injured in the past YEAR?
• If yes, is self-injury something you would like to stop?
• If no, have you self-injured in the past 3 YEARS?
✓ If yes, explore MAINTENANCE STAGE
✓ If no, no action is recommended
A more comprehensive assessment should follow this Q-tree screening approach.
The TTM approach assesses the timeline and motivations for change based on the
motivation for change theory. It is limited to these assessment categories unless you
implement additional elements needed for a more thorough NSSI assessment. We
suggest that more elements should be included for a comprehensive NSSI assessment
and have included the following adapted NSSI assessment, based on the research and
clinical work of Wester and Trepal (2017), who also found a high correlation between
NSSI and suicidal attempts. Thus, it is best practice to conduct independent suicidal risk
and NSSI assessments.
According to Wester and Trepal (2017), the NSSI assessment should gather:
(1) basic information, (2) contextual information, and (3) functional/reasoning
information. Table 6.6 can serve as a Q-tree for NSSI, and we have included some Q-tree
questions that connect to Wester and Trepal’s indicators. Upon gathering this information
and assessing NSSI risk, a crisis counselor can provide effective referral for a client.
Basic Information 	Contextual Information 	Functional/Reasoning
1. What was the age at onset?
2. How did the NSSI begin? (Was
there a triggering situation or
event?)
3. When was the last time the client
engaged in NSSI? (Start with most
recent, in past week, month, 3
months, year, over their lifetime)
4. What methods are used to
engage? Have methods changed?
5. Where on the body is NSSI
targeted?
6. Is NSSI known by others or is it
secretive?
7. Are there any wounds that have
needed medical attention?
8. Has client ever been able to
cease NSSI?
1. When engaging, are
substances (drugs,
prescription medications,
alcohol) used?
2. Has client ever found
a wound they had no
recollection of inflicting?
3. Is client able to delay
engagement?
4. If not, has there ever
been a desire to delay
engagement?
5. Is there a geographical
location or setting
where the NSSI occurs?
6. Does client have
thoughts or ideations of
suicide as well?
What reason is NSSI
used to:
1. regulate emotions?
2. feel better?
3. connect to
oneself (decrease
numbness)?
4. socially withdraw or
isolate?
5. engage or belong?
6. control or influence
others?
7. fill a craving or
addiction?
8. communicate?
TABLE 6.6 Q-Tree Questions for NSSI
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 192	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 192 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 30 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	193
Just as with suicidal risk assessment, the counselor should weigh the risk factors
and protective factors to gather all the information required for treatment planning and
referral. As a note, often NSSI behaviors can serve as protective factors so the counselor
is cautioned to not eliminate NSSI behaviors without evaluating the impact of stopping
the NSSI behavior, or exploring the elimination, as this could increase suicidal thoughts
or behaviors. This model is more comprehensive in gathering and reviewing several key
pieces of information that facilitate referral for continued care.
NSSI assessment, like suicide and homicide risk assessment, often requires long-
term care, which may exceed the time a true crisis counselor can offer, unless the NSSI
treatment takes place in long-term counseling. Often, crisis counselors will gather the
information and then refer the person to appropriate long-term counseling. Using
the template above allows a counselor to gather the basic, contextual, and functional
information needed to provide a solid referral for treatment.
Treatment Approaches
Understanding the most effective treatment approaches for NSSI is also essential. The most
common therapeutic approaches for NSSI include dialectical behavior therapy, cognitive-
behavioral therapy, problem-solving therapy (rational problem-solving therapy),
and treatment for self-injurious behaviors (T-SIB). T-SIB was developed as a brief
nine-session intervention to treat NSSI behaviors in young adults without borderline
personality disorder (see Table 6.7). T-SIB can be used as a standalone treatment or an
adjunctive intervention and includes the components in Table 6.7 with psychoeducation
Session and Overview 	Description of the Session Content
1. 	Psychoeducation
and Addressing
Motivation
Psychoeducation of NSSI, orientation to treatment, motivational
interviewing, and other strategies to decrease ambivalence may be
used by counselor
2. 	Functional
Assessment (FA)
Assess NSSI behaviors, provide alternative coping strategies for NSSI
if appropriate, and provide homework to address the functional
assessment of NSSI (is the person getting what they intend from
NSSI behaviors?)
3. 	FA 	Explore times when NSSI is not engaged
4. 	FA and Differential
Reinforcement of
Alternative Behaviors
Explore behaviors that may be adopted as alternatives to NSSI
and provide homework to only list alternative strategies with clear
instructions not to try them yet
5–6. Differential
Reinforcement of
Alternative Behaviors
Evaluate impact of each alternative listed, revise list, homework
assigned to implement alternative behaviors
7–8. Individual Modules 	Individual sessions for each client depending on their function
of events to NSSI. May integrate distress tolerance, interpersonal
communication, cognitive distortions, and restructuring
9. Termination 	Review progress and address obstacles moving forward
TABLE 6.7 T-SIB Sessions and Program Overview
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 193	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 193 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 31 of 87 --

194 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
and therapeutic interventions. Counselors know how stressful this work can be and are
reminded to receive training, practice self-care, and seek consultation and supervision
as needed. Next, read Voices from the Field 6.2.
Amanda C. La Guardia
After completing my bachelor’s degree, I started
working in the mental health field as a case manager
assigned to a small number of children and adolescents
who had been identified as “at risk” for being removed
from their homes and placed into foster care or long-
term inpatient facilities. My job was to help ensure
these youngsters stayed with their families. I was with
each family for up to 12 hours per week, which was far
more than their licensed counselors were. I frequently
felt that I did not have the training necessary to help
in the way that was needed (which is why I decided to
pursue my master’s in counseling).
One of the biggest challenges I faced with
many of my clients was treating non-suicidal self-
injurious behavior. I worked with several adolescent
females who used self-injury as a way of coping with
either the psychological impact of the trauma they
had experienced or their emotional turmoil. I also
encountered elementary school–age boys who engaged
in self-injurious behaviors for similar reasons. Rather than
perceiving these behaviors as a coping strategy, many of
the counselors I worked with judged these behaviors to
be the result of mental illness. For example, borderline
behavior was a consistent assessment for the females
and impulsivity because of hyperactivity was a common
assessment for the boys. Thus, I noticed clinicians often
did not focus on nonsuicidal self-injury as an important
treatment concern. I knew better, but I needed training.
In many cases, the clients who engaged in the
most frequent self-injurious behaviors were also con-
templating suicide. They would injure themselves to
deal with their overwhelming emotions (or lack of
emotional connection) and to prevent acting out on
their suicidal thoughts. This combination was tricky.
I knew they needed a better way of coping, but I did
not want to take away the method that they felt kept
them from walking down a more dangerous path.
Formal and informal ways of assessing their suicidal
ideations as well as their need for self-injury became
equally necessary. Self-injury and suicidal ideation are
separate issues, but they are often interconnected.
Together with my clients, we discussed what
situations (external and internal) tended to lead to
self-injurious behaviors and worked on developing
new ways of coping. I did not ask them to stop, but
I did ask them to take care of themselves and
encouraged them to find new ways of dealing with
their pain because they deserved happiness, however
they defined it; they were worth it. I let them know
I would be with them as they struggled, and then I
made sure that I was.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.2
Treating Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
HOMICIDE
Learning Objective 6.8 Describe threat assessment and treatment options for
intervention with people who are homicidal or are threats to others.
Most counselors are aware that they are likely to encounter suicidal clients in their coun-
seling practice (Laux, 2002) and be exposed to persons experiencing thoughts of suicide.
Still, many counselors underestimate the need for expertise in assessment and inter-
vention skills with homicidal clients. There is a general assumption that clients with
homicidal ideation are found primarily within the domain of forensic mental health and
therefore are not a concern for most counselors in a variety of settings. Obviously, clients
with a history of certain mental disorders and violent offenses do present an elevated
risk to the public, and mental health professionals working with violent offenders should
strive to balance public safety and client rights (Carroll et al., 2004; Large et al., 2011).
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 194	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 194 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 32 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	195
Ongoing reports from the media reveal that the potential for violence and
homicide exists in families, schools, colleges, the workplace, and across all communities.
Accordingly, it is essential that counselors in all practice settings be equipped to assess
the lethality of clients with homicidal ideation and be capable of making decisions
regarding the referral and treatment of dangerous clients. Van Brunt (2015) stated
that while mental illness is often a contributing element, “the core of assessment must
be based on threat assessment principles, not clinical pathology” (p. viii). Moreover,
counselors in all settings may be called on to provide services to survivors of loss due to
homicide. A homicidal crisis is intense and has long-lasting repercussions for individuals
and communities who are left struggling to make sense of their traumatic loss and
complicated grief (Currier et al., 2006). In this section, we explore the issue of homicidal
ideation and systems of threat level assessment as well as treatment options.
Homicide can be defined as the willful killing of one person by another person.
According to the CDC (2022b), in 2018 there were 24,576 homicides in the United States
(7.5 per 100,000). The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI; 2019) reported 16,425 homi-
cides for 2019, which reflected a rate of 5.0 per 100,000 in that year. Preliminary analy-
sis forecasts that the downward trend will continue, though the trends will be studied
closely given any pandemic-related influences on the increase or decrease in violence.
It is also important to note that while overall homicide rates have been decreasing, the
rate of mass shootings has been on the rise, with 40 mass shootings in 2020, up from 30
in 2019 (FBI, 2021).
Sixty-eight percent of homicides are committed with guns (Doucette et al., 2019).
Mental health professionals as prevention advocates are faced with myriad complex
variables related to public opinions, political and values-informed discourse, the
availability of guns through legal and illegal means, conflicting social values between
personal freedoms and personal safety, and other factors. At the very least, within the
clinical relationship, clinicians can and should strive to prevent homicide by attending to
clients’ safety with means-removal, means-restriction, and safety planning. They should
work with highly attuned standards for duty to warn and duty to protect.
“I could just kill him!” That is not an uncommon declaration from a client venting
anger at a difficult partner, peer, or coworker, and counselors must be able to ascertain
frustration from true risk of violence (Welfel, 2016). Such threats of harm toward another
usually transpire when a client is experiencing extreme psychological anguish and is
attempting to resolve feelings of distress; they are expressions of emotion without any
real intent to carry out a threat (Warren et al., 2011). The counselor is then tasked with
determining whether such pronouncements are simply common idiomatic expressions
of anger or are legitimate lethal threats. Fortunately, in most instances, clients are merely
indulging in hyperbole to give voice to intense anger or frustration; however, counselors
must be prepared to recognize and assess potential lethality in cases where resentment
and infuriation have escalated into homicidal ideation and possible violent actions.
Legal Issues
Working with potentially violent and homicidal clients presents a challenge to crisis
counselors as they attempt to assess possible homicidal behavior, provide treatment, and
protect potential intended victims and themselves (Meloy et al., 2011). When counseling
potentially homicidal clients, the protection of the public (or individual) is the priority.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 195	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 195 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 33 of 87 --

196 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
The noteworthy 1976 case of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California (refer to
Chapter 3) clarified that the duty under California law to warn individuals who are in
peril is of greater importance than the preservation of client confidentiality (Rothstein,
2014; Welfel, 2016). The Tarasoff case established the legal construct of duty to warn
through case law that inspired a higher ethical standard, even though in many states it
was not codified by law and still may not be used as a precedent in some states.
It is a good idea for crisis counselors to become familiar with the regulations of
their own state laws regarding the duty to warn, as these issues are constantly being
addressed by legislators at the state level. Welfel (2016) noted that while codes of ethics
allow breach of confidentiality regarding dangerous clients and the burden of responsi-
bility to warn targeted victims, there are state laws that require client protection to take
place through hospitalization of the threatening individual (e.g., in Ohio) or contacting
police rather than directly contacting the intended victim (i.e., in Texas) and breaching
confidentiality.
Counselors must be aware of the terminology in their licensing states in relation to
homicidal behaviors. For example, Welfel reports that some states clarify that the harm
must be imminent before confidentiality can be breached and may require consultation
with other mental health professionals. Legal consultation is strongly urged before
confidentiality is breached.
Assessment of Homicide: Risk Factors
Certain basic indicators and risk factors tend to be associated with homicidal behavior
and violence. However, a word of caution about risk factors: While they may assist
crisis counselors in assessment, it is important to remember that the existence of risk
factors does not mean the client will become violent, and, conversely, the absence of
risk factors!does not indicate a lack of homicidal intention. Remember, each case must be
evaluated on its own terms. With or without the presence of certain risk factors, someone
can become homicidal at any time for any reason. Just as the existence of a risk factor
cannot predict suicidality, risk factors for homicide in clients cannot predict whether the
client will act in a violent manner (Van Brunt, 2015).
The FBI Unified Crime Report (2019) reports the following:
• 78.3% of the 13,927 murder victims were male.
• When race was provided for the 13,927 murder victims, 54.7% were Black, 42.3% were
White, and 3.1% were of other races. Data on race was not included for 234 victims.
• More than 73% of the homicides involved the use of firearms.
• 28.3% of homicide victims were killed by someone they knew other than a family
member (acquaintance, neighbor, friend, boyfriend, etc.), 13.0% died at the hands
of a family member and 9.9% were murdered by a stranger.
Berghuis and Klott (2015) noted that, among other behaviors, males who become
homicidal tend to exhibit impulsivity and have prevalence of mental illness, family
violence, job instability, and overall insecurity in their social contexts. They usually
express a need to control intimate relationships and may exhibit possessiveness and
rage. The need to control others is most clearly demonstrated in domestic violence cases
where batterers control their partners through threats, physical violence, isolation from
friends and family, and limiting access to money. Emotional reactivity and acting out
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 196	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 196 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 34 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	197
of jealousy and revenge were found to be common themes among domestic violence
perpetrators (Juodis et al., 2014a).
Research provides information about the characteristics and risk factors associated
with youth who commit acts of violence and homicide. According to the CDC (2023a),
homicide is the third leading cause of death for youth between the ages of 10 and 24 and
the leading cause of death for non-Hispanic Black youth. Sexual minority teens are more
likely to experience multiple forms of violence compared to their heterosexual peers.
Furthermore, the report outlines various risk and protective factors, although it cautions
that risk factors are not direct causes of youth violence. A combination of individual,
relationship, community, and societal factors contribute to the risk and prevention of
youth violence.
• Individual risk factors: History of violence victimization; attention deficit or
learning disorders; history of early aggressive behavior; use of drugs, alcohol, or
tobacco; low IQ; poor behavior control; deficits in social cognitive or information-
processing abilities; intense emotional distress; history of treatment for emotional
problems; antisocial traits and beliefs; exposure to violence
• Family risk factors: Authoritarian parents; inconsistent disciplinary practices;
low parental involvement; low emotional attachment to parents or caregivers; low
education and income of parents; substance use or criminal incidents by parents;
poor family functioning; lack of supervision of children
• Peer and social risk factors: Delinquent peers; involvement in gangs; social rejection
by peers; lack of involvement in acceptable activities; poor academic performance;
low commitment to school and school failure
• Community risk factors: Diminished economic opportunities; high level of tran-
siency; high level of family disruption; low levels of community participation;
socially disorganized neighborhoods
Protective factors would be the opposite of the risk factors listed above.
School Homicide and Violence
The Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD; 2019) reminds
readers and members of K–12 school personnel that there is not a simple or obvious
profile of a student who might enact a school shooting. Though school shootings result
in extensive media coverage and collective trauma within communities and beyond,
the prevalence of gun violence off the school campus is still substantially higher
than on campuses. ASCD reported that the average number of deaths from gunshot
wounds between 2002 and 2014 was 1,300 per year, compared with 117 total fatalities
in school locations between 2000 and 2014. Despite the tragic and vexing aftermath
of school!shootings, educational settings may be considered safer than other settings
that children frequent. Everyone who cares about safer communities and schools wants
to know who that child may be that could become a school shooter, yet the ability to
predict or “spot the profile” of such a youth is elusive. ASCD reported that, while most
school shooters are White male teens, their academic and behavioral histories were
unremarkable. They experienced some successes in school, had friends or a social group,
and were relatively typical, leading the FBI and the U.S. Secret Service to advise against
using profile analysis as a prevention approach.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 197	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 197 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 35 of 87 --

198 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
That said, in recent years, it has become tragically evident that K–12 schools and
higher-education settings are vulnerable to heinous acts of violence. The FBI (2019)
tracked active shooter events from 2000 to 2013 and found a steady increase over that
time span. Of those incidents, 24.4% occurred in educational settings. Moreover, the
incidents that occurred on campuses accounted for some of the highest casualty rates.
As with violent incidents in other settings, school shootings are precipitated
by a complex interplay of personal issues and environmental circumstances. Again,
it is important to note that the presence of certain risk factors cannot predict actual
violent acts, but since most violent students communicate their intentions, ongoing
threat assessment can help school officials prevent violence and provide intervention
to troubled students. By using systematic threat assessment and being attuned to
warning signs, educational settings can more clearly identify individuals with violent
intent. According to Meloy et al. (2011), “warning behaviors are acts which constitute
evidence of increasing or accelerating risk! .! .! .! acute, dynamic, and particularly
toxic changes in patterns of behavior which may aid in structuring a professional’s
judgment that an individual of concern now poses a threat” (p. 256). School personnel
and crisis staff are certainly encouraged to maximize any efforts within the social
and emotional development initiatives schoolwide to equip students with increasing
emotional self-awareness, strong coping skills, help-seeking skills, conflict resolution
skills, and more.
Meloy et al. (2011) developed a typology of eight warning behaviors that can indi-
cate amplified risk of targeted violence and should be utilized when assessing a threat.
They state that “threat assessment is concerned almost wholly with the risk of targeted
violence by a subject of concern and has a behavioral and observational policing focus”
(p. 257). The eight warning behaviors are as follows:
1. Pathway warning behavior—the individual plans an attack
2. Fixation warning behavior—the individual becomes obsessed with a person or cause
3. Identification warning behavior—the individual identifies with attackers or warriors
4. Novel aggression warning behavior—the individual tries out violent behavior as a test
5. Energy burst behavior—the individual increases activities related to the intended
victim(s)
6. Leakage warning behavior—the individual tells another person about the plans
7. Directly communicated threat warning behavior—the individual makes an explicit
threat to the target or police
8. Last resort warning behavior—the individual displays an increase in distress and
comes to believe that there is no other way forward but violence toward the target
(Meloy & O’Toole, 2011)
It is hoped that this typology of warning behaviors can make threat assessment more
systematized and usable.
According to Meloy and O’Toole (2011), individuals leak their plans for a variety of
reasons, such as excitement, attention, anxiety, or fear. Leakage may be unintentional or
intentional. If leakage occurs during counseling, the counselor should discern the need
to follow duty to warn responsibilities. O’Toole (2014) noted that individuals who are
withdrawn, detached from others, and think they have been attacked by another person
(whether the attack is real or imagined) may begin to plot a revenge attack. Erford et al.
(2019) also state that revenge for bullying or social rejection is a specific motivation for
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 198	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 198 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 36 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	199
many school shootings. Bullying prevention must be considered an important facet of
any school violence prevention program (Duplechain & Morris, 2014). The U.S. Secret
Service (2010) offered this insight into the prevalence of leakage:
School-based attacks are rarely impulsive acts. Rather, they are typically
thought out and planned in advance. Almost every attacker had engaged in
behavior before the shooting that seriously concerned at least one adult—
and for many had concerned three or more adults. In addition, prior to most
of the incidents, other students knew the attack was to occur but did not
alert an adult.
This information points to the need to educate students, school staff and faculty, and the
public about leakage. Violence in school is usually planned, and school staff and faculty
need to be particularly attentive to signs and symptoms of violence as well as to school
environmental factors that give rise to bullying, rejection, and the promotion of violence
(Miller et al., 2000).
Kanan (2010) highlighted the following 10 findings on violent incidents in schools:
1. Incidents of violence are rarely impulsive acts.
2. Prior to most incidents, other people knew about the attacker’s ideas or plans.
3. Most attackers did not threaten their targets directly prior to advancing the attack.
4. There is no active or useful profile of students who engage in targeted school
violence.
5. Prior to the attack, most attackers engaged in some behavior that caused concern
or indicated a need for help.
6. Most attackers were known to have difficulty coping with significant losses or
personal failures.
7. Many attackers felt bullied, persecuted, or injured by others prior to the attack.
8. Most attackers had access to and had used weapons prior to the attack.
9. In many cases, other students were involved in some capacity.
10. Despite prompt law enforcement responses, most shooting incidents were stopped
by means other than law enforcement interventions. (p. 32)
A key point to consider in school shootings is the fact that attackers usually indicate
their intentions to someone. Most of the time, other students had some hints that a fellow
student was ready to lash out. Part of the difficulty that schools face is the fact that
students are reluctant to tell adults their suspicions. Payne and Delbert (2011) noted that
the use of an anonymous hotline for students to report threats, mistreatment, or bullying
can be an effective deterrent to incidents of school violence. Prevention messaging, such
as “if you see something, say something,” or training youth to get help from an adult
are important school context norms to advance.
In general, college campuses are safe environments, and there is a lower rate
of crime on college campuses compared to off-campus settings (Carr & Wood, 2006).
Horrific shootings on college campuses are more reflective of problems with mental
health access and compliance than of problems with campus safety. Colleges and
universities can combat violent incidents through training for faculty, staff, and even
students. The implementation of threat assessment and prevention programs on
campus and campus-wide warning systems could provide the means to thwart future
acts of violence and protect student lives. Campus leadership can continue to improve
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 199	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 199 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 37 of 87 --

200 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
access to mental health care, foster social and emotional support in residential facilities,
and improve morale across groups (Van Brunt, 2015). Case Study 6.2 addresses the
importance of risk assessment in schools.
CASE STUDY 6.2
Risk Assessment in Schools
Peyton is a grade 10 student who is very withdrawn and has few friends. Dalton, the
school counselor, is concerned about Peyton. Last year there was a case where some
students were bullying Peyton, who then shared thoughts of suicidal ideation with
Dalton. Peyton has been seeing a counselor for the past year and the bullies were
punished; however, Dalton has a gut feeling that the bullying continues “under the
radar” of school officials. Peyton’s English teacher recently stopped by to show Dalton
one of Peyton’s tests. Peyton did not answer a single question, but instead drew pictures
of guns all over the test.
Discussion Questions
1. What should Dalton do?
2. What questions should Dalton ask?
3. What process should Dalton follow?
4. Are there any special considerations since they are in a school setting?
5. Are there any gender considerations?
Workplace Violence and Homicide
In 2017, there were 458 workplace homicides (Doucette et al., 2019) and, according
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021), 20,870 workers in the private industry expe-
rienced! trauma from nonfatal workplace violence in 2019. Of those victims who
experienced trauma from workplace violence:
• 68% were female
• 65% were age 25–54 years
• 70% worked in the health care and social assistance industry
• 21% required 31 or more days away from work to recover, and 20% needed
3–5!days away from work
However, the number of workplace homicides has decreased overall since 1993, a year
in which 1,068 workplace homicides occurred. Even with this decrease over the years,
homicide in the workplace is the fourth leading cause of fatality at work and remains a
disturbing reality. Most workplace homicides involve robberies, and individuals who
work in retail and hospitality establishments are at greater risk, as are customers and
bystanders in these settings. Approximately 80% of workplace fatalities result from
shootings.
Just as a school can be held liable for not addressing bullying and threats, the
workplace can also be liable for failing to address danger and threats (Lies & Simonsen,
2015). Lies and Simonsen recommend that workplaces have clearly stated policies
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 200	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 200 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 38 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	201
regarding violence and threats, a way for employees to communicate concerns, a system
to promptly investigate concerns, a discipline policy, training for all employees on the
signs and symptoms of violent intent, and an Employee Assistance Program that can
counsel employees in distress to help prevent acts of violence.
According to the CDC (2021a), the most dangerous workplace risk factors involve
the following:
• Contact with the public
• Exchange of money
• Delivery of passengers, goods, or services
• Having a mobile workplace such as a taxicab or a police cruiser
• Working with unstable or volatile persons in health care, social service, or criminal
justice settings
• Working alone or in small numbers
• Working late at night or during early-morning hours
• Working in high-crime areas
• Guarding valuable property or possessions
• Working in community-based settings
The risk of workplace violence and homicide increases during times of extreme job
stress. Understaffed job sites, overworked employees, and times of downsizing or labor
disputes will create a tense and potentially dangerous context for the development of
violent behavior. Additionally, poor management, a high number of grievances, and the
lack of employee access to counseling can contribute to violence and homicidal threat
in the workplace (O’Toole, 2000). It is essential that workplace employers, particularly
in high-pressure workplaces or those undergoing turmoil, be mindful of the need for
ongoing threat assessment and be proactive by providing support to employees.
Threat Level Assessment
Various models of threat assessment have emerged over the past years, and it is beyond
the scope of this chapter to outline all of them. Counselors are encouraged to familiarize
themselves with a variety of models of threat assessment.
When a client has overtly indicated intent to harm others or has indirectly exhibited
predictors or behaviors of violence and harm to others, this constitutes a direct threat, and
the counselor must assess the level of threat (Warren et al., 2011). Threat level assessment
is critically important to ensure the safety of others and to appropriately guide treatment
decisions. While most people who make threats are unlikely to carry out a violent action,
all threats must be taken seriously and evaluated (O’Toole, 2000). Threat assessment is
the evaluation of the lethality of a threat through an examination of motive, risk factors,
intent, and the means and ability to enact the threat.
O’Toole (2000) explained that threat assessment should involve exploration of the
following questions: What are the details of the threat? Are the victims identified? Are
the details logical, plausible, and spelled out in a specific manner (time of day, method)?
Does the client have the means to carry out the threat? What is the emotional state of the
client? While emotionality does not specifically indicate lethality, knowing the affective
condition of the client provides important assessment and diagnostic information related
to lability of mood, dysregulation of feelings, ability to think clearly or not, rational
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 201	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 201 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 39 of 87 --

202 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
functioning or not. Are there stressors or triggers that might predispose a client to
violence? Is the level of threat low, medium, or high? O’Toole, working with the FBI
National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime, delineated threat levels as follows:
Low Level of Threat: A threat that poses a minimal risk to victim and public safety.
The threat is vague and indirect.
Information contained within the threat is inconsistent.
The threat lacks realism.
The content of the threat suggests the person is unlikely to carry it out.
Medium Level of Threat: A threat that could be carried out, although it may not
appear to be entirely realistic.
The threat is more direct and more concrete than a low-level threat.
The wording in the threat suggests that the person issuing the threat has given
some thought to how the act will be carried out.
There may be a general indication of a possible place and time (though these
signs still fall well short of a detailed plan).
There is no strong indication that the person who issued the threat has taken
preparatory steps, although there may be a veiled reference or ambiguous
or inconclusive evidence pointing to that possibility—an allusion to a book
or movie that shows planning of a violent act or a vague general statement
seeking to convey that the threat is not empty: “I’m serious!” or “I really
mean this!”
High Level of Threat: A threat that appears to pose an imminent and serious dan-
ger to the safety of others.
The threat is direct, specific, and plausible.
The threat suggests that concrete steps have been taken toward carrying it
out—for example, statements indicating that the person who issued the
threat has acquired or practiced with a weapon or has had the victim under
surveillance. (pp. 8–9)
The process of threat assessment must be conducted in an environment that will
calm the client, facilitate the de-escalation of intense emotions, and assist in the attain-
ment of precise information regarding the level of threat intent. The assessment of vio-
lence is like the assessment of other symptoms, in that the client’s history of violence,
family and medical history, mental status, and drug use must all be investigated. Van
Brunt (2015) underscored the need for a calm demeanor and the use of basic rapport-
building and active listening skills. Using counseling skills, a relationship can be formed,
and the clients will be more willing and able to open up about their thoughts and poten-
tial plans. Law enforcement representatives assert that the active listening skills that
counselors learn in their interpersonal listening classes are very similar to the rapport-
building strategies that crisis response or SWAT team members use in police or FBI work
(R. Jackson, personal communication, April 15, 2015; C. Spears, personal communication,
February 10, 2022).
Once rapport is established, the counselor can delve into precise questions to
obtain detailed information about the intent of the client to harm another, the extent
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 202	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 202 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 40 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	203
and intrusiveness of the homicidal thoughts, and the ability of the client to acquire the
means to implement homicide plans. When dealing with a client expressing homicidal
intent, crisis counselors must always keep the ethical obligation of public safety and the
duty to warn at the forefront of their minds, even with low-threat clients. Furthermore,
while assessing homicidal ideation, the counselor should also assess for suicidal ideation
because homicide and suicide may co-occur. Now see Case Study 6.3, which presents a
situation where a counselor must assess a client’s level of threat. Then read Voices from
the Field 6.3 and complete Activity 6.3 on threat assessment.
CASE STUDY 6.3
Assessing for Level of Threat
R$%&': 	I hate my supervisor at work. My life would be better if he was
dead.
C()*+&%(,: 	You’re so angry at your supervisor that you wish he was dead.
Have you had thoughts about harming him?
R$%&': 	Sure, I think about killing him.
C()*+&%(,: 	Have you come up with a plan to kill him?
R$%&': 	A plan? I mean I’ve got a 45 at home but no, not a plan exactly.
C()*+&%(,: 	Are there times when you feel you might act on these thoughts?
R$%&': 	Ha, whenever I’m drunk.
Discussion Questions
1. What level of threat is indicated so far?
2. What other information does the counselor need to assess the threat level?
3. If the counselor determines the supervisor is in danger, what steps should the
counselor take?
Cheryl Lewellen
When assessing for homicidal ideation of potential
clients to our nonprofit women’s residential substance
use treatment facility, we begin by using a state
assessment issued by the Department of Mental Health.
I am sure most states have a similar standardized
assessment. It takes more than an hour to perform and
assesses for multiple factors, with both suicidal and
homicidal ideation included.
Given the nature of clients struggling with
addictions, it is important to continue to verbally assess
for both suicide and homicide during individual sessions
throughout the 90 days they are here. One of the main
factors for this is that many of the women come into
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.3
Leaving No Stone Unturned
(continued)
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 203	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 203 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 41 of 87 --

204 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Referral
Because of the danger to others and the possible existence of mental disorders in homi-
cidal clients, counselors usually refer clients to or work collaboratively with other mental
health providers, particularly psychiatrists, when treating clients who pose a threat to
others. Violent clients often need the help of specialists in forensic mental health, and it is
a good idea for crisis counselors to be familiar with forensic specialists in their local area.
Clinical assessment of low-threat-level clients may reveal the need for psychiatric
evaluation and treatment with psychotropic medication; however, it is imperative that
clients with homicidal ideation who are assessed at the high and medium threat levels be
referred for psychiatric evaluation and possible treatment with medications. Because of
imminent danger to others, high-threat-level clients require immediate law enforcement
involvement and probable voluntary or involuntary commitment (O’Toole, 2000;
Warren et al., 2011). Medium-threat-level clients need to be monitored closely and may
need to be hospitalized.
In instances with out-of-control and impulsive clients, homicidal and suicidal
ideation may coexist and, therefore, such a client poses a threat to both self and others. As
with suicidal crises, practitioners should be familiar with their state and county protocols
for voluntary and involuntary commitment hearings with potentially homicidal persons.
The procedures for voluntary and involuntary commitment discussed previously in this
chapter in relation to suicide should be followed for homicide cases, with the inclusion
of law enforcement in high-threat-level situations. Personal safety of the crisis counselor
should always be a priority. A counselor should never attempt to physically stop a
resistant client from leaving. If the client is intent on leaving, it is best to get as much
information as possible about the client and request law enforcement to intervene.
What is the relationship between mental illness and homicide? Individuals with
diagnosed mental disorders are at a higher risk than the general population for violent
or homicidal behavior (Laajasalo & Hakkanen, 2004), and individuals with untreated
mental illness are more likely to threaten to kill (Warren et al., 2011). It should be noted,
however, that this risk is not present across the board and that an elevated threat to
the program insufficiently detoxed, and it takes a while
for them to gain a clear perspective on their lives. As
they begin treatment and open up to aspects of their
lives that caused them to use drugs and alcohol in the
first place, the clients become aware of the multitude
of emotions they had attempted to numb. Many of
the clients have suffered abuse on multiple levels either
before or during their drug use. Therefore, it is always
important to monitor their potential ideation of both
suicide and homicide.
As with assessment of suicidal ideation,
assessment of homicidal ideation involves asking the
client questions to establish whether an individual has
thoughts about harming or killing another person,
whether they have a plan, and to what extent the plan
could be enacted.
Think about counseling a client who requires a threat
assessment. The literature emphasizes the need for
counselors to maintain calm and use facilitative skills
to build rapport while conducting an assessment for
homicidal ideation. How difficult would you find that
to be? Put yourself in the situation: What concerns
you? What do you feel you need to master threat
assessment?
ACTIVITY 6.3
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 204	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 204 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 42 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	205
CASE STUDY 6.4
Assessing for Level of Threat: Judy
Judy is a 43-year-old single woman who has been placed on 2 weeks’ administrative
leave from her job as a research and development technician at a chemical company.
Over the years, she has had many personality conflicts with other workers, but her
expertise is valuable and these conflicts have always been smoothed over and worked
out. Recently, Judy “lost it” with her boss and flew into a rage when she was denied time
off in compensation for working late the previous week; this incident was the basis for
her administrative leave. Her family doctor has prescribed antidepressants for her and
has referred her to you for counseling.
others is mainly associated with certain diagnoses (Eronen et al., 1998). An increased risk
of violent behavior has been found with diagnoses of schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders, but the highest risk of violent and homicidal behavior has been found in
individuals with a dual diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder and substance use
disorder. Substance use repeatedly emerges as a major risk factor for violent behavior
and homicide; the comorbidity of substance use and any mental disorder increases the
likelihood of violence and should be considered when assessing and treating violent
clients.
Treatment Options
As stated earlier, a therapeutic alliance is particularly imperative with potential homicide
offenders, since client investment in treatment compliance is necessary for public safety
(Kolski et al., 2015). Tishler et al. (2000) noted that mental health providers may struggle
with extending empathy and may experience fear when working with homicidal clients.
While such reactions are understandable, it is important to remember that homicidal
behaviors are symptoms of a client’s illness and that open displays of fear and distaste
undermine rapport building and impair treatment outcomes.
Once the immediate homicidal crisis has been dealt with, the safety of others
has been assured, and appropriate medical treatment has begun, long-term treatment
planning can proceed. Ongoing assessment of the client is crucial to both treatment
outcomes and public safety; therefore, assessment must remain foremost in the crisis
counselor’s mind. One concern in assessment is the tendency for violent offenders to be
less than forthright about the facts surrounding violent acts (Carroll et al., 2004). Crisis
counselors should thoroughly examine client history and obtain external substantiation
of client facts. Suicidal ideation and homicidal ideation often co-occur, and it is important
to assess the risk of both suicide and homicide in clients who have thoughts of harm to
self or others.
By understanding how aggression may have been reinforced in the client’s past
and by exploring any inhibiting factors and situational contexts, crisis counselors and
clients can identify thoughts and behaviors that may lessen violent behavior in the
future. The client can begin to learn other ways to cope with anger and aggression. See
Case Study 6.4, which presents a situation in which a counselor must assess a client’s
level of threat.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 205	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 205 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 43 of 87 --

206 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Compliance with treatment—in particular, compliance with medication—must
be stressed with clients who have indicated homicidal ideation or intent. Nordstrom
et al. (2006) studied convicted homicide offenders who had been diagnosed with
schizophrenia. Most offenders were found to have been noncompliant with medication
and treatment at the time of their crimes, resulting in active hallucinations and delusions
during the homicidal crisis. Therefore, it is essential that crisis counselors conduct
ongoing evaluations of medication compliance throughout treatment.
Family involvement in the treatment of homicidal clients is critical as a support
for ongoing treatment compliance. Families can communicate to counselors if clients
stop taking medication and can also report observed behaviors of concern that might
indicate elevated risk (Kolski & Jongsma, 2015). Additionally, families provide a social
network foundation that can facilitate client coping. In some instances, family mem-
bers need to be given information to ensure their own safety. Family members and
friends, rather than strangers, were the most frequent victims of homicide offenders
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia (Laajasalo & Hakkanen, 2004). This fact highlights
the need for families to be an active part of collaborative treatment and ongoing evalu-
ation of homicidal clients. Counselors should establish and adhere to the terms of
confidentiality with the primary client and update any informed consent about how
information is shared and for what reason and when those boundaries would result
in exceptions.
Early environmental factors influence the development of mental disorders and
violent behavior; thus, early intervention with children at risk and their families may
deter the development of future antisocial behavior, including homicidal behavior
(Laajasalo & Hakkanen, 2004). Schools provide the first opportunity for intervention
with children who are exhibiting behavioral problems and struggling with academics,
both of which are associated with violence. Farmer et al. (2007) recommend a service
delivery structure that supports intervention and prevention to promote academic
achievement and social skills, intervention with at-risk youth, and developmental
systemic prevention strategies. It should be noted that such a delivery structure can
be achieved by the full implementation of the ASCA National Model: A Framework for
School Counseling Programs (American School Counselor Association, 2019). Also,
recent research on adverse childhood experiences has provided more clarity about
the debilitating impact of chronic, toxic stress on young children. Early intervention
Judy expresses anger and a sense of hopelessness about her situation. She is dis-
traught and drinks wine every night just to go to sleep. She is convinced that she will be
fired and that the boss is using these 2 weeks to build a case against her. Judy expresses
to you how valuable she is to the company and how much knowledge she has, includ-
ing her knowledge of tasteless but deadly poisons. She states, “Just one minute in the
break room is all someone would need; just slip it in the coffee and they wouldn’t know
what hit them.”
Discussion Questions
1. What level of threat is indicated in this case?
2. Are there factors that increase the homicide risk in this client?
3. What actions should you take?
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 206	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 206 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 44 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	207
in concert with pediatricians, early education teachers, and other community partners
when possible is recommended.
Needs of Survivors of Homicide Loss
Homicide survivors may experience symptoms consistent with complicated grief due
to the nature of the loss. According to the Mayo Clinic (2016), several symptoms may
accompany complicated bereavement:
• Extreme focus on the loss and reminders of the loved one
• Intense longing or pining for the deceased
• Problems accepting the death
• Preoccupation with one’s sorrow
• Bitterness about the loss
• Inability to enjoy life
• Depression or deep sadness
• Difficulty moving on with life
• Trouble carrying out a normal routine
• Withdrawing from social activities
• Feeling that life holds no meaning or purpose
• Irritability or agitation
• Lack of trust in others
To heal from violent loss, survivors need to feel able to openly express what has
happened to them and to fight for change in a system where they have felt injustice. It is
also important that survivors find meaning in the death of their loved one by working
to benefit others experiencing similar circumstances; this gives meaning to the loss as
well as purpose to the survivor (Rynearson, 2012). Saindon et al. (2014) examined the
use of restorative retelling, a technique where clients deal with internalized trauma and
commemorate the life of the lost loved one from a strengths-based and resilient stance.
They found that restorative retelling showed promise as an intervention, particularly
regarding easing depression, lessening avoidance, and decreasing prolonged grief.
Support groups tend to provide much healing in feeling connected to others who share
a similar experience of death connected with violence.
Crisis counselors responding to the crisis of homicide should be prepared for
complex and varied reactions and symptoms from individual survivors. Individuals and
entire communities can be altered by homicide. At college campuses where a homicide
has taken place, students may no longer feel safe and the stress and anxiety may affect
their academic achievement. Communities touched by homicide are altered by the brutal
reality of murder within their midst; a coordinated community counseling response and
activation of resources can serve to facilitate healing. Additionally, crisis counselors
should be sensitive to cultural differences in grief expression. Clients from expressive
cultures will show more outward signs of grieving. A lack of outward grief expression
may be indicative of a more emotionally restrictive culture, and crisis counselors should
not underestimate the inner grief state of less expressive clients (Cavaiola & Colford,
2018). See Case Study 6.5, which focuses on grief counseling for parents who have lost a
daughter to homicide. Then read Voices from the Field 6.4. Finally, Tables 6.8–11 provide
resources for helping people through suicide, NSSI, and homicide.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 207	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 207 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 45 of 87 --

208 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
CASE STUDY 6.5
Treatment for Families of Homicide
Debbie, a 19-year-old college student, did not show up for classes or for her job one
day. When she did not answer her cell phone or come home that night, her roommate
was worried and contacted Debbie’s family, who decided to report her as a missing
person. After 3 weeks of searching and televised pleas for her return, Debbie’s body was
found in a wooded area 30 miles from her apartment. She had been sexually assaulted
and strangled. DNA found on her body was a match with DNA from a man out on
parole from a previous rape conviction. He was accused in Debbie’s murder. The killer
claimed that he had consensual sex with Debbie in his car and that she was fine when
he dropped her off at campus. Debbie’s parents were appalled when the killer’s defense
team attempted to portray Debbie as a wild, out-of-control college student who partied
too much, had multiple sex partners, and put herself at risk. The trial ended with a hung
jury, and there is uncertainty about when there will be a new trial. Debbie’s parents have
come to you for grief counseling.
Discussion Questions
1. What factors have contributed to the parents’ complicated bereavement?
2. What emotions and reactions might you expect from the parents in this case?
3. What treatment goals and interventions are called for in this case?
Gregory Pollock
The calm of the day was interrupted by the loudspeaker
calling a code for violent behavior being exhibited
by a client. I quickly dropped what I was doing and
responded to the code. As I approached the area, the
commotion of the situation became louder and louder,
as my adrenaline levels increased quickly with each step
closer to the area. I felt my breath become shallower,
my stomach drop, and my body become tense. I had
to consciously step back and take a breath and attempt
to relax prior to entering the room where the client in
question was out of control and becoming violent. How
many of us as counselors have been faced with similar
situations?
I have learned the hard way that approaching
situations such as these while hyped up and excited
only adds to the tension and worsens the situation.
I think back to my early days in this field where
I witnessed staff enter crisis situations in a frustrated
state and saw how this exacerbated the situation in very
negative ways, at times leading to the staff or client
becoming injured.
It is imperative to remain calm when reacting in
crisis situations so that we do not add to the situation
at hand. I frequently hear from counselors-in-training
that they do not feel that they could remain calm in
a crisis and that when faced with a crisis, they seem
to “forget” all their skills. On the contrary, their skills
are not forgotten but often masked with anxiety, fear,
adrenaline, and stress reactions. So how is it possible
to remain calm and keep our wits about us when faced
with a crisis? Our training programs do a great job of
preparing us for a variety of situations using counseling
skills and techniques. Not all counselors have equal
opportunities to practice in crisis situations, and those
working in situations where crises are more common
will have a greater comfort level in dealing with crisis
incidents.
It is helpful to remain mindful of ourselves and
recognize what is going on internally when entering a
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.4
Reacting in Crisis Situations
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 208	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 208 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 46 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	209
Organization 	Website
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
Site for Loss Survivors
http://afsp.org/find-support/ive-lost-someone/
Alliance of Hope 	http://www.allianceofhope.org
American Association of Suicidology (AAS) 	www.suicidology.org. Click on the Resources
tab. Scroll down to find Attempt Survivor and
Loss Survivor resources.
AAS: Suicide Loss Survivors 	https://suicidology.org/resources/
suicide-loss-survivors/
Center for Deployment Psychology, Clinicians
as Survivors of Loss
http://deploymentpsych.org/blog/
staff-perspective-suicide-postvention-
don%E2%80%99t-forget-clinician-survivors
Department of the Air Force Resilience 	https://www.resilience.af.mil/Postvention-Tools/
Friends for Survival 	www.friendsforsurvival.org
Harvard Medical School, Harvard Health Publi-
cations, Harvard Women’s Health Watch
http://www.health.harvard.edu/
newsletter_article/Left-behind-after-suicide
HEARTBEAT: Grief Support Following Suicide 	http://heartbeatsurvivorsaftersuicide.org
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention 	www.actionallianceforsuicideprevention.org.
Use the search option to find resources. Try
using key words such as suicide loss, suicide
grief, after a suicide, suicide bereavement,
postvention, and lived experience.
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 	https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
help-yourself/loss-survivors/
Parents, Friends and Families of Suicide 	http://pos-ffos.com
TABLE 6.8 Resources for Suicide, NSSI, and Homicide
regular counseling session or a crisis. How aware are we
of our feelings and thoughts when walking into crisis
situations? It is important to control our emotions as
we enter crisis situations with the best interest of the
client at heart, much like a regular counseling session.
There are great consequences to not remaining mindful
lest we lose sight of what is needed to best remedy the
situation we face.
I refer to a yogic phrase, Ahimsa, meaning to do
no harm. This is a great term to keep in mind as we
prepare for and enter crises. The best way to ensure
that we do no harm to ourselves in yoga is by being
aware of ourselves and staying in touch with our bodies
to make sure that we do not strain ourselves. It may be
difficult to understand the amount of influence that we
have on situations and controlling our emotions goes
a long way in enabling us to enter stressful situations
in a calm manner.
Maintaining awareness daily becomes very
difficult, especially considering our listening to and taking
on the issues and circumstances of our clients, leaving us
vulnerable to compassion fatigue, which in turn can lead
to a loss of control in crises. Self-care is vitally important
to help us deal with underlying frustrations so that we
can maintain our emotional stability.
The most important thing to focus on in crises
is maintaining safety of self, the client, and other staff.
We also need to focus on what the client needs in crisis
situations, and we need to be open to empathizing,
understanding, and meeting the needs of the client in a
respectful, nonharming manner while approaching these
situations with compassion and a calm, even temperament.
(continued)
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 209	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 209 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 47 of 87 --

210 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Organization 	Website
Alabama Suicide Prevention and Resources
Coalition (ASPARC) contains resource directory
and materials for professionals and families
www.asparc.org
American Association of Suicidology (AAS) 	www.suicidology.org
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
(AFSP)
https://afsp.org
TABLE 6.9 Resources for Suicidology, Suicide Prevention, Best Practices,
and Intervention
Organization 	Website
Pennsylvania Adult/Older Adult Suicide Preven-
tion Coalition
https://www.preventsuicidepa.org/?s=loss. Use
the search option to find resources. Try using
key words such as suicide loss, suicide grief,
after a suicide, suicide bereavement, postven-
tion, and lived experience.
Sibling Survivors of Suicide Loss 	http://www.siblingsurvivors.com
SPRC website 	www.sprc.org. Use the search option to
find resources. Try using key words such
as suicide loss, suicide grief, after a sui-
cide, suicide bereavement, postvention,
and lived experience. For clinician survivors:
https://www.sprc.org/resources-programs/
clinicians-survivors-after-suicide-loss
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education (SAVE) 	https://www.save.org/what-we-do/
grief-support
Suicide Resource & Response Network 	https://srrn.net/aftercare/
Survivors of Suicide 	http://www.survivorsofsuicide.com
Survivors of Suicide Loss – San Diego 	https://www.soslsd.org
The Dougy Center for Grieving Children and
Families
www.dougy.org; https://www.dougy.org/reso
urces?how=suicide&who=&type=&audience=.
Scroll down this page to find resources for sui-
cide and grief.
The Guide (for schools) 	http://theguide.fmhi.usf.edu. Note that this
is primarily designed for schools and school
systems, but their materials are easily transfer-
able to other types of organizations. Use the
search option to find resources. Try using key
words such as suicide loss, suicide grief, after a
suicide, suicide bereavement, postvention, and
lived experience.
TABLE 6.8 Resources for Suicide, NSSI, and Homicide (continued)
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 210	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 210 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 48 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	211
Organization 	Website
Be the 1 To (an initiative of the NSPL) 	www.bethe1to.com
Centre for Suicide Prevention (Canada) 	https://www.suicideinfo.ca/
Didi Hirsch MHS (premiere crisis center in Cali-
fornia, closely related to the work of Dr. Edwin
Shneidman, “grandparent” of suicidology)
https://didihirsch.org
International Association for Suicide Prevention
(IASP)
https://www.iasp.info
Jason Foundation 	http://jasonfoundation.com
JED foundation 	https://www.jedfoundation.org
Kevin Hines (mental health advocate and
survivor, lived experience)
https://www.kevinhinesstory.com/
Living Works A.S.I.S.T. Training and SafeTalk
Training (a Canadian company that provides
extensive training in the U.S.)
https://www.livingworks.net/asist
Man Therapy (addresses many mental health
needs of men, suicide-related content among
them)
www.mantherapy.org
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention
(often referred to as the Action Alliance)
https://theactionalliance.org
National Organization for People of Color
Against Suicide (NOPCAS)
http://nopcas.org/
Olweus Bullying Prevention Program 	www.olweus.org
QPR Institute 	https://qprinstitute.com/
Speaking of Suicide Elevating the Conversation;
based on Freedenthal (2017).
https://www.speakingofsuicide.com/
Stamp out Stigma 	http://stampoutstigma.com
StopBullying.gov 	www.stopbullying.gov
Suicide Prevention Resource Center (SPRC) 	https://www.sprc.org
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education (SAVE) 	https://save.org/about-suicide/
preventing-suicide/
Suicide.org, Suicide Prevention in the Military 	www.suicide.org/suicide-prevention-in-the-
military.html
The GUIDE (designated best–practice model for
school-based suicide prevention, intervention,
and postvention care by the University of South
Florida)
http://theguide.fmhi.usf.edu
The Trevor Project 	https://www.thetrevorproject.org
(continued)
TABLE 6.9 Resources for Suicidology, Suicide Prevention, Best Practices,
and Intervention (continued)
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 211	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 211 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 49 of 87 --

212 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUMMARY
Suicide, NSSI, and homicide are crises that
counselors will encounter during their careers.
Suicide rates are increasing among all segments
of our population, and this trend is expected to
continue despite the extensive prevention efforts
ongoing at school, local, state, and national
levels. Counselors and other response-oriented
personnel may find that their own anxiety
surrounding these risk assessments may affect
their approaches to helping clients. In addition
to ongoing training, periodic self-examination
is therefore necessary to maintain an adequate
degree of differentiation from the client’s crisis,
to prevent countertransference of the crisis
counselor’s anxieties onto the client, and to avoid
damaging the potential for a positive counselor–
client relationship.
No one universally recognized rubric for
predictability of suicide, NSSI, or homicidal
behaviors exists; however, it is a standard of care
to approach these risk assessments with models
for assessment to provide effective intervention.
Three primary goals to help crisis counselors
dealing with a person threatening suicide or
Organization 	Website
Terry Wise (the lived experience, award-
winning author, speaker, advocate)
https://terrywise.com
United Survivors 	https://unitesurvivors.org
Zero Suicide Alliance (Britain/UK) 	https://www.zerosuicidealliance.com
Zero Suicide Institute 	http://zerosuicideinstitute.com
https://zerosuicide.edc.org
TABLE 6.9 Resources for Suicidology, Suicide Prevention, Best Practices,
and Intervention (continued)
Help Guide 	https://www.helpguide.org/articles/anxiety/cutting-and-self-harm.htm
S.A.F.E. Alternatives 	https://selfinjury.com/referrals/programs/
SELF 	https://www.self.com/story/self-harm-friend-help
Self-Injury Recovery
Anonymous
https://www.thesira.org/
The Recovery
Village
https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/mental-health/self-harm/related/
self-harm-statistics/#gref
TABLE 6.11 Resources for NSSI
Counselors may find numerous resources, journal articles, research, YouTube videos, and more to
learn more about NSSI. A few helpful websites to explore are:
Center for Homicide Research 	www.Homicidecenter.org
Justice for Homicide Victims 	https://justiceforhomicidevictims.org/resources/
National Organization for Victim Assistance 	www.trynova.org
TABLE 6.10 Resources on Homicide
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 212	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 212 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 50 of 87 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	213
homicide are (1) ensure client safety, (2) assist
the client in achieving immediate short-term
mastery of self and situation, and (3) connect
the client with formal and informal supports.
A variety of models were presented to help the
crisis responder achieve these goals.
Knowledge of suicide risk factors, warning
signs, and protective factors is essential for the
crisis counselor to make a qualified assessment
of suicide risk in clients who are struggling
with thoughts of death to end pain. Once the
client is assessed, the counselor formulates the
level of risk and actively monitors the client
to make progress toward symptom and risk
reduction and when subsequent events affect
the client’s disposition. Documentation of the
entire process is an increasingly important
part of the assessment and treatment cycle;
documentation is the single most important
factor in justifying and defending a particular
course of treatment action. Implementing NSSI
risk assessment should now be part of any
suicide risk assessment. Counselors should be
aware of basic, contextual, and functional aspects
to include in a Q-tree for an NSSI assessment in
order to gather the information necessary to refer
clients to the most effective treatment.
Responding to incidents of homicide
presents many of the same kinds of challenges
as responding to a suicide incident, although
many crisis counselors underestimate the need
for readiness to respond to homicidal risk. In
fact, since homicide risk is becoming more
frequent, crisis counselors should be prepared to
integrate a homicide assessment and determine
risk level. Crisis counselors may find themselves
in a position if they need to exercise the duty to
warn, duty to protect, and duty to consult. Crisis
counselors should be aware of their legal duties
in these situations.
Survivors of homicide loss often experience
complicated bereavement. They may feel
stigmatized, isolated, and traumatized by the
legal system. Treatment of survivors should
address their complicated bereavement issues
and help them find resolution and meaning.
Support groups for homicide survivors have
been found to be helpful in the healing process.
Finally, mental health counselors are
reminded to practice effective self-care when
working with the stressful situations of their
at-risk clients and family members. Crisis
counselors are often first responders who pivot
a potential tragedy into an alternative narrative
of improved well-being of their clients and who
also can experience professional gratification
for making a difference in the lives of their
clients.
M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 213	M06_Jackson_4_78918.indd 213 	18/04/23 4:55 PM	18/04/23 4:55 PM

-- 51 of 87 --

A01_Jackson_4_78918.indd 28	A01_Jackson_4_78918.indd 28 	27/04/23 2:26 PM	27/04/23 2:26 PM
This page intentionally left blank

-- 52 of 87 --

215
PREVIEW
This chapter provides an overview of substance use disorders (SUDs) and symptoms and
the counselor’s role in working with clients facing crisis situations. The etiological factors
of SUDs and various models of addiction are reviewed. Sections in the chapter dealing
with treatment are arranged to help counselors understand the sequential treatment
process in a crisis setting. Special issues such as relapse, support groups, co-occurring
disorders and crises, and cultural considerations are discussed. Case studies and activities
are provided throughout the chapter to help the reader integrate and apply the material.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon competing this chapter, readers will be able to:
7.1 Understand the nature of and importance of substance use in society, including
classification of drugs and current research.
7.2 Describe the etiology and risk factors of substance use and dependence.
7.3 Articulate procedures for the screening, assessment, and diagnosis of substance
use disorders and symptoms, including screening procedures, commonly used
assessment instruments, assessment, diagnosis, assessing a client’s readiness to
change, and treatment admission and placement processes.
7.4 Explain substance use crisis treatment, including relapse and crisis, harm
reduction, support groups, couples and family treatment, and co-occurring
disorders.
7.5 Explain multicultural perspectives on substance use in crisis situations.
7.6 Identify elements of crisis intervention related to substance use, including safety
and self-care, diagnostic considerations during a crisis, and essential substance
use–specific crisis intervention skills.
7 Understanding and Treating
Substance Use Disorders with
Clients in Crisis
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry*
C H A P T E R
*We thank William R. Sterner for contributions to past editions of this chapter.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 215	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 215 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 53 of 87 --

216 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUBSTANCE USE AND SOCIETY
Learning Objective 7.1 Understand the nature of and importance of substance use
in society, including classification of drugs and current research.
Throughout history, substances, many of which are now considered illegal in a num-
ber of countries, have been used as an integral component of social activities, religious
ceremonies, spiritual rituals, and cultural practices. Along with intended sociocultural
purposes, substances have also been sought out to alter mood and enhance sensory
experience and pleasure. People have continually experimented with mood-altering sub-
stances, as well as heuristic routes of administration that both maximize the delivery to,
and enhance the effects on, the brain. The list of mood-altering substances is as varied
as it is long and includes well-known substances such as marijuana, cocaine, heroin,
tobacco, and ethyl alcohol (one of the most widely used and easily accessible mood-
altering substances).
Data from the 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2019) revealed that over 50%
of Americans age 12 years and older (about 132 million people) are current consumers
of alcohol, and over 21% of Americans age 12 years and older (nearly 58 million people)
are current users of tobacco products. Survey results revealed that nearly 57 million
Americans reported using an illicit drug in 2019, a proportion of 20.8% of all people
12!years and older. A majority (53%) of those reporting use of nonmedical prescription-
type drugs indicated the illicit substances were acquired from family and friends. Of the
20.4 million who reported needing treatment for an illicit drug or alcohol problem, only
2.3 million (11%) received treatment (SAMHSA, 2019).
Based on these data, one may conclude that substance use has evolved beyond
sociocultural practices to more self-serving and unhealthy usage. However, what is
not clear is the primary intent for use. Reasons for using substances can be varied
and complex, as evidenced by the numerous theories developed to explain use and
addiction. Prevailing attitudes, however, may not fully acknowledge factors beyond
pleasure-seeking motives—factors such as stress, psychopathology, crisis response,
pain relief, and grief and loss responses to traumatic events such as natural and
human-generated disasters, emergencies, and tragedies. Unfortunately, aggregate
data do not delineate the extent to which substance use may in fact be as much about
pleasure-seeking as it is about compensating for psychosocial, psychopathological, and
sociocultural problems.
Classification of Drugs
The number of different drugs that exist worldwide is unknown. Anecdotal reports estimate
that the number of different drugs worldwide may be as high as 100,000. To gain some
perspective, Kinch et al. (2014), in their meta-analytic study, reported that by the end of 2013,
a total of 1,453 drugs had received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval. Rather
than attempting to quantify drugs, a more effective methodology is to classify substances
based on the specific physiological and psychological effects. Current drug classifications
include cannabinoids (e.g., marijuana, hashish, dronabinol), depressants (e.g., alcohol,
tranquilizers, barbiturates, sleeping pills, inhalants), stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines,
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 216	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 216 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 54 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	217
methamphetamine, caffeine), hallucinogens (e.g., LSD, phencyclidine, ketamine, mescaline,
psilocybin), opiates (e.g., heroin, morphine, OxyContin, codeine, methadone), nicotine, and
psychotherapeutics (e.g., Prozac, Zoloft, Ativan, Xanax, BuSpar, Cymbalta, Abilify, lithium,
Geodon, Zyprexa, Risperdal). Other drugs can have multiple effects and may fall under
several classifications. For example, Ecstasy (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine or
MDMA), a designer drug popular in the club and bar scene during the mid-1990s, has
both stimulant and hallucinogenic effects. Dextromethorphan (also known as DX or DXM),
a drug found in many over-the-counter cough syrups, can have both depressant and mild
hallucinogenic effects if taken in large doses.
The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 classified
controlled drugs into five schedules based on a continuum of potential for abuse,
accepted medical use, and potential for dependence. Drugs listed under Schedule I have
the highest potential for abuse and dependence and have no current medical application
in the United States (e.g., heroin, LSD), whereas drugs listed under Schedule V have the
lowest potential for abuse and dependence and have an established medical application
(e.g., cough syrups with codeine).
Research on Substance Use, Crisis, and Society
Several studies documented the relationship between natural and human-generated
disasters and subsequent patterns of substance use. A meta-analysis of over 30 studies
investigating substance use following terrorist attacks in the United States found an
increased use of substances in the 2 years following terrorist events, and the rates of
use were likely higher than estimated (DiMaggio et al., 2009). One month following
the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, increased use of marijuana,
alcohol, and cigarettes was reported in Manhattan (Vlahov et al., 2004). A random phone
study of 1,507 New York City residents 6 months after the September 11 attacks showed
that the incidence of alcohol problems for those who did not have drinking problems
before the attacks was 2% (Vlahov et al., 2006). In addition, a workplace cohort study
that took place before and after the September 11 attacks showed that women used more
alcohol after the attacks compared with before the event (Richman et al., 2004).
Understanding how crisis situations affect those with preexisting conditions has
important implications for addictions counselors. Examining the effects of substance
use following the April 19, 1995, Oklahoma City bombing, a majority of survivors did
not develop new SUDs; however, a majority of those survivors who did use substances
excessively had a preexisting SUD (North, 2010). Compared with a control community,
alcohol consumption among Oklahoma City bombing survivors in the year following the
Oklahoma City bombing was 2.5 times greater than for the control community (Smith
et!al., 1999). For evacuees of Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, treatment for preexisting
psychiatric illnesses, not increased substance use issues, was the main concern (North,
2010). Counselors should assess the types and quantity of substances used as well as the
source(s) or provider(s) of the substances.
NDCHealth Corporation compiled data on the use of antianxiety medication
following the September 11 attacks in the New York City and Washington, D.C.,
metropolitan areas, revealing that in the 2 weeks post–September 11, prescriptions
for Xanax, Ativan, and Valium increased significantly (Okie, 2001). Regarding
adolescent patterns of substance use, changes in usage status for adolescents exposed to
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 217	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 217 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 55 of 87 --

218 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Hurricane!Katrina were noted: 15% shifted from cigarette nonuse pre-Katrina to use
post-Katrina, 9% shifted from nonuse to use of marijuana, and 25% shifted from nonuse
to use of alcohol (Rowe et al., 2010). Adolescents not near the events of September 11
also experienced increased marijuana use (Costello et al., 2004).
Substance use can not only result from crisis situations, it can also affect crisis
situations. Schneider (2009) found a strong correlation between SUDs and suicide. In
a review of psychological autopsy studies, Schneider reported that substance-related
disorders contributed to a high proportion of suicides. Individuals who use substances
are nearly six times more likely to attempt suicide than those who report no substance use
problems (Dragisic et al., 2015). Furthermore, Dragisic et al. (2015) found that those with
SUDs who attempted suicide also had family members who had psychiatric disorders.
Darke (2009) estimated that 5% of the deaths of those who are substance dependent
are due to homicide. He noted that homicide is a major risk factor for substance-
dependent populations since substance use plays a key role in perpetuating this form of
violence, with alcohol contributing the most to substance-related homicides. Substance
use also contributes to other forms of violence, including intimate partner violence (IPV)
and sexual assault, as many perpetrators of IPV against women resulting in homicide or
attempted homicide were using alcohol, drugs, or a combination of alcohol and drugs.
Juodis et al. (2014b) reported that 76% and 65% of perpetrators of domestic homicide had
alcohol use and drug use problems, respectively. Regarding victim substance use, varying
data exist as to the relationship between victim substance use and IPV. The National
Institute of Justice (2009) highlighted findings from several studies that also indicate an
association between victim substance use and domestic violence victimization.
The relationship between substances and sexual violence may in fact be “reciprocal
in that sexual violence may be a precursor to or consequence of substance use, abuse, or
addiction” (Dawgert, 2009, p. 21). A history of sexual victimization may in fact lead to
substance use to cope with the pain and trauma, while substance use may increase the
risk for victimization. To be clear, the victim of sexual assault is never responsible for
their assault, regardless of whether they were under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
However, alcohol is a behavioral disinhibitor and makes individuals less aware or in
control of their reactions in social or interpersonal contexts. Gidycz et al. (2007) found
that for women who reported a history of sexual victimization, alcohol use contributed
significantly to revictimization during the 2-month follow-up period. Furthermore, as
alcohol use increased, so too did the risk for sexual revictimization during this period;
women with the highest risk had a history of rape or attempted rape and were also
heavy drinkers. Gidycz et al. also found that decreasing alcohol use can reduce the risk
for sexual assault. According to the National Institute of Justice (2008), sexual assault
on campuses is more frequently associated with alcohol than drugs, with less than 1%
of women reporting being incapacitated by date-rape drugs. In addition, the National
Institute of Justice reported that while more women experience forced sexual assault
before college, once in college the risk of becoming a victim of incapacitated sexual
assault increases. Based on the National Crime Victimization Survey, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics revealed that 47% of female students believed the offender was under
the influence of alcohol or drugs when the sexual assault occurred, compared with
25% who did not believe substance use by the offender factored into the sexual assault
(Sinozich & Langton, 2014). Complete Think About It 7.1.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 218	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 218 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 56 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	219
THE ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS OF SUBSTANCE USE
AND DEPENDENCE
Learning Objective 7.2 Describe the etiology and risk factors of substance use and
dependence.
The most widely accepted belief is that addiction is biologically (neurobiologically,
specifically) based; however, alternative hypotheses continue to be debated. One
reason for the diversity of theoretical perspectives likely stems from the fact that
while research continues to make inroads linking addiction to neurobiological
mechanisms, no conclusive evidence of a specific biological relationship exists
(Capuzzi & Stauffer, 2020; Hammersly, 2014), even though evidence of strong
statistical associations exists between biological factors and alcoholism (Capuzzi &
Stauffer, 2020).
Factors That Increase Risk for Substance Use Disorders
Numerous risk factors have been identified as contributing to initial substance use.
Since initial use often occurs during adolescence, most of the commonly identified
risk factors reflect events and issues relevant to that developmental stage. Some of the
more common factors include poor academic performance, alcohol and other drug
(AOD) availability,!peer pressure, living in a dysfunctional family environment, and
undiagnosed problems, such as learning disabilities. Even though initial use typically
occurs in adolescence, AOD use can occur at any age and can be triggered by various
issues such as trauma, disasters, or other emergencies.
Differentiating between risk factors for initial use and SUD is an important
consideration given that a majority of those who report experimenting or engaging in
recreational substance use do not develop problematic usage behaviors. If that were the
case, AOD data would yield a much bleaker picture. For individuals who develop SUDs
and symptoms, counselors need to be aware of other potential risk factors such as self-
esteem and self-worth issues, isolation, intimacy issues and fear of rejection, poor coping
mechanisms, and impulsivity and compulsivity patterns.
Counselors must also be knowledgeable of the co-occurring patterns of
psychopathology and SUDs and symptoms. Key psychiatric disorders that co-occur
with SUDs include major depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, and certain personality disorders (e.g., borderline personality
disorder, antisocial personality disorders). Other risk factors that can lead to abuse
and dependency problems include low socioeconomic status, cultural and subcultural
factors/expectations, criminality, history of abuse, and a family history of substance
abuse and psychopathology.
Think about a person with a SUD or significant symp-
toms. What are some of the problems that person may
be facing? What images or biases come to mind when
you think of a person who is addicted to a substance?
THINK ABOUT IT 7.1
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 219	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 219 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 57 of 87 --

220 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SCREENING, ASSESSMENT, AND DIAGNOSIS OF SUBSTANCE USE
DISORDERS
Learning Objective 7.3 Articulate procedures for the screening, assessment, and
diagnosis of substance use disorders and symptoms, including screening procedures,
commonly used assessment instruments, assessment, diagnosis, assessing a client’s
readiness to change, and treatment admission and placement processes.
A critical step in the treatment process is properly evaluating the degree to which
substance use is problematic and the extent to which it has influenced the individual,
especially those clients who are dealing with crisis or trauma situations. Careful
screening, assessment, and diagnosis not only provide an accurate clinical picture but also
help the counselor conceptualize applicable theoretical models, formulate preliminary
treatment goals, and implement techniques and approaches that will align with the
client’s presenting issue(s) and motivation for change. In crisis settings where there is
a time limit on the number of sessions, this comprehensive information is essential in
order to determine the best treatment options for clients.
Success at this stage of the treatment process is greatly influenced by the therapeutic
relationship that has been established. A strong therapeutic working alliance between
counselor and client can help create a trusting and safe environment, enabling the client
to feel more at ease when discussing substance history, especially sensitive, shameful, or
embarrassing information. Creating a collaborative counselor–client relationship can reduce
client resistance and ambivalence while increasing motivation to change.
Counselors who instill a sense of optimism or hope and focus on the client’s
strengths and successes are more inclined to find clients open to exploring
options. Seeing clients as more than their addiction is critical to this process.
Screening
The first step in the evaluation process is to rule out AOD problems. Screening
clarifies whether there is sufficient evidence of problematic substance use
and, if yes, whether this use warrants further investigation (assessment).
Screening is brief in nature and often entails simple screening questions
or brief measures related to substance usage. Questions are designed to
determine patterns of use and often focus on frequency, quantity, and
problem areas. Examples of frequency and quantity questions that might be
asked during the screening process include “During the past 30 days, how
many days per week did you drink alcohol or use drugs?” or “On a day when
you did drink alcohol or use drugs, how many drinks did you have (or what
quantity of drugs did you use)?”
Regarding the quantity question, the counselor must also determine the client’s
interpretation of a drink. The following example underscores the importance of clarifica-
tion of the quantity question:
C "#$%&'"( : 	Daryl, during the past 30 days, how many days per week did
you drink alcohol or use drugs?
D)(*': 	I’ve never used any drugs in my life but I do enjoy drinking
alcohol. During the past 30 days, I would say I drank an average
of 2 or 3 days each week, and that was mainly on weekends.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 7.1
In this video, a client identi-
fies a couple of main goals to
frame her counseling sessions.
With the counselor’s guidance,
the client targets better coping
skills as one of her main goals.
The counselor helps the client
identify positive activities and
pastimes. What other screening
questions would be important
to utilize in the session?
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 220	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 220 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 58 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	221
C"#$%&'"(: 	On those days when you do drink, how many drinks do you
consume?
D)(*': 	I only have a couple beers.
C"#$%&'"(: 	By a couple do you mean two?
D)(*': 	Actually, three or four.
Note that if the counselor concluded the questioning at this point, the only informa-
tion garnered is the number of drinks per episode and how many episodes occurred in
the past 30 days. The counselor may surmise that there is no need for further evaluation.
But what if the counselor probed further?
C"#$%&'"(: 	So on those days when you drink, it is often three or four
beers.
D)(*': 	Yes.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Tell me about the number of ounces in a typical beer. (The
counselor notices a defensive shift in client’s posture and his non-
verbal facial expression is one of frustration. Client responds in an
angry tone.)
D)(*': 	Why do you need to know this? I like a few beers, and that’s
no one’s business! (A period of silence follows) Okay, so I drink
three or four 40s. It’s not a big deal.
Making assumptions about the size of the drinks may lead to inaccurate
information and miss a potential problem. In this example, the assumption may be that
the client consumes three or four 12-ounce beers per occurrence, when in reality Daryl is
consuming over three times that amount. Using the consumption question may be more
telling than using more extensive questioning (Fleming, 2003). From a sample of men
and women, Williams and Vinson (2001) found that asking the question “When was the
last time you had more than four drinks (women) or five drinks (men)?” led to detection
of problem drinking or criteria for abuse or dependence in nearly 9 out of 10 people
sampled. Self-administered screening instruments can also provide valuable information
about substance use patterns. Given the information presented in the example above,
continued evaluation appears warranted.
Commonly Used Assessment Instruments
Counselors should carefully weigh the advantages and disadvantages of using
assessment instruments based on the information gathered during the screening phase.
If an assessment instrument is deemed necessary to gain additional information from
the client on substance use, the counselor must decide which type will be most efficient
in maximizing clinical information while minimizing client time and frustration.
The following considerations apply when using an assessment instrument:
• The client must sign an informed consent form (e.g., a form that addresses the
purpose of the assessment, risks, benefits, how the information will be used,
the!client’s right to refuse consent).
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 221	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 221 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 59 of 87 --

222 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• The counselor should see the client as more than the results (the assessment is only
one of many pieces of the clinical picture).
• The counselor should ensure that the assessment instrument is applicable and
appropriate for the population it will be used to measure.
• The counselor should have training and competency in administering the
assessment.
• The counselor must be able to interpret the results (Stauffer et al., 2020).
Four commonly used assessment instruments are the Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT; Babor et al., 2001), Michigan Alcoholism Screening
Test (MAST; Selzer, 1971), Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory–4 (SASSI-4;
Lazowski et al., 2016), and the CAGE (Ewing, 1984).
The AUDIT was developed as a collaborative project by the World Health
Organization from a six-nation study to identify early detection of problematic drinking
patterns and behaviors (Saunders et al., 1993). The AUDIT comprises 10 items divided
into three domains: questions 1–3 address alcohol consumption patterns, questions
4–6 focus on dependency issues, and questions 7–10 address problems associated with
alcohol use. The AUDIT questions use a five-point Likert-type scale (0–4) and total scores
can range from 0 to 40. A total score greater than 8 points indicates a pattern of harmful
or hazardous drinking. Of those diagnosed with harmful or hazardous drinking, 92%
had scores greater than 8 points. Of those who were not diagnosed with problematic
drinking, 94% had scores less than 8 points. Based on total scores, counselors may
incorporate certain interventions. The use of education and reduction approaches is
suggested for those who score from 8 to 15. Individuals who score from 16 to 19 likely
would benefit from brief interventions or counseling and follow-up. Individuals who
score over 20 are at high risk and should be assessed for alcohol dependence and more
intensive treatment (Babor et al., 2001).
The CAGE (Ewing, 1984) is a simple four-question screening tool that can be
incorporated into a clinical interview. It is used only with adult and adolescent clients,
and it is intended to identify behaviors related to alcohol use only. Each letter in the
acronym CAGE represents one of the four questions: Have you ever felt the need to
Cut down on your drinking? Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
Have you ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking? Have you ever had a drink first
thing in the morning to steady your nerves or to get rid of a hangover (Eye opener)?
Each yes response to these questions receives a score of 1 point. Scores 0–1 do not reflect
any apparent problems, and scores greater than or equal to 2 are a possible indication
of alcohol dependence. One concern with the CAGE is the wide variability in accurately
diagnosing alcohol use disorders.
Assessment
An assessment is conducted for the following purposes: (1) to ascertain the degree and
severity of a problem; (2) to determine the presence of co-occurring disorders; (3) to make
accurate diagnoses; (4) to assess the scope of the problem (i.e., whether it is specific to
the individual or systemic, such as within the family or support system); (5) to guide the
treatment planning process; and (6) to provide a mechanism for communication across
treatment personnel (Erford, 2021).
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 222	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 222 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 60 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	223
The primary focus of substance use assessment is to gather detailed information
on substance use patterns, including drug(s) used; progression of use (amount and
frequency of use over time); route of administration; reason for periods of increased
usage or abstinence; treatment history; and evidence of tolerance, dependence,
and!withdrawal. During the clinical interview, obtaining clients’ history of substances
used helps to establish a pattern and context of substance usage. The assessment
should compile information and usage patterns on commonly used drugs such
as alcohol, marijuana, opiates, hallucinogens, cocaine, amphetamines and related
stimulants, inhalants, nicotine, and caffeine. With the growth of synthetic or designer
illicit drugs, the assessment should include questions about use of drug variations
such as flakka (a synthetic version of the stimulant cathinone), K2 (synthetic
cannabinoids), bath salts (synthetic cathinones), wax (marijuana and butane), purple
drank (cough syrup with codeine and promethazine mixed in soft drinks or made
into candy), and krokodil (desomorphine, a derivative of codeine that is mixed with
oil, gasoline, alcohol, or paint thinner and injected), to name a few (see Table 7.1 at
the end of this chapter for resources on commonly used designer drugs).
Inquiring about use of any psychotherapeutic medications, prescriptions, and
over-the-counter drugs, including herbal supplements, rounds out the comprehensive
picture of usage. Including questions about these types of drugs is beneficial since most
clients do not consider them to be problematic, especially if they have been prescribed.
Gathering information on these substances provides valuable information on potential
synergistic effects resulting from drug interactions. Furthermore, having knowledge of
different drug interactions can help determine any potential contraindications that may
exist. For example, clients with bipolar disorder who use lithium are advised to avoid
certain drugs that are contraindicated, including alcohol, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medications such as ibuprofen, and illicit drugs such as Ecstasy that can result in changes
in lithium levels.
Assessment also provides a comprehensive picture of the client across different
psychosocial domains (e.g., medical, legal, education, employment history, family
history, psychiatric history). Often information gathered on other psychosocial issues is
directly connected to substance use. For example, clients with substance use issues may
have an unstable employment history or a pattern of legal problems. It is not uncommon
for those with a history of substance-related problems to also have conflicts in their
relationships with family and friends. Medical concerns may be directly related to
substance use, yet clients may not make the connection or resist addressing the problem.
When conducting a substance use assessment, counselors should also evaluate the
client’s current level of mental functioning, which is often done using the Mini-Mental
State Examination (MMSE-2; Folstein et al., 2016) in crisis situations. The purpose of the
MMSE-2 is to investigate signs and symptoms of impaired affect, behavior, cognition, and
intellectual functioning related to one’s mental state. The MMSE-2 can also be valuable
in differentiating between substance and nonsubstance impaired mental symptoms and
for ruling out co-occurring disorders (Rudd, 2006). Given that most clients who have
co-occurring substance use and mental health issues are likely attending counseling due
to acute symptom presentation or concerns associated with these disorders, counselors
should evaluate whether a crisis assessment is warranted. For example, clients who
have a previous history of psychiatric diagnoses (e.g., bipolar disorder, major depressive
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 223	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 223 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 61 of 87 --

224 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
disorder, schizophrenia) and substance use are at greater risk for suicidal behavior.
Depending on the score related to any cognitive impairment not due to the substance
use, a referral for a full mental status exam may be included in the treatment plan.
One of the more commonly used methods for conducting substance use assessment
is the clinical interview, a process that includes extensive and detailed questions regarding
various content domains. When counselors are conducting the clinical assessment, it is
inevitable that clients indicate how they define their substance use. Some clients may
be inclined to overestimate or underestimate use or information. Clients may indicate
that they fit into certain categories (e.g., social drinkers, recreational users) despite
information to the contrary. Therefore, counselors may need to ask additional questions
or clarify client responses.
Semistructured clinical interviews are often preferred over structured ones because
they allow the counselor to ask specific, structured questions in various domains and pro-
vide the counselor with the flexibility to expand on or deviate from questions based on
client response. Domains that are commonly covered in a clinical interview are as follows:
1. Demographic information (e.g., name, age, race, height, weight)
2. Presenting complaint or reason for attending
3. Medical history (e.g., diagnoses, medications, hospitalizations, surgeries)
4. Substance use history
5. Legal history (e.g., specific charges, incarcerations, any charges that are pending,
parole/probation status, any protection from abuse orders)
6. Employment history (e.g., job history, reason for leaving jobs, conflicts with
coworkers or supervisors, work performance and evaluations)
7. Education history (e.g., degrees achieved, problems in school and reasons for them,
difficulty with reading or writing)
8. Social and family history (e.g., childhood issues, trauma, or abuse; family discord/
dysfunction; marital status; current living arrangements; history of relationship
problems; family history of mental illness or SUD; history of child abuse or neglect
for those with children)
9. Recreational history (e.g., activities of interest, activities impacted by substance use,
hobbies, memberships in clubs or groups)
10. Religious/spiritual/cultural history (e.g., current and past religious/spiritual
beliefs, practices, attendance; spiritual injuries that cause people to question their
faith; cultural/heritage values, beliefs, considerations)
11. Psychiatric/psychological history (e.g., any psychiatric or personality diagnoses,
hospitalizations, inpatient/outpatient treatment, suicide attempts and history)
12. Sexual history (e.g., sexual identity, sexual disorders, sexually transmitted
infections)
13. Mental status exam
Scenarios 1 and 2 provide some guidance on clarifying client presenting information.
Scenario 1: Challenging a Client’s Definition of Social Drinking
C"#$%&'"(: 	Finch, you mentioned earlier in our session that you drink
daily and often drive when you know you shouldn’t. Help me
understand how you see your drinking.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 224	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 224 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 62 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	225
F+$,-: 	Well, I don’t see it as a problem. I never had a DUI [driving
under the influence] and had only minor issues with my
partner when I’ve gotten home late or with my boss when
I’ve missed time at work because I’m hung over. I guess I see
myself as a social drinker because I only drink when I go out
after work with my friends.
C"#$%&'"(: 	So you classify your drinking as social because of the location,
and you have not had any significant consequences.
F+$,-: 	That’s how I see it.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Tell me how you might view this definition if you got arrested
for a DUI, the relationship with your partner got much worse,
or you got fired from your job because of your drinking. (This
probe helps the client examine personal usage, knowing that any one
of these scenarios is a real possibility even as a “social drinker.”)
Scenario 2: Differentiating Between Recreational Use and Substance Use
H)*&%: 	I only smoke pot recreationally as a way to relax and have
some fun.
C"#$%&'"(: 	How would you classify your pot use?
H)*&%: 	I share a joint or two with some friends once a month. It’s not a
big deal.
C"#$%&'"(: 	You mentioned that you only use marijuana occasionally, yet
when you were discussing your medical and legal history, you
alluded to using it more regularly.
H)*&%: 	Just ‘cause I have breathing problems and had a few run-ins
with the law doesn’t mean I have a problem!
C"#$%&'"(: 	I sense you’re upset right now because we’re talking about
whether your use is really recreational. My intent is not to
judge or be critical of your choices around marijuana. Rather,
I’m concerned that your use may be causing problems in other
areas of your life.
H)*&%: 	Sometimes I use it more as a way to have fun.
Diagnosis
A well-conducted, thorough assessment should yield sufficient data and documentation to
make accurate decisions and establish the degree of impairment. With most other mental
health diagnoses, providing a full diagnosis during a crisis phase would be premature
and inappropriate due to the symptoms and period of time needed to accurately offer
a valid diagnosis. However, documenting prior diagnoses, onset, relapse, current client
reports, and presentations are essential to provide for the next phase of the treatment so
the next clinician can formulate a diagnosis. Pure SUDs, not including induced disorder
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 225	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 225 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 63 of 87 --

226 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
categories (e.g., substance-induced mood disorders, substance-induced bipolar disorder)
rely on self-reports and can aid the treatment planning and referral process.
The purpose of diagnosis is to identify the specific condition(s) or disorder(s) that
are causing the impairment in order to provide a basis with which treatment interventions
can be applied or to make an appropriate referral for long-term substance treatment.
The main diagnostic tool used for SUDs is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, the most current being the fifth edition, text revision (DSM-5-TR; American
Psychiatric Association, 2022). In DSM-5, substance use and addictive disorders are
organized into a number of categories. The two categories of primary interest are alcohol
use disorder and SUD, the latter covering a variety of addictive substances, such as
amphetamines, cocaine, and inhalants.
Prior to the latest edition, DSM classified substance use disorders as either
substance abuse or substance dependence. As a result of the ambiguity and confusion
surrounding dependence and addiction, DSM-5-TR does not use the terms substance
abuse and substance dependence. Instead, it uses the umbrella term substance use disorders
in relation to recurrent alcohol and drug use (American Psychiatric Association, 2022).
Dependence and addiction were often used interchangeably, and tolerance and withdrawal
were criteria central to a dependence diagnosis. However, tolerance and withdrawal
are common and expected responses to prescription medications that act on the central
nervous system and as such do not imply one is addicted, especially if these are the only
symptoms evident. The reclassification to SUDs and the use of severity specifiers (mild,
moderate, severe) provide counselors with a reference point for the progression of the
substance use pattern, as well as a perspective on how best to approach treatment and
which interventions may be most applicable.
According to DSM-5-TR, at least two of the following criteria must be met for an
individual to be diagnosed with a SUD: (1) significant problems exist at home, school,
or work due to use; (2) physical hazards occur due to repeated episodes of impaired
driving or operating machinery while under the influence; (3) substance use results in
recurring legal problems (e.g., public intoxication); (4) tolerance increases; (5) withdrawal
occurs; (6) increasing amounts of the substance are taken over time; (7) usage levels
are not being reduced; (8) a lot of time is spent acquiring the substance; (9) social or
work activities are sacrificed due to use or recovery from use; (10) use continues despite
interpersonal and physical effects; and (11) there is craving, a strong urge, or desire for
the substance. Severity is determined by the number of presenting criteria (i.e., mild: two
to three criteria; moderate: four to five criteria; severe: six or more criteria). Complete
Activity 7.1, which focuses on SUD diagnosis.
When assessing a client for a SUD, which issues and factors do you believe should be considered
to make an accurate diagnosis?
ACTIVITY 7.1
Assessing a Client’s Readiness to Change
A client’s readiness to change is an essential function to consider during the assessment
phase. Evaluating resistance to change allows the counselor to match treatment techniques
and motivational approaches to the level of client ambivalence. Several change models have
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 226	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 226 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 64 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	227
appeared since the 1970s (Connors et al., 2015), but Norcross et al.’s (2011) five-stage change
model focuses mainly on change patterns associated with health behavior change and reflects
identifiable stages individuals go through as they are attempting to change substance use
behaviors. Norcross et al. identified the following five stages of change:
1. Precontemplation—characterized by resistance to change or denying that a prob-
lem exists.
2. Contemplation—evidence of ambivalence exists and the client is contemplating
the effects of substance use as well as weighing the advantages and disadvantages
of continued use.
3. Preparation—resistance has waned and the client has made a decision to change
but is uncertain how to go about this process.
4. Action—the client is committed to making a change and has demonstrated specific
goals and behaviors toward this end.
5. Maintenance—the client has maintained a period of abstinence and is working on
maintaining recovery and addressing relapse issues and triggers.
Transitioning across stages is rarely a smooth, straightforward process. Clients may
move from one stage to the next or move across several stages only to experience a setback.
Moving back to an earlier stage is not unexpected given that change is difficult, and
clients will likely experience much frustration and discouragement during the process.
Motivational support becomes an integral component to assist in the change process.
Understanding the importance of instilling motivation as an antidote for
ambivalence and resistance, Miller and Rollnick (2013) integrated their motivational
interviewing (MI) approach into the stages-of-change model based on the belief that
motivation is not intrinsically driven as part of one’s personality or personal traits but
rather is developed through interpersonal interactions. They identified MI as a client-
centered, directive, transtheoretical approach emphasizing empathic communication to
bring about a client’s intrinsic motivation to change that aligns with values and beliefs.
MI was developed as an alternative to the directive and confrontational approaches that
were widely used and accepted in treating addiction for decades.
Miller and Rollnick (2013) developed four central processes that serve as the basis
for MI: (1) engaging—establishing a connection between counselor and client that helps
to build the working alliance; (2) focusing—involves the counselor developing and
maintaining a focused direction in the discussion about change; (3) evoking—assisting the
client to take ownership for their motivation for change; and (4) planning—establishing
a commitment to change with a specific course of action where talk shifts from whether
and why it happens to when and how to change. Read Voices from the Field 7.1.
Rachel M. Hoffman
“Addiction is an issue with which I never want to work!
I don’t want to work with clients who don’t want to
change!” That quote, or something very close to it, was
uttered by me at some point (or maybe more) during
my graduate counselor training experience. Before
being exposed to the field of addiction counseling,
I mistakenly believed that addiction was a disorder
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 7.1
Working with Substance Use
(continued)
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 227	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 227 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 65 of 87 --

228 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Treatment Admission and Placement
Information gathered during the assessment and diagnosis phases assists the counselor
in determining not only treatment planning but also the appropriate level of care for cli-
ents in crisis. Clients who present with significant substance use issues will likely require
an intensive treatment protocol compared with clients who are misusing a substance.
The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM; 2013) provides comprehensive
treatment criteria for patient placement, continued stay, and discharge. The latest ASAM
criteria put greater emphasis on co-occurring mental health disorders and SUDs. ASAM
continues to divide the continuum of treatment into increasing levels of care. The five
broad levels of care, now designated by numbers instead of Roman numerals, are as
follows:
• Level 0.5 (Early Intervention) involves screening, brief intervention, referral, and
treatment; early intervention services were expanded as a way to reach out to the
nearly 20 million individuals who are pursuing addiction treatment
• Level 1 (Outpatient Services) is considered a gateway for substance use treatment
as well as a level of care that can focus on ongoing chronic addiction and abstinence
• Level 2 (Intensive Outpatient/Partial Hospitalization Services)
• Level 3 (Residential/Inpatient services)
• Level 4 (Medically Managed Intensive Inpatient Services)
Each level also has a withdrawal management designation that aligns with what the
counselor believes is needed to manage the physiological and psychological symptoms
of withdrawal.
ASAM has developed six dimensions that practitioners can use to assess clients
at each level and provide a rationale/justification for a particular level of care. The
dimensions also serve as standardized assessment language for general health care and
mental health practitioners. The six dimensions are as follows:
1. Acute intoxication and/or withdrawal potential—assessing withdrawal
management across different levels of care and making preparations for continued
addiction services
from which people really had to “hit rock bottom”
before they could recover. Now, many years and a lot
of education later, I have a completely different view of
addictions, and I honestly could not imagine working
with any other population.
Addiction is a complex phenomenon. Many
researchers now believe that addiction is a brain disease
that results in neurological adaptations with prolonged
substance use. After spending the past several years
working in an agency that specialized in addiction,
I have learned that it is important to use interventions
appropriate for a client’s stage of change. Assessing
a client’s stage of change (i.e., precontemplation,
contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance)
allows the counselor to develop interventions based on
the client’s readiness to change a particular behavior
or situation.
In my work with clients, I have appreciated the
ability to use motivational interviewing techniques to
help the client move through the stages of change.
I respect my clients’ abilities to make changes that align
with their stated goals and desired outcomes. Adopting
this strengths-based approach to working with clients
has helped me avoid frustration, burnout, and anger in
my work. Although I did not initially intend to work with
this population, I find my daily work with addictions
immensely satisfying and rewarding, and I am thankful
that my career path has led me in this direction.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 228	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 228 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 66 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	229
2. Biomedical conditions and complications
3. Emotional, behavioral, or cognitive conditions and complications
4. Readiness to change
5. Relapse, continued use, or continued problem potential—greater focus on
addressing early stages of change
6. Recovery/living environment
The ASAM assessment dimensions should be incorporated into the continuous
evaluation of the client’s progress. Based on the outcome of an assessment, the counselor
should identify the most appropriate care and adjust the treatment plan accordingly
(Mee-Lee, 2013). When assessing all six dimensions, counselors want to select the
treatment level that is least intensive but the safest level of care based on the client’s
presenting issue and assessed dimensions. Case Study 7.1 highlights the ASAM
assessment process.
CASE STUDY 7.1
A Client Assessment Using the Six ASAM Dimensions
Jules is a 42-year-old brought to the city hospital following a DUI accident that resulted
in breaking both a collarbone and arm. Jules’s blood alcohol level (BAL) was 0.42 at the
time of arrest, and this was Jules’s second DUI in the past 12 months. Jules’s BAL for the
first DUI was 0.12, and Jules was approved for Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition,
a pretrial intervention program for nonviolent offenders with no prior record. During
the trial for the second DUI, the judge requested a substance use evaluation and is
considering remanding Jules to treatment in lieu of incarceration. The counselor
completed an assessment of Jules using the six ASAM dimensions and made a treatment
recommendation.
Dimension 1: Acute Intoxication and/or Withdrawal Potential Jules demon-
strated increased tolerance. Based on reported usage, Jules is at elevated risk for
physiological withdrawal. Concerns exist given the pattern of continued use, high
BAL, and inability to stop drinking. Jules meets criteria for Level 3.2-WM (Clini-
cally Managed Residential Withdrawal Management).
Dimension 2: Biomedical Conditions and Complications With the exception of
current medical complications, Jules did not present any specific health problems
or complications due to alcohol. Jules is not on any medications. Jules meets
criteria for Level 1 (Outpatient Services).
Dimension 3: Emotional, Behavioral, or Cognitive Conditions and Complications
Jules has problems managing anger and often fights with partners and coworkers,
especially when drinking. Jules lacks coping skills and can be quite reactive when
confronted about alcohol use. Interpersonal skills, specifically communication
skills, are poor. Jules does not take responsibility for personal actions and tends to
blame others for problems. Jules lacks self-efficacy, motivation, and cognitive
awareness to make the necessary changes at this point. Jules meets criteria for
Level 3.3 (Clinically Managed Population-Specific High-Intensity Residential
Services [adult level only]).
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 229	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 229 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 67 of 87 --

230 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUBSTANCE USE TREATMENT AND CRISIS
Learning Objective 7.4 Explain substance use crisis treatment, including relapse and
crisis, harm reduction, support groups, couples and family treatment, and co-occurring
disorders.
Treating SUDs and symptoms becomes more complex when the client is also experiencing
a crisis. Clients can be in crisis at any point along the substance use continuum and may
require different interventions depending on their level of motivation, stage of change,
the significance of the crisis event, intensity of the crisis response, coping capacity,
resilience, and existence of co-occurring disorders. Before continuing, complete Think
About It 7.2 and read Voices from the Field 7.2.
Dimension 4: Readiness to Change Jules is at the precontemplative stage of change.
Jules does not see personal use as a problem and believes no assistance is needed
with the drinking. Jules feels misunderstood and is in denial about usage and
amount. Jules is defensive and angry when discussing alcohol use and meets cri-
teria for Level 3.3.
Dimension 5: Relapse, Continued Use, or Continued Problem Potential Jules’s
potential for relapse is very high without intensive treatment. Jules lacks skills
and resources to maintain sobriety and denies having any friends who do not
drink or who provide positive support systems. Without intensive treatment and
an established support network, the prognosis for maintaining sobriety is very
poor. Jules meets criteria for Level 3.3.
Dimension 6: Recovery/Living Environment Jules has alienated partners and fam-
ily and does not care. Jules has refused to attend 12-Step meetings and thinks they
are a waste of time. The current support system cannot assist Jules in helping to
maintain recovery. All social activities revolve around drinking. Jules meets crite-
ria for Level 3.3.
Recommendation to the Judge Jules meets criteria for Level 3 for five of the six
dimensions. Treatment recommendations are as follows: complete inpatient/
residential treatment detoxification protocol followed by Level 3.3 residential
treatment (adult level only). Length of stay will depend on progress on all six
dimensions and should be reevaluated after 4 weeks. Step down to Level 2.1
intensive outpatient treatment following successful discharge from Level 3 care.
Discussion Questions
1. What treatment approaches might you consider using with Jules?
2. As the counselor, what issues would come up for you as you work with Jules?
Think about your personal characteristics and skill lev-
els. What counselor characteristics and counseling skills/
techniques do you believe are important when working
with clients who use substances as a means to manage
a crisis response?
THINK ABOUT IT 7.2
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 230	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 230 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 68 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	231
Steve Zappalla
One of the most common traits of substance use clients
is their denial system and strong habit to protect their
substance of choice, often at any cost. For the counselor,
it is important to relate to and understand their desire
to use a substance. Using language, descriptions, and
techniques they understand is helpful to gain their
trust, respect, and confidence quickly. Meeting clients
where they are is extremely important.
Listen carefully to the client’s resistance and use
calm, reflective statements. Determine the main theme
that is bothering the client and avoid attacking the
drinking or using problem. It helps to hear what they
are saying. Try to see things from the client’s point of
view, no matter how unreasonable or how irrational
it seems. Your goal is to create a space to help clients
see that what they are doing is not working and try
to get them to want to do something about it, not to
win a confrontation. It could prove more beneficial to
acknowledge different viewpoints.
Try to be encouraging and understanding. Clients
often become resistant, even hostile, when they feel
frustrated or confused. Clients with SUDs and symptoms
tend not to have a very mature emotional coping system
and will react quickly with what they know best. The most
important thing to keep in mind is that there is a good
chance the client does not know any other way. While
small steps may seem a success early on, it is critically
important to help clients feel and see the long-term
benefit of this new behavior. It is most important to help
clients see that what they are doing is not working and
begin to help them take steps to do something about it.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 7.2
Engaging the Client Who Uses Substances
Counselors should be aware of a multitude of treatment options when working
with clients identified with SUDs and symptoms. Over the years, numerous treatment
modalities have been implemented to address SUDs. Sorting out which treatments
are effective has been no simple task. Decisions for treatment approaches have often
been based on personal interest or counselor familiarity rather than on empirically
supported evidence. Efforts to understand which treatments are effective have
increased significantly over the past several decades. Traditional approaches such
as confrontational approaches, aversion therapies, insight-based psychotherapy,
and educational approaches have generally been ineffective (Miller et al., 2003).
A comprehensive review of various treatment modalities revealed that approaches such
as brief interventions, motivational enhancement, gamma-aminobutyric acid agonists
and opiate antagonists, various behavioral treatments, community reinforcement, and
social skills training were ranked the highest in terms of treatment efficacy.
Given that brief interventions and motivational enhancement approaches were
two of the highest-ranked, most effective approaches to address SUDs and symptoms,
integrating a crisis model that aligns with these approaches allows the counselor
to effectively address both the crisis response and SUD (see the task model of crisis
assessment and intervention presented in Table 1.1). Case Studies 7.2 and 7.3 provide
practice in applying the model of crisis assessment and intervention.
CASE STUDY 7.2
A Single Crisis Session
Lenora is a 23-year-old woman who was transported to the hospital during the early-
morning hours by her sister, Mary. Lenora presented as visibly upset, very angry,
shaking, disheveled, and crying uncontrollably. Mary told the attending nurse that
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 231	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 231 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 69 of 87 --

232 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
CASE STUDY 7.3
Multisession Crisis Intervention with a Substance Use Client
Francis is a 39-year-old married man who recently learned that his wife of 10 years is
filing for divorce because of his marijuana and cocaine addiction. He also learned she
is having an affair with his best friend. Francis has been distraught for several days
upon hearing this news and is contemplating suicide. At his mother’s insistence, Francis
begrudgingly attends the initial appointment she made for him with a counselor who
specializes in substance use and crisis issues at the local mental health agency. Francis
is aware that his drug use was causing problems at home and has tried several times
to stop, but he has been unable to maintain abstinence for more than a day. He reports
that he was in counseling 2 years ago when his wife threatened to leave him but was not
motivated to change and dropped out after a couple of sessions. He also did not feel the
counselor listened to him and instead told him what to do. Francis acknowledges his
drug use has caused problems and is upset over his wife’s affair with his best friend. He
is coming to the realization that it is too late to save his marriage. He states that he has
no reason to live. Let’s examine how the counselor may structure the first six sessions.
Session 1
The counselor must undertake several tasks simultaneously. Understanding what was
helpful and not helpful from the client’s previous counseling experience can provide
valuable information as to how the client views counseling, approaches that should
be avoided or enhanced, a sense of motivation, and ways to conceptualize how best
to establish a working alliance. Establishing a working alliance is essential given the
client’s fragile emotional state. While the counselor is working to establish rapport
and create an environment where the client can feel supported, effort must be directed
toward the client’s message of desperation and suicide ideation. The counselor must
assess the severity of the client’s statement around self-harm. During this process,
the counselor must assess the level of intent and determine both the subjective (client
statements) and objective (specific concrete behaviors) messages. Using direct language
Lenora had been out drinking earlier that night and met a man. Mary explained that he
was buying Lenora drinks and at one point must have slipped her a “roofie.” Lenora
did not recall what took place but when the drug wore off, she found herself alone and
unclothed in a hotel room several blocks from the bar. Lenora reported that she had been
raped. Mary also shared that Lenora “has been drinking a lot for the past 6 months”
following the termination of a long-term relationship. You are an addictions counselor
working for a local mental health agency that contracts with the hospital for evening and
weekend crisis response calls.
Discussion Questions
1. Explore how you could integrate the task model of crisis assessment and interven-
tion (see Table 1.1).
2. What would be the first thing you would do to address this crisis situation?
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 232	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 232 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 70 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	233
(direct questions vs. reflective responses) is necessary to evaluate intent, means to
carry out the intent, and a clearly developed plan. Conveying this information in an
empathic manner creates a sense of care and concern that increases the likelihood the
client will come back next session. Let’s look at the counselor–client dialogue related
to examining intent.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Francis, I appreciate your willingness to seek help and for
being open with me. I want to ask you a few questions to help
me better understand your emotional state.
F()$,+%: 	OK.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Tell me about what you mean by not wanting to live anymore.
F()$,+%: 	My world has fallen apart. My wife has been upset about my
drug use for some time, and I think it drove her to have an
affair. I don’t see any reason for living. I really screwed up.
C"#$%&'"(: 	A couple times today you mentioned or alluded to the fact that
you don’t want to live. Before we talk about what’s going on
right now for you, let’s discuss any previous suicidal thoughts
or attempts. Have you made any suicide attempts previously?
F()$,+%: 	No, never, but I’ve thought about it from time to time, espe-
cially after my wife and I got into fights about my drug use.
C"#$%&'"(: 	At that time, did you have a plan to hurt yourself and, if you
did, did you have the means to carry it out? (Give examples of
methods)
F()$,+%: 	No, I didn’t have a plan. It was just thoughts running around
my head that I couldn’t let go of. I got really scared of my
thoughts because I didn’t feel I had any reason to live. I felt
that I was no good to her or anyone. I felt overwhelmed and
the pain was unbearable.
C"#$%&'"(: 	You felt so distraught and worthless because nothing seemed
to matter anymore. The only solution in your mind was to
hurt yourself. Describe your intention to hurt yourself at that
point.
F()$,+%: 	I thought a lot in those moments about killing myself, but
I didn’t because I would have hurt more knowing my children
and my mom would have to live with this.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Francis, you were aware of the painful outcomes killing your-
self would have on loved ones. Help me understand more
about your state of mind during that time. Did you think of or
have a plan in place and, if so, did you have a means to carry
out that plan?
F()$,+%: 	No plan. I just wanted the pain to go away. I started to use
more drugs to numb out.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 233	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 233 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 71 of 87 --

234 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
C"#$%&'"(: 	Did you plan to use more drugs with the hope of killing your-
self? (Exploring drug use as a possible means to carry out suicide is
important to assess as it can be easily overlooked with the focus on
more acute means of lethality.)
F()$,+%: 	No. I never planned or intended to overdose or use drugs to
kill myself. Only to take away the pain.
C"#$%&'"(: 	So, you had no specific plan or means?
F()$,+%: 	That’s right. I guess I chickened out.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Choosing to live when you were facing incredible pain takes a
lot of courage and strength. (The counselor continues to use empa-
thy to build support, rapport, and trust.)
F()$,+%: 	I guess, but I’m not feeling a lot of courage right now.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Describe your current thoughts about wanting to kill yourself.
(The counselor may use a 1 to 10 scale to help assess, with 1 being no
intent, plan, or means to kill myself and 10 being a definite plan and
means to kill myself.)
F()$,+%: 	Kind of like what we talked about before. Feeling really over-
whelmed. Maybe a 3 or 4.
C"#$%&'"(: 	So a 3 or 4 would indicate feeling overwhelmed like what you
felt before, or is it more than before?
F()$,+%: 	Pretty much the same.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Thank you for helping me understand. Francis, given these
recent painful experiences, do you have a plan or means to kill
yourself right now?
F()$,+%: 	No. I just feel really awful. I just wish the pain would go away.
C"#$%&'"(: 	The pain feels really unbearable, so much so that you think that
the only way to reconcile it is by not existing anymore. (If the cli-
ent mentioned a plan and intent, the counselor would explore in detail
the plan and means. The counselor would ask about specific sources to
carry out suicide and continue to examine multiple methods until the
client states that no other methods have been considered.)
F()$,+%: 	Yes. (Francis cries for several minutes.) And I don’t know what to
do next because nothing has worked out and my wife is leav-
ing and screwing around with my best friend because of my
drug use.
C"#$%&'"(: 	It sounds like you don’t want to die, you just want your life to
make sense. Right now, you’re uncertain what direction to go
to alleviate the pain. You know that drugs have not helped the
situation, but they have been the only thing that has helped to
numb the pain.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 234	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 234 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 72 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	235
F()$,+%: 	Exactly! I know this is no way to live my life. I’m tired of feel-
ing this way, but it’s the only thing I know that works and I’m
not sure I want to let go of using drugs at this point. (The cli-
ent’s affect brightens a little and seems a little hopeful that he is being
listened to, something he complained his wife never did.)
C"#$%&'"(: 	It sounds like the relationship with drugs is causing a lot of
pain and problems, but you’re not ready to let it go. Maybe we
can work together to examine this relationship and the costs
and benefits of using versus not using.
F()$,+%: 	It’s something I’ve been thinking about. I’ve been trying to
figure out why I keep doing this when it causes so many other
problems, but I need it and I’m not sure I can give it up right
now because it hurts too much when I don’t use drugs.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Let’s not focus on all-or-nothing options related to use. Would
you instead be open to examining your use and understanding
what purpose it’s serving for you?
F()$,+%: 	I’d be open to talking about that.
C"#$%&'"(: 	To help start that conversation, I have some materials that
others have found helpful as they attempted to understand
similar issues you’ve been facing. Would you be interested in
looking these over between now and our next session?
F()$,+%: 	Yes, I’d be interested.
The counselor established that there was no chronic suicidality or previous attempts.
Client responses indicate mild risk, and the counselor should evaluate and monitor risk
on an ongoing basis. The client has difficulty when facing challenging situations, feels
overwhelmed, often uses substances impulsively to manage emotional instability, and
has a history of fleeting thoughts of suicide but no established intent, plan, or means.
During the remainder of the session, the counselor will assess the client’s drug use
and motivation to change. The counselor is still concerned about the client’s strained
emotional state and will work to establish a plan in the event that the client’s condition
worsens before the next session. The counselor may consider using the commitment
to treatment statement (CTS), an agreement to commit to the treatment process and to
living, and a crisis response plan that outlines specific behaviors the client will engage
in if the crisis escalates (see Rudd, 2006).
The counselor and client also work together to examine a realistic plan for substance
use. It is evident the client is in the contemplative stage, and the counselor wants to
continue to enhance client understanding and awareness. The counselor also commits
time in session to discussing the marital issues and explores the dynamics that have
triggered this recent crisis situation. The client is feeling better at the end of the session,
and they agree to meet again in 4 days. At the end of this session, the counselor must
thoroughly document the session and provide specific content related to the suicidal
ideation, established patterns, and current condition. The use of direct client quotes
strengthens the record.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 235	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 235 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 73 of 87 --

236 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Session 2
The counselor continues to build rapport and establish the therapeutic working alliance
using basic reflective skills and advanced skills such as clarification and immediacy as
needed while helping the client color in the details related to the presenting problem,
including the implications of the affair. In this session, the counselor assesses the client’s
emotional state and explores behaviors and activity during the past several days and
evaluates whether different interventions are necessary. Motivational enhancement
approaches continue to serve as a building block for exploration of the client’s substance
use and assist in shifting the client’s ambivalence toward change.
The exploration and implementation of treatment options will align with the
client’s stage of change. Assessing cultural factors and their role in understanding a
client’s motivation level is important during the second session. Also, the counselor
discusses the bibliotherapy assignment and specific reactions, thoughts, and insights and
how the client has integrated this information and any newly acquired knowledge into
his situation. The counselor and client discuss additional options, including continued
bibliotherapy options and the possibility of listing advantages and disadvantages of
current substance use for the next session. At the end of the session, the counselor
and client both summarize salient issues and the counselor reminds the client of the
behavioral plan in the event the crisis reemerges.
Sessions 3–6
Evidence of a stronger therapeutic alliance is emerging with ease of rapport and signs
that the client is trusting the counselor. The exploration of presenting problems continues.
The counselor notices that the client has chosen options to help explore ambivalence,
including a handwritten list of the advantages and disadvantages of drug use. The
client reports that he knew his substance use was a problem but did not understand the
magnitude until he made this list. He reports that he wants to make changes and wants
to end this relationship with drugs. He also realized how much he alienated his wife and,
while still very hurt and upset over her affair, understands how his drug use contributed
to this process. He reports that he wants to change but does not know where to begin.
He also reports that he has not used drugs for the past 12 hours and has been feeling a
little rough but indicates he would like to be drug-free in the next month.
The client’s attitude has shifted from the first session, and his behaviors indicate
that he is preparing to move toward making a change. The counselor recognizes this shift
and works with the client to develop a plan to change and specific treatment options that
align with the preparation. During this stage, the client’s motivation aligns with specific
behavioral approaches and the opportunity for the counselor to use other advanced skills
such as challenging, advanced empathy, and immediacy. During these sessions, working
with the client to establish a support system is critical.
At this point, the counselor would discuss various types of supports and assess the
client’s willingness to explore each. It is important that the counselor be knowledgeable
of different support options and help the client navigate this process. For example,
integrating 12-Step support groups is quite common, yet many counselors may not take
the time to process the client’s apprehensions or fears. Explaining what 12-Step groups
are about, the types of meetings available, expectations, and what a typical meeting
entails can do much to allay client fears. The counselor may suggest to Francis that to
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 236	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 236 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 74 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	237
Relapse and Crisis
One of the more critical aspects of substance use treatment is addressing relapse. Relapse
is sometimes inevitable, especially for clients who have a chronic, long-term history of
substance dependence. Despite efforts to address relapse as part of treatment goals, it
continues to be problematic for many clients. Various studies report 40–75% of clients
with SUDs relapse in the 6 months following treatment (Hasin et al., 2013; Kabisa et
al., 2021; Maehira et al., 2013; Moradinazar et al., 2020; Sapkota, 2019). Even those who
maintain abstinence beyond a year struggle. Dennis et al. (2007) found that 36% of
respondents with less than 1 year of abstinence (any substance) were able to maintain
it at year 8. For those with 1–3 years of abstinence, rates improved to 66%, and they
increased to 86% for those with 3 or more years of abstinence. Dennis et al. concluded
that the first 3 years of abstinence yield the highest risk for relapse. Numerous factors
may contribute to this wide variance in relapse rates, such as treatment not addressing
relapse issues, clients not following through with treatment goals, and clients dropping
out of treatment. Those with SUDs and significant symptoms may be at a higher risk for
relapsing when facing crisis situations.
During treatment, counselors need to prepare for relapse by helping clients explore
triggers and learn new cognitive-behavioral strategies. Even in short-term crisis centers,
these triggers can be identified, explored, and documented when clients are referred
for treatment. Examining the client’s high-risk behaviors, self-monitoring activities,
and coping skills (Moss & Cook, 2020) as well as supporting the client in progressive
relaxation techniques can help counselors address relapse concerns (Lewis et al., 2019).
Counselors need to help clients differentiate when use is viewed as a “lapse” or a
“relapse.” A lapse is a single episode of using a substance following a period of abstinence.
The individual often takes responsibility for this lapse and examines the specific experience
or trigger(s) that resulted to build on recovery. A relapse is a return to sustained use of
the same substance or another mood-altering substance following a defined period of
abstinence. Counselors need to be extra vigilant to potential warning signs, including client
rationalization or denial (or using other defense mechanisms); the client not showing up for
treatment; the client not attending 12-Step meetings or working with a sponsor; the client
demonstrating changes in attitudes, behaviors, or!thoughts around substance use; and
the client reconnecting with unhealthy people or environments. An established support
system is an essential piece in addressing relapse during a period of crisis. Clients should
be encouraged to seek support from 12-Step groups, be aware of the need to commit more
time to meetings, and work closely with sponsors. Complete Think About It 7.3.
help ease into this process, it may be beneficial to see whether a friend would be willing
to accompany him the first time. Support is an essential step in enhancing motivation
and creating an alternative to relying on drugs as a means of coping.
Discussion Questions
1. What other issues warrant consideration in this case?
2. What other considerations would you integrate into the session 1 dialogue?
3. What counselor responses would you change or revise and why in the session 1
dialogue?
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 237	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 237 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 75 of 87 --

238 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Think about relapse. What are your thoughts, attitudes, and beliefs about relapse? What approach would you
take if a client reported a lapse or relapse?
THINK ABOUT IT 7. 3
Harm Reduction
For those with SUDs and symptoms, the main goal of
treatment is to establish and maintain abstinence, while
incorporating strategies for harm reduction. Getting to a
place of abstinence is often a complex and difficult process.
Counselors using various approaches may also find using
harm reduction approaches is a valuable tool within the
treatment protocol. Harm reduction approaches are tools to
help the client reduce the negative consequences associated
with use, regardless of one’s usage pattern. Clients in the
early stages of change are not going to be open to hearing
about severing their relationship with their drug. Harm
reduction can be helpful to find a common ground and
meet clients where they are. Harm reduction is often used
during the early stages of change when clients are expressing
resistance. Harm reduction is often misunderstood, and
some believe it may encourage continued use. In reality, the
ultimate goal of harm reduction is to achieve abstinence and
prevent future crisis situations.
Marlatt et al. (2011) identified five underlying principles of harm reduction:
1. Strive for abstinence while considering alternative options to help minimize harm.
2. View prevention as a way to reduce the negative consequences or harmful outcomes
associated with use but not focusing specifically on usage.
3. Focus approaches on where the client is at that point in their use or addiction and
develop approaches accordingly.
4. View harm reduction as a community-oriented process where action is taken at the
grassroots level to advocate for change specific to the needs within that community.
5. Focus on minimizing harmful consequences and not about judging or criticizing
client behavior.
Using harm reduction approaches helps establish rapport because the counselor
is working with client resistance and not targeting complete abstinence but, rather,
focusing on ways to reduce the harm associated with use. Clients are also more likely
to buy into alternatives to reducing harm that can lead to lowered resistance. Harm
reduction approaches may lead to an increased motivation for change while examining
usage patterns. The dialogue that follows illustrates how a counselor can use harm
reduction with a resistant client.
C "#$%&'"( : 	Sam, you mentioned that you like to drink and have no
intention of stopping. Spending time out with your friends at a
bar is an important part of your social life.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 7. 2
In this video, a client shares the
scope of his substance abuse.
The counselor helps the client
begin to identify his goals
and talk about safe recovery,
including the assistance of a
trained physician, as well as
the risks of overconsumption.
Why is it important to offer
psychoeducation with
substance use?
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 238	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 238 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 76 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	239
S).: 	Yes, so it’s not really a good use of your time or mine if these
sessions are going to be about you preaching to me about the
ills of drinking. I don’t have a problem and see nothing wrong
with how I spend my time.
C"#$%&'"(: 	I appreciate your honesty. My intention is not to preach to you
about your alcohol use. Rather, I was wondering if we might
examine transportation options so that when you are out
drinking you can avoid getting another DUI.
S).: 	Well, now that I got my license back, I really don’t want to
risk losing it again. I need my license so I can get to work. I’m
willing to discuss this, but I don’t have an alcohol problem.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Fair enough. Let’s brainstorm some possible transportation
options together for the next time you go out with your
friends. (The counselor is not focusing on alcohol reduction at
this point. The emphasis is on reducing the negative consequences
associated with drinking and driving. By working together, the
counselor is not only establishing the therapeutic alliance and
working to reduce harm but also helping the client feel comfortable
and laying a foundation for later trust and change.)
Support Groups
Support groups serve a valuable function within the treatment process. Clients with
SUDs or significant symptoms often find that as the condition progresses, they become
alienated and isolated from family, friends, and coworkers as they spend more time in
relationships with their substances and those who enable the behavior. When clients
enter treatment, some are often faced with the hard and painful reality that life is empty
and too much damage has been done to repair some relationships.
Another obvious issue is that clients often have poor social and coping skills,
so engaging in social contact can be difficult. A common treatment goal is to learn
to establish social and coping skills, which are critical components in developing
and maintaining abstinence. Support groups play an instrumental role in facilitating
and practicing these skills. The most common and best-known support groups are
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and Narcotics Anonymous (NA), which are both based
on a philosophy that addiction is a disease and individuals are powerless over its effects.
In order to recover, they come to understand that they are powerless over the effects
of the substance and cannot recover under their own volition and must turn their will
over to a higher power.
The underlying mechanism of AA and NA are the 12 Steps, a series of sequential
action steps that help individuals acknowledge their powerlessness over alcohol or other
drugs and move toward accepting responsibility for their recovery. Several common
misconceptions exist with respect to 12-Step meetings, including the belief that AA
and NA are religious based and that these meetings serve as treatment for a person’s
addiction. Counselors encouraging clients to attend 12-Step meetings should educate
clients on the purpose and mission of these meetings, as well as the variety of group
options, meeting formats, and meeting structures.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 239	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 239 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 77 of 87 --

240 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Encouraging support group attendance should align with the client’s stage of
change. Clients may also report feeling discouraged or frustrated after attending a
meeting and should be encouraged to try out different meetings to find out which best
match their needs. Clients may find other groups like SMART (a four-point program that
emphasizes self-reliance and empowerment), Double Trouble (for those dealing with
mental health and SUDs), Al-ANON (for families of those with substance addiction),
Overeaters Anonymous, Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous, and Gamblers Anonymous
as options. Complete Activity 7.2, which focuses on enhancing your knowledge of
12-Step meetings.
Clients unfamiliar with 12-Step meetings are often
reluctant or resistant to attend because they have
misconceptions and fears about what to expect.
Counselors can help allay client concerns by educating
them about these meetings. For this activity, attend an
open meeting of the 12-Step group of your choice.
Note the sequence of events, format, and structure
of the meeting and other pertinent information. How
would you explain these meetings to a client?
ACTIVITY 7.2
Marital and Family Treatment
Marital and family treatment (MFT) has been an integral part of substance use treatment
for decades. During this period, research findings have demonstrated a reciprocal
relationship between problem drinking and family and marital discord (Merkouris
et!al., 2022). Stress and problems within the marriage and family can contribute to the
development and continuation of problematic alcohol use. In cases where abstinence has
been achieved, those individuals who continue to deal with unresolved marital and family
conflicts may be at a higher risk for relapse. Merkouris et al. (2022) highlighted client
characteristics that contribute to successful completion of MFT, including being older,
entering counseling following a crisis, being employed, having a history of serious alcohol
problems, having graduated from high school, and living together with one’s family.
Counselor attributes that tend to lead to successful outcomes include addressing
client and family members simultaneously; focusing on alcohol problems first; using
empathetic listening and dealing effectively with intense anger during the initial stages of
counseling; developing a structured, directive approach that includes establishing rules,
boundaries, and consequences; and viewing the change process as long term. Treatment
goals for MFT include eliminating substance use and addressing marital and family
dysfunctional patterns. Initial sessions address negative interactions and feelings, and
later sessions focus on increasing positive interactions and communications, developing
healthy coping skills, implementing behavior change contracts, and integrating problem-
solving skills.
Co-occurring Disorders and Crisis
Substance use disorder is the most common co-occurring disorder with severe mental
illness. SAMHSA (2022) defines a co-occurring disorder as the concomitant occurrence of a
substance use and mental health disorder. Co-occurring disorders were first identified in
the early 1980s, and treatment outcomes often had poor results, as traditional approaches
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 240	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 240 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 78 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	241
for treating substance use were integrated into existing mental health services (Drake
et!al., 2004). Clients who are diagnosed with a co-occurring disorder may find that crisis
situations not only present challenges to maintain abstinence from substances but also
trigger symptoms associated with a mental health diagnosis. Counselors working with
clients with co-occurring disorders must be competent in understanding each disorder
as well as how to integrate treatment so as to ensure that the disorders are addressed
simultaneously. Unfortunately, integrated treatment options within many communities
may not be widely available (National Alliance of Mental Illness, 2017).
Counselors need to understand how substance use can present symptoms that
mimic mental illness and other medical conditions. As discussed, effective treatment
requires counselors to make an accurate diagnosis, but doing so is often unrealistic in
crisis settings with short-term exposure to the client. Careful consideration should be
given to conducting differential diagnosis, especially if there is evidence that mental
health disorders or medical conditions may be present. Focusing on the evident symptoms
is critical. For example, clients who use alcohol may also present with symptoms of
depression. If alcohol is the reason for the depression yet the counselor fails to connect
this information to a SUD diagnosis, the counselor may incorrectly diagnose the primary
cause as a depressive disorder.
Similar scenarios involve clients who use stimulants such as amphetamines or
cocaine, with symptom presentation manifesting as manic episodes or, depending on
the amount of usage, psychotic episodes. If there is no co-occurring psychotic disorder,
stimulant-induced psychosis will be temporary and subside as the individual comes off
the high. When assessing individuals who present with psychosis, counselors should
be aware that while symptom presentation for certain substances may mimic certain
psychotic disorders, some differences exist. For example, clients with amphetamine-
induced psychosis may present symptoms similar to those of clients with paranoid
schizophrenia. However, clients with amphetamine-induced psychosis tend to present
with visual hallucinations, whereas clients with paranoid schizophrenia tend to report
auditory hallucinations.
More time is needed to make most other mental health diagnoses that are not SUDs.
A client who presents with possible co-occurring mental health disorders while in a crisis
center or with a crisis counselor can be documented as follows: “Client [demonstrates,
presents, or reports] with symptoms consistent with an anxiety-related disorder.” This
documentation allows the next treatment provider to be aware of possible differential
or co-occurring disorders.
Withdrawing from a substance can also create a crisis situation. For clients who
establish tolerance and dependence on alcohol and benzodiazepines, withdrawal can
have potentially life-threatening consequences. Complications from withdrawal of
alcohol can result in serious medical conditions, such as seizures, stroke, tachycardia,
and death. Counselors also need to be aware that overdose or sudden death due to
substance use (e.g., alcohol poisoning, inhalant use, heroin overdose) can also result in
acute crisis situations and trauma for family and friends. Educating clients and their
families about drug actions, interactions, and synergistic effects, as well as symptoms of
withdrawal, is an important treatment consideration.
As we now transition to multicultural perspectives related to substance use,
complete Activity 7.3, which asks you to consider the clients with whom you possibly
feel uncomfortable or fearful.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 241	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 241 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 79 of 87 --

242 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
MULTICULTURAL PERSPECTIVES, SUBSTANCE USE, AND CRISIS
Learning Objective 7.5 Explain multicultural perspectives on substance use in crisis
situations.
One of the many issues a counselor must consider is the significance of culture in shaping
a client’s identity. Culture refers to the values and beliefs that shape a person’s worldview.
Pedersen (1991) emphasized the importance of cultural diversity within the counseling
relationship and the recognition that all counseling is multicultural counseling. Counselors
working with clients with SUDs or significant symptoms and in crisis need to understand
how the culture of substance use influences each client’s worldview. Historically,
treatment has focused on reduction or abstinence goals, often with little consideration
for understanding the role that culture plays in etiology or maintenance of use. Relapse
considerations often emphasize exploring both intrapersonal and interpersonal factors
yet may not fully explore the implications of culture on substance use behavior.
Counselors must be knowledgeable about and implement multicultural counseling
competencies in their practice. Ratts et al. (2015) outlined four multicultural counseling
competencies—counselor self-awareness, client worldview, counseling relationship, and
counseling and advocacy interventions—that each comprise four dimensions—attitudes
and beliefs, knowledge, skills, and actions. Addictions counselors should develop
self-awareness of attitudes and beliefs that may interfere with their work with clients,
including any attitudes or beliefs associated with specific substances and substance
usage patterns or behaviors. For example, if a counselor has specific attitudes or beliefs
regarding clients exchanging sex for drugs, which may be a common practice within
some drug-using subcultures, judgment and biases may spill over into counseling.
Addictions counselors should also be aware of the client’s cultural worldview and
the role substances play as part of that identity. For example, the counselor working with
adolescent boys should understand whether certain substance use coincides with cultural
expectations or rites of passage. Integrating cultural awareness into substance use treatment
better aligns the treatment with the client’s particular cultural worldview and context.
Counselors should also consider the significance of the client’s cultural worldview
during the assessment phase, when evaluating motivation and ambivalence. Motivation for
continued substance use involves a complex and varied set of factors and circumstances that
often manifest as client ambivalence and resistance. In some instances, ambivalence may
be less about mood altering and getting high and more about maintaining a client’s beliefs,
customs, or rituals associated with substance use as it relates to cultural identity or tradition.
Assessing cultural meaning as it relates to substance use provides a broader
understanding of the cultural dynamics that may help explain ambivalence. Counselors
should maintain a cultural focus when working with clients through the five stages of
change. Moreover, triggers for relapse behavior should be examined from a cultural
perspective. Case Study 7.4 explores multicultural considerations when working with a
client who uses substances.
With what types of clients, characteristics of clients,
or specific cultural differences would you feel most
uncomfortable or even fearful? Discuss the reason(s)
for your concern.
ACTIVITY 7.3
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 242	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 242 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 80 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	243
CASE STUDY 7.4
Multicultural Considerations with a Substance-Using Client
Van is a 26-year-old multiracial man. Over the past 6 months, his use of alcohol and
marijuana has increased significantly. His usage has coincided with his disclosure to his
parents that he is gay, which conflicts with their beliefs and values. Van thinks he has let
his parents down and feels depressed and isolated. He has been attending counseling for
the past month and has experienced suicidal ideation. The ideation issue was dealt with
in session 1 and determined to be low risk: no plan, specific means, and low motivation
to self-harm. In this session, the discussion focused on understanding substance use and
cultural expectations.
C"#$%&'"(: 	Van, we’ve been talking the last several sessions about your
coming-out process and your parents’ reaction. You knew tell-
ing your parents that you are gay was going to be hard, but
you didn’t think it was going to be this painful. They are very
angry and disappointed.
V)$: 	I didn’t want to disappoint them, but I couldn’t keep living
this lie. They were pressuring me to settle down, get married,
and have a family. They believe I’m making a choice to be gay
as an act of defying them. The weight of their anger and disap-
pointment sits heavy in my heart.
C"#$%&'"(: 	I’m sensing your pain as we talk and the heavy toll it’s tak-
ing on you. Tell me more about your parents’ cultural beliefs
about being gay.
V)$: 	In my culture, being gay has always been viewed as some
sort of defect and has been looked down on. My parents don’t
support this lifestyle and believe it’s sinful. They made it clear
that they would never accept this lifestyle in any of their chil-
dren. I was always fearful because I knew I was gay for a long
time.
C"#$%&'"(: 	You knew deep down that identifying as gay meant you’d
never be accepted by your parents, so you turned to alcohol
and drugs as a way to numb the pain.
V)$: 	Well, it’s a lot easier to drink and get high to take away the
pain than to feel it. Yet I still feel it and sometimes it only mag-
nifies the feelings. Maybe I should just give them what they
want because I see how much it is hurting them and me. It’s so
confusing and I don’t know what to do.
C"#$%&'"(: 	You’re questioning yourself and thinking giving them what
they want will make everything better. (Van looks dejected, like
he is feeling lost and confused. It is clear he is struggling with his
truth versus family and cultural expectations.)
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 243	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 243 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 81 of 87 --

244 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
OVERVIEW OF THE ELEMENTS OF CRISIS INTERVENTION RELATED TO
SUBSTANCE USE
Learning Objective 7.6 Identify elements of crisis intervention related to substance
use, including safety and self-care, diagnostic considerations during a crisis, and
essential substance use–specific crisis intervention skills.
The purpose of this final section is to review several specific elements of crisis intervention
related to substance use, including safety and self-care, diagnostic considerations during
a crisis, and essential substance use–specific crisis intervention skills.
V)$: 	Yeah.
C"#$%&'"(: 	(Using an advanced empathic statement to make the implicit mes-
sage explicit) Van, as we’ve been talking today and over the last
several sessions, might it be that you can’t accept yourself as a
gay man unless your parents can also accept you in that way?
That you have struggled for a long time with the realization
that being true to who you are means alienating your family?
Knowing that you’re disappointing them has led to alcohol
and drugs as a way to numb the pain. Yet the pain never
goes away.
V)$: 	(Van sits for several minutes in silence reflecting on the
counselor’s response) I just wanted the pain to stop, but how
can it as long as I keep denying who I am? I can’t control
how they see me, but I can control how I see myself and
how I want to live my life. I’m really tired of feeling like
I have to be something I’m not. I need to find other ways of
dealing with this problem, and I realize using alcohol and
drugs is not solving it.
C"#$%&'"(: 	You want to be true to yourself and find healthier ways
of dealing with the pain. We can use our time together to
explore what cultural expectations and messages you want
to embrace while finding healthier ways to deal with painful
emotions.
A multiculturally competent counselor examines any value conflicts and biases that
arise as clients tell their stories and addresses those conflicts and biases. The counselor
also attempts to see the presenting problem from the client’s worldview. Strategies for
change will likely require exploration and resolution of conflicting cultural messages and
healthier ways of coping as clients move toward embracing their identity.
Discussion Questions
1. What other strategies for change should be integrated into the work with Van?
2. How should the counselor go about dealing with the substance use concerns?
3. What other cultural issues do you believe should be considered and why?
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 244	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 244 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 82 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	245
Meghan Brown
Recently, while sitting at my desk, one of the counselors
on my team came to my office and noted that a
15-year-old girl in her group was “acting out” and
refusing to leave the women’s restroom. I could hear
the young girl yelling at her counselor and to all in
the group: “Leave me alone!.!.!.!my life is crap!” The
counselor returned to her group while I stood outside
the restroom, nonchalantly pouring myself a cup of
coffee. After a few moments, the young woman came
out of the restroom, joined me at the kitchenette, and
clearly stated, “No one can understand me!.!.!.!no one
is me. I’d like to be a butterfly because butterflies are
free.” I immediately recognized that she was under the
influence.
I asked the young woman to go into an open
group room with me. I told her that she did not have
to talk to me, but she was more than welcome to talk
about anything as I was interested in what had made
her so upset. During the time she spoke, I was able
to conduct an informal mental status exam, explore
her judgment, assess her potential for suicide, and
observe her behaviors to further assess what substance
she had taken. The conversation was very interesting
but frightening due to hearing the girl repeatedly note
that she has no reason to live, she wants to die, she
will overdose to die, she has a history of psychiatric
hospitalizations, she does not like her parents, and
she enjoys her relationship with drugs. She remained
disorganized in her thoughts, glared at me, was
agitated, and demonstrated trouble regulating her
breathing. Every few moments, it appeared as though
she was gasping for air. I observed that her trouble
breathing was not related to her crying but potentially
more a result of her using a system depressant. I quickly
asked her counselor to give the rest of the group a
break and to come and sit with her in the open group
room while I contacted her parents.
The young woman’s parents arrived at the
facility within minutes of our phone call. They were
concerned and immediately defensive about their
daughter’s condition. The mother repeatedly noted
that she does not think her daughter uses alcohol or
other drugs, despite her being involved in chemical
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 7.3
Substance Use and Crisis Issues
Safety and Self-Care
Clients with SUDs or even symptoms can be particularly vulnerable to the effects of
crises. Crises can result in greater risk for increased use of substances or lapse/relapse
behaviors. Those who engage in substance use tend to be at a higher risk for crisis or
trauma while under the influence (Zinzow et al., 2010). When individuals with SUDs or
symptoms experience crisis or trauma, the recovery process and the work of the coun-
selor can be challenging (SAMHSA, 2014). Driessen et al. (2008) reported that individu-
als with SUDs and symptoms who experience trauma tend to have poorer treatment
outcomes than those who lack a history of trauma. Clients who increase substance use
because of crisis or trauma create potentially dangerous outcomes for themselves (e.g.,
overdose, suicide) and the community (e.g., homicide, DUI-related accidents).
During a crisis, the counselor simultaneously addresses a client’s crisis or trauma
response and the potential risk for or actual substance use. Ensuring that the client is
safe is a critical first step in crisis intervention. To effectively address safety concerns
in relation to the client, the counselor establishes rapport, trust, and genuineness and
creates a safe environment. Creating an environment where the client is protected and
out of harm’s way can help deescalate the crisis situation. The counselor assesses the risk
of suicidality or instrumental suicide-related behavior and takes a directive role when
the client in crisis presents danger to self or others. Voices from the Field 7.3 describes
one counselor’s experience with substance use and crisis issues.
(continued)
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 245	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 245 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 83 of 87 --

246 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Assessing and placing the client in the appropriate level of care can help reinforce
the importance of safety by aligning the client’s needs with applicable treatment and
interventions. Determining where the client is in the stages of change can be valuable so
the counselor can begin to conceptualize appropriate and applicable interventions. Use
of personal support and empathy can be instrumental throughout the crisis. Employing
harm reduction measures may be valuable for clients who are in the precontemplative
or contemplative stages of change.
Once the crisis situation has deescalated, the counselor can enhance safety in a
variety of ways, including employing grounding exercises to help clients establish some
control when they feel overwhelmed; creating a structured counseling setting with
specific routines or rituals; creating opportunities for safe discussion; identifying triggers
or behaviors that create feelings of not being safe both in the moment and in general; and
developing a safety plan (SAMHSA, 2014).
Counselors also take steps to ensure their own safety when dealing with clients who
are in crisis!(see Chapter 2). Counselors need to be aware of the dangers of working with
clients who pose a threat to public safety or who have a history of violence, especially
those who may also be under the influence of a substance (e.g., phencyclidine or other
forms of hallucinogens resulting in distortions in one’s perception of reality). Counselors
should gauge the risk in working with clients who pose safety concerns and can take
steps to minimize the risk by screening high-risk clients, avoiding seeing clients when
there is a lack of physical security available, recognizing warning signs of violence,
avoiding working alone during in-home counseling, and establishing rules prohibiting
weapons in session.
Working with clients who have SUDs and significant symptoms creates unique
challenges for counselors. Counselors who constantly face client resistance, ambivalence,
dependency treatment and testing positive in her most
recent drug screen. I informed the parents that an
ambulance had been called for their daughter due to
her difficulty breathing and her high risk for suicide.
The primary counselor and I worked with the client and
the parents to try to keep everyone calm and provide
the emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and police
officer with the appropriate information.
The young woman repeatedly refused to
cooperate with the EMTs and the police officer. As a
result of her refusal, the police officer told the young
woman’s parents that he could not take her to the
hospital. Her parents, although initially resistant to the
idea that their daughter was under the influence, noted
that they were afraid to take her home. They informed
me that the police officer refused to “pink slip” their
daughter and was going to send her home with them.
It was at that point that I reminded the police officer
what I had already told the EMTs, that this young
woman was clearly under the influence, stated she had
no reason to live, and had the means to overdose if she
wanted to die. It was only then that the officer agreed
to mandate the young woman be taken to the hospital
for a 72-hour hold.
The entire length of this event was a total of
45!minutes, but looking back on it all, it seemed more
like 3 hours. The situation required legal knowledge,
sound ethics, and clinical judgment. I needed to be
able to recognize the symptoms of a client under the
influence of alcohol and/or other drugs, the risk factors
and signs of suicide, and how to keep a client calm
in a crisis situation to get the information needed to
obtain appropriate care for the client. Had I not spent
some time with the client to hear the words “I want to
die” and understand the means she had to kill herself,
I would not have been able to gain the support of law
enforcement to have the young woman mandated to
receive care in the emergency department.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 246	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 246 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 84 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	247
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 7. 3
In this video, a counselor
offers psychoeducation about
drinking to the client. How can
psychoeducation be essential
in a crisis session? When can
it be harmful?
motivational concerns, and relapse issues may question their effectiveness in facilitating
change. Working with this population requires counselors to integrate self-care
techniques into their daily routine to minimize the potential for burnout. Self-care
techniques that can be effective when working with clients with SUDs or significant
symptoms include engaging in interests and hobbies; having a strong support network;
establishing work boundaries; attending to one’s physical, mental, and spiritual
needs; learning effective time management; engaging in continued professional
development and training; attending counseling to address any maladaptive patterns
or interpersonal issues that hinder emotional or psychological well-being; and seeking
out supervision.
Diagnostic Considerations During a Crisis
A crisis situation can exacerbate and confound the diagnostic process, especially if the
client has co-occurring issues. The first consideration is to differentiate among symptoms
that are due to the acute crisis situation and symptoms that present as part of the
pathology. Differentiating crisis symptom presentations from pathological symptoms
helps counselors explain to clients that their experiences are normal by associating those
symptoms with the crisis, which can help minimize the client’s stress. Explaining to
clients how crisis situations can manifest physically and psychologically helps clients
better understand the symptom presentation. Furthermore, explaining to clients how
crisis situations can magnify affective states and trigger increased substance use may
help normalize their experience.
As mentioned, the purpose of diagnosis is to determine an appropriate course
of treatment. Differentiating between crisis symptoms and other presenting mental
health and substance abuse symptoms enables the counselor to properly assess and
triage the situation while also identifying appropriate interventions and normalizing
the client’s experience. Caution is warranted when providing a mental health diagnosis
that may require more information than can be obtained in an assessment during crisis
intervention.
Essential Substance Use–Specific Crisis Intervention Skills
The intervention skills used for clients with SUDs and symptoms tend to
also apply when these clients experience crises. Use of attending behaviors
and active listening skills is important in crisis situations. Creating warmth,
expressing genuineness, and creating an atmosphere of trust, safety, and
acceptance not only target the motivational factors inherent with treating
SUDs and symptoms but also help clients in crisis deescalate from the acute
stressor and feel more at ease and comfortable with the counselor. Using a
directive approach, conducted in a compassionate and empathic manner,
allows for clarification and understanding of the crisis threat so that appro-
priate courses of action can be taken.
Table 7.1 provides a number of online and print resources that will
expand your knowledge of the interplay between crises and substance
abuse.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 247	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 247 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 85 of 87 --

248 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUMMARY
Substance use has been an integral part of
the human experience and cultural identity
throughout time. The reasons that people
use drugs vary; however, specific biological,
psychological, and sociological circumstances
are key factors. Unfortunately, as the data reveal,
only a fraction of those needing substance use
treatment actually receive care. Failing to address
SUD issues or significant symptoms can be
particularly problematic for clients who are also
dealing with crisis issues. Numerous models
have been developed in an attempt to explain the
complex phenomenon of addiction. Still, there
is no consensus on the causality of addiction.
Counselors having knowledge of different models
and theories of addiction are better equipped to
address the array of etiological considerations.
To understand and treat clients with
SUDs or significant symptoms, especially those
who are dealing with a crisis, counselors must
be competent in all aspects of assessment and
diagnosis. Proper assessment and diagnosis
are instrumental in establishing an effective
treatment protocol and resources for the
client. Numerous screening and assessment
instruments exist, with the clinical interview
being one of the most commonly used assessment
tools. Treatment must consider both the level
of motivation and the nature and severity of
the crisis situation. Treatment considerations,
especially for clients facing crisis situations, need
to factor in admission and placement decisions
as outlined by ASAM’s level of care criteria.
Understanding the stages of change within
the crisis context can assist the counselor in
developing both an effective crisis response and
a quality therapeutic alliance once the crisis is
managed. The implementation of crisis models
helps the client return to a precrisis level of
functioning and is the first step in the treatment
process, especially when a client’s crisis response
involves an increased use of substances or a relapse.
Furthermore, counselors should think
about how to structure subsequent sessions
based on response to the initial crisis session.
Establishing a strong therapeutic working
alliance 	between 	counselor 	and 	client 	is
critical throughout the crisis period. Other
Online Resources
Harm Reduction Coalition: https://harmreduction.org
National Alliance on Mental Illness: https://www.nami.org/Home
ProjectKnow: https://projectknow.com
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: https://www.samhsa.gov
Print Resources
American Society of Addiction Medicine. (2013). The ASAM criteria: Treatment criteria for
addictive, substance-related, and co-occurring conditions (3rd ed.). Author.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: Helping people change (3rd ed.).
Guilford Press.
Publishers Group. (2022). Street drugs: A drug identification guide 2022. Author.
Rudd, M. D. (2006). The assessment and management of suicidality. Professional Resource Press.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2022). 2021 National Survey on
Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) Methodological Resource Book, Section 2: Sample Design
Report. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2021-nsduh-sample-design-report
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014). Trauma-informed care
in behavioral health services (Treatment Improvement Protocol [TIP] Series 57, HHS
Publication No. [SMA] 13-4801). Author.
TABLE 7.1 Resources on Substance Use and Crisis
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 248	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 248 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 86 of 87 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	249
considerations include assessing client and
counselor safety, client support, risk (on a
continued basis), how substance use factors
into risk behavior, specific plans once the crisis
subsides, and motivation to change.
Also, counselors must understand that the
risk of relapse is high when dealing with SUDs
or symptoms and can become magnified when
clients are in crisis. Helping clients identify and
address triggers is a key part of treatment, as is
helping clients understand the difficulty and
inherent challenges and obstacles in maintaining
abstinence in both the short and long term.
Other matters that must be considered
during 	counseling 	include 	marriage 	and
family concerns, co-occurring disorders, the
integration of a harm reduction philosophy
and approach into the overall treatment model,
and the involvement of support systems such
as 12-Step groups. Throughout the treatment
process, counselors must apply multicultural
counseling competencies to ensure that the
counselor’s cultural attitudes, values, and biases
do not interfere with care; the client’s worldview
is recognized; and culturally appropriate
intervention strategies are implemented.
This chapter highlights a number of
considerations when working with clients
with co-occurring crisis and substance use
issues. Substance use can not only lead to crisis
situations but also exacerbate them, so counselors
need to navigate crisis situations and substance
use issues simultaneously. Effectively assessing
client motivation to change means counselors
understand 	applicable 	and 	appropriate
strategies, skills, and approaches that align with
the client’s current state of change. Furthermore,
assessing the stage of change and motivation
can have important implications once the crisis
has been addressed, especially if substance use
precipitated the crisis event. Finally, counselors
who can create a therapeutic environment based
on genuineness, trust, acceptance, and warmth
go a long way toward establishing therapeutic
rapport while building a foundation that
enhances short- and long-term client change.
M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 249	M07_Jackson_4_78918.indd 249 	06/04/23 7:42 PM	06/04/23 7:42 PM

-- 87 of 87 --

