Welcome to Crisis Counseling and Abuse
I go by Dr. E or Dr. McCartney
esther.mccartney@northwestu.edu
Dr. Esther McCartney
A Little Bit About Me 
Education
M.Ed. In Clinical Mental Health Counseling with an Addictions Specialty from the College of William & Mary (2015)
Ph.D. in Counselor Education from University of South Carolina (2021)
Experience
Child & Adolescent Counselor in schools and worked with clients with safety plans
Worked as an on-call crisis stabilization counselor and worked with clients ages 5-18 and their families
Disclaimer
The Lord is near to the brokenhearted and saves the crushed in spirit.
Psalm 34:18
Think on your feelings about starting the new semester
Class Schedule
Thursday, Jan 8 
Thursday, Feb 5   
Friday, Feb 13 No meeting- Psychological 1st aid training and Suicidal Assessment Training  
Thursday, Feb 26     
Thursday, March 5 
Thursday, March 19    
Thursday, April 2  
Thursday, April 9 
Agenda for TodayReview Syllabus and ExpectationsQuestionsLecture on Chapters 1-3
Syllabus Review
Expectations
Academic Honesty
Turn in your own work. 
Cite your sources using APA 7th edition
Grading
Assignments are due at class time (6pm), but may be turned in up to one week late with a 10% reduction
If this PowerPoint presentation contains mathematical equations, you may need to check that your computer has the following installed:
1) MathType Plugin
2) Math Player (free versions available)
3) NVDA Reader (free versions available)
Attendance 
Attendance
You are only allowed to miss one class. More than one missed class will result in having to retake the course. 
Sickness
Do not come to class sick!
All classes will be recorded and posted on Discovery. For those who are sick, a make-up assignment will be provided.
Communication
Check your Northwest email regularly (at least once a day)
Responses may be delayed.
If you have not received a follow-up response from me, contact me again. 
Any questions?
Disclaimer
Some of the material we will cover in class may likely cause discomfort and anxiety whether you have experienced trauma yourself. It is imperative that students learn how to tolerate and work with intense affect, including their own. It is expected that students will struggle, learn, and seek help as needed. Students should carefully assess if they are currently able to face the emotional challenge of this material at the current time. 
Chapter 1:Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention
What is a crisis?
An event that changes you.
"There's no going back"
What is a Crisis?
A crisis is an event that may or may not be perceived as a disruption in life. A crisis does not necessarily lead to trauma.
Typically, a crisis is described using a trilogy definition; that is, there are three essential elements that must be present for an event to be considered a crisis:
a precipitating event
a perception of the event that leads to subjective distress
diminished functioning when the distress is not alleviated by customary coping mechanisms or other resources
When a crisis is perceived as disruptive to one’s life, the crisis may be experienced as a traumatic event.
The models include the factors as follows. • A, Event or situation. • B, Resources. • C, Perception. • X, Degree of stress. (Low, high, and crisis). The model shows that a family breaks during the crisis. 
What is Stress?
Crisis versus Stress
If this PowerPoint presentation contains mathematical equations, you may need to check that your computer has the following installed:
1) MathType Plugin
2) Math Player (free versions available)
3) NVDA Reader (free versions available)
Measuring Stress
What is a Traumatic Event?
Responses to Trauma (1 of 2)
Responses to Trauma
Physical responses may be experienced through symptoms such as palpitations, shortness of breath, nausea, muscle tension, headaches, and fatigue.
Behaviorally, individuals may experience sleep and dietary changes, social withdrawal, purposeful avoidance of or attention to reminders of the trauma, changes in relationships, and increased use of alcohol or other mood-altering substances.
Cognitive responses include rumination, preoccupation, forgetfulness, and difficulty concentrating.
Emotional responses include distress, anxiety, impatience, irritability, anger, and symptoms of depression.
Spiritual responses are centered on existential questions and attempts to find meaning in the traumatic event.
Responses to Trauma-Key Terms
ASD vs. PTSD
Coping
Adaption
Resilience
Know the difference!
Pathologized Response to Trauma
While most people return to a level of equilibrium and healthy functioning following a reaction to traumatic stress, some may experience consequences that impair their ability to function.
Two trauma- and stressor-related diagnoses in the DSM-5-TR include acute stress disorder (ASD) and posttraumatic stress disorder (P TSD).
According to the DSM-5-TR, the diagnostic criteria for ASD and PTSD include hyperarousal (e.g., hypervigilance, difficulty concentrating, exaggerated startle responses, sleep disturbance), reexperiencing (e.g., flashbacks, nightmares, intrusive thoughts), negative cognitions and mood (e.g., memory lapse, exaggerated negative beliefs, distorted cognitions, lessened interest in activities), and avoidance (e.g., attempts to avoid reminders of the traumatic event, inability to recall components of the event, detachment, dissociation, restricted affect).
What is Coping?
Coping is defined as any behavioral or cognitive action that is taken to manage stress.
Responses to stress fall into three broad categories:
Problem-focused coping: taking direct behavioral actions to change or modify aspects of the environment that are thought to be the causes of stress.
Emotion-focused coping: reducing affective arousal so that the stressful situation may be tolerated; it generally involves cognitive processes that change the meaning of a stressor or create emotional distance from it.
Avoidance-focused coping: responses such as distraction or diversion are employed to avoid the stressor and the emotions that would be associated with it.
What is Adaptation?
Adaptation, as an outcome of stress or crisis, is the degree to which functioning has changed over an extended period and may be measured by the fit between the individual or family system and the environment.
In some families, changes may have occurred in functional behaviors such as rules, roles, boundaries, and interpersonal communication patterns, resulting in families being better equipped to meet the challenges of future stressors.
Conversely, for some individuals and families, an imbalance continues between stress demands and the capability to meet those demands.
What is Resilience?
Resilience may be defined as the dynamics that contribute to positive adaptation following exposure to experiences that have the potential to disrupt functioning (Masten & Obradovic, 2008).
Several fundamental adaptive systems seem to make a difference in human resilience.
Beginning in early childhood, adaptation and the likelihood of resilience seem to depend on the quality of relationships with attachment figures.
Social groups and networks provide resources such as information and support that are important in dealing with adversity.
Larger systems, such as religious and spiritual connections, provide attachment-like relationships and social support, as well as opportunities to practice self-regulation through prayer and meditation.
People who are resilient seem to be better at applying cognitive skills during times of high stress or threat of harm than those who are less well adapted.
What is Crisis Intervention?
What is Crisis Intervention?
A unique strategy within the profession of counseling, distinguished from other forms of counseling by its purpose, setting, time, and intervention plan.
Whether working in an office or in the field, within established counseling relationships or new ones, the crisis counselor’s goal is the safety and stability of clients—that is, working toward restoring equilibrium.
Once equilibrium is restored, other forms of counseling may be initiated or resumed.
Crisis Counseling versus Traditional Counseling
Crisis work prioritizes stabilization and immediate assistance with the presenting distress
Happens in the spur of the moment, in any setting where the client is
Sessions can last minutes to hours
Termination is viewed differently and typically ends with a referral
Does not typically include diagnosing clients
Goal is usually to increase functioning
Happens in scheduled, predetermined setting
Sessions typically 45 or 60 minutes
Termination is a process over multiple sessions
Treatment may include providing a diagnosis
Reframing Counseling for Crisis Work
It is important for counselors-in-training to view their work, in crisis intervention, with clients who experience a crisis as a multi-step process that includes:
If a counselor tries to address long-term goals with a person in crisis, the assessment and treatment plan will not address the presenting problem.
Trauma-Informed Care
Often the terms trauma-informed care (T I C) and crisis assessment are inappropriately used interchangeably.
Components of T I C may be integrated into the crisis assessment process, but T I C is not the same as crisis assessment and intervention.
Trauma-informed care assists an individual in restoring a sense of safety, power, and self-worth.
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2014).
Trauma-Informed Care
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2014).
The six guiding principles of T I C include:
Counselor’s Role
Roles in Crisis Intervention
Professional Counselor:
Helping them to gain insight into the ways crises affect their lives in a cognitive, behavioral, and emotional manner over a lengthy period
Providing specific treatment goals and objectives related to crisis
Monitoring and assessing the magnitude of severity of a crisis
Providing insight into co-occurring mental and emotional disorders and crisis (e.g., showing a client diagnosed with bipolar disorder how to cope with and monitor a crisis)
Providing specific crisis intervention strategies during a crisis and over time
Providing clients in crisis with resources and preventive measures
Assisting in alleviating symptoms associated with the crisis
Preparing clients to handle future crises
Roles in Crisis Intervention 
Paraprofessionals
Individuals within the mental health community with limited formal education and training in the professional mental health field, but they perform essential tasks for individuals in crisis such as:
Manage resources that help facilitate stabilization (e.g., make sure clients keep all medical, financial, emotional, environmental, and social service appointments).
Ensure clients are aware of appropriate resources that could be seen as preventive actions to crisis (e.g., make sure that a client has appropriate resources to pay the natural gas bill to have heat in the winter).
Provide an outlet for clients to decrease isolation and talk to others (e.g., talk with individuals in crisis and provide assurance that someone cares for them and their situation).
Participate in executing the modality and frequency aspects of the treatment plan—in other words, make the connections set out in the treatment plan.
Hotline workers
Are often the first point of contact for many individuals experiencing a crisis and may handle any number of crises resulting from suicidal and homicidal ideation, domestic violence, substance use, and sexual assault.
Crisis hotline workers perform essential tasks during a crisis situation:
They assess the severity of the crisis situation and the lethality of the caller.
They provide immediate crisis intervention to the caller in an attempt to deescalate the crisis. This is critical in a crisis situation because the caller does not have to make an appointment with a professional or wait to get help. Most hotlines are 24-hour services open 365 days a year.
They provide resources to the caller that may help resolve the crisis.
Impact of COVID-19
Society has now adapted telehealth as an alternative to face-to-face counseling.
Although still not preferred by mental health professionals for many situations, including crisis assessments, the ability to receive some form of counseling via telehealth procedures is better than the absence of counseling.
In crisis situations, telehealth considerations should still be evaluated for effectiveness in high-risk situations, work with young children, stabilization of clients with serious mental illnesses, and in situations where individuals have limited privacy, such as clients at home who experience intimate partner violence.
Approaches In Crisis Counseling
Approaches to Working with Clients in Crisis
Directive approaches include leading the person in crisis in a specific direction
For example, if someone is highly uncertain, spontaneous, or ambiguous and, at the same time, unable to get out of a crisis state, direction could provide immediate, though temporary, relief to feelings surrounding the crisis.
Another example, a person who presents with highly suicidal behaviors requires the crisis counselor to initiate an emergency involuntary hospitalization for the safety of the client.
Approaches to Working with Clients in Crisis 
Nondirective approaches allow the person in crisis to come up with the directives while the crisis counselor facilitates that process.
If the client can make rational decisions, even though in crisis, a nondirective approach may empower the client to make progress toward deescalation.
For example, asking clients who are recent flood victims what might be of most help to them right now allows them to respond with specifics, rather than the counselor determining what is needed.
Approaches to Working with Clients in Crisis 
A collaborative approach is a blend of directive and nondirective approaches, but with a flavor of togetherness:
Provides support and a sense of working together toward a common goal.
Collaboration can be particularly beneficial to clients who feel that they have too many choices, are aware of only options that have been ineffective in the past, or need some assistance in generating new options.
Case Study-Jane
Reflection Questions
How does the crisis worker determine that the client is in a crisis state and not manifesting a stress response? 
How does the crisis worker use his personal style in establishing rapport with the client? 
How would you gather additional information to identify impairments in functioning? 
What else might the crisis worker ask in order to determine resources available to the client? 
Crisis Intervention Theory and History
Crisis Intervention Theory
Studies of families in crisis following war separation led Reuben Hill (1949) to propose a model through which family stress and crisis could be conceptualized by considering the family’s resources, perception, and previous experience with crises.
Additional research on families and crisis events was launched following a more acute stressor event, the Cocoanut Grove nightclub fire that claimed nearly 500 lives in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1942.
Studies of the responses of the survivors of the fire, family members of those who died, and the community illuminated some common reactions to such a traumatic event and led Gerald Caplan and Erich Lindemann to propose recommendations for responding to community crises.
Pioneers in the Field of Crisis Intervention 
Lindemann, a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, worked with patients dealing with grief following traumatic loss.
Outlined several common clinical features, including somatic distress, feelings of guilt, hostility, disorganization, behavioral changes, and preoccupation with images of the deceased
Referred to these symptoms as “acute grief” as a call for intervention
Lindemann suggested that helpers other than psychiatrists could be of assistance
Lindemann worked with his colleague Gerald Caplan to establish a community-wide mental health program in Cambridge, Massachusetts, known as the Wellesley Project.
Pioneers in the Field of Crisis Intervention 
By studying and working with individuals who had experienced loss through the fire or similar traumatic events, Caplan (1964) developed the concept of “preventive psychiatry,” which proposed that early intervention following a disaster or traumatic event can promote growth and well-being.
Beverley Raphael (2000) coined the term “psychological first aid.”
She advocated for attention that included comfort and consolation, immediate physical assistance, reunification with loved ones, an opportunity to express feelings, and support during the initial period following a traumatic event.
Described the need to consider Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and the importance of attending first to basic survival needs before attempting more traditional forms of counseling.
Applied Crisis Theory- Crisis Domains
Applied Crisis Theory-Crisis Domains
The crisis domain acts as a framework for understanding the individual’s perception of the event and its life effects.
It is important for the crisis counselor to understand the individual’s perception of the crisis before categorizing the crisis into one or more of the domains.
A crisis must be understood by how it is perceived by the individual affected by it.
The Task Model of Crisis Assessment and Intervention
Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks 
Assessment Task 1: Address Safety, Stabilization, and Risk
A thorough risk assessment should be the first step in the assessment and the main goal for the counselor. Risk should be assessed throughout crisis intervention as well.
Not assessing for risk in a crisis situation, or waiting until the end of a session to conduct such an assessment that is not thorough, is negligent.
Adhering to the standard of care is a primary focus of Assessment Task 1 and, if lethality is present, it should continue to be a focus in subsequent steps.
Often a person who is at risk may not initially report ideation or intentions of suicidal or homicidal behavior.
A client also must be stabilized enough to progress through the intervention tasks of this model and collaborate in the intervention plan.
Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks 
Assessment Task 2: Follow a Holistic Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Approach
Crisis counselors should thoroughly assess a client for physical, medical, substance, psychological, social, spiritual, and other concerns.
If medical and other issues the client faces are not assessed, the diagnosis of the client may be incorrect, leading to an ineffective and inappropriate treatment plan or referral.
It is essential to assess the baseline functioning of the client during the present crisis and prior to the crisis. Later, the goal may be to formulate a plan that moves the person back to precrisis functioning or to develop a new baseline.
This task model follows an A B C D E assessment approach (affect, behaviors, cognitions, development, and environment).
Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks 
Assessment Task 3: Clarify the Problem(s)
Although a client may present initially with a particular problem (which should be taken into consideration), the actual problem may not be known until a complete history is taken.
During this task, active listening, offering unconditional positive regard, and being nonjudgmental are essential. Empathically phrased yet challenging questions may be required to understand the actual crisis so that an effective action plan can be developed.
Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks 
Assessment Task 4: Explore Coping Skills, Resources, and Supports
After clarification of the problem(s), crisis counselors explore the coping skills, resources, and supports that were available to the client when dealing with past crises and adjustments.
The client and counselor also discuss potential new resources, coping skills, and supports that the client may not be aware of or may not have used in the past.
Counselors assess these resources using a variety of research-based approaches, including resilience-based, positive psychology, hope-based, and wellness models.
Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks 
Intervention Task 1: Normalize and Educate
A vital aspect of crisis intervention is to normalize a person’s response to the crisis.
Often, clients experience normal reactions (e.g., fear, abandonment, hopelessness, loss of control) to an abnormal event.
Clients in crisis are feeling and thinking that things are out of control, they may be unable to control their feelings and thoughts as they typically do in other situations or do not like the feelings and thoughts they are experiencing.
Teaching clients that many of their feelings and thoughts are normal can remove much of the power the client perceives the crisis to have.
Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks 
Intervention Task 2: Explore Options
The crisis counselor and client should collaboratively explore and evaluate all the options known to the client, as well as those developed by the counselor.
The intent is to work collaboratively in developing a plan for the safety of the person or others.
In cases where the client is not able to commit to any plan involving safety, the counselor may have to move to a more directive approach.
The safety of the crisis counselor is as important as the safety of the client in crisis; therefore, if there is any sense of potential harm by the client, the crisis counselor should make personal safety a priority.
Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks 
Intervention Task 3: Develop a Plan and Obtain a Commitment
The intervention plan is individualized and based on the comprehensive assessment of the client.
The counselor must consider the risk factors, biopsychosocial-spiritual elements; medical information; and coping skills, supports, and resources.
The plan should be documented as part of the discharge summary when referring the client to another mental health professional and used as a plan for follow-up.
Client commitment is essential for ownership and responsibility. Plans should have attainable and measurable goals to demonstrate progress.
Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks 
Intervention Task 4: Prepare Documentation, Follow Up, and Provide Referrals
In a typical crisis, a client may be referred to another mental health professional in the community for continued or long-term care to meet client needs as specified in the intervention plan.
If the crisis occurred during a long-term case, documentation and follow-up must be made in a manner outlined in the plan.
The A B C-X and Double A B C-X Models of Crisis 
The A B C-X and Double A B C-X Models of Crisis 
Reuben Hill (1949, 1958) postulated the A B C-X model of family crisis. According to this theory, there is an interaction among a provoking stressor event (A), the family’s resources (B), and the meaning that the family attaches to the stressor event (C). The crisis (X), a state of acute disequilibrium and immobilization of the family system, is an outcome of this interaction.
The better-known variations of Hill’s work is the double A B C-X model of crisis proposed by McCubbin and Patterson (1982).
The “double A” factor that includes Hill’s original concept of a provoking stressor plus the buildup of further stressors that must be addressed.
The “double B” factor refers to resources available at the time of the provoking stressor along with tangible and intangible resources that have been acquired or strengthened.
The ABC-X and Double ABC-X Models of Crisis 
The “double C” factor refers not only to perceptions and meanings assigned to the original provoking stressor but also to accumulated stressors, resources, coping, and the entire situation.
The original crisis (Hill’s X factor) constitutes a beginning point, while adaptation (“double X”) occurs later in time. Adaptation is an outcome variable involving changes in functioning and perception.
Elements of Stress and Crisis Theory 
Provoking Stressor Events:
Boss et al. (2017) categorized stressor events and situations by source, type, and severity.
Beyond classifying stressors by their source and type, Boss (2006) described stressor situations according to their duration and severity.
Resources:
Traits, characteristics, or abilities that can be used to meet the demands of a stressor event and that can be available at the individual, family, or community level.
When resources are adequate to meet the demands created by a stressor situation, the crisis is less likely to be perceived as problematic—and less likely to lead to trauma.
Elements of Stress and Crisis Theory
Meaning or Perception:
The meaning and perception of the event is the main determination of whether an event becomes a crisis.
The meaning attributed to a stressor event is subjective and comes from the way it is appraised through both cognitive and affective processes.
Coping:
Any effort taken to deal with stress may be considered coping.
Three types of coping responses may be used: direct actions, intrapsychic mechanisms, and efforts to manage emotions.
Ecological and Contextual Considerations
Boss (2006) and Collins and Collins (2005) suggested that stress and crisis are affected by contextual factors.
Collins and Collins advocated a developmental–ecological perspective to conceptualizing crises.
Regardless of whether the stressor event is developmental or situational, lifespan variables must be considered to determine their meaning and impact on the stress or crisis situation.
In addition to considering developmental factors, the context provided by environmental factors such as interpersonal relationships, community resources, and society at large must be recognized.
Crisis Assessment, Intervention, and Prevention
Chapter 2: Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations
The Importance of Proactive Approaches to Safety
The ultimate success of crisis intervention depends on planning, training, and the preparedness of team members.
A proactive and safety-conscious plan should be in place prior to the actual crisis.
When a crisis event occurs, particularly a large-scale disaster that affects many people, crisis teams must be ready, with well-defined roles, resources, and training.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA, 2021) stresses that crisis planning is an ongoing cycle of planning, organizing, training, evaluating, and improving.
Safety training for new professionals is an important priority. Ongoing training should be provided to address the use of self-defense, appropriate restraint practices, and restraint-free procedures.
Collaboration and Crisis Management
A crisis team comprises workers from across the community or organization who come together in response to a crisis event.
Mental health providers are an essential component of any crisis team, and all members of a crisis response team should work together toward the same goal, which is to advance the recovery process following a disaster.
In the event of large-scale emergency situations (e.g., natural disasters, terrorism, civil unrest), the safety and security of the area will be maintained by law enforcement. Firefighters and medical personnel provide rescue and first-aid assistance.
These first responders will collaborate with crisis counselors by referring clients in need of immediate mental health evaluation services.
In addition to collaboration as team members during a large-scale disaster or major crisis, counselors may also collaborate with law enforcement officials regarding a crisis with an individual client.
Safety Issues
Crisis counselors must be aware of their own safety and take proactive steps to ensure a secure and effective counseling environment as they are working collaboratively to achieve public safety.
Safety Issues
High-Risk Clients—clients who are a danger to themselves or others.
Clients who pose a danger to themselves and others may need to be hospitalized.
A high-risk client who needs to be involuntarily hospitalized will need to be transported to the hospital by a family member, crisis response team, ambulance, or law enforcement official.
If a high-risk client suddenly leaves a counselor’s office, the counselor should not attempt to physically stop the client and should notify law enforcement for assistance.
Safety Issues- Physical Safety
Safety Issues- Physical Safety
Safety Issues- Individual Clients in Crisis
Individual clients in crisis can present an increased risk for the counselor, particularly a sole practitioner in private practice.
A counselor practicing alone at home faces additional risks due to the isolation from others and allowing clients to gain the counselor’s personal information.
Counselors should always have a clear escape route that cannot be blocked by chairs or coffee tables, remove objects from the office that could be used in an attack, install panic alarms, and consider carrying pepper spray.
In any situation where a client’s escalation is becoming unmanageable, safeguarding the counselor’s personal safety and that of peers is the most prudent decision.
New clients should be screened carefully with as much initial information that can be provided.
Signs for concern in a new client include a history of violent behavior, a psychiatric or forensic history, intoxication, erratic speech and behavior, and sexual posturing and insinuation.
Special Issues Related to Safety and the counselor
Special Issues Related to Safety and the Counselor 
Health care and social service workers are at a higher risk for workplace violence due to multiple factors:
Working with a client population that has a history of violence and/or substance abuse
Facility design that impedes visual contact with other workers
Poor lighting
Lack of means to communicate for help during an emergency
According to the United States Department of Labor (2019), the most effective protections offered by employers is a zero-tolerance policy on workplace violence.
Mental health workers who have been assaulted should have access to debriefing and counseling to address trauma and stress concerns.
Mental health providers working in forensic inpatient units have an increased risk of harm from violent clients.
Special Issues: Trauma Informed Treatment
Trauma from past events can arise when a client does not feel safe or supported in a therapeutic environment.
A trauma-informed therapeutic environment engages all participants in a collective approach to treatment.
Trauma-informed mental health practitioners work in a collaborative manner to empower clients and families and promote resilience.
Six key principles for working from a trauma-informed perspective:
Safety
Trustworthiness and transparency
Peer support
Collaboration and mutuality
Empowerment, voice, and choice
Cultural, historical, and gender issues
Special Issues: Counselors Most at Risk
Inpatient settings and residential house counselors are most at risk for assault from clients.
Violent incidents increase because clients in these settings are likely to be diagnosed with severe psychopathology and because staff members spend more time with clients.
Counselors in training who are young and with less experience are also at increased risk.
Female counselors are just as likely as male counselors to be assaulted.
Some form of aggressive client behavior is likely to occur during every mental health provider’s career.
Special Issues- Stalking
Another danger faced by mental health providers is the threat of being stalked by a client.
Clients who stalk are motivated by a need for intimacy, infatuation, resentment or revenge, or a misinterpretation of the therapeutic relationship as a friendship or romance.
Mental health providers must be very clear about the nature of the therapeutic relationship and set firm boundaries, preferably in writing.
Cyber stalking is a major threat as well. Clients can harass counselors using social media and online forums to stalk and verbally attack practitioners.
When clients cannot respect the nature of the therapeutic relationship and continually violate boundaries, the counseling relationship should be terminated and the client referred for a psychiatric evaluation.
Special Issues- In-Home Counseling
Research and Recommendations on Client Violence
Client violence is not uncommon and may be underreported; therefore, the significance of the violent incidents may not be appropriately acknowledged and tracked.
Fears and anxiety around an attack often linger, and mental health workers who have suffered an assault are prone to lower levels of job satisfaction and may begin to question their professional competency.
Recommendations for managing the aftereffects of a violent incident committed by a client.
Practitioners should be aware that client violence happens infrequently, sporadically, and usually is perpetrated by a lone client
Practitioners should engage in intentional self-care
Practitioners should examine and accept emotional and psychological distress
Practitioners should be alert to coworker distress and provide support
Workplaces should examine safety policies and procedures
Summary
Working in crisis situations, counselors are at an increased risk for their personal safety and well-being.
Proactive, preventive crisis planning and awareness of crisis safety protocols are vital.
Collaboration, planning, and training with first responders and other crisis workers increase safety and improve crisis intervention services.
Therapeutic support for counselors who have been assaulted is essential for the psychological well-being of the counselor and organization.
Administrators should review safety procedures, should not tolerate even low levels of violent behavior from clients, should provide debriefings when safety issues occur, and should revise safety plans as needed with staff input.