If this PowerPoint presentation contains mathematical equations, you may need to check that your computer has the following installed:
1) MathType Plugin
2) Math Player (free versions available)
3) NVDA Reader (free versions available)
Slides in this presentation contain hyperlinks. JAWS users should be able to get a list of links by using INSERT+F7.
Chapter 8
Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence
Overview of Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence (1 of 2)
Intimate partner violence (I P V) involves physical, sexual, and emotional aggression, violence, or stalking by a current or former intimate partner.
I P V is an inclusive term that is used to describe violence among opposite- or same-sex couples currently or formerly in a relationship.
I P V is only one aspect of domestic violence (D V) and, used by itself, is not inclusive of other individuals who are in violent relationships.
I P V is not the legal term used in federal or state statutes or regulations that outline mandated reporting laws for health care providers or laws that govern law enforcement practices when intervening in D V situations.
Overview of Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence (2 of 2)
Domestic violence (D V) is defined as “violence between spouses, or spousal abuse but can also include cohabitants and non-married intimate partners.”
States may further narrow this definition, and counselors should be aware of the laws that govern their practice with D V victims and perpetrators in their state.
Law enforcement intervention and charges will vary depending on the state’s definition of D V and assault or whether the person in the D V relationship aligns with the definition of D V or assault.
Statistics regarding D V vary due to the range of definitions and data collection methods used by researchers.
Most instances of D V are never reported, so the available facts and figures are considerable underestimates of its occurrence.
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2021) reported that D V accounted for about 20% of all violent victimizations.
Cycle of Violence Theory
The cycle of violence theory was originally developed by Walker, a psychologist who based her theory on interviews with hundreds of women who experienced D V.
Each phase varied in time and intensity during each cycle of violence for the same couple and between different couples.
Educating I P V/D V clients about the cycle of violence can help in naming experiences as abusive.
Cycle of Violence Theory
Tension-building
The explosion or acute battering incident
The honeymoon phase of kindness and contrite, loving behavior
Cycle of Violence Theory 
Phase 1: Tension-Building
This phase is characterized by mounting pressure and strain in the relationship.
The abused partner “walks on eggshells” around the abusive partner, becoming compliant, nurturing, or whatever it takes to keep the abusive partner’s anger from escalating.
This phase also involves minor battering incidents.
Phase 2: The Acute Battering Incident
This phase occurs when tensions build to the point of explosion in an acute battering incident that is characterized by unpredictability, uncontrollable rage, brutality, and seriously damaging consequences.
The acute battering incident is typically triggered by an external event or the abusive partner’s internal state and can last for hours or even days.
During an acute battering incident, victims have reported dissociative experiences, such as feeling as though they are outside their own bodies and watching themselves being thrown into a wall, choked, or raped.
Cycle of Violence Theory 
Phase 3: The Honeymoon Phase
This phase is characterized by loving and repentant behavior from the abusive partner.
The abuser may shower the I P V/D V victim with gifts, beg for forgiveness, and promise never to be violent again.
The honeymoon phase results in the I P V/D V victim feeling needed and loved, leading to a renewed commitment to the relationship.
After repeated cycles of violence, the honeymoon phase may shorten or eventually be eliminated
Helpful Models for Understanding IPV/DV(1 of 3)
The Duluth model was developed in 1984 by a group of I P V/D V activists and is based on the actual experiences of female I P V/D V survivors.
The central component of the Duluth model is the Power and Control Wheel, a visual representation of the most experienced abusive tactics.
The Power and Control Wheel can be used to help female I P V/D V victims normalize and understand their experiences. It can also assist abusive partners in identifying violent behaviors as part of a batterer intervention program.
Another component of the Duluth model is the Equality Wheel, which is a visual representation of the changes needed to move from an abusive relationship to a nonviolent relationship.
Helpful Models for Understanding I P V/D V (2 of 3)
Counselors seeing clients in crisis should be aware of various resources in the community for referral purposes for clients experiencing I P V/D V, which may help normalize a victim’s experiences while in and after the crisis.
Learned helplessness theory has been used to explain why I P V/D V victims remain in abusive relationships.
An I P V/D V client may reach out for help from family, friends, or the police, yet the battering continues. Thus, the victim receives the message that efforts to control the situation are ineffective. Repeated incidents of uncontrollable violence diminish the victim’s motivation to respond, leading to passivity and learned helplessness.
The contextual model of family stress provides a more comprehensive view of I P V/D V. This model considers the interaction of the stressor event, available resources, an individual’s perception of I P V/D V, the external family context (culture, history, economy, development, and heredity), and the internal family context (family boundaries and rules, understanding of a stressor event, and family values, beliefs, and assumptions).
Helpful Models for Understanding I P V/D V (3 of 3)
Counselors are advised to consider how their interventions with victims and perpetrators of I P V/D V may be influenced by their beliefs about I P V/D V and why victims stay in abusive relationships.
Since I P V/D V impacts so many individuals and families, counselors must be aware of their beliefs and judgments about perpetrators and victims, since this is a population most likely to be served in a crisis setting.
How a counselor views victims and perpetrators in crisis may affect intervention.
Common Crisis Issues (1 of 3)
As a counselor responding to an I P V/D V crisis, the overarching goal is the safety of the victims, regardless of whether they decide to stay in or leave the violent relationships.
Simultaneously, counselors should also work to empower clients to solve problems effectively based on the client’s unique situation and available resources.
Counselors should conduct a triage assessment to determine which aspects of the situation require immediate intervention.
Common crisis issues that emerge when working with I P V/D V clients include attending to physical injury, establishing immediate safety, and deciding whether to report I P V/D V to the police.
Common Crisis Issues (2 of 3)
Attending to physical injury
Physical injury resulting from I P V/D V can range from scrapes and bruises to permanent disfigurement, disability, and death.
Emergency medical treatment may be required before any further counseling intervention can occur; therefore, counselors should be prepared to refer clients and arrange transportation to appropriate medical facilities.
Since I P V/D V can take the form of sexual assault and rape, counselors should also be aware of medical facilities that specialize in rape.
Establishing immediate safety
During an I P V/D V crisis, time is of the essence, and crisis counselors must gain thorough and accurate information quickly by conducting a detailed assessment of the situation, including violence severity, available resources, and barriers to accessing resources and treatment.
In some situations, the client may not be able to return home safely, so the counselor must arrange for emergency shelter. In the event a client decides to return home, a harm reduction plan should be developed.
Common Crisis Issues (3 of 3)
Reporting I P V to the police
The process for reporting an I P V/D V incident to the police is complex and differs from state to state. States outline who is a mandated reporter, what injuries require reporting, and what exceptions are outlined in the law.
Mandated reporting laws for I P V/D V are different from the mandated reporting laws for suspected child, elder, or other vulnerable persons abuse. If a victim of D V discloses there is also abuse to a child, elder, or vulnerable adult, then the mandated reporting under these separate suspected abuse situations must be made in compliance with state mandates.
The majority of I P V/D V incidents are not reported to the police.
Unless suicidality, homicidality, specific injuries sustained, or suspicion of child, elder, or vulnerable persons abuse is disclosed, counselors are not required to report I P V/D V incidents and should support the choice the client makes regarding police notification.
The counselor should discuss the pros and cons of police intervention with the client and then respect the client’s decision.
Intimate Partner Violence in Specific Populations
Culture is important to consider when understanding and treating clients experiencing I P V/D V. It guides how clients define, view, experience, and respond to I P V/D V.
Counselors responding to I P V/D V should attend to cultural dimensions such as sex, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (S E S), level of acculturation, language, religiosity, sexual orientation, ability status, and age.
Race and Ethnicity
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that 54% of Black women and 44% of multiracial, non-Hispanic women experienced sexual assault, I P V, or stalking in their lifetime, which is a higher proportion than White, non-Hispanic women (35%).
Asian or Pacific Islander women were less likely to experience I P V/D V over their lifetime compared to White (non-Hispanic) women.
This report also estimates Alaskan Native men and Black, non-Hispanic men experienced rape, physical violence, or stalking by an intimate partner more frequently than White, non-Hispanic men.
Regardless of the differences in I P V/D V prevalence rates by race and ethnicity, there seem to be similar reasons for remaining in violent relationships.
There are cultural subtleties in how I P V/D V is recognized and addressed that affect reporting trends across racial-ethnic groups. The interrelated factors include patriarchal family structure, S E S, immigrant status, and religious and spiritual beliefs.
Socioeconomic Status
The role of lower socioeconomic status (S E S) may be connected to higher rates of I P V/D V incidents.
Poverty is linked to limited resources, substance use, social isolation, pregnancy, and unemployment. These variables collectively create unhealthy environments that both initiate and perpetuate I P V/D V.
Others argue I P V/D V transcend S E S and occur at similar rates across S E S groups. However, middle- or upper- S E S groups often have the resources to seek more formal counseling, services, or supports that are not often used by reporting agencies.
Immigrant Status
I P V/D V is more common among immigrants and refugees than longer-term U.S. citizens overall, as migration from one country to another often creates isolation that facilitates I P V/D V situations.
Language barriers often prevent women in abusive relationships from seeking assistance. Lack of knowledge of available resources, distrust of government agencies, and lack of knowledge of the U.S. legal system may also be barriers to help seeking for immigrant women who experience I P V/D V.
Undocumented immigrant victims of I P V/D V may be more hesitant to report I P V/D V due to concerns with deportation.
Religious and Spiritual Beliefs
Religiosity, spirituality, and partner violence are linked in both positive and negative ways.
Some individuals who perpetrate partner violence may use (and misuse) religious texts and beliefs to justify or rationalize I P V/D V.
Some I P V/D V victims may stay in abusive relationships due to religious or spiritual beliefs that condemn divorce and promote male domination, superior male morality, the value of suffering, and submission and obedience to husbands.
Some I P V/D V victims may be hesitant to seek help outside of the religious or spiritual community or may be reluctant to disclose I P V/D V to preserve the family image.
Religious or spiritual practices may also serve as protective factors against I P V/D V and as a coping mechanism in recovering from its consequences.
Female-to-Male Violence
Most of the literature, as well as provision of shelters and other resources, have historically focused on women as victims of D V.
Research does support the higher prevalence of women in D V relationships, but data also show that men are victims of D V.
Gender norms may prevent men who suffer emotional, physical, or sexual abuse from reporting because disclosure might “emasculate” them; men may also fail to define their experiences as abusive or may fear being laughed at or ridiculed if they reach out for help; male victims of I P V/D V may also be reluctant to report abuse from a female partner for fear that they will also be accused of being abusive.
Additionally, there are fewer I P V/D V resources available for men.
To effectively meet the needs of male victims, counselors should validate their experiences, provide accurate educational information about I P V/D V, and provide gender-appropriate I P V/D V resources.
L G B T Q + Violence
The lifetime prevalence of I P V/D V for L G B T Q + (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning, and others) individuals is greater than that in heterosexual couples.
Homophobia and transphobia, or prejudice and discrimination against L G B T Q + individuals and their culture, contribute to the minimization of I P V/D V in the L G B T Q + community and preclude many from seeking help from traditional I P V/D V resources (e.g., shelters, community agencies, the legal system).
There is a lack of resources for L G B T Q + individuals who experience I P V/D V.
Disability Status
Controlling for race/ethnicity, age, and S E S, women with disabilities are physically or sexually assaulted at a rate double that of those without a disability.
A victim or perpetrator with a disability is at risk for I P V/D V, or the disability may be a result of I P V/D V toward the individual.
Vulnerability and powerlessness are prevalent in this population, as they often depend on their intimate partners to assist them with activities of daily living, such as providing medication, bathing, dressing, and running errands.
A vulnerable person is a person who is under the care of another person for some or even all their daily living activities. Because of being “under the care of” another, laws are in place that mandate counselors to report these incidents to authorities.
Elder Abuse
With the U.S. population living longer, I P V/D V will increasingly affect those within the aging population. Abuse of an older adult may occur within intimate relationships as well as extended families.
In addition to physical, sexual, and emotional abuse, types of older adult abuse include neglect (e.g., malnutrition, poor personal hygiene, unsafe or unclean living conditions), abandonment (e.g., desertion of an elder at a facility or public location), financial or material exploitation (e.g., sudden changes in bank account practices, unpaid bills despite availability of resources, forgery), and self-neglect.
Vulnerability and powerlessness can be common risk factors for elder abuse and individuals with disabilities.
Similar to mandated reporting laws for vulnerable persons, all states have mandated reporting laws for elder abuse.
Dating Violence among Adolescents and Young Adults
I P V/D V begins early for many—sometimes with their first dating experiences.
Dating violence includes physical, emotional, and sexual abuse and stalking.
Adolescents who do not have clear ideas about appropriate boundaries and healthy relationships may characterize abusive behaviors as acceptable or even positive characteristics of a relationship.
The C D C linked adverse childhood experiences (A C E s) to higher rates of teen dating violence.
Dating violence on college and university campuses is of particular concern.
The Counselor’s Response to Intimate Partner Violence Clients in Crisis
Screening for Intimate Partner Violence
Screening for Intimate Partner Violence
There are two absolutes that crisis counselors should follow with victims of I P V/D V.
Counselors should never ask about abuse in the presence of the client’s partner; doing so may greatly increase the risk for harm to the client. 
Counselors should be careful not to recommend ending the relationship as the only way to establish safety. 
Question Tree Screening Approach
I P V/D V is one of the areas that a Q-tree can assist, as many questions must be asked during the assessments to develop a plan.
As with all Q-trees, how a person replies to a surface question will determine needed follow-up questions.
The Q-tree approach allows counselors to determine whether a safety plan or harm reduction plan should be developed. It also allows counselors to determine whether a mandated report of abuse must be made.
Response to Intimate Partner Violence Disclosure
Immediately following an I P V/D V disclosure, it is critical for the crisis counselor to validate the victim’s experience and communicate that the victim is not to blame for the abuse.
Documentation that the client is experiencing I P V/D V is also important. It is helpful for crisis counselors or health care workers to make notes about the disclosure of I P V/D V and to take pictures of physical injuries, which could later be used in court if the victim chooses to take legal action.
Providing the victim with resources and protection is another essential component of responding to an I P V/D V crisis. Counselors should have an extensive list of I P V/D V resources available, including options for emergency shelter, transportation, food, child care, medical needs, mental health care, and legal aid.
  .
Response to Intimate Partner Violence Disclosure
The National Domestic Violence Hotline can be accessed 24 hours a day, 365 days per year at 1-800-799-S A F E or at www.thehotline.org
  .
Safety Planning and Harm Reduction Planning (1 of 2)
Safety Planning
If a client decided to leave the abuser, the counselor should develop a safety plan with the main goal of keeping the client physically safe, as well as any other vulnerable person living in the home.
The safety plan is tailored to the unique situation of each I P V/D V victim; the counselor and client should determine appropriate supports for the client, locations that provide physical safety (e.g., shelters), and whether law enforcement should be contacted.
It is important to emphasize that a safety plan in no way guarantees the safety of the I P V/D V victim.
Safety Planning and Harm Reduction Planning (2 of 2)
Harm Reduction Planning
These plans are developed for clients who do not intend to leave the abusive relationship.
The goal of the plan is to reduce the amount of harm a victim may encounter by an abuser.
Some harm reduction plans may also integrate strategies to assist in alleviating pain from abuse.
Intimate Partner Violence Shelters: Opportunities and Challenges
I P V/D V shelters provide a safe haven for many abused women and their children. Shelters not only protect victims from additional physical harm but also provide a safe place where emotional healing can begin.
While I P V/D V shelters are invaluable resources for many victims, life in a shelter is certainly not stress-free and it requires adherence to programmatic rules and regulations that may infringe on a victim’s sense of autonomy.
In addition, victims may not feel ready to address the emotional impact of their abuse yet may be required to do so as part of the shelter program.
Addressing the Emotional Impact of Intimate Partner Violence
The emotional consequences of I P V/D V can be as devastating as the physical consequences.
High rates of depression and low self-esteem are common among victims, and I P V/D V is a major predictor of drug and alcohol use in women.
Many I P V/D V victims experience symptoms of P T S D. In addition to the symptoms traditionally associated with P T S D, I P V/D V victims often experience a cluster of symptoms referred to as battered woman syndrome, which includes disrupted interpersonal relationships, difficulties with body image/somatic concerns, and sexual or intimacy problems.
When working with I P V/D V victims, it is essential to consider their trauma history in constructing a treatment plan or making a diagnosis.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impacts on I P V/D V
The increased isolation due to COVID-19 has impacted individuals in I P V/D V situations worldwide to the extent that the W H O issued statements regarding the need for a global awareness of social isolation on I P V/D V victims.
The decreased ability to seek leave from environments of abuse has been assumed to increase situations of D V.
Pre-pandemic supports such as visiting with family and friends and workplace and educational environments that often provided some form of distancing from an abuser were cut off during most of the pandemic, meaning diminished reprieves from the abuser.
Add in the stressors from the pandemic, such as economic changes, and abuse is believed to have increased.
The services that were available to individuals in I P V/D V relationships were impacted by the pandemic. Services may have been scaled back, personnel cut or limited, and shelters may have closed or limited access for safety.
Batterer Intervention (1 of 2)
I P V/D V response has two aspects: victim intervention and batterer intervention.
One model of attending to the needs of both I P V/D V victims and batterers is a coordinated community response (C C R), which involves the collaboration of local councils of service providers in developing a more comprehensive response to I P V/D V incidents.
C C R helps victims identify and access multiple available services, of which victims are often not aware. These services focus on advocacy, criminal justice, child services, health care, education, and vocation.
Batterer intervention programs have three primary goals:
Ensuring the safety of I P V/D V victims
Stopping future acts of partner violence
Increasing offenders’ accountability for their behavior.
Batterer Intervention (2 of 2)
Safety
Steps to ensuring safety include assessment of the resources that are available to I P V/D V victims, assessment of the severity and repetition of violent incidents, and assessment of the effects on children exposed to I P V/D V.
Cessation of Violence
One of the first steps toward stopping all forms of violence, including verbal, emotional, physical, and sexual abuses, is acknowledgement of one’s violent behavior.
Such an acknowledgment means discarding denial, minimizing, and blaming.
Accountability
Developing alternatives to battering is an essential component of increasing accountability.
A second task in becoming accountable is to learn to recognize triggers or cues leading to violent behavior.
Challenges to Referrals to Batterer Intervention Programs
One of the biggest challenges regarding batterer intervention is that most program participants are court mandated.
For a judge or probation officer to refer an I P V/D V offender to treatment, someone must first report an I P V/D V incident. Thus, if I P V/D V incidents go unreported, batterer intervention is nearly impossible.
The financial aspect of batterer intervention is also a challenge. Most federal and state monies for I P V/D V go to battered women’s programs.
Treatment refusal, overt or passive resistance, and premature termination (i.e., dropout) are common issues confronted by counselors in the typical batterer intervention program.
Assessing Perpetrators of Intimate Partner Violence
Assessment of batterers is important when considering the holistic impact upon victims, victim safety, and changing abusive behaviors.
Most assessment tools ask questions of victims rather than perpetrators, although both parties can be asked the same set of questions.
The more comprehensive assessment tools ask questions that seek to know more about the abusive relationship and invite discussion of how victimization patterns and relationships changed over time.
A significant but often overlooked factor that should be considered when assessing the severity of I P V/D V is stalking. Stalking is a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to feel fear.
Screening batterers for alcohol and other drug (A O D) problems and substance use is highly recommended. Dual screening serves multiple purposes, including being more vigilant about victim safety and focusing on anger and trauma issues when working with A O D batterers.
Personal Safety
The presumption is that batterers will exert violence only toward their intimate partner. However, counselors should be aware of how they interact with perpetrators and be cognizant of personal safety.
Accusations and criticism should be kept at a minimum while balancing skills of challenging and confrontation to assist in empathy building, awareness of violence, and behavioral change.
Perpetrators should be held accountable, but they should also be allowed to work in an environment where they can safely explore their behaviors and not feel continuously criticized.
Counselors should also be able to identify when clients’ emotions become heightened to assist in calming the situation or, if that is not possible, to seek additional means of intervention.
Summary
Understanding the cycle of violence is a critical first step for crisis counselors working with I P V/D V victims.
Common crisis issues for I P V/D V victims include attending to physical injury, establishing immediate safety, and deciding whether to report the I P V/D V to the police.
Screening for I P V/D V includes gathering concrete and specific details about the client’s I P V/D V history and conducting a lethality assessment to determine the degree of urgency required in responding to the crisis.
When I P V/D V is disclosed, the counselor should validate the victim’s experience, document that it is occurring, and provide resources and continued support to the victim.
A specific component of I P V/D V response is safety planning or harm reduction planning, which is based on the victim’s decision to stay in or leave the abusive relationship.