School Psychology International
32(2) 163–178
! The Author(s) 2011
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0143034311400830
spi.sagepub.com
Article
School-based support
groups for traumatized
students
Linda Leek Openshaw
Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas, USA
Abstract
After students experience a traumatic event, group counseling is an effective tool to
offset the effects of grief and distress. Following a school crisis, successful school-based
intervention requires interdisciplinary coordination between school psychologists,
counselors, school social workers, teachers, and administrative staff. Within a short
time after a traumatic event, school personnel are encouraged to create student sup-
port groups, helping students cope with intense feelings and assuring them that they are
not alone. Interventions are most effective when schools pre-determine an action plan,
train staff to respond with correct intervention techniques, and seamlessly transition
into crisis intervention and support mode. Quick professional response through orga-
nizing and offering children’s support groups will help increase school stability and
alleviate the effects of traumatic events.
Keywords
children, crisis intervention, grief, group counseling, school, support
When faced with overwhelming challenges following a school disaster, students and
staff have the capacity to pull together, grieve together, and start the healing pro-
cess (Heath, Nickerson, Annandale, Kemple, & Dean, 2009). Following the April
20, 1999 Columbine High School shootings (Colorado, USA), one Student Services
Director stated, ‘. . . the power of people to come together and support one another
in the deepest, dreariest days is absolutely incredible. The resiliency of the human
spirit is second to none’ (Austin, 2003, p. 4). Expanding on this statement, school-
based mental health professionals (SBMHPs) have the unique opportunity of gal-
vanizing social and emotional support within the school community.
Corresponding author:
Linda L. Openshaw, 2601 Harborview Blvd., Rowlett, TX 75058, USA
Email: lindaopenshaw@att.net

-- 1 of 16 --

School disasters
A school crisis ‘brings chaos’ that ‘undermines the safety and stability of the entire
school’ (Johnson, 2000, p. 18). It exposes students to ‘threat, loss, and traumatic
stimulus’ and undermines their ‘security and sense of power’ (Johnson, 2000, p. 3).
A variety of tragedies and stressful events impact students and staff, including
death 	of 	a 	student 	or 	teacher, 	acts 	of 	terrorism, 	and 	school 	shootings
(Williams, 2006).
Some school crises, such as school bus accidents, happen outside the school
building. Other crises, such as student and teacher deaths (Poland & Poland,
2004) or natural disasters (e.g. earthquakes, floods, or tornadoes; Evans &
Oehler-Stinnett, 2006; Heath et al., 2009), may occur either at or away from
school. Additionally, exposure to gangs and bullying also contributes to a toxic
school environment and precipitates acts of school violence (Center for Social and
Emotional Education, 2010; James, Logan, & Davis, 2011).
School-based support following disasters
Highly publicized school shootings and catastrophic disasters have increased
school administrators’ awareness of the need for crisis plans. Currently, almost
95% of US schools have crisis plans in place to guide emergency response
(US Government Accountability Office, 2007). When a crisis occurs, the school’s
crisis plan goes into effect immediately, dealing solely with the crisis at hand.
In practice, school-based crisis plans and intervention are typically reactive
rather than proactive, most efforts going into immediate response rather than
into prevention efforts and planning (Nickerson & Heath, 2008; Shafombabi,
1999). However, recent efforts note the importance of prevention in school-based
crisis planning efforts (Brock et al., 2009; James et al., 2011; US Department of
Education, 2007).
In the aftermath of a school crisis, interventions range from counseling with
individual students to meeting with large debriefing groups (Nader & Muni, 2002).
Focusing on mental health, SBMHPs (i.e. school counselors, school psychologists,
and social workers) assist in helping staff, faculty, and students address their feel-
ings in both the immediate situation and during the weeks and months following
the tragedy. This support is offered to counter the effects of trauma.
Both small and large scale school crises devastate children and teachers, parti-
cularly those centrally involved or closely tied to precipitating events and subse-
quent fallout. Survivors have strong emotional responses because trauma always
involves loss and loss precipitates grief (Cohen & Mannarino, 2011; Cohen,
Mannarino, & Deblinger, 2006; Webb, 2010, 2011). When working with children,
the primary goals in school-based grief and trauma work are to help children in the
following areas: to feel safe; to stay connected with supportive peers, school staff,
and family; and to adaptively cope with resultant thoughts, feelings, and associated
behaviors (Cohen et al., 2006; Zambelli & DeRosa, 1992).
164 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 2 of 16 --

Conducting school-based grief support groups
Empirical evidence supports the effectiveness of group intervention with trauma-
tized and bereaved children (Chemtob, Nakashima, & Hamada, 2002; Finn, 2003;
Jaycox, Langley, Dean, Stein, et al., 2009; Salloum & Overstreet, 2008; Stubenbort
& Cohen, 2006). Finn (2003) summarized several research studies that demonstrated
the positive effects of children’s grief groups. She concluded that group interven-
tions reduced children’s feelings of isolation and normalized feelings of loss, two
critical aspects of supporting children’s coping skills and facilitating adaptive grief.
Following a tragedy, schools provide an ideal setting for group interventions
(Jaycox, Langley, Dean, Stein, et al., 2009). Offering support for large numbers of
traumatized students and staff, SBMHPs can offer helpful interventions such as
conducting classroom presentations (Sheras, 2000), informing and offering imme-
diate intervention to impacted students and staff (Nader & Muni, 2002), and
defusing volatile and emotionally charged situations (Furlong, Pavelski, &
Saxton, 2002). In particular, discussing and processing traumatic events in group
settings helps counter feelings of isolation, increases group cohesiveness and human
connectedness, and reduces students’ anxiety, decreasing symptoms of posttrau-
matic stress disorder (PTSD; Cohen et al., 2006; Nickerson, Reeves, Brock, &
Jimerson, 2009; Poland, 2002; Tol et al., 2008).
Leadership provided by SBMHPs
Because SBMHPs are part of the school community and interact with children,
parents, and teachers on a daily basis, these professionals can unobtrusively assess
the impact of trauma over time (Cohen & Mannarino, 2011). They can assist in
determining survivors’ needs and offer support without pressuring students to
divulge personal thoughts and feelings. The school setting is a natural avenue for
offering students mental health support: Services in this setting decrease family’s
financial burdens (paying for the cost of privatized mental health care) and social
stigma often associated with professional services offered in community settings
(Heath & Sheen, 2005).
In a school setting, student support groups are an efficient and effective option
to assist large numbers of students and teachers who have experienced trauma
(Chibbaro & Jackson, 2006; Huss & Ritchie, 1996; Layne et al., 2001, 2008;
Stein et al., 2003; Tol et al., 2008; Worden, 2009). However, in the immediate
aftermath of a large scale tragedy the task of providing emotional support
cannot be shouldered solely by the limited number of SBMHPs (Heath & Sheen,
2005; Jaycox, Langley, & Dean, 2009).
Leadership provided by teachers and staff
When needed, with minimal training, paraprofessionals and teachers may provide
structured therapeutic activities within classroom settings or in small groups.
Openshaw 	165

-- 3 of 16 --

Though not extensively studied, this type of service delivery has been shown to
positively impact students and decrease levels of PTSD and trauma-related anxiety
(Jaycox, Langley, Dean, Stein, et al., 2009; Tol et al., 2008). Support for Students
Exposed to Trauma (SSET), based on the Cognitive-Behavioral Intervention for
Trauma in Schools (CBITS) format, was specifically created for school staff work-
ing with youth ages 10- to 14-years-old. SSET has been shown to be effective when
administered by school staff with minimal preparatory training (Jaycox, Langley,
Dean, Stein, et al., 2009). The SSET manual is provided free of charge from
the following internet link: [http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/2009/
RAND_TR675.pdf].
More extensively researched and proven effective, CBITS is sponsored by the
National Institute of Mental Health and endorsed by the National Child
Traumatic Stress Network (NCTSN). CBITS is described as a ‘promising’
research-based practice (Jaycox, Langley, Dean, Stein, et al., 2009). The CBITS
manual (sold through Sopris West Publishers) and the SSIT include worksheets
and outlined lessons that are classroom friendly and easily designed to be admin-
istered in schools. Additionally, both SSIT and CBITS have proven effective with
economically disadvantaged students, with students from a variety of faiths and
cultures, with ethnically diverse students; and with non-English speaking students.
An added benefit for schools both in and outside the US, these programs’ materials
are translated into several languages. Language and culture specific information
regarding the CBITS can be accessed from the following Internet link [http://
www.nctsnet.org/nctsn_assets/pdfs/promising_practices/cbits_cultural.pdf].
Understanding challenges in offering school-based support
Group leaders (ideally SBMHPs) must be extremely flexible and cooperative in
coordinating efforts with teachers. Conducting traditional grief support groups
in public schools poses several challenges requiring group leaders to address prac-
tical implications. Because schools run on a rigid time schedule, setting up groups
to align with students’ class schedules and scheduling a regular time for long-term
support groups is difficult. Due to transportation issues, groups are best handled
within the school day rather than before or after school.
Students’ academic work suffers if they repeatedly miss the same class period,
therefore group leaders must be creative in identifying times for group meetings.
Additionally, class periods are typically 30 to 50 minutes in length, leaving little
time in each group for students to address sensitive grief-related feelings. Groups
must be carefully planned to maximize the effectiveness of activities and discussions
in the allotted time frame.
Additionally, adequate time for closure of each session must be provided. If the
traumatic topic is left open, students’ grief may be exacerbated. Students who
openly express feelings of loss and fear may need additional time to process their
feelings prior to returning to class. If students are upset and anxious when return-
ing to class, teachers and principals may perceive the groups as disruptive rather
166 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 4 of 16 --

than supportive of students’ education. Relaxation activities should be practiced at
the close of group sessions to prepare students for returning to class. Additionally,
the last few minutes of group can be dedicated to ‘fun thoughts’, letting each
student share one sentence with the group about what they are looking forward
to in the coming week.
Educating teachers and administrators
School personnel need to be aware of the effects of trauma and grief (Balk,
Zaengle, & Corr, 2011). Following a traumatic event, students have difficulty focus-
ing and learning. ‘In mental health as in education—trauma leaves children behind’
(Wong, 2008, p. 400). Although SBMHPs and school crisis teams provide support,
teachers are on the frontline observing students’ reactions to the crisis, noting
changes in behavior and social interactions, and listening to students’ concerns.
Reid and Dixon (1999) noted, ‘children are most likely to select someone they
know with whom to discuss their loss’ (p. 219). Understanding the symptoms of
grief is crucial for teachers because they are on the front lines interacting with
students. Teachers have daily opportunities to observe students’ difficulty
moving through the grief process. However, if unaware of the warning signs, edu-
cators may have difficulty identifying children and adolescents who are experienc-
ing traumatic grief, depression, and symptoms related to PTSD. Bottom-line,
teachers should be considered part of the intervention team and should be trained
to notice warning signs in traumatized children.
Understanding the warning signs
When SBMHPs provide in-service trainings, presentations should include helping
staff to recognize basic warning signs, to understand how to respond, and to know
when and how to seek professional assistance. To assist teachers in learning this
important information, the National Traumatic Stress Network (NCTSN) offers
an excellent 21-page toolkit for teachers and educators that can be downloaded
from 	the 	following 	website 	[http://www.nctsnet.org/nctsn_assets/pdfs/
Child_Trauma_Toolkit_Final.pdf]. However, prior to making recommendations
and to ensure a good fit for a specific school’s situation, considered materials
should be carefully reviewed.
Warning signs may be evident at school or students may report symptoms, such
as heightened physical reactions (e.g. hyper-vigilance, anxiety, and cardiovascular
reactivity); separation anxiety; sleep disorders and recurring nightmares; depres-
sion and feelings of hopelessness; withdrawal and avoidance; perseveration on
thoughts and actions related to the traumatic event; and inappropriate acting
out and risk-taking (e.g. increased aggression, increased involvement with drugs
and alcohol, and sexual permissiveness). When considering these warning signs,
two important points must be considered: Each individual’s grief is unique and
grief takes time. If after three to six months students are still experiencing excessive
Openshaw 	167

-- 5 of 16 --

difficulties and have not returned to their previous level of functioning, professional
attention is warranted. Parents and teachers need to know the school’s referral
process: how to report their concerns, who to turn to, and how to access support.
Encouraging children’s expression
When helping children come to terms with trauma and grief, some children may not
want to discuss their feelings. In fact, forcing discussions or repeatedly bringing up
the catastrophic event may actually re-traumatize children (Cohen et al., 2006).
Professional sensitivity must be used in allowing children the opportunity to express
their feelings when they are ready. Additionally, in a classroom setting or support
group, students should be offered a variety of activities or modes of expression, such
as journaling, drawing, creating cards or posters, listening to music, brainstorming
ideas to offer support (service to others), reading a carefully selected book, research-
ing related topics, creating a memory book, etc. (Webb, 2011).
Obtaining parental consent for student participation
Receiving parental consent is an important consideration when working with chil-
dren and adolescents. It is recommended that school administrators send a letter to
parents at the beginning of each school year. This letter informs parents about
student access to immediate support services during and following school-related
crises. The purpose of this letter is to explain school procedures for offering indi-
vidual and group support. However, in the event of a crisis, another letter (letter of
consent) would be sent to parents offering the option of ongoing group support for
grieving students.
During emergency situations professionals who offer ‘psychological first-aid’
may meet once or twice with students (individually or in groups), but not on a
continuing basis without parental permission. Immediate psychological first-aid is
viewed as emergency support and considered essential in maintaining student safety
(Jacob & Feinberg, 2002). SBMHPs should assist their crisis team and school
principal in identifying procedures for both immediate and ongoing student sup-
port, preparing letters in advance and keeping a variety of stock letters with the
school’s crisis plan. This preparation is greatly appreciated in the event such letters
are needed. Also helpful when drafting letters for a specific situation, sharing letters
with other crisis teams and school districts saves valuable time.
School-based psychological first-aid
Crisis team members should be trained in offering psychological first-aid and in
de-escalating chaos. SBMHPs should work together in refining protocols for
responding to school crisis situations, streamlining efforts and organizing direc-
tions that guide emergency response. Volunteer mental health professionals from
the community should be paired with on-site professionals, because SBMHPs
168 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 6 of 16 --

know the students, staff, and the school’s system and protocols. Optimally, group
leaders should have prior experience assisting in the immediate aftermath of a
school or community crisis.
The purpose of immediate short-term crisis intervention and classroom support
groups is to counter the effects of trauma and strengthen and solidify support for
students. These groups are time limited, have a specific purpose, and should be con-
ducted in the familiar classroom setting with the teacher present (unless the teacher is
emotionally traumatized and unable to provide emotional support). The main goal is
to support students who are coping with the immediate effects of trauma and loss.
Although ‘debriefing’ (Everly & Mitchell, 2000; Mitchell & Everly, 2001) has
increasingly come under fire over the past 15 years, in school settings the use of
modified debriefing has typically been described as helpful and accepted as a stan-
dard intervention for children immediately following a traumatic event (Brock
et al., 2009). In fact, Brock et al. state that no solid data have been provided to
prove that ‘classroom-based crisis intervention’ (CCI) for children and adolescents
is harmful. Brock et al. support this type of intervention, with the following indi-
cations: (a) Participating students’ exposure to the trauma should be indirect and
secondary, not sole or primary victimization; (b) CCI should not be conducted as
one isolated piece, but should be integrated in a larger and well organized crisis
intervention response, including social support over time; (c) the initial CCI meet-
ing should allow extended time to cover required elements (approximately 3 hours);
and (d) CCI should be conducted within a supportive group of students exposed to
a common trauma because this increases unity and helps normalize students’ expe-
riences and feelings (p. 212). When considering the healing process and meeting the
needs of bereaved students, the benefits of strengthening the existing school’s social
support cannot be overemphasized.
During and following CCI, teachers and SBMHPs may identify students who
require more intensive long-term interventions. Initially, some students may resist
small group or individualized help. No student should be forced to participate.
However, in the ensuing weeks and months following a traumatic event, parents
and teachers may recognize warning signs and more accurately identify students
who need more intensive intervention to address grief related thoughts and feelings.
For ongoing student support groups, trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy (TF-CBT) has been shown to be effective in reducing the incidence and severity
of PTSD (Cohen et al., 2006; Jaycox, Langley, Dean, Stein, et al., 2009). For young
children, play therapy may also be considered (Drewes, Carey, & Schaefer, 2001;
Gil, 1991, 2006; Shelby, 2010; Webb, 2011).
Following traumatic events, some immediate interventions are easy to imple-
ment. Teaching basic relaxation techniques helps students of all ages learn the
connection between emotions, thoughts, and physical sensations and reactions
(e.g. heart rate, depth and rate of breathing, muscle tension). Cohen et al. (2006,
pp. 75–86) provide information on relaxation that could easily be utilized in class-
room settings. First and foremost, students of all ages enjoy relaxation exercises.
Teachers and parents should also be encouraged to assist children in tapping into
Openshaw 	169

-- 7 of 16 --

this anxiety-reducing technique. Involving teachers and parents helps empower
children’s most influential natural support system (Cohen & Mannarino, 2011).
Minimally, students could be encouraged to inhale a long deep breath and to
slowly exhale, relaxing their muscles as they do so. Groups ending with a two-
minute practice of guided relaxation help reduce students’ anxiety and ends the
group on a positive note.
When working with students following a tragedy, participating students should
be approximately equal in their exposure to the traumatic event, so group members
are on equal footing in regard to their stories and exposure to the trauma. This
helps prevent highly impacted students from traumatizing others with graphic
comments and extreme reactions. Highly impacted students may need more indi-
vidualized intervention and smaller groups with other students similarly impacted.
Ongoing support for students
In organizing ongoing student support groups, strong consultation skills are
needed in bringing key players on board. Helpful introductory information
should be abbreviated and formatted into a one-page handout, ready to share
with administrators, teachers, and parents. Initial conversations should include
school leadership, particularly the school’s principal, in setting up student support.
The principal must sanction activities, allow release from class, and provide an
appropriate private place for student support group meetings. Additionally, when
necessary, teachers must allow student group members to miss class without being
penalized and to accommodate for students’ missed class work. Teachers are also
helpful in encouraging students to return parent permission forms (necessary prior
to student participation in interventions extending beyond the immediate trauma).
SBMHPs should focus support groups on individual and group strengths,
empowering students and teachers in restoring equilibrium, hope, and trust
(Chen & Rybak, 2004). Individuals participate in their own recovery, fostering
and utilizing natural support systems and personal strengths (McNally, Bryant,
& Ehlers, 2003). During group sessions, using a strengths-based approach helps
students address challenges with a positive frame of mind and channel their efforts
into proactive problem solving, rather than dwelling on loss. Although parents and
teachers may view crisis situations as injurious to survivors, these situations also
provide opportunities for personal growth (Saleebey, 1997). It is critical to increase
the school staff’s understanding that positive growth comes as survivors develop
adaptive coping skills.
Classroom-based support for 5- to 7-year-olds
Compared to older children, younger children have more difficulty expressing guilt.
Though a common survivor’s reaction following a traumatic event, guilt may be a
difficult topic for children to understand and express. Adults may need to talk
about these feelings and reassure children: ‘It is not your fault. Sometimes children
170 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 8 of 16 --

think that something they said or did caused bad things to happen (normalize
feelings), but children are not the cause’. Keep this conversation open and help
children feel comfortable talking about their feelings of guilt. This topic needs to be
discussed, and then re-discussed across time to continue reassuring children that
the death or trauma was not their fault.
Children aged 5- to 7-years-old have difficulty processing trauma with words (both
expressive and receptive communication). At this age, children should have the
option of drawing a picture of the traumatic event. Children should then be encour-
aged to describe their picture, telling their story of what they believe happened.
Secondary or vicarious trauma occurs when children receive information about
the event from parents, other children, or when they see news coverage of the event.
With this information, children form their own mental pictures of the event and
formulate ideas about what caused the event. At the beginning of a group inter-
vention, group leaders may ask children to draw a picture of the traumatic event
(their perception of the event). After reviewing the pictures, group leaders can offer
basic facts, replacing faulty images and perceptions. They can also begin to identify
where misperceptions may be occurring that exacerbate guilt. During later sessions,
group leaders may again ask the children to draw a picture of the event. The initial
drawing can be compared to the later drawing to determine children’s progress in
understanding facts and changing misperceptions to more accurate perceptions of
the event. The following example demonstrates classroom-based psychoeduca-
tional groups for young children.
Case example
During the middle of the school year, Mrs Flores, a kindergarten teacher suddenly
died from a heart condition (during childbirth). Shortly after the teacher’s death,
the school psychologist talked with the students and new teacher in their class-
room, letting them know of her sadness about their teacher’s death. The school
psychologist brought a one-page handout for each child to take home to their
parent/guardian. The handout described grief in young children and listed things
the parent could do and say to support their child (English and Spanish translated
handouts to match the languages spoken in the students’ homes). In addition to the
handout, parents also received a letter of consent, to either approve or disapprove
student participation in upcoming classroom support groups.
After receiving signed parent permission for each student, five group counseling
sessions (one per week) were held in the classroom. All 21 students and the new
teacher participated. Each session lasted approximately 30 to 40 minutes. The first
session focused on giving the students information about their teacher’s death and
reassuring the students of the school’s support; the availability of the school coun-
selor, school psychologist, and school social worker; and the availability of the
principal to check in on their classroom.
During the second session, students were asked to draw pictures of what they
heard about their teacher’s death and what they thought happened to their teacher.
Openshaw 	171

-- 9 of 16 --

Then, each child discussed their drawing. Commonalities were noted (normalizing
experiences and feelings). Facts were briefly described, and then differences in
stories were noted. Children were reassured that when someone dies children and
adults may get confused about what really happened. Children closed the session
by drawing pictures of flowers because their teacher loved flowers. The flower
pictures were displayed to decorate the classroom. This activity left the children
with positive thoughts about their teacher and moved them into an active role.
During the third session, the school psychologist explained—with basic facts and
on the children’s level—how Mrs Flores heart condition created stress on her body.
The school psychologist stated, ‘This stress caused her to die because her heart
stopped working. The doctor said she died of a heart attack’. The children were
assured that this was not common and very few young people have heart problems
(dispelling fear that a child or parent would die of a heart attack). Following the
school librarian’s recommendation, the new teacher read aloud the story, Badger’s
Parting Gifts (author, Susan Varley). Similar to the story’s message, children dis-
cussed things they learned from Mrs Flores. Their comments were listed on a large
poster board, later decorated by the children and given to Mrs Flores’ husband. This
activity moved the children from a passive to an active role.
In session four, the students were asked to draw another picture of what hap-
pened to their teacher. Each child talked about their picture and their thoughts and
feelings about their teacher being gone. The children asked for their new teacher to
read ‘their story’ again (Badger’s Parting Gifts). In closing, the teacher and students
talked about good things that were happening in the classroom over the past
month. The school psychologist noted, ‘Mrs Flores was always pleased when her
students had good things happen’.
The fifth and final session gave the students a chance to ask questions about
death, funerals, and what people did to honor Mrs Flores. This final session
allowed the school psychologist to check on students’ adjustment and coping
skills. Additionally, each child was given an opportunity to share something they
learned during their group meetings. This provided a sense of closure. The class
then brainstormed an activity to remember their teacher. The class planned to plant
a flower garden outside their classroom window alongside the school. The principal
and custodian were involved in the planning and offered to assist. The garden
would be named after their teacher, ‘Mrs Flores Flower Garden’. In honor of
Mrs Flores, the librarian ordered several copies of Badger’s Parting Gifts. One
copy was permanently assigned to the Kindergarten classroom. Following the
fifth session, as follow-up, the school psychologist checked in each week and
helped plant the ‘Mrs Flores Memory Garden’ the following spring.
Classroom-based support for 14- to 18-year-olds
Older adolescents may want to lash out after a peer’s or teacher’s death (Balk et al.,
2011). They may want to blame an individual and focus their energy on destructive
revenge. Although their feelings should not be discounted, energy channeled in a
172 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 10 of 16 --

more positive direction will facilitate adaptive coping and healing. One positive
direction is to support students in honoring the life of the deceased (Bingham et al.,
2009; Jerome, 2011). It is common among adolescents to become involved in cre-
ating temporary shrines, taking monetary collections to support surviving family
members or to pay for a memorial, or planning and participating in an activity to
remember the deceased.
For this age group, classroom psychoeducational support meetings may last up
to 75 minutes, depending on the group’s ability to stay on task and process infor-
mation and feelings. After initial rapport building, the group facilitator should
focus on helping students identify and express feelings. If groups are formed fol-
lowing a tragedy, the SMBHP should give available facts surrounding the tragedy,
allow adolescents to express their thoughts and feelings, and help them cope with
their loss. Special arrangements should be made to offer individualized support for
those directly impacted (e.g. close friends or siblings of the deceased, those who
witnessed the tragedy, students struggling with other challenges, etc.). Teachers’
and staff support serves as a natural support system, facilitating students’ adaptive
coping. To assist teachers and staff, a basic one- to two-page handout should be
offered to describe common adolescent grief reactions and strategies to strengthen
coping skills.
Following a tragic event, adolescents should be offered psychological first-aid.
Adolescents need an opportunity to discuss facts surrounding a tragedy and a safe
place to express feelings. Adolescents may want to become actively involved in
brainstorming opportunities to offer condolences and support for those impacted
by the trauma (e.g. signing cards, creating banners, planning service projects, etc.).
Supervised counseling rooms and the school counselor’s office should be made
available for those desiring more individualized attention. Special hall passes
should be prepared in advance, easing student access to this support. The school
crisis team may also prepare basic ‘self care’ directions, printed on credit-card-sized
laminated stock paper and easily stored in wallets and pockets.
Several months following a tragedy, psychoeducational groups should be offered
to provide additional support for adolescents (signed parent permission is
required). However, rather than focusing on one specific tragedy, these groups
should focus on coping with grief and loss across the life span. The primary
focus of group support is to encourage students to express their grief, help nor-
malize their reactions (‘you are not alone’), and support adaptive coping skills.
Group leaders help students understand the connection between an individual’s
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Group support also encourages group members
to channel their feelings of grief in a positive direction. Moving from a passive to an
active role, adolescents are empowered to use positive coping strategies.
School-community coordination of services
Typically, teachers, parents, and administrators make referrals for students to par-
ticipate in school-based support groups. However, individuals from the community
Openshaw 	173

-- 11 of 16 --

(e.g. tutors, religious and spiritual leaders, scout leaders, coaches, probation offi-
cers, and others) may also observe a child or adolescent having difficulty coping
with grief (James et al., 2011). School district officials, especially public relations
specialists, should announce through the local media that school-based support
groups are available to students. Home-school communications should announce
upcoming groups, giving parents the option of referring their child for participa-
tion. Contact information should always be included, encouraging parents to call
and discuss questions and concerns.
Follow-up
Following a school tragedy most students gain support either in the classroom’s
natural setting, in smaller school-based groups, in individual counseling sessions,
or in community-based counseling agencies. The vast majority of students adapt to
their previous level of functioning within the first three to six months (Cohen et al.,
2006). These students successfully adapt and incorporate their loss and grief into
their life experience. After offering psychological first-aid and classroom psychoe-
ducational counseling, SBMPHs should consult with teachers and parents/guard-
ians to determine which students would benefit from continued grief-related
counseling.
Another aspect of follow-up, all adults who offer student support following a
tragedy are at risk for developing secondary traumatic stress or vicarious trauma.
Often referred to as ‘compassion fatigue’ (Jenkins, & Baird, 2002), this vulnerabil-
ity, if left untreated, can lead to burn-out. It is essential for all involved adults,
particularly group leaders, to have a supportive group opportunity to discuss their
experiences. These discussions follow the same format as psychological first-aid,
offering an opportunity for adults to discuss how they were directly and indirectly
impacted by what they heard, saw, and experienced. This type of group support
allows adults to become aware of their own personal responses, to express their
thoughts, and to examine their emotions. It may be necessary to bring in a mental
health professional from another school or school district to help run this group.
This is a critical preventative measure that helps maintain the mental and physical
health of those who are at risk for compassion fatigue and burnout.
Conclusions
Tragic events impact schools and communities. In response to these tragedies, the
amount of information available on the topic of assisting traumatized and bereaved
students is burgeoning (Cohen et al., 2006; Jaycox et al., 2009; Layne et al., 2008;
Webb, 2010). SBMHPs must have the basic skills to assist students and staff
through the grief process. Additionally, they must have the ongoing support of
school administrators in offering student grief support services. SBMHPs must
continue to sharpen their knowledge and skills in offering effective and efficient
intervention to students and staff. Offering the most effective and efficient grief
174 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 12 of 16 --

interventions typically involves school-based group interventions (Jaycox et al.,
2009; Jaycox, Langley, Dean, & Stein, 2009; Layne et al., 2008). Following a
crisis, group interventions address the emotional needs of students, helping schools
return to previous functioning more quickly. Additionally, students benefit from
group intervention, learning lifelong skills of coping with loss and strengthening
natural support systems.
References
Austin, S. J. (2003). Lessons learned from the shootings at Columbine High School. The
human side of school crises—A Public Entity Risk Institute (PERI) Symposium.
Retrieved from http://www.schoolcounselor.org/files/columbine.pdf
Balk, D. E., Zaengle, D., & Corr, C. A. (2011). Strengthening grief support for adolescents
coping with a peer’s death. School Psychology International, 32(2), 144–162.
Bingham, R., Heath, M. A., Lyon, R. C., Williams, M., Whicker, J., & Paine, C. K. (2009).
Memorializing Columbine. Illness, Crisis & Loss, 17(3), 223–241.
Brock, S. E., Nickerson, A. B., Reeves, M. A., Jimerson, S. R., Lieberman, R. A., &
Feinberg, T. A. (2009). School crisis prevention and intervention: The PREPaRE model.
Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists.
Center for Social and Emotional Education. (2010). School climate research summary:
January 2010. School Climate Brief, 1(1), 1–16. Retrieved from http://www.schoolclima-
te.org/climate/documents/SCBrief_v1n1_Jan2010.pdf
Chemtob, C. M., Nakashima, J. P., & Hamada, R. S. (2002). Psychosocial intervention for
postdisaster trauma symptoms in elementary school children: A controlled community
field study. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 156, 211–216. Retrieved from
http://www.crid.or.cr/digitalizacion/pdf/eng/doc17382/doc17382-contenido.pdf
Chen, M., & Rybak, C. J. (2004). Group leadership skills: Interpersonal process in group
counseling and therapy. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Chibbaro, J. S., & Jackson, C. M. (2006). Helping students cope in an age of terrorism:
Strategies for school counselors. Professional School Counseling, 9(4), 314–321.
Cohen, J. A., & Mannarino, A. P. (2011). Supporting children with traumatic grief: What
educators need to know. School Psychology International, 32(2), 117–131.
Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., & Deblinger, E. (2006). Treating trauma and traumatic grief
in children and adolescents. New York, NY: Guilford.
Drewes, A. A., Carey, L. J., & Schaefer, C. E. (Eds.) (2001). School-based play therapy. New
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Evans, L., & Oehler-Stinnett, J. (2006). Children and natural disasters: A primer for
school psychologists. School Psychology International, 27(1), 33–55, doi: 10.1177/
0143034306062814.
Everly, Jr, G. S. , & Mitchell, J. T. (2000). The debriefing ‘controversy’ and crisis interven-
tion: A review of lexical and substantive issues. International Journal of Emergency
Mental Health, 2(4), 211–225.
Finn, C. A. (2003). Helping student cope with loss: Incorporating art into group counseling.
The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 28(2), 155–165, doi:10.1080/714860157.
Furlong, M. J., Pavelski, R., & Saxton, J. (2002). The prevention of school violence. In S.
E. Brock, P. J. Lazarus, & S. R. Jimerson (Eds.), Best practices in school crisis prevention
and intervention (pp. 131–150). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School
Psychologists.
Openshaw 	175

-- 13 of 16 --

Gil, E. (1991). The healing power of play: Working with abused children. New York, NY:
Guilford.
Gil, E. (2006). Play therapy for severe psychological trauma. New York, NY: Guilford.
Heath, M. A., Nickerson, A. B., Annandale, N., Kemple, A., & Dean, B. (2009).
Strengthening cultural sensitivity in children’s disaster mental health services. School
Psychology International, 30(4), 347–373.
Heath, M. A., & Sheen, D. (Eds.) (2005). School-based crisis intervention: Preparing all
personnel to assist. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Huss, S. N., & Ritchie, M. (1999). Effectiveness of a group for parentally bereaved children.
The 	Journal 	for 	Specialists 	in 	Group 	Work, 	24, 	186–196, 	doi: 	10.1080/
01933929908411429.
Jacob, S., & Feinberg, T. (2002). Legal and ethical issues in crisis intervention and response
in schools. In S. E. Brock, P. J. Lazarus, & S. R. Jimerson (Eds.), Best practices in school
crisis prevention and intervention (pp. 709–732). Bethesda, MD: National Association of
School Psychologists.
James, R. K., Logan, J., & Davis, S. A. (2011). Including school resource officers in school-
based crisis intervention: Strengthening student support. School Psychology International,
32(2), 210–224.
Jaycox, L. H., Langley, A. K., & Dean, K. L. (2009). Support for students exposed to trauma:
The SSET program. Group leader training manual, lessons plans, and lesson mate-
rials and worksheets (RAND Publication No. TR-675-NIMH). Santa Monica,
CA: 	RAND. 	Retrieved 	from 	http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/2009/
RAND_TR675.pdf
Jaycox, L. H., Langley, A. K., Dean, K. L., Stein, B. D., Wong, M., Sharma, P., Kataoka, S.
H. (2009). Making it easier for school staff to help traumatized students (RAND
Publication No. RB-9443-1-NIMH). Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Jenkins, S. R., & Baird, S. (2002). Secondary traumatic stress and vicarious trauma: A
validational study. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 15(5), 423–432, doi: 10.1023/
A:1020193526843.
Jerome, A. (2011). Comforting children and families who grieve: Incorporating spiritual
support. School Psychology International, 32(2), 194–209.
Johnson, K. (2000). School crisis management: A hands-on guide to training crisis response
teams (2nd ed.). Alameda, CA: Hunter House.
Layne, C. M., Pynoos, R. S., Saltzman, W. R., Black, M., Arslanagic, B., Savjak, N., &
. . .Houston, R. (2001). Trauma/grief-focused group psychotherapy: School-based
postwar intervention with traumatized Bosnian adolescents. Group Dynamics, 5(4),
277–290.
Layne, C. M., Saltzman, W. R., Poppleton, L., Burlingame, G. M., Pasˇalic´ , A., Durakovic´ ,
E., & Pynoos, R. S. (2008). Effectiveness of a school-based group psychotherapy program
for war-exposed adolescents: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American
Academy 	of 	Child 	& 	Adolescent 	Psychiatry, 	47(9), 	1048–1062, 	doi:10.1097/
CHI.0b013e31817eecae.
McNally, R. J., Bryant, R. A., & Ehlers, A. (2003). Does early psychological intervention
promote recovery from posttraumatic stress? Psychological Science in the Public Interest,
4(2), 45–79, doi:10.1111/1529-1006.01421.
Mitchell, J. T., & Everly, Jr, G. S. (2001). Critical incident stress debriefing: An operations
manual for the prevention of traumatic stress among emergency services and disaster work-
ers (3rd ed.). Ellicott City, MD: Chevron.
176 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 14 of 16 --

Nader, K., & Muni, P. (2002). Individual crisis intervention. In S. E. Brock, P. J. Lazarus, &
S. R. Jimerson (Eds.), Best practices in school crisis prevention and intervention
(pp. 405–428). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists.
Nickerson, A. B., Reeves, M. A., Brock, S. E., & Jimerson, S. R. (2009). Identifying, assess-
ing, and treating PTSD at school. New York, NY: Springer.
Nickerson, A. B., & Heath, M. A. (2008, Winter). Developing and strengthening school-
based crisis response teams. School Psychology Forum, 2(2), 1–16.
Poland, S. (2002). Practical suggestions for crisis debriefing in schools. Communique, 30(7), 5.
Poland, S., & Poland, D. (2004, April). Dealing with death at school. Principal Leadership,
4(8), 	8–12. 	Retrieved 	from 	http://www.nasponline.org/resources/principals/
Dealing%20with%20Death%20at%20School%20April%2004.pdf
Reid, J. K., & Dixon, W. A. (1999). Teacher attitudes on coping with grief in the public
school classroom. Psychology in the Schools, 36(3), 219–229.
Saleebey, D. (Ed.) (1997). The strengths perspective in social work practice (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Longman.
Salloum, A., & Overstreet, S. (2008). Evaluation of individual and group grief and trauma
interventions for children post disaster. Journal of Clinical and Adolescent Psychology,
37(3), 495–507, doi: 10.1080/15374410802148194.
Shafombabi, D. E. (1999). The development of school-based crisis response efforts in
southeastern 	Pennsylvania. 	(Doctoral 	dissertation). 	Retrieved 	from 	ProQuest.
(AAT9921194).
Shelby, J. (2010). Cognitive-behavioral therapy and play therapy for childhood trauma and
loss. In N. B. Webb (Ed.), Helping bereaved children (3rd ed. pp. 263–277). New York,
NY: Guilford.
Sheras, P. L. (2000). Grief and traumatic loss: What schools need to know and do. In K.
J. Doka (Ed.), Children, adolescents, and loss: Living with grief (pp. 275–290).
Washington, DC: Hospice Foundation of America.
Stein, B. D., Jaycox, S. H., Kataoka, S. H., Wong, M., Tu, W., Elliott, M. N., & Fink, A.
(2003). A mental health intervention for schoolchildren exposed to violence: A random-
ized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 290(5), 603–611, doi:
10.1001/jama.290.5.603.
Stubenbort, K., & Cohen, J. A. (2006). Cognitive-behavioral groups for traumatically
bereaved children and their parents. In L. A. Schein, H. I. Spitz, G. M. Burlingame, &
P. R. Muskin (Eds.), with S. Vargo, Psychological effects of catastrophic disasters: Group
approaches to treatment (pp. 581–628). New York, NY: Haworth.
Tol, W. A., Komproe, I. H., Susanty, D., Jordans, M. J. D., Macy, R. D., & De Jong, J. T.
V. M. (2008). School-based mental health intervention for children affected by political
violence in Indonesia: A cluster randomized trial. The Journal of the American Medical
Association, 300(6), 655–662, doi:10.1001/jama.300.6.655.
United States Department of Education. (2007). Practical information on crisis planning:
A guide for schools and communities (revised). Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/admins/
lead/safety/emergencyplan/crisisplanning.pdf
United States Government Accountability Office. (2007, June). Emergency management:
Most school districts have developed emergency management plans, but would benefit
from additional federal guidance. Washington, DC: Author. (GAO-07-609). Retrieved
from http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d07609.pdf
Webb, N. B. (Ed.) (2010). Helping bereaved children: A handbook for practitioners (3rd ed.).
New York, NY: Guilford.
Openshaw 	177

-- 15 of 16 --

Webb, N. B. (2011). Play therapy for bereaved children: Adapting strategies to community,
school, and home settings. School Psychology International, 32(2), 132–143.
Williams, M. B. (2006). How schools respond to traumatic events: Debriefing interventions
and beyond. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma, 12, 57–81, doi: 10.1300/
J146v12n01_04.
Wong, M. (2008). Interventions to reduce psychological harm from traumatic events among
children and adolescents: A commentary on the application of findings to the real world
of schools. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(4), 398–400, doi: 10.1016/
j.amepre.2008.07.002.
Worden, J. W. (2009). Grief counseling and grief therapy: A handbook for the mental health
practitioner (4th ed.). New York, NY: Springer.
Zambelli, G. C., & DeRose, A. P. (1992). Bereavement support groups for school-age chil-
dren: Theory, intervention, and case example. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
62(4), 484–493, doi: 10.1037/h0079386.
Linda Leek Openshaw, currently an Associate Professor of Social Work and MSW
Program Director, Texas A&M University-Commerce, served as a practitioner for
three years in community mental health (CA and UT) and 14 years as a school
social worker (UT and TX). Her interests include school social work, child and
adolescent welfare, and spirituality in social work. Address: 2601 Harborview
Blvd., Rowlett, TX 75058, USA. Email: lindaopenshaw@att.net
178 	School Psychology International 32(2)

-- 16 of 16 --

