Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration
SUICIDE ASSESSMENT
SAFE-T
Five-StepEVALUATION AND TRIAGE
1 IDENTIFY RISK FACTORS
Note those that can be modified
to reduce risk
2 IDENTIFY PROTECTIVE
FACTORS
Note those that can be enhanced
3 CONDUCT SUICIDE INQUIRY
Suicidal thoughts, plans,
behavior, method, and intent
4 DETERMINE RISK LEVEL &
INTERVENTION
Determine risk. Choose
appropriate intervention
to address and reduce risk.
5 DOCUMENT
Assessment of risk, rationale,
intervention, and follow-up
Suicide assessments should be
conducted (1) at first contact; (2) with
any subsequent suicidal behavior,
increased ideation, or pertinent
clinical change; (3) prior to changes
in behavioral health treatment; and
(4) at inpatient discharge.
RISK FACTORS	1. 1
• 	Prior suicide attempt(s)
• 	Alcohol or substance use
• 	History of mental health concerns, particularly
depression and other mood disorders
• 	Access to lethal means, including firearms
• 	Knowing someone who died by suicide, particularly
a family member
• 	Social isolation
• 	Chronic disease and/or disability
• 	Lack of access to behavioral health care
• 	Prolonged feelings of hopelessness
POPULATIONS AT INCREASED RISK FOR SUICIDE
• 	American Indian,
Alaska Native, and
Tribal communities
• 	Black youth
• 	Rural communities
• 	LGBTQI + youth and
young adults
• 	Middle-aged men
• 	Older adults
2. PROTECTIVE FACTORS1
Note: Protective factors, even if present,
may not counteract significant acute risk
• 	Connectedness to people, family, community, and
social supports
• 	Effective behavioral health care
• 	Life skills (including problem-solving skills, coping
skills, emotional regulation, ability to adapt to change)
• 	Self-esteem and a sense of purpose or meaning in life
• 	Cultural, religious, or personal beliefs that discourage
suicide
• 	No access to lethal means
1https://sprc.org/risk-and-protective-factors

-- 1 of 2 --

3. SUICIDE INQUIRY
Specific questioning about thoughts, plans, behaviors, intent
• 	Ideation: Frequency, intensity, duration—in last 48 hours, past month, and worst ever
• 	Plan: Timing, location, lethality, availability, preparatory acts
• 	Behaviors: Past attempts, aborted attempts, rehearsals versus non-suicidal self-injurious actions
• 	Intent: Extent to which the patient (1) expects to carry out the suicide plan and (2) believes the plan/act
to be lethal. Explore ambivalence: reasons to die versus reasons to live
For Youth: Ask parent/guardian about history of suicidal thoughts, plans, or behaviors, and changes in mood,
behaviors, or disposition.
4. RISK LEVEL/INTERVENTION
• 	Assessment of risk level is based on clinical judgment, after completing steps 1–3
• 	Reassess as patient or environmental circumstances change
• 	Develop a safety plan for all individuals at low, moderate, and high risk levels
RISK LEVEL 	RISK/PROTECTIVE FACTOR 	SUICIDALITY 	POSSIBLE INTERVENTIONS
HIGH 	Individuals experiencing severe
behavioral health symptoms or acute
precipitating event; protective factors
not relevant
Suicidal ideation with plan
(when and where), method
(how), and intent to carry
out the suicide plan
Emergency psychiatric treatment in a
secure setting may be necessary unless
a significant change reduces risk
MODERATE 	Multiple risk factors, experiences
some elevated behavioral health
symptoms, and few protective
factors
Suicidal ideation with plan,
but no intent or behavior
Admission may be necessary
depending on risk factors. Give
emergency/crisis numbers to
include the 988 Lifeline
LOW 	Manageable risk factors, strong
protective factors
Thoughts of death, no plan,
intent, or behavior
Outpatient referral with a warm handoff,
symptom reduction. Give emergency/
crisis numbers, 988 Lifeline
Note: This chart is intended to serve as an example of a range of risk levels and interventions, not actual determinations.
5. DOCUMENT
Document: Risk level and rationale; treatment plan to address/reduce current risk (e.g., safety plan,
medication, psychotherapy, contact with significant others, consultation, etc.); counseling on access to lethal
means; follow-up plan. Patients/clients should receive a copy of their safety plan. For youth, the treatment
plan should include roles for parent/guardian/supportive adult.
SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCES
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, call or text 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org for 24/7 support
samhsa.gov/find-help/988
• 	Download this and additional
resources at store.samhsa.gov
• 	SAMHSA’s Suicide Prevention webpage:
samhsa.gov/mental-health/suicide
• 	The 2024 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention
and Federal Action Plan:
hhs.gov/programs/prevention-and-wellness/
mental-health-substance-abuse/national-strategy-
suicide-prevention/index.html
• 	Suicide Prevention Resource Center:
https://sprc.org
• 	National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention:
https://theactionalliance.org
• 	American Foundation for Suicide Prevention:
https://afsp.org
• 	988 End Cards for Media: samhsa.gov/find-
help/988/partner-toolkit/end-cards-media
Acknowledgments: This resource was originally conceived by Douglas Jacobs, MD, and developed as a collaboration between
Screening for Mental Health, Inc., and the Suicide Prevention Resource Center. This material is based upon work supported by the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) under Grant No. 1U79SM57392. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of SAMHSA.
HHS Publication No. (SMA) 09–4432 | CMHS–NSP–0193 | Updated 2024

-- 2 of 2 --

