If this PowerPoint presentation contains mathematical equations, you may need to check that your computer has the following installed:
1) MathType Plugin
2) Math Player (free versions available)
3) NVDA Reader (free versions available)
Crisis Assessment, Intervention, and Prevention
Chapter 4: Essential Crisis Intervention Skills
Essential Crisis Intervention Microskills (1 of 2)
The difference between basic counseling skills and crisis counseling skills is less about what the counselor does or the techniques and strategies employed and more about contextual application, or where and in what situation skills are applied.
Crisis counseling tends to be more directive and can involve information giving, probing questions, and even direct or indirect confrontations.
The focus is on the immediate issue that is causing the instability for the client so the counselor must differentiate immediate issues (risk) that are the priority from longer-term issues that may be documented for postcrisis therapy.
Essential Crisis Intervention Microskills (2 of 2)
It is important to continuously be aware of and apply effective skills, since doing so is the hallmark of effective crisis counseling.
Ivey et al.’s microskills hierarchy—a set of verbal and behavioral responses that facilitate the process of counseling and alliance formation, regardless of the crisis counselor’s theoretical orientation.
The skills are presented as a hierarchy that is organized in a systematic framework.
At the bottom of the hierarchy are the basic attending skills, such as patterns of eye contact, body position, vocal tone, and silence.
A bit farther up the skills hierarchy is the basic listening sequence, which includes asking open and closed questions, using reflecting skills, and summarizing.
Attending Skills and the Solar Framework
Most meaningful communication takes place nonverbally; nonverbal attending behaviors communicate a counselor’s interest, warmth, and understanding to the client. Basic attending skills include:
Eye Contact, Body Position, Vocal Tone, and Silence
How would you use these skills?
Eye Contact
Maintaining good eye contact is how a crisis counselor conveys interest, confidence, and involvement in the client’s story.
Through eye contact, clients know a counselor is focusing on them and fully committed to the helping process.
Eye contact varies among cultures and is influenced by the intensity of emotions involved in the crisis situation.
A good guideline to follow is to maintain a moderate amount of eye contact while monitoring your client’s level of comfort and to adjust your eye contact accordingly.
Body Position
Your body position should convey to the client your interest and involvement.
Face the client and adopt an open, relaxed, and attentive body posture.
The physical distance between counselor and client should also be taken into consideration; getting too close can be overwhelming and uncomfortable, whereas being too distant can make the counselor appear aloof and may be awkward for the client.
By considering body position, you can create a safe environment for both you and your client.
Use your body posture and physical space to comfort clients and de-escalate the anxiety, anger, or agitation a client in crisis might feel.
Vocal Tone
Emotions are frequently conveyed via tone of voice.
The pitch, pacing, and volume can all influence how a client responds emotionally to a crisis counselor.
Your control and calmness may be among the greatest benefits to your client in crisis.
If your client is overly agitated, it is often helpful to speak more slowly and in a soothing tone, as this will help your client to slow things down and begin to focus.
To convey a sense of empathic understanding, it can be helpful to emphasize specific words used by your client. This technique of giving increased vocal emphasis to certain words or short phrases is called verbal underlining.
Silence
Silence is important for both clients and professional counselors. It is essential for crisis counselors to develop a comfort with silent pauses.
Clients in crisis need space to think, sort out their thoughts, and process what is happening. The counselor needs that time as well.
Silence, if used appropriately and at the right time, can convey acceptance and empathic understanding.
SOLER- a framework to show presence
The Basic Listening Sequence
The basic listening sequence represents a set of interrelated skills used to achieve three overarching goals:
To obtain an overall summary and understanding of the client’s presenting issue
To identify the key facts of the client’s situation
To identify the core emotions and feelings the client is experiencing
Counseling Skills
Skills Review
What is this skill?
How would it apply to crisis counseling?
Questions
Asking Open and Closed Questions (1 of 3)
Questioning is a primary skill that allows crisis counselors to gather important and specific information about clients.
Crisis counselors do not want counseling sessions to sound like an interrogation.
Thus, they need to be aware of how to use questions appropriately and pay close attention to the types of questions used to gather information.
Open Questions
Usually elicit fuller and more meaningful responses by encouraging the client to talk at greater length.
They typically begin with what, how, could, would, or why and are useful to help begin an interview, elaborate the client’s story, and bring out specific details.
Be careful when using why questions and “leading” questions.
Asking Open and Closed Questions (2 of 3)
Closed Questions
They can be used when crisis counselors need to obtain very specific, concrete information and get all the facts straight.
They typically either elicit a yes/no response or provide specific factual information.
Crisis counseling often requires quick and focused responses. Thus, these questions are useful because the counselor must gather specific information to aid in the prompt assessment of the problem and development of a plan of action.
Crisis counselors should still guard against the overuse of closed questions, which can cause clients to shut down and simply wait for the next question to answer.
Counselors should also avoid negative interrogatives, which are closed questions that are used in a subtle way to coerce the client into agreeing with the counselor.
Asking Open and Closed Questions (3 of 3)
Open versus Closed Questions
In crisis intervention work, crisis counselors often need to use closed questions to quickly identify and bring out specific details to seek the resolution of the crisis state.
However, they can often obtain the same information by asking open questions, so counselors should try to refrain from moving too quickly into a closed questioning approach unless they are unable to obtain the information otherwise.
Reflections
Reflecting Skills (1 of 4)
Reflecting skills are a form of active listening that conveys to the client your interest in and understanding of that which the client may be struggling.
They stimulate a deeper exploration and understanding of the problem so that the client can examine the issues more objectively.
They include paraphrasing, restating, reflecting feelings, and summarizing.
Paraphrasing
By paraphrasing, a crisis counselor mirrors back to the client, in a nonjudgmental way, an accurate understanding of the client’s communication and the implied meaning of that communication.
Paraphrasing conveys empathic understanding and facilitates the exploration and clarification of the client’s problems.
It is important for counselors to be sure the paraphrased information is accurate by checking with the client.
In crisis counseling, adding, “Is that correct” or “Did I hear you right” allows for both accuracy and for clients to gain some control over situations where they may not have held control.
Reflecting Skills (2 of 4)
Restating
In crisis counseling, the skill of restatements is intended to focus or direct the priority of the crisis and include the client’s exact words.
The counselor should understand the priority is first on risk issues followed by the issues that led to the risk.
The underlying issues would be secondary for crisis work and the focus of long-term counseling goals once the primary risk is identified and addressed.
Reflecting Feelings
Naming and identifying a client’s feelings can serve several important functions: 
It can help the client become aware of the emotions experienced in relation to the issue at hand.
It can have a positive impact on the therapeutic relationship.
When clients do not state their feelings directly, counselors may still be able to infer these feelings either from the context of a client’s communication or from the client’s nonverbal behaviors (e.g., facial expression, posture).
Reflecting Skills (3 of 4)
Summarizing
A process through which a crisis counselor can begin to put together the key themes, feelings, and issues that the client has presented.
By distilling the key issues and themes and reflecting this back to the client, counselors can begin to help clients make sense of what may have originally seemed to be an overwhelming and confusing experience.
A summary not only is used to end a session or to begin a new session by recapping the previous session but also can be used periodically throughout the session, helping to keep a focus and put together the pertinent issues at hand for the client.
Three types of summaries relevant to crisis intervention counseling: focusing summaries, signal summaries, and planning summaries.
Reflecting Skills (4 of 4)
Summarizing
Focusing summaries are often used at the beginning of the session to pull together prior information the client has given and to provide a focus to the session.
Signal summaries are used to signal to the client that you have captured the essence of the topic and that the session can move on to the next area of concern.
Planning summaries help provide closure and are used to recap the progress, plans, and any recommendations or agreements made. They are good for ending the session on a positive note and for providing a sense of direction for the client.
De-Escalating Client Emotions
There are four primary objectives when counseling agitated clients: safety, client emotion management to regain control, avoidance of physical restraint, and avoidance of escalating coercive interventions.
Richmond et al. reviewed the literature on verbal de-escalation of agitated patients and suggested the following guidelines for environment, people, and preparedness:
Physical space should be designed for safety.
Staff should be appropriate for the job.
Staff must be adequately trained.
An adequate number of trained staff must be available.
Objective scales should be used to assess agitation.
4 Types of Aggression (1 of 2)
Richmond et al. summarized four different types of aggression and suggested that each type required a different style of intervention:
Instrumental aggression—used by people who have learned that they can get their way through threats or actual violence.
If a client makes an overt threat, unspecified counteroffers should be used.
Fear-driven aggression—the client is on the defensive and may behave aggressively to protect against being hurt.
The counselor should give the client plenty of personal space and match the client’s pace and rhythm until the client is fully focusing on the content of the discussion rather than the internal state of fear.
Types of Aggression (2 of 2)
Irritable aggression based on boundary violations—usually displayed by individuals who have experienced some humiliation or interpersonal violation and are trying to put their world back into some semblance of order.
The best approach is to agree with the client that anger is a justifiable emotion, in principle, but that the resolution to the problem cannot occur while enraged.
Irritable aggression based on chronic anger—displayed by clients who are angry at the world and seem to be looking for ready excuses to “lose it.”
When interacting with an escalated, chronically aggressive client, it is essential not to appear defensive or startled, but to respond in an emotionless manner, repetitively offering choices and options for resolving or de-escalating the situation.
Handling Aggression
Reasoning with angry, out-of-control people is not likely possible. Thus, de-escalation becomes the primary goal.
De-escalation requires the counselor to remain calm, even when one is frightened and angry.
Recommendations on a practitioner’s physical stance and verbal interventions when faced with an aggressive client include:
Physical stance:
Never turn your back
Always be at the same level
Allow extra physical space
Verbal de-escalation instances:
Calmly bring the level of arousal down
Empathize with feelings but not with the behavior
Suggest alternative behaviors where appropriate
Defusing Through Reflection
When reflecting feelings, a useful way to help defuse a client in an emotional crisis state is to also reflect the client’s stated, or unstated, need or goal that is implied within the context of their narrative.
Because of the interpretive aspects, checking for accuracy is also important with this skill.
The formula for this would be: “You feel                        because                                                                                              and you want (or need)                    .”
De-escalation is about transferring calmness to the client and showing genuine interest in what the client has to say.
Be respectful, set clear limits, and trust that you have supplied the conditions that allow the client to want to respond positively.