Class 3
Chapters 7-8
If this PowerPoint presentation contains mathematical equations, you may need to check that your computer has the following installed:
1) MathType Plugin
2) Math Player (free versions available)
3) NVDA Reader (free versions available)
Agenda
Lecture 6-6:30
Nancy Documentary 6:30-7:30
Process 7:30-8
8-8:30- Dinner
8:30-10- Midterm
If this PowerPoint presentation contains mathematical equations, you may need to check that your computer has the following installed:
1) MathType Plugin
2) Math Player (free versions available)
3) NVDA Reader (free versions available)
Slides in this presentation contain hyperlinks. JAWS users should be able to get a list of links by using INSERT+F7.
Substance Use and Society
Over 50% of Americans age 12 years and older (about 132 million people) are current consumers of alcohol.
Over 21% of Americans age 12 years and older (nearly 58 million people) are current users of tobacco products.
Over 20% of Americans age 12 years and older (nearly 57 million people) reported using an illicit drugs in 2019.
Of the 20.4 million who reported needing treatment for an illicit drug or alcohol problem, only 2.3 million (11%) received treatment.
Substance Use, Crisis, and Society
There is an increased use of substances in the 2 years following terrorist events in the United States, and the rates of use were likely higher than estimated (DiMaggio et al., 2009).
Individuals who use substances are nearly six times more likely to attempt suicide than those who report no substance use problems (Dragisic et al., 2015).
Commonly Used Assessment Instruments 
Four commonly used assessment instruments are the:
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT; Babor et al., 2001)
Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test (MAST; Selzer, 1971)
Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory–4 (SASSI-4;Lazowski et al., 2016)
CAGE (Ewing, 1984)
Assessing SUD
Assessment for SUD usually focuses on 
Intensity
Frequency
Duration
Substance Use Disorder Diagnosis (1 of 2)
According to D S M-5-T R, at least two of the following criteria must be met for an individual to be diagnosed with a S U D:
significant problems exist at home, school, or work due to use
physical hazards occur due to repeated episodes of impaired driving or operating machinery while under the influence
substance use results in recurring legal problems (e.g., public intoxication)
tolerance increases
withdrawal occurs
increasing amounts of the substance are taken over time
usage levels are not being reduced
Substance Use Disorder Diagnosis (2 of 2)
a lot of time is spent acquiring the substance
social or work activities are sacrificed due to use or recovery from use
use continues despite interpersonal and physical effects
there is craving, a strong urge, or desire for the substance
Severity is determined by the number of presenting criteria (i.e., mild: two to three criteria; moderate: four to five criteria; severe: six or more criteria).
Assessing a Client’s Readiness to Change
Norcross et al. identified the following five stages of change:
Motivational Interviewing
engaging—establishing a connection between counselor and client that helps to build the working alliance
focusing—involves the counselor developing and maintaining a focused direction in the discussion about change
evoking—assisting the client to take ownership for their motivation for change
planning—establishing a commitment to change with a specific course of action where talk shifts from whether and why it happens to when and how to change
Treatment Admission and Placement (1 of 2)
Relapse and Crisis
During treatment, counselors need to prepare for relapse by helping clients explore triggers and learn new cognitive-behavioral strategies. Even in short-term crisis centers, these triggers can be identified, explored, and documented when clients are referred for treatment.
Counselors need to help clients differentiate when use is viewed as a “lapse” or a “relapse.”
A lapse is a single episode of using a substance following a period of abstinence. The individual often takes responsibility for this lapse and examines the specific experience or trigger(s) that resulted to build on recovery.
A relapse is a return to sustained use of the same substance or another mood-altering substance following a defined period of abstinence.
Safety and Self-Care
Counselors need to be aware of the dangers of working with clients who pose a threat to public safety or who have a history of violence, especially those who may also be under the influence of a substance.
Counselors should gauge the risk in working with clients who pose safety concerns and can take steps to minimize the risk by screening high-risk clients, avoiding seeing clients when there is a lack of physical security available, recognizing warning signs of violence, avoiding working alone during in-home counseling, and establishing rules prohibiting weapons in session.
Working with clients who have S U D s and significant symptoms creates unique challenges for counselors. Counselors who constantly face client resistance, ambivalence, motivational concerns, and relapse issues may question their effectiveness in facilitating change.
Chapter 8
Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence
Overview of Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence
Intimate partner violence (I P V) involves physical, sexual, and emotional aggression, violence, or stalking by a current or former intimate partner.
I P V is an inclusive term that is used to describe violence among opposite- or same-sex couples currently or formerly in a relationship.
I P V is only one aspect of domestic violence (D V) and, used by itself, is not inclusive of other individuals who are in violent relationships.
I P V is not the legal term used in federal or state statutes or regulations that outline mandated reporting laws for health care providers or laws that govern law enforcement practices when intervening in D V situations.
Cycle of Violence Theory
Tension-building
The explosion or acute battering incident
The honeymoon phase of kindness and contrite, loving behavior
Common Crisis Issues 
Attending to physical injury
Establishing immediate safety
Reporting IPV to the police
Risk Factors
Women of Color (54% of black WomEn, 44% of Hispanic Women, and 35% of White Women)
SES
Immigrant Status
Religion and Spiritual Beliefs
LGBTQ+
Female to Male Violence
Disability Status
Elderly Populations
Young Adults
The Counselor’s Response to Intimate Partner Violence Clients in Crisis
Screening for Intimate Partner Violence
Screening for Intimate Partner Violence
There are two absolutes that crisis counselors should follow with victims of I P V/D V.
Counselors should never ask about abuse in the presence of the client’s partner; doing so may greatly increase the risk for harm to the client. 
Counselors should be careful not to recommend ending the relationship as the only way to establish safety. 
Response to Intimate Partner Violence Disclosure
Validate the victim’s experience and communicate that the victim is not to blame for the abuse.
Documentation- make notes about the disclosure of I P V/D V and to take pictures of physical injuries, which could later be used in court if the victim chooses to take legal action.
Providing the victim with resources and protection is another essential component of responding to an I P V/D V crisis. 
  .
Response to Intimate Partner Violence Disclosure
The National Domestic Violence Hotline can be accessed 24 hours a day, 365 days per year at 1-800-799-S A F E or at www.thehotline.org
  .
Safety Planning and Harm Reduction Planning (1 of 2)
Safety Planning
If a client decided to leave the abuser, the counselor should develop a safety plan with the main goal of keeping the client physically safe, as well as any other vulnerable person living in the home.
The safety plan is tailored to the unique situation of each I P V/D V victim; the counselor and client should determine appropriate supports for the client, locations that provide physical safety (e.g., shelters), and whether law enforcement should be contacted.
It is important to emphasize that a safety plan in no way guarantees the safety of the I P V/D V victim.
Safety Planning and Harm Reduction Planning (2 of 2)
Harm Reduction Planning
These plans are developed for clients who do not intend to leave the abusive relationship.
The goal of the plan is to reduce the amount of harm a victim may encounter by an abuser.
Some harm reduction plans may also integrate strategies to assist in alleviating pain from abuse.
Intimate Partner Violence Shelters: Opportunities and Challenges
I P V/D V shelters provide a safe haven for many abused women and their children. Shelters not only protect victims from additional physical harm but also provide a safe place where emotional healing can begin.
While I P V/D V shelters are invaluable resources for many victims, life in a shelter is certainly not stress-free and it requires adherence to programmatic rules and regulations that may infringe on a victim’s sense of autonomy.
In addition, victims may not feel ready to address the emotional impact of their abuse yet may be required to do so as part of the shelter program.
Addressing the Emotional Impact of Intimate Partner Violence
Physical consequences
High rates of depression and low self-esteem 
Many IPV/DV victims experience symptoms of PTSD. 
Batterer Intervention (1 of 2)
Batterer intervention programs have three primary goals:
Ensuring the safety of I P V/D V victims
Stopping future acts of partner violence
Increasing offenders’ accountability for their behavior.
Challenges: court-mandated, finances, treatment refusal