

-- 1 of 545 --

Crisis Assessment,
Intervention, and Prevention
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Marymount University
Bradley T. Erford
Peabody College at Vanderbilt University
F o u r t h 	E d i t i o n

-- 2 of 545 --

Content Development: Shannon LeMay-Finn
Content Management: Rebecca Fox-Gieg
Content Production: Purnima Narayanan
Product Management: Drew Bennett
Product Marketing: Krista Clark
Rights and Permissions: Jenell Forschler
Please contact https://support.pearson.com/getsupport/s/ with any queries on this content.
Cover Image by Onfokus /E+/Getty Images
Copyright © 2024, 2018, 2014 by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates, 221 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030. All Rights
Reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission
should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise. For information regarding
permissions, request forms, and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights and Permissions
department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the appropriate page within the text.
PEARSON and REVEL are exclusive trademarks owned by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates in the U.S. and/or other
countries.
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks, logos, or icons that may appear in this work are the
property of their respective owners, and any references to third-party trademarks, logos, icons, or other trade dress are
for demonstrative or descriptive purposes only. Such references are not intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement,
authorization, or promotion of Pearson’s products by the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner and
Pearson Education, Inc., or its affiliates, authors, licensees, or distributors.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Jackson-Cherry, Lisa R, editor. | Erford, Bradley T, editor.
Title: Crisis assessment, intervention, and prevention / [edited by] Lisa
R. Jackson-Cherry, Marymount University, Bradley T. Erford, Peabody
College at Vanderbilt University.
Description: Fourth edition. | Hoboken : Pearson, [2024] | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023008068 | ISBN 9780137878918 (paperback) | ISBN
9780138039110 (ebook) | ISBN 0137878915 (print)
Subjects: LCSH: Crisis intervention (Mental health services)
Classification: LCC RC480.6 .C7418 2024 | DDC
362.2/04251--dc23/eng/20230406
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023008068
ScoutAutomatedPrintCode
ISBN 10: 	0-13-787891-5
ISBN 13: 978-0-13-787891-8

-- 3 of 545 --

We embrace the many dimensions of diversity, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender,
sex, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, ability, age, and religious or political beliefs.
Education is a powerful force for equity and change in our world. It has the potential to deliver
opportunities that improve lives and enable economic mobility. As we work with authors to create
content for every product and service, we acknowledge our responsibility to demonstrate inclusivity
and incorporate diverse scholarship so that everyone can achieve their potential through learning.
As the world’s leading learning company, we have a duty to help drive change and live up to our
purpose to help more people create a better life for themselves and to create a better world.
Our ambition is to purposefully contribute to a world where:
Accessibility
We are also committed to providing products
that are fully accessible to all learners. As per
Pearson’s guidelines for accessible educational
Web media, we test and retest the capabilities
of our products against the highest standards
for every release, following the WCAG guidelines
in developing new products for copyright year
2022 and beyond.
You can learn more about Pearson’s
commitment to accessibility at
https://www.pearson.com/us/accessibility.html
Pearson is dedicated to creating bias-free content that reflects the diversity,
depth, and breadth of all learners’ lived experiences.
Pearson’s Commitment
to Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion
• Everyone has an equitable and lifelong
opportunity to succeed through learning.
• Our educational content accurately reflects
the histories and lived experiences of the
learners we serve.
• Our educational products and services are inclusive
and represent the rich diversity of learners.
• Our educational content prompts deeper
discussions with students and motivates them to
expand their own learning (and worldview).
Contact Us
While we work hard to present unbiased, fully
accessible content, we want to hear from you about
any concerns or needs with this Pearson product so
that we can investigate and address them.
Please contact us with concerns about any
potential bias at
https://www.pearson.com/report-bias.html
For accessibility-related issues, such as using
assistive technology with Pearson products,
alternative text requests, or accessibility
documentation, email the Pearson Disability Support
team at disability.support@pearson.com

-- 4 of 545 --

To all crisis workers who give selflessly to alleviate the pain of
others. To my family, Jim, Gabrielle, and Alexandra. In memory
of my parents, Barbara Japzon-Jackson and Francisco Japzon, MD,
whose sacrifices throughout my life are too numerable to list. Your
love continues to be felt even without your physical presence. I am
ever-mindful that all my blessings are attributed to God.
LJC
This effort is dedicated to The One: the Giver of energy, passion,
and understanding; Who makes life worth living and endeavors
worth pursuing and accomplishing; the Teacher of love
and forgiveness.
BTE

-- 5 of 545 --

PREFACE
The purpose for writing this text was to convey the practical implications of and appli-
cations for dealing with crisis situations. Prior to September 11, 2001, crisis counselors’
and university faculty members’ conceptualization of crisis was generally limited to
individual clients, primarily addressing suicidal client needs. But recent events (e.g.,
terrorism, school shootings, natural disasters), coupled with renewed societal concerns
over continuing violence (e.g., homicide, intimate partner violence, rape, sexual abuse),
have expanded our conceptualization of crisis and the needs of the new generation of
counselors. This text addresses this expanded concept of crisis in today’s world and
includes the practical applications that will help crisis counselors serve diverse clients
immediately in a changing world. Crisis intervention and crisis roles differ from tra-
ditional counseling. Understanding these differences is imperative to assisting indi-
viduals in a variety of crises. Crisis counselors, when able to assess and intervene
effectively, may also assist individuals in responding to future crises—a preventive,
resiliency-based approach.
Preservice students and mental health professionals in the field need crisis inter-
vention training to effectively intervene in the various crisis situations they will encoun-
ter in their roles as counselors with diverse populations and across settings. This short
text provides vital information on assessing and reacting to various crises involving
suicide, homicide, intimate partner violence, sexual assault/abuse, bereavement/grief,
substance use, natural disasters, war, and terrorism. The text provides practical applica-
tions for various crisis situations experienced by crisis workers. The text allows students
to become familiar with various crisis issues and situations and to practice necessary
skills before encountering the problem for the first time in the field. The text features
numerous crisis situations not found in other crisis texts and is of benefit to various
counseling specialties (e.g., school counseling, university counseling, mental health
counseling, and pastoral clinical mental health counseling). Students see the process as
a whole and are exposed to crucial information, clinical considerations, and practical
experiences on every crisis topic.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
The fourth edition of Crisis Assessment, Intervention, and Prevention has been purposefully
revised with new and expanded content to address the needs of a diverse group of
counselors in the field and counselors-in-training. The following features are new to this
edition:
• Application of the task model for assessment and intervention was integrated into
cases throughout the book.
• Technological and distance counseling applications of crisis intervention during a
pandemic were added to chapters, as applicable.
• Counselor safety, self-care, and wellness issues were added to each chapter, as
applicable.
• The schools/universities chapter has been expanded.
v

-- 6 of 545 --

vi 	Preface
• Updated references and citations connect practitioners with the latest
information.
• Updated and standardized chapter features include Case Studies, Voices from the
Field, Activities, Think About It features, and resource lists.
ORGANIZATION OF THIS TEXT
The text is divided into two parts. Part I: Elements of Crisis Intervention, which includes
Chapters 1 through 5, reviews the fundamental information related to crises and crisis
intervention.
In Chapter 1: Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Jason M.
McGlothlin, and Bradley T. Erford acknowledge that crises occur in a variety of settings
for a variety of reasons. Responses to crises are equally variable. Chapter 1 also provides
basic frameworks for assessing and conceptualizing crises, along with a discussion of
how crisis intervention may differ from traditional counseling. A task model of crisis
assessment and intervention is introduced in Chapter 1 and integrated into all chapters.
The model is a more comprehensive approach to assessing the whole person for a more
accurate intervention.
Chapter 2: Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations was written by James Jackson, Lisa R.
Jackson-Cherry, Latofia Parker, and Bradley T. Erford. When responding to a crisis,
counselors need to be able to act promptly, meaning that crisis preparedness is essential
to best practice during emergency situations. A brief overview of crisis planning guide-
lines and crisis counselor safety procedures is presented.
In Chapter 3: Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling, Paul F. Hard,
Laura L. Talbott-Forbes, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford propose that crisis
counselors well versed in crisis procedures and processes will be able to provide ethical,
skilled help in all types of crisis conditions. The goal of this chapter is to provide infor-
mation on ethical and legal considerations related to preventive measures, federal leg-
islations, sentinel court findings, and best practices regarding privacy matters in crisis
counseling.
Chapter 4: Essential Crisis Intervention Skills, by Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R.
Jackson-Cherry, provides an overview of the fundamental skills needed to engage in
effective crisis intervention work. The skills covered in this chapter focus on Ivey et al.’s
(2022) microskills hierarchy. At the heart of this hierarchy is the basic listening sequence,
an interrelated set of skills that not only fosters the development of rapport with clients
but also aids in the identification of interventions to help achieve a successful resolution
to the client’s crisis state. Examples of the skills in use, as well as practice exercises to
foster individual skill development, are provided.
Part I concludes with Chapter 5: Loss, Grief, and Bereavement, by Lisa R. Jackson-
Cherry and Bradley T. Erford, which covers approaches to crisis counseling with mourn-
ers, theories of grieving, and the variables that affect how a bereaved person mourns.
The chapter also addresses how timing, cause of death, and the role the relationship
played in a person’s life all mediate the mourning process, as well as an attempt to dis-
tinguish between “normal” grief and complicated bereavement. Chapter 5 concludes
with an outline of components that should be implemented when preparing for and
providing effective death notifications. Effective death notifications decrease the need

-- 7 of 545 --

Preface 	vii
for intense debriefings and a complicated grief process, reduce counselor burnout, and
may open the door for individuals to seek counseling when they are ready.
Part II: Special Issues in Crisis Intervention comprises the remaining chapters of the
text. Chapter 6: Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and
Homicide, by Judith Harrington, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford, recog-
nizes that suicide and homicide continue to play increasingly important roles in American
society and on the world stage and that they affect us personally as we, family members,
friends, and those in extended social networks struggle with the ever-increasing chal-
lenges of modern life. As personal liberty has increased, the chance for violent responses
to stressful situations has increased. The effectiveness of the care given by professional
emergency first responders, as well as the effectiveness of ordinary people in responding
to their own crises and the crises of those about whom they care, is improved by back-
ground knowledge involving current trends in and treatments for suicide and homicide
impulses.
Chapter 7: Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis,
by Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, reviews substance use disorders and
the disease of addiction, including causes, manifestations, and treatment. There are
numerous models and theories about the causes of alcoholism and drug addiction, and
this chapter introduces the medical and moral/legal models as well as important genetic,
sociocultural, and psychological theories.
Chapter 8: Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence is by Lisa R. Jackson-
Cherry and Bradley T. Erford. This chapter provides an overview of DV/IPV, discusses
the cycle of violence commonly experienced in abusive relationships, and explores per-
spectives on survivors who stay in relationships with abusive partners. Common crisis
issues experienced by survivors of DV/IPV are also highlighted. In addition, this chapter
explores special considerations regarding DV/IPV in lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
questioning, and other (LGBTQ+) relationships, relationships characterized by female-
to-male violence, abusive relationships in various racial-ethnic populations, and abusive
dating relationships among adolescents and young adults. Guidelines for crisis
counselors conducting DV/IPV assessments, responding to DV/IPV disclosure, plan-
ning for client safety, and addressing the emotional impact of DV/IPV are provided.
Finally, the goals, theories, and challenges associated with DV/IPV offender intervention
are discussed.
Chapter 9: Sexual Violence, by Robin Lee and Jennifer Jordan, reveals that sexual
violence is one of the most underreported crimes, with survivors facing a number of
potential physical, psychological, cognitive-behavioral, and emotional consequences.
Crisis counselors who work with individuals who have survived sexual violence need
to be aware of the multitude of challenges these individuals face, best practices for treat-
ment, and support services available in the local community.
In Chapter 10: Child Sexual Abuse, by Carrie Wachter Morris, child sexual abuse is
defined, signs and symptoms described, treatment interventions discussed, and guide-
lines for working with law enforcement and child protective services personnel provided.
In addition, this chapter addresses sexual offenders, their patterns of behavior, and
common treatment options.
Chapter 11: Military and First Responder Populations, by Seth C. W. Hayden and Lisa R.
Jackson-Cherry, acknowledges that serving the needs of military personnel and families

-- 8 of 545 --

viii 	Preface
presents unique challenges for counselors working in a variety of settings. This chapter
provides an in-depth discussion of the military experience and offers various approaches
to assist military service members and their families. The chapter also addresses the
unique issues encountered by first responders. Occupational stressors, medical emergen-
cies, threats to personal safety, acts of violence, deaths, and crimes are common daily
occurrences. Understanding the roles of first responders, their limitations based on
departmental policies, and how to work as a team with first responders is important for
crisis counselors. Common intervention programs with first responders are discussed to
meet their unique needs.
In Chapter 12: Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace,
by Jason M. McGlothlin, the information and interventions from the preceding chapters
are integrated into an overview of the various disasters and crises that crisis counselors
may need to address. Crisis intervention models and clinical implications for disasters
and terrorist situations are explored.
In Chapter 13: Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities, by
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, crisis management in the school and uni-
versity is explored, including the components of a crisis plan and the role of counselors
and other officials. Mitigation and prevention strategies are emphasized as critical ele-
ments in the educational environment. Crisis preparedness, response, recovery, and
debriefing procedures are applied to school and university settings. Special emphasis is
given to strategies for how to help students and parents during and after a crisis event.
Like Chapter 12, the content of this chapter infuses information found in previous
chapters to allow readers to synthesize what they have previously read.
Finally, Chapter 14: Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations, written by James Jackson,
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford, provides a brief overview of counselor
self-care concerns and wellness.
KEY CONTENT UPDATES BY CHAPTER
All chapters include updated references/sources and compliance with the 2024 CACREP
curricular standards. Application of the task model for assessment and intervention was
integrated into cases throughout the book. Technological and distance counseling appli-
cations of crisis intervention during a pandemic were added to chapters, as applicable.
Counselor safety, self-care, and wellness issues were added to chapters, as applicable.
Chapter features including Case Studies, Voices from the Field, Activities, Think About
It features, and resource lists were updated and standardized. In addition, specific con-
tent updates follow.
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention incorporated learning objectives,
reorganized content order for clarity, and added a new case study so that two cases are
used to exemplify the task model of crisis assessment and intervention.
Chapter 2: Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations incorporated learning objectives and
expanded several subsections to reflect current workplace safety protocols.
Chapter 3: Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling incorporated
learning objectives and bolstered several sections to included electronic health record
updates, technology, and spiritual and multicultural considerations.
Chapter 4: Essential Crisis Intervention Skills incorporated learning objectives,
SOLER content, and revised examples to be more diverse, inclusive, and crisis focused.

-- 9 of 545 --

Preface 	ix
Chapter 5: Loss, Grief, and Bereavement incorporated learning objectives and
added content related to delayed or masked grief reactions and the importance of culture
in understanding grief reactions.
Chapter 6: Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and
Homicide incorporated learning objectives, reorganized the chapter content order for
clarity, added a new section on nonsuicidal self-injury, introduced Q-trees and addi-
tional assessment strategies, updated prevalence statistics, and expanded the discussion
of violence risk factors.
Chapter 7: Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in
Crisis incorporated learning objectives, updated statistics, resources, and content and
revised cases to use more inclusive language.
Chapter 8: Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence incorporated learning
objectives, updated statistics, resources, and content and added a Q-tree assessment for
DV/IPV.
Chapter 9: Sexual Violence incorporated learning objectives, restructured order of
content for flow and clarity, clarified terminology, expanded the section on treatment of
juvenile offenders, and added a Q-tree.
Chapter 10: Child Sexual Abuse incorporated learning objectives and bolstered the
prevention of CSA section.
Chapter 11: Military and First Responder Populations incorporated learning objec-
tives and updated resources.
Chapter 12: Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Work-
place incorporated learning objectives, updated standards, expanded coverage of the
response to natural disasters and use of telehealth, and updated resources.
Chapter 13: Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities
incorporated learning objectives and updated statistics and was expanded to include
crime prevention through environmental design, the PREPaRE model, trauma-informed
approaches, soft and hard lockdown protocols, evacuation and reverse evacuation pro-
tocols, contingency planning, psychological safety, new resources, and university
response teams.
Chapter 14: Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations incorporated learning objec-
tives, the importance of ongoing counselor self-assessment, and new self-assessments
for wellness and resiliency.
PEDAGOGICAL FEATURES
Voices from the Field includes interviews with teachers, administrators, and curriculum
specialists related to instructional practices and policies. These Voices features take the
reader to the counseling frontlines for a real-life glimpse of what it is like to live the life
of a professional counselor.
Think About It includes thought-provoking questions and examples that challenge
the reader to dig deeper into the content and apply the learning to real-world contexts.
Activities provide applied learning, practice, and skill-building opportunities by
encouraging readers to act upon and apply what they are learning. It is oft said, “You
won’t really learn it until you do it.” Activities encourage readers to do just that!
In-chapter Case Studies with discussion questions and Skill Practice provide addi-
tional opportunities for students to apply what they learn to real-life case studies and

-- 10 of 545 --

x 	Preface
skill applications. Each case study is accompanied by processing questions that challenge
the reader to think more deeply and apply what they learn to benefit clients.
PEARSON ETEXTBOOK, LEARNING MANAGEMENT (LMS)–
COMPATIBLE ASSESSMENT BANK, AND OTHER INSTRUCTOR
RESOURCES
Pearson eTextbook
The Pearson eTextbook is a simple-to-use, mobile-optimized, personalized reading expe-
rience that allows you to easily highlight, take notes, and review key vocabulary all in
one place—even when offline. Seamlessly integrated videos and other rich media will
engage you and give you access to the help you need when you need it. To gain access
or to sign into your Pearson eTextbook, visit: https://www.pearson.com/pearson-etext.
Each chapter includes:
• Video Examples that illustrate principles or concepts aligned pedagogically with the
chapter. These clips include captions that ask you to consider how you would
respond to situations depicted in the video.
Assessment Bank
With this new edition, all assessment types—quizzes, application exercises, and chapter
tests—are included in LMS-compatible banks for the following learning management
systems: Blackboard, Canvas, D2L, and Moodle. These packaged files allow maximum
flexibility to instructors when it comes to importing, assigning, and grading. Assessment
types include:
• Chapter Quizzes Each chapter learning objective is the focus of a Chapter Review
Quiz. Learning objectives identify chapter content that is most important for learn-
ers and serve as the organizational framework for each chapter. The multiple-choice
questions in each quiz will measure your understanding of chapter content, guide
the expectations for your learning, and inform the accountability and the applica-
tions of your new knowledge. Each multiple-choice question includes feedback for
the correct answer and for each distractor to help guide students’ learning.
• Application Exercises Each chapter provides opportunities to apply what you have
learned through Application Exercises. These exercises are usually in short-answer
format and can be based on Pearson eTextbook Video Examples, written cases, or
scenarios modeled by pedagogical text features. A model response written by
experts is provided to help guide learning.
• Chapter Tests Suggested test items are provided for each chapter and include
questions in multiple choice and short answer/essay formats.
Instructor’s Manual
The Instructor’s Manual is provided as a Word document and includes resources to assist
professors in planning their course.

-- 11 of 545 --

Preface 	xi
PowerPoint® Slides
PowerPoint slides are provided for each chapter and highlight key concepts and sum-
marize the content of the text to make it more meaningful for students.
Note: All instructor resources—LMS-compatible assessment bank, instructor’s manual, and PowerPoint
slides—are available for instructor download at www.pearson.com. After searching for your title, be sure
you have selected “I’m an educator,” then select the “Instructor resources” tab.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all of the contributing authors for lending their expertise in the various topical
areas. As always, Rebecca Fox-Gieg, our editor at Pearson, and Shannon LeMay-Finn,
have been wonderfully responsive and supportive. Thanks to Purnima Narayanan,
Anitha Vijayakumar, and Sasibalan Chidambaram for shepherding this book through
production with great care. Thanks also to Laura Specht Patchkofsky for copyediting
and to Sheila Joyce for proofreading. Their attention to detail was greatly appreciated.
Special thanks go to the outside reviewers whose comments helped to provide substan-
tive improvement to the fourth edition: Franci Crepeau-Hobson, University of Colorado
Denver; Michelle Cox, Azusa Pacific University; Joyce A. DeVoss, Northern Arizona
University; Jessica Melendez Tyler, Auburn University; and Jeffrey Tysinger, Georgia
Southern University.

-- 12 of 545 --

xii
BRIEF CONTENTS
Part I 	Elements of Crisis Intervention
Chapter 1 	Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	1
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Jason M. McGlothlin, and Bradley T. Erford
Chapter 2 	Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	45
James Jackson, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Latofia Parker,
and Bradley T. Erford
Chapter 3 	Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	63
Paul F. Hard, Laura L. Talbott-Forbes, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry,
and Bradley T. Erford
Chapter 4 	Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	99
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Chapter 5 	Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	123
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry and Bradley T. Erford
Part II 	Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Chapter 6 	Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury,
and Homicide 	163
Judith Harrington, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford
Chapter 7 	Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients
in Crisis 	215
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Chapter 8 	Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	251
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry and Bradley Erford
Chapter 9 	Sexual Violence 	285
Robin Lee and Jennifer Jordan
Chapter 10 	Child Sexual Abuse 	333
Carrie Wachter Morris
Chapter 11 	Military and First Responder Populations 	365
Seth C. W. Hayden and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Chapter 12 	Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community
and Workplace 	399
Jason M. McGlothlin
Chapter 13 	Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	425
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Chapter 14 	Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	457
James Jackson, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford

-- 13 of 545 --

xiii
About the Editors 	xxiv
About the Contributing Authors 	xxvi
Part I 	Elements of Crisis Intervention
Chapter 1 	Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	1
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Jason M. McGlothlin,
and Bradley T. Erford
Preview 	1
Key Terms and Concepts Related to Crisis 	1
What Is a Crisis? 	2
Stress 	4
Trauma 	5
Responses to Trauma 	5
Coping 	6
Adaptation 	7
Resilience 	8
Crisis Intervention and Traditional Counseling 	10
Trauma-Informed Care 	12
Roles of and Collaboration Among Mental Health Workers During
a Crisis 	12
Professional Counselors 	12
Psychiatrists 	14
Psychologists 	14
Social Workers 	14
Paraprofessionals 	14
Hotline Workers 	16
Collaboration Among Crisis Workers 	16
Collaboration with Other Professionals 	16
Impact of COVID-19 	16
Approaches to Working with Clients in Crisis 	17
Crisis Intervention Theory 	19
The Genesis of Crisis Intervention in the United States 	19
Applied Crisis Theory 	21
The Task Model of Crisis Assessment and Intervention 	22
Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks 	22
Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks 	26
CONTENTS

-- 14 of 545 --

xiv 	Contents
Other Models of Crisis Assessment and Intervention 	36
The ABC-X and Double ABC-X Models of Crisis 	36
Elements of Stress and Crisis Theory 	38
Ecological and Contextual Considerations 	40
Summary 	44
Chapter 2 	Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	45
James Jackson, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Latofia Parker,
and Bradley T. Erford
Preview 	45
The Importance of Proactive Approaches to Safety 	45
Collaboration and Crisis Management 	46
Safety Issues 	47
High-Risk Clients 	47
Physical Safety 	48
Individual Clients in Crisis 	50
Special Issues Related to Safety and the Counselor 	53
Trauma-Informed Treatment 	55
Counselors Most at Risk 	55
Stalking 	56
In-Home Counseling 	56
Research and Recommendations on Client Violence 	58
Summary 	61
Chapter 3 	Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	63
Paul F. Hard, Laura L. Talbott-Forbes, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry,
and Bradley T. Erford
Preview 	63
Prevention Considerations 	64
Wellness 	64
Continuing Education 	65
Peer Supervision and Consultation 	65
Ethical Decision-Making Models 	66
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 	67
What Is HIPAA? 	68
How HIPAA Affects Crisis Counseling 	70
Family Education Rights and Privacy Act 	72
What Is FERPA? 	72
How FERPA Affects Crisis Counseling 	75
The Application of HIPAA and FERPA to College
and University Student Records 	77

-- 15 of 545 --

Contents 	xv
The Tarasoff v. Regents Decision 	79
What Was the Effect of Tarasoff v. Regents? 	79
How Tarasoff v. Regents Affects Crisis Counseling 	81
Special Considerations Related to Crises 	82
Negligence and Malpractice 	83
Documentation and Record Keeping 	84
Informed Consent 	86
Confidentiality 	87
Termination in Crisis Intervention 	89
Spiritual and Multicultural Considerations 	92
Crisis Intervention in a Technological World 	93
Summary 	97
Chapter 4 	Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	99
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Preview 	99
Essential Crisis Intervention Microskills 	99
Attending Skills 	101
Eye Contact 	101
Body Position 	102
Vocal Tone 	103
Silence 	104
The Basic Listening Sequence 	106
Asking Open and Closed Questions 	106
Reflecting Skills 	111
Deescalating Client Emotions 	119
Types of Aggression 	120
Handling Aggression 	121
Defusing Through Reflection 	121
Summary 	122
Chapter 5 	Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	123
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry and Bradley T. Erford
Preview 	123
Historical and Current Perspectives and Models
of Grief Work 	123
Lindemann’s Approach 	124
The Death Awareness Movement: Kübler-Ross 	125
Worden’s Task Model of Grieving 	127
Attachment and Loss 	128

-- 16 of 545 --

xvi 	Contents
Understanding Grief 	129
Cultural Factors in Grieving 	129
Ambiguous Loss and Disenfranchised Grief 	130
Mediators of the Grief Process 	133
Relationship: The Role of the Person Who Died 	133
Cause of Death 	136
Normal versus Complicated Bereavement and the DSM-5-TR 	137
Interventions for Grief and Loss 	139
Restoring Life’s Meaning 	140
COVID-19 and Other Pandemics 	143
Interventions 	144
Group Support 	146
Working with Children 	147
Family Interventions 	151
Difficulties in Grief Counseling 	151
Withdrawal 	152
Counseling the Crisis Counselor 	154
Effective Death Notifications 	154
In Person and in Pairs 	156
In Time and with Accurate Information 	156
In Plain Language 	158
With Compassion 	159
Follow-Up 	159
Debriefing with Team Members 	160
Summary 	161
Part II 	Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Chapter 6 	Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal
Self-Injury, and Homicide 	163
Judith Harrington, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford
Preview 	163
Prevalence and Rates of Suicide, Homicide, and Nonsuicidal Self-Injury 	164
Suicide Terminology 	166
Risk Factors, Protective Factors, and Warning Signs 	167
Risk Factors 	167
Protective Factors 	169
Warning Signs 	170
Acute versus Chronic Suicide Risk 	170

-- 17 of 545 --

Contents 	xvii
Level of Suicidal Risk 	172
Effective Questions and Assessment Strategies for
Suicide Intervention 	177
Question-Tree Approach for Suicide Assessment:
Essential Questions 	178
Suicide Lethality Assessments 	180
Treatment Planning and Care Management with a Suicidal Client 	182
Safety Plan 	182
Outpatient and Inpatient Treatment Decisions
and Management 	185
Postvention 	187
Nonsuicidal Self-Injury 	190
Assessments and Q-Tree 	191
Treatment Approaches 	193
Homicide 	194
Legal Issues 	195
Assessment of Homicide: Risk Factors 	196
School Homicide and Violence 	197
Workplace Violence and Homicide 	200
Threat Level Assessment 	201
Referral 	204
Treatment Options 	205
Needs of Survivors of Homicide Loss 	207
Summary 	212
Chapter 7 	Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with
Clients in Crisis 	215
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Preview 	215
Substance Use and Society 	216
Classification of Drugs 	216
Research on Substance Use, Crisis, and Society 	217
The Etiology and Risk Factors of Substance Use
and Dependence 	219
Factors That Increase Risk for Substance Use Disorders 	219
Screening, Assessment, and Diagnosis of Substance
Use Disorders 	220
Screening 	220
Commonly Used Assessment Instruments 	221
Assessment 	222

-- 18 of 545 --

xviii 	Contents
Diagnosis 	225
Assessing a Client’s Readiness to Change 	226
Treatment Admission and Placement 	228
Substance Use Treatment and Crisis 	230
Relapse and Crisis 	237
Harm Reduction 	238
Support Groups 	239
Marital and Family Treatment 	240
Co-occurring Disorders and Crisis 	240
Multicultural Perspectives, Substance Use, and Crisis 	242
Overview of the Elements of Crisis Intervention Related
to Substance Use 	244
Safety and Self-Care 	245
Diagnostic Considerations During a Crisis 	247
Essential Substance Use–Specific Crisis Intervention Skills 	247
Summary 	248
Chapter 8 	Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	251
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry and Bradley Erford
Preview 	251
Overview of Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	252
Cycle of Violence Theory 	253
Phase 1: Tension-Building 	254
Phase 2: The Acute Battering Incident 	254
Phase 3: The Honeymoon Phase 	254
Helpful Models for Understanding IPV/DV 	255
Common Crisis Issues 	257
Attending to Physical Injury 	257
Establishing Immediate Safety 	258
Reporting Intimate Partner Violence to the Police 	258
Intimate Partner Violence in Special Populations 	260
Race and Ethnicity 	260
Socioeconomic Status 	261
Immigrant Status 	261
Religious and Spiritual Beliefs 	262
Female-to-Male Violence 	262
LGBTQ+ Violence 	262
Disability Status 	264
Elder Abuse 	264

-- 19 of 545 --

Contents 	xix
Dating Violence among Adolescents and Young Adults 	265
The Counselor’s Response to Intimate Partner Violence
Clients in Crisis 	266
Screening for Intimate Partner Violence 	266
Question Tree Screening Approach 	269
Response to Intimate Partner Violence Disclosure 	270
Safety Planning and Harm Reduction Planning 	271
Intimate Partner Violence Shelters: Opportunities
and Challenges 	273
Addressing the Emotional Impact of Intimate
Partner Violence 	273
COVID-19 Pandemic Impacts on IPV/DV 	276
Batterer Intervention 	277
Safety 	277
Cessation of Violence 	277
Accountability 	278
Challenges to Referrals to Batterer
Intervention Programs 	278
Financial Resources 	279
Completion Rates 	279
Assessing Perpetrators of Intimate Partner Violence 	279
Personal Safety 	280
Summary 	282
Chapter 9 	Sexual Violence 	285
Robin Lee and Jennifer Jordan
Preview 	285
Sexual Violence, Sexual Assault, and Rape 	286
Penetration 	287
Noncontact Unwanted Sexual Experiences 	288
Consent 	288
Sexual Assault and Rape 	288
Sexual Assault 	289
Rape 	289
Rape Myths 	294
Victim versus Survivor 	296
Other Types of Sexual Violence 	296
Sexual Harassment 	297
Stalking 	297

-- 20 of 545 --

xx 	Contents
Human Trafficking 	297
Sexual Violence and School-Age Children 	299
Effects of Sexual Violence 	301
Physical Effects of Sexual Violence 	302
Cognitive-Behavioral Effects of Sexual Violence 	302
Emotional and Psychological Effects of Sexual Violence 	302
Sexual Assault and Current Issues 	306
Medical and Law Enforcement Involvement with Individuals
Who Experience Sexual Violence 	307
Medical Examinations 	308
Law Enforcement Involvement 	309
Treatment of Individuals Who Experience Sexual Violence 	309
Short-Term/Immediate Interventions 	310
Long-Term Interventions 	312
Cognitive-Behavioral Approaches 	313
Anxiety Management Training Programs 	315
Other Approaches to Trauma Treatment 	316
Spiritual and Multicultural Issues in Sexual Violence and Assault 	318
Spirituality and Religious Issues Related to Sexual Violence
and Assault 	319
Multicultural Issues and Victims with Special Needs 	320
LGBTQ+ Victims of Sexual Violence 	321
Perpetrators of Sexual Violence 	323
The Motivators of Rape 	323
Treatment of Sex Offenders 	324
Recidivism Rates of Adult Sex Offenders 	327
Sex Offender Registry 	328
Treatment of Juvenile Sex Offenders 	329
Summary 	331
Chapter 10 	Child Sexual Abuse 	333
Carrie Wachter Morris
Preview 	333
Prevalence and Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse 	334
Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse 	334
Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse 	336
Defining Child Sexual Abuse and Related Terms 	337
Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse 	337
Statutory Rape 	338

-- 21 of 545 --

Contents 	xxi
The Cycle of Child Sexual Abuse 	338
Signs and Symptoms of Child Sexual Abuse 	339
Intervention Strategies for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse 	341
Initial Disclosure and Interviewing for Child Sexual Abuse 	341
Collecting Information for an Initial Report of Child
Sexual Abuse 	346
Forensic Child Sexual Abuse Interviews 	347
Reporting Child Sexual Abuse 	349
Reporting Past Incidents of Child Sexual Abuse 	350
Treatment of Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse 	350
Child Sexual Abuse Coping Strategies and Their Impact
on Treatment 	353
Perpetrators of Child Sexual Abuse 	354
The Characteristics of Child Sexual Abuse Perpetrators 	354
Treatment of Adult Sex Offenders 	357
Treatment of Adolescent Sex Offenders 	359
Overview of the Elements of Crisis Intervention Related to Child
Sexual Abuse 	361
Safety 	361
Diagnostic Considerations during a Crisis 	361
Essential Child Sexual Abuse–Specific Crisis
Intervention Skills 	362
Summary 	363
Chapter 11 	Military and First Responder Populations 	365
Seth C. W. Hayden and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Preview 	365
Military Personnel and Their Families 	366
Military Culture 	367
Mental Health and Military Stigmatization 	368
The Cycle of Deployment 	369
The Physical and Emotional Effects of War-Zone Deployment 	370
Separation from the Military and Mental Health Issues 	371
Issues for Military Families Related to Deployment 	372
Familial Stress Associated with Deployment 	372
Reunification 	373
Counselor Intervention with Military Service Members 	373
Interventions for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	374
Traumatic Brain Injury 	376

-- 22 of 545 --

xxii 	Contents
Suicide Risk Assessment 	377
Supporting Military Families 	377
The Spiritual and Religious Needs of Deployed Military
Service Members 	378
Special Risks First Responders Face 	380
Law Enforcement Officers 	381
Stressors of Law Enforcement Officers 	382
Emergency Medical Services Professionals 	388
Stressors of Emergency Medical Services Professionals 	389
Firefighters 	391
Stressors of Firefighters 	391
Crisis Intervention with First Responders 	392
Psychological First Aid 	392
Critical Incident Stress Management 	393
Other Crisis Interventions 	394
Summary 	396
Chapter 12 	Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community
and Workplace 	399
Jason M. McGlothlin
Preview 	399
Leadership Roles in a Multidisciplinary Crisis Response Team 	399
Natural Disasters 	402
Types of Natural Disasters 	402
Responses to Natural Disasters 	403
Natural Disaster Counseling Using Telehealth 	410
Terrorism 	410
Interventions After a Disaster or Act of Terrorism 	412
Riots 	416
Hostage Situations 	418
Resources for Additional Study and Training on Community
and Workplace Crises 	422
Summary 	423
Chapter 13 	Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools
and Universities 	425
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
Preview 	425
Characteristics of School and University Crises 	425
Mitigation and Prevention 	427
Crisis Planning and Preparedness 	429

-- 23 of 545 --

Contents 	xxiii
Establishing a Crisis Team 	430
Taking Steps to Prepare for a Crisis 	431
Developing a Written Crisis Plan 	432
Establishing Lockdown Protocols 	435
Establishing Evacuation Protocols 	436
Establishing Communication and Other Protocols 	437
Response 	438
Recovery 	440
Helping Students 	441
Helping Parents/Guardians 	442
Notifying Students of a Death, Accident, or Event 	447
Debriefing 	449
Specific Guidance Related to Responding to Crises In
University Settings 	450
Shelter-in-Place 	451
Threat Assessment Teams 	453
Campus Assessment Response and Evaluation and Other
University Crisis Response Teams 	453
Summary 	456
Chapter 14 	Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	457
James Jackson, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford
Preview 	457
Counselor Self-Care Is Essential 	457
Ongoing Self-Assessment for Counselors 	458
Self-Assessment of the Counselor during Crises 	459
Countertransference 	461
Burnout 	461
Compassion Fatigue 	463
Vicarious Trauma 	464
Vicarious Resiliency 	466
Self-Care Strategies 	468
Emphasizing Self-Care in Counselor Training Programs 	468
Supervision and Self-Care 	471
Overview of the Elements of Crisis Intervention Related
to Self-Care 	476
Summary 	478
References 	481
Index 	503

-- 24 of 545 --

xxiv
ABOUT THE EDITORS
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, PhD, LCPC, NCC, ACS, NCSC, PCE, is a professor and director in
the School of Counseling at Marymount University. She received a PhD in counselor education
and supervision, an EdS in counseling, a Master’s of Criminal Justice from the University of South
Carolina, and a BA in Psychology and Sociology from the University of Notre Dame of Maryland.
She is a Fellow with the American Counseling Association (ACA) and served two terms on the
ACA Governing Council. Dr. Jackson-Cherry is the recipient of the ACA Carl Perkins Government
Relations Award; the Lifetime Service Award from the Military and Government Counseling
Association (MGCA) for her contributions with Law Enforcement and families; the Outstanding
Service Award, Leadership Award, and Meritorious Service Award by the Association for
Spiritual, Ethical, and Religious Values in Counseling (ASERVIC); the Outstanding Leadership
recipient of the European Branch of the American Counseling Association; the Outstanding
Professor recipient of the Mediterranean Region Counselors Association; and the Outstanding
Service and Leadership Awards from the Licensed Clinical Professional Counselors of Maryland.
Dr. Jackson-Cherry is a licensed clinical professional counselor in Maryland, national certified
counselor, approved clinical supervisor, and national certified school counselor. She is approved
as a pastoral counselor educator by the American Association of Pastoral Counselors. She is
trained as a disaster mental health counselor by the American Red Cross and in Critical Incident
Stress Management/Debriefing by the International Critical Incident Stress Foundation.
Dr. Jackson-Cherry is past president of ASERVIC, a division of ACA, and served on the Executive
Board of the American Association of State Counseling Boards. She was appointed as the Task
Force Committee Chair by MGCA to develop Best Practices for Counseling First Responder
Populations. She was appointed to the Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists in
Maryland, serving as chairperson for 4 years, chair of the Ethics, Credentials, and Legislative/
Regulations Committees; and interim Executive Director. Dr. Jackson-Cherry’s research focuses
mainly on the areas of crisis intervention, ethical and legal issues in counseling and supervision,
stressors with military and first responders, risk assessment, and religious and spiritual integra-
tion. She is the primary investigator and project director for a $1.2 million grant to increase clinical
mental health counselors working with medically underserved populations and communities.
She teaches courses primarily in the areas of crisis assessment and intervention, pastoral coun-
seling integration, ethical and legal issues in counseling, and clinical mental health counseling
internship. She coordinates an international class annually on global mental health issues and
responses. Dr. Jackson-Cherry has been in private practice in Maryland for more than 20 years,
the majority in an interdisciplinary and primary care setting where she worked with children,
adults, and families focusing on anxiety, depression, substance use, autism, and behavioral issues.
She served for many years as lead counselor with COPS-Kids (Concerns of Police Survivors-Kids)
during National Law Enforcement Officers Week, providing group counseling to children who
experienced the death of a law enforcement officer-parent in the line of duty. Prior to her faculty
appointment in 2000, her previous clinical experiences consisted of clinical director for a mobile
crisis team in Baltimore City, behavioral specialist (Grades K–5), conflict resolution coordinator/
counselor (Grades 9–12), and group co-facilitator for a women’s maximum-security correctional
facility. She also worked with the dual-diagnosed population, in a police department youth coun-
seling services division, and as a crisis intervention training facilitator for law enforcement basic
trainees and hostage negotiators. Dr. Jackson-Cherry has written numerous articles, book reviews,

-- 25 of 545 --

About the Editors 	xxv
and book chapters and participated extensively at state, national, and international confer-
ences over the past 25 years.
Bradley T. Erford, PhD, LCPC, NCC, LPC, LP, LSP, is professor and director of the human
development counseling program of the Department of Human and Organizational
Development in Peabody College at Vanderbilt University and Human Development
Counseling Program Director. He was the 61st President of the American Counseling
Association (ACA) for 2012–2013 and ACA Treasurer for 2017–2018. He is a Fulbright Specialist
and is the recipient of the ACA Research Award, ACA Extended Research Award, ACA Arthur
A. Hitchcock Distinguished Professional Service Award, ACA Professional Development
Award, Thomas J. Sweeney Award for Visionary Leadership and Advocacy, and ACA Carl D.
Perkins Government Relations Award. Dr. Erford was also inducted as an ACA Fellow. In
addition, he has received the Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education (AACE)
AACE/MECD Research Award, AACE Exemplary Practices Award, AACE President’s Merit
Award, the Association for Counselor Education and Supervision’s Robert O. Stripling Award
for Excellence in Standards, Maryland Association for Counseling and Development (MACD)
Maryland Counselor of the Year, MACD Counselor Advocacy Award, MACD Professional
Development Award, and MACD Counselor Visibility Award. He is the editor of numerous
texts including Orientation to the Counseling Profession, Crisis Intervention and Prevention, Group
Work in the Schools, Internship and Practicum Experiences in Counseling, Group Work: Process and
Applications, Transforming the School Counseling Profession, Professional School Counseling:
A Handbook of Principles, Programs and Practices, Assessment for Counselors, Research and Evaluation
in Counseling, and The Counselor’s Guide to Clinical, Personality, and Behavioral Assessment and
coauthor of several more books: Mastering the NCE and CPCE, 45 Techniques Every Counselor
Should Know, Free Access Assessment Instruments for Common Mental Health and Addiction Issues,
Educational Applications of the WISC-IV, and Group Activities: Firing Up for Performance. Dr. Erford
is also the General Editor of The American Counseling Association Encyclopedia of Counseling. His
research specialization falls primarily in development and technical analysis of psychoeduca-
tional tests and has resulted in the publication of more than 90 refereed journal articles, 1,500
book chapters, and 20 published tests. He is editor emeritus of Measurement and Evaluation in
Counseling and Development (MECD) and Senior Associate Editor of Journal of Counseling &
Development. Dr. Erford was a representative to the ACA Governing Council and the ACA
20/20 Visioning Committee. He is a past president and past treasurer of the Association for
Assessment and Research in Counseling, past chair and parliamentarian of the American
Counseling Association - Southern (U.S.) Region; past chair of ACA’s Task Force on High
Stakes Testing; past chair of ACA’s Standards for Test Users Task Force; past chair of ACA’s
Interprofessional Committee; past chair of the ACA Public Awareness and Support Committee
(co-chair of the National Awards Sub-committee); chair of the Convention and past chair of
the Screening Assessment Instruments Committees for AACE; past president of MACD; past
president of Maryland Association for Measurement and Evaluation; past president of
Maryland Association for Counselor Education and Supervision; and past president of the
Maryland Association for Mental Health Counselors. He was an associate editor of the Journal
of Counseling & Development. Dr. Erford is a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor, Licensed
Professional Counselor, National Certified Counselor, Licensed Psychologist and Licensed
School Psychologist. A graduate of The University of Virginia (PhD), Bucknell University
(MA), and Grove City College (BS), he teaches courses in assessment, research and evaluation
in counseling, and stress management (not that he needs it, of course).

-- 26 of 545 --

xxvi
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Paul F. Hard, PhD, LPC-S, NCC, is Chair of the Department of Counselor, Leadership, and
Special Education at Auburn University at Montgomery, where his concentrations are in clinical
mental health and marriage and family counseling. He has over 26 years of agency counseling
and private practice experience. Dr. Hard’s clinical foci have been in the areas of addictions,
relationship counseling, individuals with LGBTQ+ sexual identities, and trauma. His research
interests have been in the areas of ethics, counselor/professional impairment and wellness, com-
plicated grieving in pre- and postnatal loss, professional credentialing and advocacy, sexual
minority issues in counseling, and ministerial termination.
Judith Harrington, PhD, LPC-S, LMFT, is an associate professor and program coordinator at the
University of Montevallo in Alabama, and also maintained a private practice for over 30 years in
Birmingham, providing counseling and consultation to individuals, couples, families, groups, and
agencies. She is an approved trainer for the Assessing and Managing Suicidal Risk curriculum for
mental health professionals on behalf of the Suicide Prevention Resource Center at the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). Since 2008, Dr. Harrington has
instructed the graduate counselor education curriculum on suicide for the University of Alabama
at Birmingham and the University of Montevallo. She served for 5 years on the Standards, Train-
ing, and Practices Committee for the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at SAMHSA. She has
served the suicidally bereaved community by facilitating the SOS Bereavement Group for 14 years
and was the first- and twice-elected president of the nonprofit Alabama Suicide Prevention and
Resources Coalition (ASPARC). Dr. Harrington’s state and ASPARC were twice awarded a 3-year
Garrett Lee Smith Youth Suicide Prevention grant for which, among its many initiatives, she devel-
oped the Comprehensive Suicide Prevention Resource Directory for mental health professionals
and concerned citizens, found at www.asparc.org.
Seth C. W. Hayden, PhD, NCC, is an associate professor of counseling and coordinator of the
clinical mental health program at Wake Forest University. His research focuses on the connection
between career development and mental health. In addition, he examines the career and personal
development needs of military service members, veterans, and their families. Dr. Hayden is a
licensed clinical mental health counselor in North Carolina, a licensed professional counselor in
Virginia, a national certified counselor, a certified clinical mental health counselor, a certified
career counselor educator, and an approved clinical supervisor. In addition, he is past president
of the Military and Government Counseling Association and National Career Development Asso-
ciation, both divisions of the American Counseling Association.
James Jackson, PhD, LPC-S, NCC, is a professor and coordinator of the Clinical Mental Health
Counseling track at the University of Montevallo in Alabama. His clinical specialties include play
therapy, trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy, and advocacy services with abused chil-
dren and adolescents in schools, foster homes and group homes, as well as serving adults and
families through private practice, in-home, and community mental health agencies.
Jennifer Jordan, PhD, LPCS, NCC, is a professor in the Counseling and Development program
at Winthrop University. She is president of the South Carolina Board of Examiners for licensed
professional counselors, marriage and family therapists, addictions counselors, and psychoedu-
cational specialists and Executive Director of the South Carolina Counseling Association.

-- 27 of 545 --

About the Contributing Authors 	xxvii
Robin Lee, PhD, is a professor in the Professional Counseling program in the Womack
Educational Leadership Department at Middle Tennessee State University, specializing in mental
health counseling. She earned a PhD in counselor education and supervision from Mississippi
State University and an MEd in community counseling and a BA in psychology from Delta State
University in Cleveland, Mississippi. Dr. Lee is a licensed professional counselor with Mental
Health Service Provider status in Tennessee, a national certified counselor, and an approved clini-
cal supervisor.
Jason M. McGlothlin, PhD, LPCC-S, is an associate professor in the Counselor Education and
Supervision program at Kent State University. He earned his PhD in counselor education from
Ohio University and is a licensed professional clinical counselor with supervisory endorsement
in Ohio. For nearly 30 years, he has specifically worked with suicidal clients in a variety of settings
including his private practice (McGlothlin Counseling & Consultation, LLC). Through his practice
and research, Dr. McGlothlin developed the SIMPLE STEPS model of suicide lethality assessment
and presents and consults nationally and internationally on suicide assessment practices. He has
served as president of the Ohio Counseling Association (2000–2001) and in 2022 began serving as
chair of the American Counseling Association Midwest Region.
Latofia P. Parker, PhD, LPC, NCC, BC-TMH, completed her doctoral study at the University
of Alabama and is an associate professor in the Counselor Education program at the University
of Montevallo, with primary teaching responsibilities in grief and loss, ethical and legal issues in
counseling, and clinical supervision. Her research interests include crisis intervention, counselor
education pedagogy, and ethical and legal issues in counselor education.
Laura L. Talbott-Forbes, PhD, MCHES, is an associate professor in the Department of Human
Studies at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. She has served as a prevention specialist
with general college student health issues and director of substance abuse prevention programs
at a large university. Her research interests include the prevention of substance abuse, education
and early intervention with potentially suicidal persons, and other public health issues that impact
young adult health.
Carrie Wachter Morris, PhD, NCC, ACS, is an associate professor of Counseling and Educational
Development at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, where she coordinates the school
counseling track. She served as president (2015–2016) of the Association for Assessment and
Research in Counseling. She has nearly two dozen articles in national peer-refereed journals, one
book, and an additional 10 chapters in different works. She presents regularly at state, regional,
and national conferences on topics related to the scholarship of teaching and learning in counselor
education, crisis, and school counselor education.

-- 28 of 545 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 29 of 545 --

1
PREVIEW
Crises occur in a variety of settings for a variety of reasons. Responses to crises can
come in various forms and can include multiple levels of complexities. In this chapter,
we discuss how crisis intervention may differ from traditional counseling, describe the
roles of various professionals and paraprofessionals who work in crisis teams, describe
actions crisis workers can take depending on the crisis affecting the client, describe basic
historical and contemporary crisis theories, and describe models of crisis assessment and
intervention. We start our exploration of crisis intervention by discussing key terms
and concepts related to crisis.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1.1 Describe the key terms and concepts in the field of crisis intervention.
1.2 Compare crisis intervention and traditional counseling.
1.3 Describe the roles of various professionals and paraprofessionals who work in
crisis teams.
1.4 Describe approaches crisis workers can take depending on the crisis affecting the
client.
1.5 Describe historical and contemporary crisis theories.
1.6 Apply the task model of crisis assessment and intervention to crisis situations.
1.7 Apply other models of crisis assessment and intervention to crisis situations.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS RELATED TO CRISIS
Learning Objective 1.1 Describe the key terms and concepts in the field of crisis
intervention.
To help plan effective crisis response strategies, it is important to keep a few key concepts
in mind and to be aware that many of the terms used in stress and crisis literature are
used inconsistently, interchangeably, or without specificity. While the definitions of
many terms seem obvious, some have unique connotations within the context of crisis
intervention. In this section, we define key phrases and concepts used to describe
crisis intervention theories and models.
1 Basic Concepts of Crisis
Intervention
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Jason M. McGlothlin, and Bradley T. Erford
C H A P T E R

-- 30 of 545 --

2 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
What Is a Crisis?
If asked to think about a crisis, what comes to mind? Natural disasters? School shootings?
Suicide? Domestic violence? How do some people survive crisis events adaptively and
with resilience, while others endure mental health issues for months, years, or a lifetime?
To begin, situations such as tornadoes, earthquakes, acts of terror, and suicide do
not in and of themselves constitute crises. A crisis is an event that may or may not be
perceived as a disruption in life. A crisis does not necessarily lead to trauma. Typically,
a crisis is described using a trilogy definition; that is, there are three essential elements
that must be present for an event to be considered a crisis: (1) a precipitating event, (2) a
perception of the event that leads to subjective distress, and (3) diminished functioning
when the distress is not alleviated by customary coping mechanisms or other resources.
Using the trilogy definition, some experience diminished functioning following a crisis
event experience, while others, however affected or horrified, usually continue to
function as normal. For these individuals, the crisis event was not perceived as traumatic,
and it did not disrupt their everyday lives.
James and Gilliland (2017) reviewed numerous definitions of crisis that exist in the
literature and summarized crisis as “a perception or experiencing of an event or situa-
tion as an intolerable difficulty that exceeds the person’s current resources and coping
mechanisms” (p. 3). When a crisis is perceived as disruptive to one’s life, the crisis may
be experienced as a traumatic event. Fortunately, most individuals can work through
crisis events. For many who experience a crisis, the experience can assist in preventing
or working through future crises, therefore decreasing trauma in the future.
No formula exists that explains why some individuals can work through a crisis,
while others who experience the same crisis find it traumatic and disruptive to daily
functioning. Therefore, the idea that an individual’s perception of an event determines
whether the event will become traumatic is paramount to understanding an individual
and making a plan of action. However, an individual’s perception of an event can be
influenced by various determinants, such as the individual’s level of resilience, resources,
coping mechanisms, and support system.
Often a crisis can lead to additional crises that can be debilitating and affect not only
the person but also the entire family or community system. When a person encounters
multiple crises, or when past crises the person was exposed to were not resolved
effectively, the person or system could experience trauma. When a person experiences
trauma, they may need assistance from a crisis counselor to assess the situation, evaluate
options for adjusting to the crisis, explore resources currently available to the client,
work through the current crisis, and connect with new resources and referrals. As a first
exposure to the potential characteristics of a crisis, see Case Study 1.1 and answer the
discussion questions that follow. Also read Voices from the Field 1.1.
CASE STUDY 1.1
The Nguyens: A Natural Disaster Affects a Family System
Vin and Li Nguyen are recent immigrants to the United States. They reside in a small
town along the Gulf Coast of Mississippi, where many other Vietnamese immigrants
have settled. Like many new members of the community, the Nguyens are learning

-- 31 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	3
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 1.1
My First Day
Beth Graney
I spent the summer planning all the classroom lessons
and groups I would offer students in my first position
as the only school counselor in a K–12 school in rural
Iowa. After the principal shared with me that the
previous counselor never really connected with many
of the kids, I knew I needed to be especially creative to
win their trust. The principal told me the town had a
saying, “If you aren’t born here, you’re not from here!”
How would a big-city girl from Chicago ever fit in?
All these thoughts raced through my head,
drowning out the din of my radio as I drove the
20 miles to school. The newscaster’s report that a
couple died in a motorcycle accident the previous night
barely registered. When I arrived early that morning,
the principal greeted me at the door and pulled me into
her office. “The parents of two of our students died last
night, and other students have arrived at school crying.
You have to do something,” she blurted as she hurried
off to take care of notifying the rest of the staff. My
mouth went dry and my thoughts started to race. What
should I say? What should I do? What strategies would
be most effective? More importantly, I thought, I don’t
know a single student in this building!
As I entered the large classroom that was now my
office, I saw 20 kids ranging in age from early elementary
to high school. As I put down my bag on the desk,
I looked at the crying kids, pulled up a chair, and said,
“Who wants to start?” Someone began with, “They
are my friends, my neighbors, and our classmates!”
I listened. Soon another child said, “My grandma is
sick,” and then others said, “My dad lost his job” and
“My parents are getting divorced.” I listened. As the
morning progressed, some kids went on to class, others
went home, and more came from class or home to share
their grief and fears with the group. I listened some
more. When the long day finally ended, I did not know
everyone’s name that I had written on the sign-in sheet
by memory, but I had a growing sense of community.
Two days later, after listening to many students
and teachers explain how this tragedy had affected
them, the principal told me the funeral service would
be held in the gym because the gathering would be
so large. She thought it would be important for me to
to speak, read, and write English and are hoping to become naturalized citizens of the
United States someday. After arriving in the United States, the Nguyens invested all
their money in an old shrimp boat to support themselves by selling their daily catch to
local seafood processing facilities.
Recently, the shrimp boat was heavily damaged, and the seafood processing
facilities were destroyed by a hurricane. Subsequently, the Nguyens had no income for
quite a while. With that and no health insurance, they relied on the county department
of public health for prenatal care when Li became pregnant. Li’s pregnancy progressed
normally; however, her daughter was born with spina bifida. As you read this chapter,
try to conceptualize the Nguyens’ situation according to the crisis models presented.
Discussion Questions
1. What incidents have occurred in the Nguyens’ lives that could be considered pro-
voking stressor events?
2. Beyond these events, are there additional stressors that the Nguyens must address?
3. What resources are the Nguyens using?
4. What additional information do you need to determine whether the Nguyens are
in crisis?
5. What factors will predict the outcome for this family?
(continued)

-- 32 of 545 --

Stress
In Western culture, the word stress is widely used to describe emotional phenomena
ranging from feeling mild irritation and frustration to being frozen with fear. As the
word relates to crises, however, it applies more to the ability to function than it does
to affect. The term stress was introduced into medical literature by Hans Selye (1978),
to describe nonspecific responses of the human body to demands that are placed on it.
Stress activates what Selye called the “general adaptation syndrome,” which is associated
with biological responses. Changes in hormonal patterns, such as increased production
of adrenaline and cortisol, over time, may deplete the body’s energy resources, impair
the immune system, and lead to illness. Selye distinguished between two types of stress:
(1) distress (i.e., changes that are perceived negatively) and (2) eustress (i.e., changes
that are perceived positively). He noted that distress tends to cause more biological
damage than eustress, the latter seeming to contribute to well-being. Thus, how stress is
perceived influences adaptation.
The terms stress and crisis often have been used interchangeably in the literature,
thus creating a bit of confusion. Boss (2006) has attempted to distinguish between the
two concepts, stating that stress is a continuous variable (i.e., stress may be measured by
degree), whereas crisis is a dichotomous variable (i.e., there either is or is not a crisis).
In other words, it is helpful to think of a crisis as simply an event. There either is a crisis
or there is not a crisis. Stress may be thought of as a process that exists over time, such
as the stress of having a loved one serving in the military in a hostile environment. In
contrast, crisis may be thought of as a temporary period during which typical coping
ceases and there is intense disorganization and disequilibrium. For example, a family
accustomed to coping with the stress of having a loved one serving in the military and
stationed in a combat zone may experience crisis when that individual returns home.
The family’s boundaries, structure, and coping mechanisms may have changed during
the loved one’s absence, leaving the family inadequately equipped to function with that
loved one’s homecoming.
Stress is the pressure or tension on an individual or family system. It is a response
to demands brought about by a stressor event and represents a change in the equilibrium
or steady state of an individual or family system (Boss, 2006; Bush & Price, 2020). The
degree of stress experienced hinges on perceptions of, and meanings attributed to,
the stressor event. While anything with the potential to change some aspect of the
individual or family (e.g., boundaries, roles, beliefs) might produce stress, increased
stress levels do not necessarily always lead to crises. Often, stress can be managed, and
the family or individual can arrive at a new steady state.
be there to support the kids in case anyone needed
immediate assistance. I listened as the minister and other
family members eulogized the parents. After the service,
I met many of the parents and community members,
and again I listened to their grief and pain. When a
person dies, the family and friends grieve. But in a small
town, when someone dies, the whole town grieves.
As I drove home that day, I felt drained and
wondered whether I had been helpful because I had
no great insights or strategies to offer the students or
parents as to why something so difficult and tragic had
happened. All I really did was listen. It was then that
it struck me that it was the first skill ever taught in my
graduate counseling program: Listen! And so began
one of my most memorable years in counseling. My
phone did not stop ringing and my sign-up sheet was
never empty. I made the transition from city girl to rural
school counselor simply by listening.
4 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention

-- 33 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	5
Since stress can be measured by degree, a common and effective technique used in
assessing stress levels and changes to stress is scaling (Erford, 2020). This simple technique
can be used to monitor increases and decreases in stress (as well as just about any other
symptom or variable such as depression, sadness, anger, etc.) and then to compare present
distress to a baseline prior to the crisis event. This may occur, for example, when asking a
client in crisis, “On a scale of 0 to 10 (with 0 being none and 10 being the highest you ever
experienced), what would you rate the level of anxiety you are feeling right now?” If you
have worked with the client previously, you can use the number as a comparison in the
next contact, “Last time we met, you said your anxiety was an 8. Where would you rate
it today?” Then the same scaling can be used to understand possible helpful or hindering
coping resources, changes in symptoms, or new events. For example, in this dialogue, if
the client says they are now at a 2, you could inquire; “The last time we met, you rated
your stress at an 8 and now you report a 2. What has made the number lower today?” For
a crisis worker, this simple assessment can help better understand whether coping tools or
resources are helpful and allow for adjustments. We suggest using a scale from 0 to 10 and
identifying the end points so there is no confusion or misinterpretation of rating levels.
Trauma
Stressor events that involve trauma are powerful and overwhelming, and they threaten
perceptions of safety and security. Some may be single incidents of relatively short-term
duration, whereas others may occur over longer periods of time, resulting in prolonged
exposure to the threatening stressor.
Just as the terms stress and crisis have been incorrectly used interchangeably, so
too have the terms crisis and trauma. A crisis is the event that, by itself, does not result in
trauma. The crisis event cannot be controlled. If a person perceives the crisis event in a
way that affects daily functioning, the crisis event may become a traumatic experience.
Likewise, stress may or may not be experienced because of an event. Rather, it depends
on the individual’s perception of the crisis.
According to the fifth edition, text revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2022), a traumatic
event involves threatened or actual death or serious injury, or a threat to the well-being
of oneself or another person. Traumatic events may be human-caused accidents or
catastrophes. Other traumatic events include acts of deliberate cruelty, such as acts of
terrorism, school and workplace shootings, and homicides and sexual assaults. Note that
these crisis events created trauma in some people but not in all people. The crisis was an
event; trauma was a reaction to that event.
Responses to Trauma
In general, people experiencing traumatic events respond with intense feelings of fear and
helplessness (American Psychiatric Association, 2022). Most people respond to trauma
within a normal range of reactions to abnormal events, whereby the individual’s baseline
is not disrupted to the point that it causes impairment or dysfunction. Others become
significantly distressed and impaired, and a few develop illnesses such as acute stress
disorder (ASD) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The risk for psychological
disturbance tends to increase with the magnitude or intensity of the traumatic stressor
and with the degree to which the event was human caused and intended to harm.

-- 34 of 545 --

6 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Reactions to traumatic events typically include physical, behavioral, cognitive,
emotional, and spiritual responses, which tend to occur in stages but ultimately are
temporary. These transient reactions are often referred to as reactions to posttraumatic
stress. Physical responses involve the autonomic nervous system as the person prepares
to “fight, flee, or freeze” and may be experienced through symptoms such as palpitations,
shortness of breath, nausea, muscle tension, headaches, and fatigue. Behaviorally,
individuals may experience sleep and dietary changes, social withdrawal, purposeful
avoidance of or attention to reminders of the trauma, changes in relationships, and
increased use of alcohol or other mood-altering substances. Cognitive responses include
rumination, preoccupation, forgetfulness, and difficulty concentrating. Emotional
responses include distress, anxiety, impatience, irritability, anger, and symptoms of
depression. Finally, spiritual responses are centered on existential questions and attempts
to find meaning in the traumatic event. These reactions may transpire over a period of
up to 2 years but are not considered pathological.
While most people return to a level of equilibrium and healthy functioning following
a reaction to traumatic stress, some may experience consequences that impair their ability
to function. Many of these people experience one or two of the trauma- and stressor-related
disorders described in the DSM-5-TR: ASD or PTSD. These two disorders are similar in
their symptomology and differ mainly in their temporal association with exposure to
the traumatic event. According to the DSM-5-TR, the diagnostic criteria for ASD and
PTSD include hyperarousal (e.g., hypervigilance, difficulty concentrating, exaggerated
startle responses, sleep disturbance), reexperiencing (e.g., flashbacks, nightmares,
intrusive thoughts), negative cognitions and mood (e.g., memory lapse, exaggerated
negative beliefs, distorted cognitions, lessened interest in activities), and avoidance (e.g.,
attempts to avoid reminders of the traumatic event, inability to recall components of the
event, detachment, dissociation, restricted affect)—symptoms that lead to distress and
impairment in key areas of functioning such as work and interpersonal relationships. If
these symptoms appear within 1 month of exposure to the trauma, ASD is diagnosed. If
exposure to the traumatic event occurred more than a month prior to the development
of these symptoms, PTSD is diagnosed. If symptoms persist for more than 3 months,
PTSD is considered chronic. For the most part, the role of the crisis counselor would be
to gather this information, indicate what the client reported about these events, and list
with which symptoms the client presented.
Coping
A crisis event may be perceived as traumatic due to a lack of resources or failed coping
strategies. Coping is defined as any behavioral or cognitive action that is taken to manage
stress. In general, coping is considered a process (Erford, 2023). The process begins with
an appraisal of a stressor and its potential for harm. If the situation is perceived as
challenging or threatening (as opposed to irrelevant), further assessment takes place
to determine what responses are possible and what the potential outcomes might be.
Responses to stress fall into three broad categories: problem-focused coping, emotion-
focused coping, and avoidance-focused coping (Linley & Joseph, 2004).
Problem-focused coping involves taking direct behavioral actions to change or
modify aspects of the environment that are thought to be the causes of stress. When this
type of coping strategy is employed, efforts are made to define the problem, generate

-- 35 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	7
possible solutions, weigh alternatives in terms of their costs and benefits, choose an
alternative plan, and act. Emotion-focused coping, on the other hand, is more likely to
be used in situations deemed unlikely to change. The aim of such coping is to reduce
affective arousal so that the stressful situation may be tolerated, and it generally involves
cognitive processes that change the meaning of a stressor or create emotional distance
from it. Avoidance-focused coping, the third type of response to stress, may be viewed as
a subset of emotion-focused coping, in which responses such as distraction or diversion
are employed to avoid the stressor and the emotions that would be associated with it.
Coping may lead to successful or unsuccessful and adaptive or maladaptive
outcomes. Following the experience of a traumatic stress event, for example, some
individuals may choose to increase their alcohol consumption. While this behavior does
little to address the needs brought about by the stressor, it may be an effective (albeit
unhealthy) way to keep unwanted emotions at bay (Bush & Price, 2020). Whether coping
averts crisis and leads to adaptation depends on the person experiencing stress, the
specific type of stress encountered, and the features of the stressful encounter that the
person attempts to manage.
Although problem-focused, emotion-focused, and avoidance-focused coping
have all been linked to adaptation or posttraumatic growth (Linley & Joseph, 2004),
none of these approaches to coping guarantees a positive outcome. Problem-focused
coping seems to be most valued in Western culture (Hays & Erford, 2023), yet it can
be counterproductive if the situation causing stress is unalterable. If the stressor is
unalterable, problem-focused efforts fail and distress is likely to persist. In such times,
emotion-focused coping might be the better option. Avoidance-focused coping is least
likely to result in adaptation or growth and most likely to lead to impaired well-being
(Linley & Joseph, 2004). Complete Think About It 1.1 to assess how you cope with stress.
Think about how you cope with stress (and possibly
trauma). What material factors and cognitions help you
cope? What people help you cope? How could these
material factors, cognitions, and people be considered
protective factors in your life?
THINK ABOUT IT 1.1
Adaptation
Adaptation—an outcome of stress or crisis—is the degree to which functioning has
changed over an extended period and may be measured by the fit between the individual
or family system and the environment. Some individuals and families benefit from the
challenges of adversity. Successfully dealing with adversity often results in an outcome
that is better than one that might have been reached without the adversity. Many
individuals and families change to the point where they have the resources to meet the
demands of stressors while continuing to grow. Quite often, changes have occurred in
functional behaviors such as rules, roles, boundaries, and interpersonal communication
patterns, resulting in families being better equipped to meet the challenges of future
stressors. Conversely, for some individuals and families, an imbalance continues between
stress demands and the capability to meet those demands. Many families may adopt
unhealthy and unproductive responses to stress. Unhealthy coping behaviors, such as

-- 36 of 545 --

8 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
addictions or domestic violence, result in additional stress. Furthermore, it is often the
case that coping behaviors that appear to be healthy contribute to stress. A parent, for
example, might take a second job to increase the family’s financial resources. Working
extra hours, however, removes that parent from the home and may contribute to strained
family relationships and a decrease in other nontangible resources.
Resilience
Individuals or families that bounce back from adversity are considered to have resilience.
Numerous studies have attempted to identify factors that determine resiliency in
individuals. Although there has been some confusion in the literature about whether to
conceptualize resilience as a personal trait or as a dynamic process (Luthar, 2006), the
prevailing viewpoint favors process. Thus, resilience may be defined as the dynamics
that contribute to positive adaptation following exposure to experiences that have the
potential to disrupt functioning (Masten & Obradovic, 2008).
Early studies of resilience focused on individuals with schizophre-
nia and factors that would predict the course of the illness for them, but
most research on resilience has focused on children experiencing adversity.
Among the multiple adverse conditions studied have been parental men-
tal illness, chronic illness, poverty, community violence, abuse, and cata-
strophic events (Luthar, 2006). Through these studies, a variety of concepts
were identified as protective factors that operate to ensure resilience. For the
most part, these factors involve relationships.
Masten and Obradovic (2008) summarized several fundamental
adaptive systems that seem to make a difference in human resilience.
Beginning in early childhood, adaptation and the likelihood of resilience
seem to depend on the quality of relationships with attachment figures.
Attachments that are described as “secure” seem to moderate anxiety by
allowing children to feel confident, connected, and reassured. As secure,
confident children mature, they develop competence, self-efficacy, and
mastery. Mastery develops as individuals learn they can interact successfully with their
environments. In times of adversity, those with mastery motivation are likely to persist
in their efforts to manage the environment.
Related to mastery is the ability to apply cognitive skills to solve problems. People
who are resilient seem to be better at applying cognitive skills during times of adversity
than those who are less well adapted. During times of high stress or threat of harm, it is
important to be able to continue to think and plan effective responses. Thinking and prob-
lem solving during stressful situations are enhanced when emotions, arousal, and attention
are self-regulated (Masten & Obradovic, 2008).
Being a part of larger social systems also seems to play a role in resilience.
Social groups and networks provide resources such as information and support that
are important in dealing with adversity. For children, attending school provides
opportunities to acquire knowledge, develop social skills, and practice self-regulation,
all resources that might be called for in times of stress. For older children, adolescents,
and adults, being part of friendship networks, clubs, work groups, or civic organizations
also has the potential to contribute to resilience.
Among the larger systems most studied are religion and spirituality. Religious and
spiritual connections provide attachment-like relationships and social support, as well
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 1.1
This short video provides an
example of one person’s experi-
ence of mutliple losses that
resulted from Hurricane Katrina
and the healing and resiliency
that is possible after a crisis.
What can crisis counselors do
to help individuals in becoming
more resilient after a crisis?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=kQ3CxNkVe
8M&t=234s

-- 37 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	9
as opportunities to practice self-regulation through prayer and meditation (Masten &
Obradovic, 2008). In addition, religious and spiritual beliefs influence the way people
attribute meaning to stressful situations and events and contribute to posttraumatic
growth (Gerber et al., 2011).
Whether individuals experiencing adverse conditions demonstrate resilience
depends on the operation of protective systems that have evolved through biology and
culture (Masten & Obradovic, 2008). If the systems are operating normally, the capacity for
resilience is optimal; if they are damaged, the potential for resilience is compromised. Read
Voices from the Field 1.2, which discusses resilience within the context of a hurricane.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 1.2
Human Resilience in the Aftermath of Katrina
Beth Graney
We landed in the New Orleans airport 6 weeks after
Hurricane Katrina devastated the coastal areas and
encountered the first of many eerie and unsettling
sights we would experience over the next 2 weeks.
Six school counselors from our county were given
permission to volunteer with the Red Cross disaster
relief effort to provide counseling to victims of the
hurricane. Our mission, or so we thought, was to
aid school-age children. However, upon arriving, we
quickly found that the Red Cross had different ideas.
Due to the devastation caused by the hurricane, most
children were still with parents in shelters throughout
Louisiana and other states.
As a licensed professional counselor, I was able to
function as a counselor/therapist; however, “my office”
was outside, at a drive-through Red Cross site handing
out food and cleaning supplies to folks who had lost
their homes or were beginning the clean-up process. As
cars came through, we offered people advice on safety
issues for cleaning up mold, pamphlets on medical
concerns typical after a devastating event, and warning
signs of depression and other mental health concerns.
The days were long and hot with a steady stream of
cars from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. or later. From the
beginning, I was talking and listening to people and
their experiences, sharing their pain.
At first, I was not clear about how I was offering
counseling or mental health assistance. Yet as the days
passed, I noticed that many people came again and
again, and each time I heard a little more of their story.
Some days a person seemed upbeat, only to come back
later in the day with tears, anger, or frustration at the
bureaucracy involved in getting anything meaningful
accomplished. I heard stories of amazing escapes
from the hurricane or the flooding when the levees
burst. People told me how they witnessed great acts
of selflessness and heroism—stories that never made
the papers. Others talked of all they lost: “I don’t even
have one picture of my three kids,” “I not only lost my
house, my possessions, my car, but my job too,” “All
of my important medical papers are gone as well as
all of my insurance information.” Most heartbreaking
were the loss of friends and relatives: “I still can’t reach
my daughter,” “My mother died because she wouldn’t
leave her house.” One woman was trying to find a
place to continue her chemotherapy treatment from
breast cancer, while another talked about leaving with
her son who was a quadriplegic and trying to replace
important medical equipment she could not bring
when she left.
Yet, each day, there was laughter and happiness
despite the hurricane, because people had survived and
so they could begin again. At times, people pulled their
car out of the line so we could talk in-depth about
their situation—not for answers necessarily, just for a
few brief moments to allow themselves to grieve before
they got back in line to pick up yet another bottle of
bleach and a new mop to continue their clean-up.
I learned many things about people and how they
come to terms with hardship, loss, and devastation.
Firsthand, I learned that Maslow was right: People’s
primary needs such as food, clothing, shelter, and safety
must first be met before they can deal with higher-
level emotional needs. I learned that people can and
do survive against overwhelming odds and the most
difficult of circumstances. Often, they do so with great
resolve, courage, and even optimism. Quickly I noted
that most people were able to deal with the loss of
their possessions because they realized they could have
(continued)

-- 38 of 545 --

10 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
CRISIS INTERVENTION AND TRADITIONAL COUNSELING
Learning Objective 1.2 Compare crisis intervention and traditional counseling.
Now that we have described some of the key terms and concepts related to crisis, let’s
discuss the similarities and differences between crisis intervention and traditional
counseling.
Crisis intervention is a unique strategy within the profession of counseling,
distinguished from other forms of counseling by its purpose, setting, time, and
intervention plan. The American Counseling Association (Kaplan et al., 2014) defined
counseling as a “professional relationship that empowers diverse individuals, families,
and groups to accomplish mental health, wellness, education, and career goals.” While
crisis intervention does not stray from this definition, the ways in which relationships
are formed, clients are empowered, or goals are accomplished often seem divergent
from other forms of counseling. It is sometimes the case that crisis intervention occurs
within counseling relationships that are ongoing. For example, a client who already
has an established relationship with a counselor in a school or an agency may reveal
suicidal ideation, making it necessary for the counselor to adjust to a crisis intervention
strategy. At other times, crisis intervention occurs between counselors and clients who
do not already know each other. Disaster mental health counselors respond by going to
sites where catastrophes have occurred and meeting new clients in these environments.
Whether working in an office or in the field, within established counseling relation-
ships or new ones, the crisis counselor’s goal is the safety and stability of clients—that
is, working toward restoring equilibrium. Once the client is safe and stable, other forms
of counseling may be initiated or resumed. Consider, as an analogy, a car accident in
which an individual may have experienced a severe medical trauma. It is essential for
the emergency medical technician to stabilize the patient to prevent further injuries prior
to transferring (referring) the patient to a surgeon at the hospital. Therefore, the goal of
long-term counseling is usually to increase functioning, whereas crisis work prioritizes
stabilization and immediate assistance with the presenting distress.
In addition, crisis counselors do not view termination through the same lens as
traditional counseling because termination in crisis work may be a referral to other
professionals or resources. In severe risk situations, involuntary hospitalization may
mark the termination of the crisis counselor’s involvement, as discharge from a hospital
usually would be to long-term mental health outpatient care and likely not back to the
crisis worker. For many crisis workers, termination comes with a referral for emergency
lost the important people in their lives. Humor, along
with revisiting past success, was the most-used strategy
to deal with the hardship people were experiencing.
I learned that normalizing sadness, fear, grief, and
many other emotions comforted people more than
I would have expected and that even in the most
difficult times, most people see humor and joy in life.
On the trip home, my colleagues and I, after lots
of tears and discussion, individually and collectively
concluded that people really are resilient and go on to
become stronger through difficult times. As for me,
I learned that I could sleep on a cot with 80 other people
snoring and coughing in the same room. I can go a day
without a shower; I can eat a meal from the ERVE (Red
Cross Emergency Response Vehicle); and I can stand on
my feet for 12 hours a day in hot weather. I learned that,
just like the people who survived the storm, you bond
with those who have responded to the same disaster
because no one else fully understands what you have
experienced. Most of all, I learned that I am more resilient
than I knew and sometimes the best, most helpful
counseling does not take place in a nice, quiet office!

-- 39 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	11
or stabilization care, and the crisis counselor may never learn the status or outcome of
the individual they referred. Therefore, it is important for crisis workers to reframe their
work with clients in crisis to consider, “How have I made the client’s situation better
right now?” For a crisis worker this means conducting comprehensive risk assessment
to keep the person alive, get them to the next level of long-term care, or connect them
with the resources they need. It will not mean working on long-standing issues that led
the person to want to take their own life.
As noted, counselors in private practice may have clients who experience a crisis dur-
ing their time in therapy. In these situations, addressing the crisis would need to be the
priority over other long-term goals in a client’s treatment plan. Also in these cases, the client
may return to the counselor in private practice for continuing care after the crisis subsides.
Another difference between traditional counseling and crisis intervention is the time
span and setting of the work. Traditional counseling is typically a scheduled event that
lasts for a specific period of time (e.g., a weekly 45- to 60-minute session), and it is expected
to consist of more than one such session over a period of time. Traditional counseling
sessions take place in mental health agencies, private practices, hospitals, correctional
facilities, schools, residential facilities, and other locations related to mental health services
(Gladding, 2017). In pure crisis work, there may typically be only one meeting, which may
be as brief as a few minutes or as long as half a day. That meeting sometimes occurs in
a chaotic setting with minimal privacy. Most crisis workers will see a client in crisis for
one and perhaps up to three to four contact sessions. Often at the end of the assessment
of the problem, if the distress is not alleviated, the crisis worker will refer the client and
provide other resources. Because a crisis is not a scheduled event, crisis intervention usu-
ally happens in the spur of the moment. While crisis intervention can take place in nearly
any counseling setting, it has much broader borders and could take place in the client’s
home (e.g., after a child is reported missing), a makeshift shelter (e.g., after a hurricane), an
emergency department (e.g., after a sexual assault), or any one of numerous other contexts.
Another difference between crisis and traditional counseling involves diagnosis of
individuals in crisis. It is rare to diagnose a person in crisis since most persons are reacting
normally to an abnormal event. A premature diagnosis may lead to a treatment plan that is
ineffective or harmful. For example, in many situations, referral for medication may be too
premature and cause a person to delay healing. Most individuals do not want to experience
unpleasant feelings and thoughts even when the processing of them are beneficial to the
healing process. Medication may numb the feelings and lead to delayed healing. Too often,
clinicians rush too soon into a diagnosis rather than determining whether symptoms are
improving or worsening and how the client’s condition is impacting functional levels.
Crisis workers need to consider risk assessments and client level of functioning prior
to referrals for medication during crises. The DSM-5-TR suggests diagnosis only if “the
disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, academic,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.” Crisis workers often document the
onset of symptoms related to the presenting problem and continuing reports as symptoms
change. In many situations, a client may report already having a medical or mental health
diagnosis. In these situations, the information should be documented “as reported by the
client” with available documentation of who the professional was who issued the diagnosis.
Crisis intervention may also be conceptualized differently by different types of
counselors. For example, clinical mental health counselors and couples and family
counselors typically schedule clients who meet on a regular basis and develop a plan to

-- 40 of 545 --

12 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
help guide treatment. For these types of counselors, crisis intervention is seen as a part
of counseling and could (in some ways) be anticipated if the counselor knows the client
well enough. By contrast, school counselors often see students on an unscheduled basis
and because of crises. Thus, for school counselors, crisis intervention is a model used
more frequently and without much foresight of the crisis.
Given the distinctions between traditional counseling and crisis intervention, it is
important for counselors-in-training to understand they need to reframe the work they will
be doing with clients who experience a crisis as (1) conducting a thorough assessment of
the person in crisis, (2) providing stabilization, and (3) connecting the person to the next
level of care for longer-term counseling, other noncounseling connections, or additional
resources to address the crisis. If a counselor tries to address long-term goals with a person
in crisis, the assessment and treatment plan will not address the presenting problem.
Trauma-Informed Care
It is also imperative to understand the difference between trauma-informed care
(TIC) and crisis assessment/intervention. Often these terms are inappropriately used
interchangeably. Components of TIC may be integrated into the crisis assessment
process, but TIC is not the same as crisis assessment and intervention.
Crisis assessment is assessing an individual to determine the impact of a crisis (the
event). Specific questions and assessments are used depending on the crisis situation. These
questions often come from a standard of practice in the field. Trauma-informed care recognizes
that crisis events may overwhelm an individual and manifest in certain symptomatology.
TIC assists an individual in restoring a sense of safety, power, and self-worth. The six
guiding principles of TIC include (1) safety; (2) trustworthiness and transparency; (3) peer
support and mutual help; (4) collaboration and mutuality; (5) empowerment, voice, and
choice; and (6) cultural, historical, and gender issues (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, 2014). Of course, the components of TIC may be integrated into
the crisis assessment. However, the crisis assessment must be conducted at the foundational
level in order to determine the perception of the event as traumatic or causing dysfunction
to address the trauma and assist in long-term care.
ROLES OF AND COLLABORATION AMONG MENTAL HEALTH
WORKERS DURING A CRISIS
Learning Objective 1.3 Describe the roles of various professionals and
paraprofessionals who work in crisis teams.
Most individuals who work in mental health professions are familiar with basic
counseling skills that can help clients adapt during crises or stressful situations. The brief
descriptions that follow illustrate how different mental health professionals—including
professional counselors, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, paraprofessionals,
and hotline workers—can be helpful in crisis situations.
Professional Counselors
In practice, professional counselors differ from psychiatrists and psychologists in that
they work from prevention, developmental, and wellness perspectives. Counselors often
work through advocacy and collaboration and play a vital role in a comprehensive crisis

-- 41 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	13
leadership team (Kerr & King, 2018). Professional counselors can provide short-term
or long-term counseling and therapy and may work with individuals or groups. Like
psychologists, most licensed professional counselors may diagnose and treat mental
and emotional disorders. Overall, these mental health professionals need a minimum
of a master’s degree to become licensed to practice (Newsome & Gladding, 2017).
Professional counselors can assist individuals in crisis situations by doing the following:
• Helping them to gain insight into the ways crises affect their lives in a cognitive,
behavioral, and emotional manner over a lengthy period
• Providing specific treatment goals and objectives related to crisis
• Monitoring and assessing the magnitude of severity of a crisis
• Providing insight into co-occurring mental and emotional disorders and crisis (e.g.,
showing a client diagnosed with bipolar disorder how to cope with and monitor
a crisis)
• Providing specific crisis intervention strategies during a crisis and over time
• Providing clients in crisis with resources and preventive measures
• Assisting in alleviating symptoms associated with the crisis
• Preparing clients to handle future crises
Some professional counselors bring various types of expertise in crisis intervention
to their work, as these examples illustrate:
• Marriage and family counselors work from a systemic perspective. They provide
support for couples and families and may involve the family in the resolution of
the crisis on a short- and long-term basis.
• Pastoral counselors provide religious or spiritual integration in times of a crisis.
Often, a crisis involves a spiritual or religious disconnect or dimension that must
be explored. It is also important to understand any religious or spiritual coping
mechanisms that were effective in the past that could be applied to the present
crisis. Certainly, the notion of incorporating spirituality into crisis intervention
has an abundance of benefits and is not the sole property of pastoral counselors.
All counselors would want to explore how one’s religious and spiritual beliefs can
provide solace in times of crises.
• Chemical dependency counselors specifically address the use of drugs and alcohol
as a coping mechanism during crisis.
• Professional counselors who specialize in treating children, adolescents, adults, or
geriatric populations bring a developmental perspective to the conceptualization
and treatment of crisis.
• Rehabilitation counselors assist people diagnosed with acute or chronic disabilities
in the personal, social, or psychological effects of those disabilities on employment
or independent living.
• School counselors work to maximize student achievement and to “promote equity
and access to opportunities and rigorous educational experiences for all students”
as well as helping to facilitate “a safe learning environment and work[ing] to
safeguard the human rights of all members of the school community” (American
School Counselor Association, 2022, p. 2). School counselors can be helpful
in school crisis situations by using individual counseling, group counseling,
and classroom guidance activities and by collaborating with key stakeholders.
Individual counseling can be helpful to those who are directly affected by crisis

-- 42 of 545 --

14 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
(e.g., by working with a student on expressing feelings after a home was destroyed).
Providing group counseling to those who have been exposed to crisis (e.g., by
establishing a support group for students who have divorced parents) could ease
the pain of the initial impact of the crisis and create a support network among the
group members. School counselors may provide primary or secondary preventive
programs via classroom guidance activities on crisis, suicide, handling stress, self-
regulation, and communication skills. Lastly, school counselors may collaborate
with school system personnel as well as with parents, families, and members of the
community on preventing and responding to crisis (e.g., by providing school staff
with materials and training on recognizing suicidal behavior).
Psychiatrists
As noted earlier in this chapter, much of the early work in the field of crisis intervention
was done by two psychiatrists working in the Boston area in the 1940s. According to the
American Psychiatric Association (2023), psychiatrists are physicians who have obtained
specific training and experience in treating mental and emotional disorders. The key dif-
ference between the scope of practice of psychiatrists and that of other mental health prac-
titioners is that psychiatrists are medical doctors and can prescribe medication to clients.
Psychologists
Clinical and counseling psychologists are mental health practitioners who engage in the
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of mental and emotional disorders. To be licensed to
practice, state licensure boards require completion of a doctoral degree. In a few areas of the
United States, including Idaho, Iowa, Illinois, Louisiana, and New Mexico, and in the Indian
Health Service and the military, where access to psychiatrists is often limited, psychologists
with specific training may prescribe medication. Regarding psychologists’ participation in
crisis intervention, much of their work is identical to that of professional counselors.
Social Workers
Social workers engaged in crisis intervention also function like professional counselors.
Depending on the scope and focus of practice, some social workers may be employed after
earning a bachelor’s degree, while other, more specialized clinical practice settings may
require a master’s degree. Although performing many of the same duties as counselors,
social workers are well equipped to concentrate on the resource needs of their clients.
Paraprofessionals
Some individuals within the mental health community have limited formal education
and training in the professional mental health field, but they perform essential tasks (e.g.,
case management duties, residential care) for individuals in crisis. Paraprofessionals can
do the following:
• Manage resources that help facilitate stabilization (e.g., make sure clients keep all
medical, financial, emotional, environmental, and social service appointments).
• Ensure clients are aware of appropriate resources that could be seen as preventive
actions to crisis (e.g., make sure that a client has appropriate resources to pay the
natural gas bill to have heat in the winter).

-- 43 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	15
• Provide an outlet for clients to decrease isolation and talk to others (e.g., talk with
individuals in crisis and provide assurance that someone cares for them and their
situation).
• Participate in executing the modality and frequency aspects of the treatment plan—
in other words, make the connections set out in the treatment plan. For example, the
professional counselor may develop a treatment plan for someone in a residential
program that involves attending Alcoholics Anonymous groups daily, attending
a group on a specified psychosocial issue three times per week, and addressing a
medical issue. The paraprofessional case worker may be responsible for following
through with the treatment plan by assisting the client in making the appointments
and setting up transportation to the appointments or groups.
To be effective, a crisis worker, whether a professional or a paraprofessional,
must be able to (1) rely on life experiences and emotional maturity to remain stable
and consistent, (2) remain calm and poised in order to deescalate the situation, (3) use
creativity and flexibility to adapt to rapidly changing situations, (4) maintain energy and
resilience to keep up with the rigor of working in a crisis situation, and (5) use effective
clinical skills in a timely fashion in order to create a trusting and safe environment and
suspend one’s values just for the crisis time in order to stabilize and refer the client to
another professional (James & Gilliland, 2017). Keep these characteristics in mind as you
complete Activity 1.1.
ACTIVITY 1.1
In the crisis situations that follow, what might be
some activities, interventions, responsibilities, and
considerations for each of the mental health professionals
discussed earlier? Practice using the task model of crisis
assessment and intervention as you process each case.
Crisis Situation 1
Casey and Blake have been married for 3 years. Casey
has been cheating on Blake for the past 6 months, and
Blake has been cheating on Casey for the past year. Each
is unaware of the other’s infidelity, but the stress in their
house is severe. They yell constantly, and Blake throws
objects during arguments. In the past month, Casey has
begun to slap Blake during these arguments. Last night
Casey hit Blake so hard that Blake was knocked
unconscious. Blake is now in the hospital talking to a
social worker: “I’m afraid of my partner,” Blake says,
“but I don’t have anywhere else to go. I feel so alone.”
Crisis Situation 2
John F. Kennedy High School, located in a primarily
low- to middle-class rural community, comprises
approximately 1,000 students, most of whom know
one another. Within the past 4 months, the school has
been evacuated five times because of a call indicating
that there is a bomb in the building and that “everyone
should get out.” As a result of these threats and
evacuations, students are scared, parents do not want
to send their children to school, and teachers and other
school personnel are frightened to go to work. Students
also have begun to accuse each other of calling in the
bomb threats, and several students have been
ostracized and bullied. The Parent-Teacher Association
has called a meeting tonight to address this issue.
Crisis Situation 3
Walter has been married for 52 years and has four
children and six grandchildren. He is a 74-year-old
Black male who has worked all his life as a plumber.
Due to intense flash floods within the past week from
melting snow, their household is 7 feet under water.
When the water came, Walter, his 40-year-old
daughter June, and his 13-year-old granddaughter
Beverly had to be rescued from their house by boat.
Their house is destroyed, Beverly is having nightmares
and does not want to leave her family, and June is
recovering from a head trauma that occurred while
being evacuated.

-- 44 of 545 --

16 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Hotline Workers
Hotline workers are often the first point of contact for many individuals experiencing
a crisis and may handle any number of crises resulting from suicidal and homicidal
ideation, domestic violence, substance use, and sexual assault. There are hotlines that
specialize in these and other specific types of crisis situations. There are even crisis
hotlines for specific age groups (e.g., a hotline dedicated to teen callers). Typically,
hotline workers are not mental health professionals but volunteers who have undergone
specific training in responding to crises. No matter what their focus, crisis hotlines play
a vital role in assessing, intervening in, and preventing the occurrence of crises. Crisis
hotline workers perform essential tasks during a crisis situation:
• They assess the severity of the crisis situation and the lethality of the caller.
• They provide immediate crisis intervention to the caller in an attempt to deescalate
the crisis. This is critical in a crisis situation because the caller does not have to make
an appointment with a professional or wait to get help. Most hotlines are 24-hour
services open 365 days a year.
• They provide resources to the caller that may help resolve the crisis (see Table 1.2
at the end of this chapter).
Collaboration Among Crisis Workers
Professional counselors, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, various
paraprofessionals, and hotline workers can all play vital roles in the mental health of
people in crisis. Collaboration works best when the client’s treatment goals are clearly
communicated, the responsibilities of different crisis workers are known and respected,
and an open dialogue in which all differing views of treatment are heard and considered.
When crisis workers collaborate in a professional and respectful fashion, a broader scope
of treatment that addresses multiple facets of a client’s recovery can take place.
Collaboration with Other Professionals
More than any other mental health professionals, crisis workers tend to collaborate
with other professionals in the community for the well-being of clients. For example,
crisis workers may need to collaborate with religious and spiritual leaders, medical
professionals, and law enforcement officers in crisis situations. Each of these professional
groups have a different scope of practice that governs their actions with clients. For
example, religious and spiritual leaders assist alignment with their religious and spiritual
values, beliefs, and traditions. Traditional medical professionals tend to practice from
a pure medical model and intervene with medical practices that may counter mental
health practices. Law enforcement officers protect and safeguard the public by enforcing
laws; their intervention may be quite different from crisis workers because it is based on
training and protocols to protect the community and themselves.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has forced changes in the field of crisis counseling and these
changes will be integrated throughout the remaining chapters of this book. The transition

-- 45 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	17
was quick to provide continued client care by medical and mental health professionals.
While the transition was helpful for continuity of care, it also may have challenged certain
ethical, legal, and best-practice safeguards in crisis situations. Historically, distance
counseling was looked down upon; the pandemic forced mental health practitioners
into providing some form of tele-mental health counseling when the world curtailed
most human contacts. Society has now adapted telehealth as an alternative to face-to-
face counseling. Although still not preferred by mental health professionals for many
situations, including crisis assessments, the ability to receive some form of counseling via
telehealth procedures is much better than the absence of counseling. However, in crisis
situations, telehealth considerations should still be evaluated for effectiveness in high-
risk situations, work with young children, stabilization of clients with serious mental
illnesses, and in situations where individuals have limited privacy, such as clients at
home who experience intimate partner violence.
APPROACHES TO WORKING WITH CLIENTS IN CRISIS
Learning Objective 1.4 Describe approaches crisis workers can take depending on
the crisis affecting the client.
The procedures for working with clients in crisis begin with assessment of
how best to approach such individuals to deescalate and stabilize the crisis.
In other words, there is a need to assess whether the situation calls for coun-
selors to be directive, nondirective, or collaborative.
Directive approaches call for counselors to “direct” or lead the person
in crisis in a specific direction. Clients in crisis are typically distracted and
less able to plan beyond their current situation. Therefore, providing some
form of direction may help. For example, if someone is highly uncertain,
spontaneous, or ambiguous and, at the same time, unable to get out of a
crisis state, direction could provide immediate, though temporary, relief
to feelings surrounding the crisis. As another example, a person who
presents with highly suicidal behaviors requires the crisis counselor to
initiate (directive approach) an emergency involuntary hospitalization
for the safety of the client.
Nondirective approaches allow the person in crisis to come up with the
directives while the crisis counselor facilitates that process. If the client can
make rational decisions, even though in crisis, a nondirective approach may
empower the client to make progress toward deescalation. For example, asking clients
who are recent flood victims what might be of most help to them right now allows them
to respond with specifics, rather than the counselor determining what is needed. The
thought process and response of such clients may also empower them and allow them
to feel they are regaining some control over their own lives.
A collaborative approach focuses on showing the person in crisis that the counselor is a
participant in the journey toward stabilization and normalcy and that others can provide
help, decrease isolation, and allocate resources to them. A collaborative approach is a
blend of directive and nondirective approaches—but with a flavor of togetherness. In
other words, a collaborative approach provides support and a sense of working together
toward a common goal. Collaboration can be particularly beneficial to clients who feel
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 1.2
This video shows an example
of how a crisis worker can work
with a client collaboratively in
the planning of an action plan.
How is it beneficial to be able
to work collaboratively with cli-
ents? Keep this role play in mind
when reviewing the task model
of crisis assessment and inter-
vention, further in the chapter,
as an example of planning and
obtaining a commitment.
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=H_62Cbm5W_c

-- 46 of 545 --

18 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
that they have too many choices, are aware of only options that have been ineffective in
the past, or need some assistance in generating new options.
Complete Activity 1.2 to gain practice identifying these various approaches.
Examples of directive, nondirective, and collaborative approaches in crisis situations follow. Discuss
how each could be an appropriate statement in specific circumstances.
ACTIVITY 1.2
EXAMPLE 1
• “Please put the gun down.” (directive)
• “What would help you feel more comfortable about putting the gun down?”
(nondirective)
• “I want to help, but knowing you have that gun in your hand scares me. Can you
put the gun down for me so I can help you more?” (collaborative)
EXAMPLE 2
• “It sounds like you are thinking about killing yourself during most of the day and
every day and have decided nothing else can take away your pain. You tell me
that you will not follow through with whatever we plan and that you will kill
yourself. I am concerned for your safety and want you to be here, alive. I really
think the best option is for us to spend some time focusing on just you. I want to
help you stay alive, and the only option I see to do that is for you to be admitted
to the hospital.” (directive)
• “You have generated some ideas on how you can stay safe, and they seem like
good options.” (nondirective)
• “I am happy to hear that you do not want to follow through on killing yourself.
I also hear you saying that the pain at times is unbearable. You have been able to
generate many options for staying alive. Can we continue to work together to see
what resources are the best options and make a list so that when you start to have
thoughts of wanting to kill yourself you can act on the best options first?”
(collaborative)
EXAMPLE 3
• “I’m going to call the police.” (directive)
• “Do you think calling the police will help?” (nondirective)
• “If I bring you the phone, would you call the police?” (collaborative)

-- 47 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	19
CRISIS INTERVENTION THEORY
Learning Objective 1.5 Describe historical and contemporary crisis theories.
Let’s now turn our attention to some historical and contemporary crisis theories. We
start our discussion by examining the genesis of crisis intervention in the United States.
The Genesis of Crisis Intervention in the United States
The study of crisis intervention began in the 1940s in response to several stressor events.
During World War II, numerous families experienced disorganization and changes in
functioning after family members left home to participate in the war effort. In most cases,
disorganization was temporary and families found ways to adjust. Families that had
the most difficulty reorganizing and adapting to the absence of their loved ones seemed
to experience the greatest degree of distress. Studies of families in crisis following war
separation led Reuben Hill (1949) to propose a model through which family stress and
crisis could be conceptualized by considering the family’s resources, perception, and
previous experience with crises.
Additional research on families and crisis events was launched following a more
acute stressor event, the Cocoanut Grove nightclub fire that claimed nearly 500 lives
in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1942. Studies of the responses of the survivors of the fire,
family members of those who died, and the community illuminated some common
reactions to such a traumatic event and led Gerald Caplan and Erich Lindemann to
propose recommendations for responding to community crises. In the decades following
the 1940s, the original models proposed by Hill, Caplan, and Lindemann were expanded,
with more attention to contextual variables and outcomes.
Caplan and Lindemann are often credited as pioneers in the field of crisis intervention.
Lindemann, a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts
General Hospital, worked with patients dealing with grief following traumatic loss.
Although many people died because of the Cocoanut Grove fire, hundreds who were
at the nightclub on that fateful night survived. The survivors and the grieving relatives
of those who perished provided Lindemann with an opportunity to study psychological
and emotional reactions to disaster. Based on interviews with those who survived the fire
as well as relatives of the deceased, Lindemann (1944) outlined several common clinical
features, including somatic distress, feelings of guilt, hostility, disorganization, behavioral
changes, and preoccupation with images of the deceased. Lindemann referred to these
symptoms as “acute grief,” which was not a psychiatric diagnosis but was a call for
intervention, nonetheless. Today, many of the symptoms of acute stress disorder identified
in the DSM-5-TR seem to parallel Lindemann’s description of acute grief.
In addition to describing clinical features of acute grief, Lindemann outlined inter-
vention strategies for dealing with the symptoms. Because acute grief was not considered
a psychiatric diagnosis per se, Lindemann suggested that helpers other than psychiatrists
could be of assistance. This idea was further fueled by the large number of people in
need of intervention following the Cocoanut Grove fire and became a cornerstone in the
conceptualization of community mental health.
In response to the needs of the number of people experiencing acute grief following
the nightclub fire, Lindemann worked with his colleague Gerald Caplan to establish a
community-wide mental health program in Cambridge, Massachusetts, known as the

-- 48 of 545 --

20 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Wellesley Project. By studying and working with individuals who had experienced
loss through the fire or similar traumatic events, Caplan (1964) developed the concept
of “preventive psychiatry,” which proposed that early intervention following a
disaster or traumatic event can promote growth and well-being. Lindemann’s “basic
crisis theory” focused on crisis intervention as a distinct area in the helping field
requiring specific interventions. His theory allowed others to build upon and develop
alternative perspectives. Crisis intervention is focused and brief but is not the same as
brief therapy. Brief therapy attempts to decrease symptoms associated with ongoing
mental health problems. Crisis intervention attempts to assist individuals who are
experiencing temporary affective, behavioral, and cognitive symptoms associated with
a crisis event.
Building on Caplan’s model, Beverley Raphael (2000) coined the term “psychological
first aid.” Following a train accident in Australia in 1977 in which many people died,
Raphael worked with bereaved families and injured survivors of the train disaster. She
advocated for attention that included comfort and consolation, immediate physical
assistance, reunification with loved ones, an opportunity to express feelings, and support
during the initial period following a traumatic event. In particular, Raphael described
the need to consider Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and the importance of attending
first to basic survival needs before attempting more traditional forms of counseling.
In describing crisis reactions, Raphael noted that the full impact of trauma may be
experienced a considerable time following the initial crisis event, thereby leading an
individual to undergo a period of “disillusionment.” Much of her work after the 1977
train accident focused on the prevention of PTSD. In a classic work, Caplan (1964) offered
this explanation:
People are in a state of crisis when they face an obstacle to important life
goals—an obstacle that is, for a time, insurmountable by the use of customary
methods of problem-solving. A period of disorganization ensues, a period of
upset, during which many abortive attempts at solution are made. (p. 18)
What is important to note in Caplan’s description is that the concept of crisis refers
to an outcome of a precipitating event, not to the precipitating event itself. Like more
recent definitions of crisis, Caplan described the outcome, or the crisis, as the state of
disequilibrium that is experienced.
There are several schools of thought pertaining to crisis theory, and the concept
of disequilibrium following a stressful event seems to be common to all of them. Some
theories focus on the disequilibrium experiences of individuals, whereas others take
a more contextual, systemic stance. Many researchers and theorists take the point of
view that the disequilibrium that constitutes a crisis can be understood by examining
an individual’s past experiences, cognitive structures, behaviors, and competencies. In
their studies on hysteria, Freud and Breuer (2004) concluded that many of the neurotic
symptoms that contributed to clients’ states of equilibrium were repressed memories
of past traumatic events. Their disequilibrium was sustained by destructive defense
mechanisms.
Other crisis theorists contend that the disequilibrium is the result of ineffective
psychological tools, such as negative or faulty thinking, poor self-esteem, and
maladaptive behavior. According to “adaptational” theory (James & Gilliland, 2017),

-- 49 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	21
individuals who become incapacitated or dysfunctional following stressful events
are those who perceive and interpret stressful events negatively. Negative thoughts,
irrational beliefs, and defeating self-talk led to paralyzing rather than helpful behaviors.
From a cognitive-behavioral perspective, crises may be ameliorated when individuals
replace their faulty thinking and ineffective behaviors with more positive thoughts and
adaptive behaviors. From an interpersonal perspective, self-confidence and self-esteem
also counter the disequilibrium of crises as individuals become more focused and reliant
on their own abilities.
Applied Crisis Theory
Applied crisis theory comprises four crisis domains: developmental, situational,
existential, and ecosystemic (James & Gilliland, 2017):
• Developmental crises are events that are expected to be experienced by most
individuals during normal development. However, for some, the developmental
crisis event could cause considerable trauma. Examples of developmental crises
include pregnancy, graduation, retirement, career transition, and aging.
• Situational crises are events that are often unexpected and involve some degree of
a catastrophic, shocking, or random act. Examples of situational crises include a
terrorist attack, a sexual assault, job loss, an accident, and a sudden illness.
• Existential crises may or may not involve religious faith or spirituality but are events
that affect one’s sense of meaning, purpose, freedom, independence, forgiveness,
shame, or other core beliefs.
• Ecosystemic crises, which include natural or human-caused events, affect not only
the individual but also any of the systems (e.g., families, schools, communities)
connected with the crisis event.
It is important for the crisis counselor to understand the individual’s perception
of a crisis before categorizing the crisis into one or more of the four crisis domains. The
reason is that the crisis domain acts as a framework for understanding the individual’s
perception of the event and its life effects. For example, consider the case of a woman who
enters a crisis center pregnant. Initial observation may lead a crisis counselor to assume
that the woman is experiencing a developmental crisis. However, upon learning that
the pregnancy is the result of a rape, the crisis counselor may categorize the pregnancy
as a situational crisis. It is also possible that the woman is thinking of terminating the
pregnancy, which may constitute an existential crisis because following through would
conflict with religious beliefs. As this example indicates, a crisis must be understood by
how it is perceived by the individual affected by it.
Regardless of the theory adopted, crisis intervention requires that a crisis counselor
undertake a series of tasks to understand the client’s circumstances, ameliorate the most
harmful aspects of the crisis, and help return the client to precrisis or baseline functioning
as safely, quickly, and efficiently as possible. Theories are assumptions about why an
individual may experience a crisis and perceive it as traumatic. Theories provide a
rationale or explanation that informs a crisis counselor’s guiding practice, or how a crisis
counselor works through the crisis with a client. This guiding practice is one’s model of
practicing in crisis intervention.

-- 50 of 545 --

22 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
THE TASK MODEL OF CRISIS ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION
Learning Objective 1.6 Apply the task model of crisis assessment and intervention
to crisis situations.
The task model of crisis assessment and intervention developed by Lisa Jackson-Cherry (2018;
see Table 1.1) focuses on four important tasks of crisis assessment that lead to an effective
intervention plan for individuals in virtually every type of crisis, regardless of setting.
Addressing safety, stabilization, and risk; following a holistic biopsychosocial-spiritual
approach; clarifying the problem(s); and exploring coping skills, resources, and supports
are essential crisis assessment tasks. Only when a thorough assessment is completed
can an effective crisis plan be developed to address the actual problem(s). In traditional
counseling, the definition of the problem may be very clear, and the plan may follow
a prescribed sequence. However, due to the complex nature of individuals in crisis, a
consistent and useful definition of the problem can only be clarified after appropriate
and comprehensive assessment tasks are completed and followed by an appropriate
crisis plan.
Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks
Let’s examine the four essential crisis assessment tasks in more detail: address safety,
stabilization, and risk; follow a holistic biopsychosocial-spiritual approach; clarify the
problem(s); and explore coping skills, resources, and supports.
ASSESSMENT TASK 1: ADDRESS SAFETY, STABILIZATION, AND RISK 	A crisis counselor
should always maintain a sense of safety for self and others (see Chapter 2). Safety should
be the main priority for the client, community, and counselor. Therefore, a thorough risk
assessment should be the first step in the assessment and the main goal for the counselor.
Due to the nature of a crisis, risk should be assessed at varying times throughout crisis
intervention. A client may be referred (or self-referred) for a perceived presenting
problem that is not the primary problem causing the difficulties, and the client could
present with varying degrees of lethality (i.e., none, low, moderate, or high) and types of
risk (i.e., homicidal, suicidal). Lethality must always be assessed at the beginning of the
Level I: Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks
Assessment Task 1: Address Safety, Stabilization, and Risk
Assessment Task 2: Follow a Holistic Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Approach
Assessment Task 3: Clarify the Problem(s)
Assessment Task 4: Explore Coping Skills, Resources, and Supports
Level II: Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks
Intervention Task 1: Normalize and Educate
Intervention Task 2: Explore Options
Intervention Task 3: Develop a Plan and Obtain a Commitment
Intervention Task 4: Prepare Documentation, Follow Up, and Provide Referrals
TABLE 1.1 The Task Model of Crisis Assessment and Intervention (Jackson-Cherry, 2018)

-- 51 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	23
relationship. If any degree of lethality is present, a comprehensive plan must be discussed
with the client and documented. Not assessing for risk in a crisis situation, or waiting
until the end of a session to conduct such an assessment that is not thorough, is negligent.
If a person were to leave a session and follow through with suicidal or homicidal ideation
or behavior that was not thoroughly assessed, the standard of care could be questioned.
Adhering to the standard of care is a primary focus of Assessment Task 1 and, if lethality
is present, it should continue to be a focus in subsequent steps.
Often a person who is at risk may not initially report ideation or intentions of
suicidal or homicidal behavior. Clients need to know that the crisis counselor is willing
to explore the delicate issues that are leading to thoughts or behaviors of suicide or
homicide, can provide an emotionally safe environment, and is competent to assist
with an appropriate plan. Allowing for an open and thorough assessment helps clients
understand that the counselor is fully present, cares, and is competent to assist with
lethal thoughts. An assessment of safety and lethality actually enhances the rapport
between the client and counselor. Importantly, if a client is experiencing intense crisis
circumstances that affect the client’s baseline functioning, then it is unlikely that the
counselor and client can collaboratively progress through the essential intervention
tasks that follow.
A client also must be stabilized enough to progress through the intervention tasks
of this model and collaborate in the intervention plan. Thus, client stabilization is a
focus before moving forward with additional tasks. If the client is unable to work col-
laboratively toward the additional tasks and unable to implement lifesaving plans, the
main goal for the counselor should be for the immediate safety of the client or others and
options for intensive care, including hospitalization, should be pursued.
ASSESSMENT TASK 2: FOLLOW A HOLISTIC BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL-SPIRITUAL APPROACH
Next, crisis counselors should thoroughly assess a client for physical, medical, substance,
psychological, social, spiritual, and other concerns. Often, individuals experience a crisis
because of medical issues such as pain associated with a physical condition or
noncompliance with medical practices (including medication noncompliance), religious/
spiritual and/or other existential conflicts, or other reasons. These medical issues often
present with symptoms consistent with mental health issues during a crisis. If medical and
other issues the client faces are not assessed, the diagnosis of the client may be incorrect,
leading to an ineffective and inappropriate treatment plan or referral. Without this kind of
assessment, the root problem will never be addressed and symptoms may increase over
time, making the situation worse for the client. A comprehensive assessment of all these
considerations must be conducted to determine the cause of or connection to the perceived
or actual crisis event. A medical assessment may include questions such as the following:
• When was your last medical examination?
• Have you presented to the emergency department or another physician with an
acute or chronic medical complaint? How often? When was the last visit?
• Have you been diagnosed with any medical condition(s)? Have you been prescribed
any medications for the medical condition(s)? Have you been compliant with the
recommended medication regimen? If not, what has prevented you from continuing
to take the medications as prescribed? Has the medication affected your thoughts,
mood, or behavior? What was your life like prior to the medical condition(s)?

-- 52 of 545 --

24 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
• Have you had medical complaints that are not being addressed by a medical
doctor?
• Have you had any recent injuries? When was the injury? Did you receive medi-
cal attention? What was the treatment plan set by the physician? Have you been
compliant with the treatment plan? Has there been a follow-up? Have you felt your
mood change since the injury? If so, in what ways? What was your life like prior
to the injury?
It is essential to assess the baseline functioning of the client during the present crisis
situation and prior to the crisis. Later, the goal may be to formulate a plan that moves
the person back to precrisis functioning or to develop a new baseline.
Most crisis models follow an ABC (affect, behaviors, cognitions) assessment
approach. However, this task model follows an ABCDE assessment approach (affect,
behaviors, cognitions, development, and environment). Keep in mind that while some
assessment measures may fall into more than one category, all impact the overall
assessment.
Affect consists of how a person presents during the assessment and may include
nonverbal communication. Is the client withdrawn, distant, restrictive in speech or space,
agitated, incongruent in presentation, and so on?
Behaviors are assessed to determine a person’s response and potential to move
through the crisis. For example, since the precipitating crisis, what has the client done (or
not done) in response to the crisis event? What resources has the person accessed or not
accessed? How have the person’s eating habits, sleep, work, and normal activities and
behaviors changed from before the crisis? What is preventing the person from moving
toward the behaviors that were evident in precrisis daily living?
Cognitions, or thoughts, include thinking patterns, distortions, and deficiencies. In
most situations, cognitions affect behaviors and how a person presents emotionally (i.e.,
affect). Are cognitive distortions present that are preventing the person from moving
personal behaviors toward the precrisis or new baseline functioning? Are cognitions
restrictive? For example, does the client believe no actions will improve the situation?
For risk assessment, does a person believe that there is only one way to “fix” the problem
(e.g., suicide, homicide), and is the person not willing to evaluate other options in the
development of a plan?
In addition to the ABC assessment commonly used as the main criteria in
the field, crisis counselors should understand the appropriate development and
environment factors that may affect a person’s response to a crisis. A person’s response
and functioning should be assessed based on normal levels of development, and plans
should be made based on the developmental functioning level of a client. How does a
client’s current functioning abilities affect how the client perceives the crisis? Are there
limitations in the cognitive processing domain (e.g., how clients frame and perceive
problems)? How do physical or emotional limitations affect the client’s ability to use
resources or follow through with a plan? For example, a young adult with autism
spectrum disorder may need a plan established with goals appropriate for functional
level and ability to process the situation, which may be far different from a person
not diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. A person with a lower intellectual
ability attempting to process the impact of the death of a parent will need to be given

-- 53 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	25
information in a very different way, with more concrete and simplified information
than a person of higher intellectual ability.
The environment, which includes common multicultural components (e.g.,
socioeconomic status [SES], religious or spiritual influences, racial-ethnic identification
with groups, gender, resilience, physical abilities, sexual or affectional orientation,
educational level), must also be assessed and considered. In addition, personality
characteristics formed by these components may promote or hinder moving past
the crisis. For example, if a client is experiencing a spiritual crisis and, in the past,
relied on a religious or spiritual leader to cope, a referral to the person’s religious or
spiritual leader may be crucial for intervention. However, this client, feeling guilty
and intimidated by the perceptions and judgment of others, may not act (behavior) on
this past coping skill in contacting a spiritual leader if the person believes (irrational
cognitions) that a higher power will never forgive the action that is causing such
emotional and spiritual pain.
A thorough ABCDE assessment allows the counselor to obtain information that is
useful in developing a plan to get the person back to precrisis baseline functioning or to
develop a plan to create a more stable new baseline.
ASSESSMENT TASK 3: CLARIFY THE PROBLEM(S) 	Although a client may present initially
with a particular problem (which should be taken into consideration), the actual problem
may not be known until a complete history is taken. For example, a person may have
lost a life partner 5 years ago, but the death of the partner’s pet may be the actual crisis
due to the meaning placed both on the pet and the significant-other relationship.
Counselors should be aware that a client may be facing multiple crises since an event
may affect many parts of the client’s life and cause multiple traumas or retraumatization.
Counselors should also realize, when working with several individuals in the same
family, that each person may have a different presenting problem.
During this task, active listening, offering unconditional positive regard, and
being nonjudgmental are essential. Likewise, empathically phrased yet challenging
questions may be required to understand the actual crisis so that an effective action
plan can be developed. These steps are important for the client to gain control over
the problem and begin the healing process. Providing a client with the space to share
personal stories in their own words will allow the client to gain some control over the
crisis. Identifying any attached meaning the client has to the perceived crisis can lead
to an in-depth understanding of the actual crisis and a more effective intervention plan.
ASSESSMENT TASK 4: EXPLORE COPING SKILLS, RESOURCES, AND SUPPORTS 	After
clarification of the problem(s), crisis counselors explore the coping skills, resources,
and supports that were available to the client when dealing with past crises and
adjustments. Crisis counselors also explore which coping skills, resources, and
supports were effective and ineffective, as well as which are available and unavailable
for the current crisis. The client and counselor also discuss potential new resources,
coping skills, and supports that the client may not be aware of or may not have used
in the past. Counselors assess these resources using a variety of research-based
approaches, including resilience-based, positive psychology, hope-based, and
wellness models. The motivation of the client is also assessed.

-- 54 of 545 --

26 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks
Let’s now examine the four essential crisis intervention tasks in more detail: normalize
and educate; explore options; develop a plan and obtain a commitment; and prepare
documentation, follow up, and provide referrals.
INTERVENTION TASK 1: NORMALIZE AND EDUCATE 	In most situations, a vital aspect
of crisis intervention is to normalize a person’s response to the crisis. Unless the
person has acted out of malicious intent to harm another person, a person in crisis
may behave in a variety of ways. It is always easy to look back and think that one
should have acted differently, but in a crisis, most people try to make the best
decision during a situation that is often out of their control at the time. Often, clients
experience normal reactions (e.g., fear, abandonment, hopelessness, loss of control)
to an abnormal event. Because clients in crisis are feeling and thinking that things are
out of control, they may be unable to control their feelings and thoughts as they
typically do in other situations or do not like the feelings and thoughts they are
experiencing. Clients can become overwhelmed, and the crisis can be even more
debilitating due to these new feelings and thoughts. Counselors should understand
the normal responses to crisis events and teach clients that many of their feelings and
thoughts are normal. This normalizing can remove much of the power the client
perceives the crisis to have.
INTERVENTION TASK 2: EXPLORE OPTIONS 	Using the information collected during
assessment tasks 1–4, the crisis counselor and client should collaboratively explore
and evaluate all the options known to the client, as well as those developed by the
counselor. Even when there is evidence of lethality to self or others, the intent is to
work collaboratively in developing a plan for the safety of the person or others. In
some situations, when the client is not able to commit to any plan
involving safety, the counselor may have to move into a directive
approach. The safety of the crisis counselor is as important as the safety of
the client in crisis; therefore, if there is any sense of potential harm by the
client, the crisis counselor should make personal safety a priority. For
example, if the crisis counselor believes the client should be hospitalized
due to high suicide lethality, but through the discussion of this option the
client becomes agitated and there is a fear of personal safety, then
collaborating is no longer the mode of interaction and the counselor
arranges to have the client hospitalized.
INTERVENTION TASK 3: DEVELOP A PLAN AND OBTAIN A COMMITMENT 	The
resulting intervention plan is individualized and based on the comprehen-
sive assessment of the client. The counselor must consider the risk factors,
biopsychosocial-spiritual elements; medical information; and coping skills,
supports, and resources. The plan should be documented as part of the
discharge summary when referring the client to another mental health pro-
fessional and used as a plan for follow-up. Client commitment is essential
for ownership and responsibility. Plans should have attainable and meas-
urable goals to demonstrate progress.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 1.3
In this Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services
(SAMHSA) training segment,
crisis workers assist a couple
who have been impacted by a
natural disaster. The role play
shows essential assessment and
intervention tasks outlined in
the task model of crisis assess-
ment and intervention, such as
normalizing, exploring options,
and action planning. Can you
give examples of these essential
tasks provided by the crisis
workers?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jRPkSFhzM2U
Watch from 08:34 to 12:09

-- 55 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	27
INTERVENTION TASK 4: PREPARE DOCUMENTATION, FOLLOW UP, AND PROVIDE
REFERRALS 	In a typical crisis, a client may be referred to another mental health
professional in the community for continued or long-term care to meet client needs as
specified in the intervention plan. In this case, proper documentation should be
completed to terminate the case with detailed information on the referral and the
intervention plan. If the crisis occurred during a long-term case, documentation and
follow-up must be made in a manner outlined in the plan.
See Case Studies 1.2 and 1.3, which incorporate the task model of crisis assessment
and intervention. Also read Voices from the Field 1.3.
CASE STUDY 1.2
Integration, Demonstration, and Application of the Task Model of Crisis Assessment
and Intervention: Ellery
Level I: Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks
Assessment Task 1: Address Safety, Stabilization, and Risk
Ellery presented with suicidal ideation over the breakup of an intimate, long-term
relationship. After initial screening questions for suicide, homicide, and nonsuicidal self-
injury (NSSI), Ellery is not experiencing homicidal ideation or NSSI. Ellery does admit
to thoughts of self-harm, saying “I just want this horrible pain to end.” The standard of
care mandate here is to assess for risk factors and planning as well as to discern the risk
of lethality, so a thorough assessment is needed; client stabilization is the primary focus
before moving forward with additional tasks. The initial severity appears moderate, so
the immediate safety of the client or others is the priority and options for more intensive
care, including hospitalization, should be considered.
Assessment Task 2: Follow a Holistic Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Approach
The counselor undertook a holistic biopsychosocial-spiritual assessment with the
following items of note. Regarding physical health, Ellery made no complaints and
presented as a youthful and healthy person. Ellery’s last general medical examination was
5 years earlier. Ellery has never presented to the emergency department or physician with
an acute or chronic medical condition. Ellery reports only mild seasonal allergies, takes no
medications, and reported no recent injuries or other medical treatments. Ellery overuses
alcohol and marijuana, especially since the breakup. Ellery reports a family history of
depression and periodic feelings of sadness. Socially, Ellery reports having few friends.
Ellery presented with some other affective, behavioral, cognitive, development, and
environment concerns. Ellery’s affect was depressed and introspective (“How could I have
screwed up so bad?”). Ellery complained of feeling sad, depressed, hopeless, fatigued, and
helpless to change the situation. Since the precipitating crisis and in response to the crisis
event, Ellery reports increased behaviors of moping, drinking, smoking marijuana, and
isolation. Ellery claims to have few resources and few close friends. Ellery sometimes will
drink with coworkers after work but does not discuss personal issues with them. Ellery
reports insomnia, no appetite, poor performance at work, and absenteeism due to excessive
drinking since the breakup. Regarding cognitions, Ellery does not understand why the
partner left and has stopped taking Ellery’s calls or responding to texts. When asked about

-- 56 of 545 --

28 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
ideas to “fix” the problem, Ellery just wants help for the pain to end and has been thinking
about suicide. Developmentally, some physical or emotional limitations may affect Ellery’s
ability to use resources or follow through with a plan. For example, Ellery feels their current
job is a dead-end, money and promotion wise, and has little motivation to change course
socially or interpersonally. Environment, which includes common multicultural components
(e.g., SES, religious or spiritual influences, racial-ethnic identification with groups, gender,
resilience, physical abilities, sexual or affectional orientation, educational level), was also
assessed and considered. Ellery is not currently spiritual and has no religious leader but
feels comfortable contacting one. Ellery repeated that suicide is a sin and people who die
from suicide will “burn in hell.”
Other data were collected. Ellery reported the following responses to the Columbia
Suicide Severity Rating Scale – Screen Version (C-SSR; https://www.cms.gov/files/document/
cssrs-screen-version-instrument.pdf): Q1 (wished dead?) – Yes; Q2 (thoughts of killing self?) –
Yes; Q3 (thinking how? No developed plan) – Yes; Q4 (intention? Minor.) – Yes;
Q5 (plan?) – No; and Q6 (initiated plan?) – No. Therefore, Ellery was determined using
this screener to be Moderate to High Risk.
Throughout the interview, Ellery divulged the following specific risk factors:
• Demographics: unwillingly separated from partner.
• Psychosocial: perceived lack of social support.
• Psychiatric diagnosis: probable mood disorder and substance use disorders.
• Psychological dimensions: feels five key suicidal emotions: hopelessness,
helplessness, worthlessness, loneliness, and depression.
• History: family history of depression (client has made no previous suicide attempts
and has no history of suicidal ideation).
• Individual factors: Current alcohol and drug use (no past suicidal ideation, plans,
or intent; current ideation, with minor plan and minor intent but no suicidal
behaviors); reports little reason for living (no homicidal ideation).
Ellery’s responses to a Q-tree for suicide follow:
• Do you have a plan for how you would attempt suicide?
Ellery: Not really. I haven’t really planned for anything.
• (If yes:) What is the plan? Have you acted on the plan (rehearsed it, or made plans to
follow through)? Have you used this plan in the past?
• Do you have a way (means) to carry out the plan?
Ellery: Not really. I don’t own a gun or anything like that.
• (If yes:) Have you attempted or started to act on the plan? If that plan did not result in
death, is there another plan and means? Have you used this plan and means in the past?
• Have you had any past suicidal attempts?
Ellery: No. None.
• (If yes:) How many? How has the plan and means increased in lethality and frequency?
When? What was an underlying issue for the attempt?
• What was the result of the attempt? Hospitalization, counseling, no intervention? Did
others know of the attempt and what was their support? Who was part of the rescue?
• If the result was hospitalization, what happened at discharge? Was there a diagnosis?
What was the diagnosis? Was medication prescribed? If medication was prescribed, are
you compliant? Was mental health counseling provided after discharge? Did you follow
through with the outpatient mental health referral?

-- 57 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	29
• Do you have a mental health diagnosis (whether you agree or disagree)?
Ellery: No. There is a history of depression in my family, but I have not been
diagnosed with depression, although I feel really depressed right now. More than
I have in the past.
• Are you under the care of a mental health provider? Are you still seeing a counselor?
Were you prescribed medication? What was it? Are you compliant? If not, when was the
medication stopped and why?
Ellery: No counselor. No medication.
• Do you have a family member with a history of a substance use disorder or mood disorder
(e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, or other mood disorder)?
Ellery: Yes. My mother and my sister are both depressed. We all drink too much
but I don’t know if anyone has a substance use disorder diagnosis. They don’t
really talk about it.
• Do you have a family history of suicide? (Family means any perception of family and does
not have to be related by blood.) For children and teens, has a friend attempted suicide or
died by suicide?
Ellery: No. No one of whom I am aware.
• Has an issue occurred that has not been resolved?
Ellery: My breakup!
• Has the event caused distress that has impacted your daily functioning? Was the event
humiliating? Has there been a recent change in life because of the issue (moving, sepa-
ration from children/family)? Is there a sense of shame connected with the unresolved
issue?
Ellery: Absolutely! I am gutted. In real agony. I don’t know what to do. How to get
them back. I planned to live with them the rest of my life!
• In past situations, what have you done to get past the issue?
Ellery: This is the first time it has happened. I don’t know what to do.
• Do you have a social support system?
Ellery: My mom and sister; my father abandoned us when I was a teenager, and we
haven’t spoken since. Work friends. Friends I shared with my partner, but I don’t
think they want anything to do with me anymore.
• Has the support changed? Is the support system reliable? Are there other new supports
or supports you can think of that would be helpful?
Ellery: My friends either don’t know or have not reached out to me. I am so embar-
rassed and don’t want to talk with them about it. They probably would take my
ex’s side anyway.
• Do you have hope that things will get better?
Ellery: No. Everything is so messed up. I am in such emotional pain. I can’t see
things ever being good again.
• How will things get better?
• What has prevented you from following through on your suicidal thoughts?
Ellery: My dwindling hope of reconciliation and my family’s religious beliefs.
• Do you want to die?
Ellery: Not really, but the pain of living without my partner is overwhelming.
• Can you commit to working on a plan to keep you alive?
Ellery: Yes. I definitely don’t want to go to hell!

-- 58 of 545 --

30 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Given all of this information and evidence, determine Ellery’s lethality rating in
the context of Low to High, where:
Low: The client is not suicidal at the time of the assessment.
Low-Moderate: The client is somewhat suicidal but does not have any risk factors
associated with suicide.
Moderate: The client is suicidal and has several risk factors.
Moderate-High: The client is determined to die and may commit suicide within
the next 72 hours unless intervention occurs.
High: The client is currently in the process of committing suicide (e.g., already
swallowed pills).
Given all of the assessment data collected above, Ellery’s lethality rating appears to be
moderate. At this time, Ellery is periodically considering suicide, has several risk factors,
but has not formulated a plan or displayed intent of imminent action.
Assessment Task 3: Clarify the Problem(s)
Although Ellery presented initially with a particular problem (the breakup), the
comprehensive history has helped enrich our understanding of the actual problem and
context. This was accomplished through active listening, unconditional positive regard,
and being nonjudgmental. The interview unearthed a previous issue of abandonment
(father abandoning the family) that was explored in more detail, and Ellery admitted
to thinking about that abandonment a lot more recently and wondering what personal
failings have led to these broken relationships.
The counselor used empathically phrased yet mildly challenging questions to help
the client better understand the actual crisis and to help Ellery gain more control over the
problem to begin the healing process. This included identifying attached meanings Ellery
had to the perceived crisis, including not really knowing what friends knew about the
breakup and whether continuing supportive friendships were possible. The counselor
explored this and other relationships (family, friends, work colleagues, potential spiritual
leaders) to develop a better understanding of the actual crisis and allow for more effective
intervention planning by tapping into potential emotional supports.
Assessment Task 4: Explore Coping Skills, Resources, and Supports
After clarification of the problem, it is essential for counselors to explore the coping skills,
resources, and supports available to Ellery, especially when dealing with past crises and
adjustments. Counselors should also explore and evaluate which coping skills, resources,
and supports were effective and ineffective, as well as which are available and unavailable
for the current crisis. The client and counselor also should discuss potential new resources,
coping skills, and supports of which Ellery may currently be unaware of or may not have
used in the past. These resources are explored using a variety of research-based approaches,
including resilience-based, positive psychology, hope-based, and wellness models. Ellery’s
motivation to change was also assessed. At this time, Ellery claims some motivation to change
but is in such emotional pain and low mood that a path forward has not been detected.
The counselor administered the Brief Resilience Scale (BRS; https://ogg.osu.edu/
media/documents/MB%20Stream/Brief%20Resilience%20Scale.pdf) to assess Ellery’s

-- 59 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	31
resilience under normal circumstances (Ellery scored in the normal range of resilience)
and the 5F-Wel (https://www.mindgarden.com/99-five-factor-wellness-inventory) to better
understand Ellery’s areas of personal strengths and challenges so as to better prepare a
strengths-based treatment plan. From this assessment, family and friendship resources
were discussed and plans were made to begin more healthful exercise (e.g., cardiovascular,
strength training, yoga) and nutrition regimens. Plans were also discussed to reconnect
Ellery with a previous spiritual guide.
Level II: Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks
Intervention Task 1: Normalize and Educate
The purpose of intervention is to normalize a person’s response to the crisis. People in
crisis may behave in a variety of ways. In hindsight, most clients reflect that they could
have acted differently, but while in a crisis, people make the best decisions they can at the
time in a situation that seems beyond their control. Ellery experienced normal reactions
(i.e., abandonment, hopelessness) to an unexpected event (i.e., the breakup) that left them
feeling out of control. The counselor helped Ellery explore emotions and the feelings of
being out of control. This was supplemented by psychoeducation on processes of grief
and loss to help Ellery understand that stages of grief are predictable and survivable.
The goal was to help Ellery gain more control over feelings and thoughts, even though
the feelings and thoughts experienced are uncomfortable and, at times, overwhelming.
Ellery was helped to realize that these new feelings and thoughts can make the situation
even more debilitating. The normalization of feelings and thoughts helps clients remove
much of the power the client perceives the crisis to have.
Intervention Task 2: Explore Options
Ellery and the counselor used information gleaned from assessment tasks 1–4 to
collaborate, develop, and explore options. The moderate lethality estimation (i.e., no plan
or means, low to moderate intent) means that hospitalization is probably not necessary
at this time but should be discussed as a continuum of care option. It is often helpful to
accelerate outpatient care to make sure the client is safe, so they considered twice-a-week
sessions, daily call-ins, and other options. Use of medication was discussed. They also
considered who could be contacted or visited when Ellery felt depressed and needed to
talk. Ellery suggested phone calls with their mother or sister, and even suggested talking
to a spiritual leader and perhaps returning to more regular attendance. Suggestions
from the 5F-Wel and BRS were also considered. Ellery and the counselor then discussed
motivation and willingness to change and implement the strategies agreed to. By this
time, while still depressed and heartbroken, Ellery was beginning to feel some hope that
things might eventually get better and understand the importance of personal safety
and self-care. Of course, if there is any sense of potential harm by the client, the crisis
counselor should make personal safety a priority.
Intervention Task 3: Develop a Plan and Obtain a Commitment
Ellery and the counselor decided to schedule two 1-hour sessions per week for the next
2 weeks. Ellery will also call the counselor for a daily check-in at 5:00 p.m. for a brief
confirmation that no or minimal suicidal ideation occurred. Ellery will contact family to
arrange two 10-minute phone calls per week to share life events and seek their support.
Ellery also decided to contact a spiritual leader to meet and discuss personal spiritual

-- 60 of 545 --

32 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
issues and strengthen the expressed commitment to attend religious events again. Notice
that the resulting intervention plan is individualized and based on the comprehensive
assessment of the client. Client commitment is essential for ownership and responsibility.
Plans should have attainable and measurable goals to demonstrate progress.
Intervention Task 4: Prepare Documentation, Follow Up, and Provide Referrals
The counselor kept excellent records for continuity of care in this outpatient context and
in case future hospitalization or referral was necessary.
Discussion Questions
1. What other environment variables could have been explored to develop a holistic
plan of action for Ellery?
2. What educational information could also be provided to Ellery and Ellery’s support
network?
3. What other referrals could be made to assist Ellery?
4. What assumptions did you make regarding Ellery’s self-identifications?
CASE STUDY 1.3
Integration of the Task Model of Crisis Assessment and Intervention: London
Marty, a clinical mental health counselor in private practice, frequently receives referrals
for at-risk students from schools and the community. The parents of 4-year-old London
contacted the practice because London is at risk of being expelled from a third preschool
for severe behavioral issues, including biting and hitting other children.
Before meeting London in the office, Marty conducted an observation at the
preschool. There, Marty witnessed London punch another child in the face over a fire
truck. In response, the teacher took the fire truck from London and comforted the child
who London punched. Throughout the preschool observation, London does not appear
to engage in any developmentally appropriate interaction with other children. At lunch,
London sits with the other children and does not interact except to try to take food from a
few of them using threatening gestures. In response, the other children give London their
food. At the end of this observation, it seems clear that London demonstrates several
defiant behaviors and appears to show no remorse for these behaviors.
A week later, London and London’s parents arrive for their first in-office visit
with Marty. After meeting with the parents and London together and then spending
some time with London alone, Marty decides to have the parents join them again. When
leaving to get the parents, Marty stops behind London as London colors and tells London
that the parents will join them again. London does not respond, nor does London display
any body movements in reaction to Marty’s voice. Curious, Marty gives several other
commands that are ignored by London, who simply continues to color. Marty keeps
these observations in mind while proceeding with the assessment.
Assessment Task 1: Address Safety, Stabilization, and Risk
Because Marty often works with at-risk clients, Marty knows the need to assess and be
mindful that any person, no matter the age, could exert harm to self or others. Children,

-- 61 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	33
depending on their ability to express appropriate emotions and control their actions,
could become violent (and Marty already witnessed London engage in violent behavior
during the observation). With safety for self and others in mind, Marty starts an in-depth
assessment of London. London’s parents provide most of the information because London
appears to be content coloring and does not respond to basic initial questions. Marty asks
London’s parents: Has London demonstrated threatening behaviors or actions to family
members, friends, animals, or toys? In what environment does London show more anger
or violence? Does London behave violently toward self (e.g., scratching, biting, cutting,
hitting their head or other body parts against a wall or object)? and Has London made
any verbal threats to others? The task of addressing safety, stabilization, and risk would
continue during other assessment tasks.
Assessment Task 2: Follow a Holistic Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Assessment Approach
Marty continues the assessment to obtain a more holistic understanding of London, the
family, and their social life. Marty asks London’s parents: Has London witnessed any
violence on television or with family members? Does London play with friends or other
family members about the same age? How would you describe London’s play? How
would you describe your parenting style (e.g., how do you provide encouragement,
reinforcement, rewards, consequences, and punishment)? What seems to calm London
when frustrated? What activities does London enjoy? Did London reach developmental
milestones on time? When did London learn to walk and talk? Does London have any
chronic or acute medical conditions (e.g., ear infections, urinary infections)? Is London
on any medications? Has there been a history of domestic violence or sexual violence in
the family or with London?
Marty asks about London’s most recent well visit with a pediatrician. London’s
parents indicated that, aside from vaccinations, London has not been seen by a doctor
regularly, with the exception of the local urgent care center, where London’s chronic
ear infections are treated. Marty asks the parents whether they followed up after the ear
infections. They say they assumed that the medicine healed the ear infections.
Noticing that London still does not respond, Marty initiates a conversation with
London and begins to color with London. London grabs the crayons and throws them
across the room and then goes to stand in the corner. London’s parents indicate that
this behavior is normal for London, in that when London becomes violent, standing
in the corner is the punishment. Marty asks if there was ever any discussion between
the parents and London when this happened. They say, “No, London learned this in
preschool.” Marty quietly walks behind London and snaps. No response. Marty asks
London to turn around. No response.
At this point, Marty is highly suspicious that something more is happening with
London than solely behavioral issues (the original presenting problem). Marty moves
in front of London and motions for London to come and sit down. London proceeds to
sit back on the floor. Marty (while covering their own mouth) starts talking to London.
London reaches up and tries to lower Marty’s hand to stare at Marty’s lips. Marty then
says, “Do you want to color or use the blocks?” London nods and says, “Color.”
During this assessment, Marty noted the ABCDE observations. London’s affect
was observed when receiving directives (e.g., behaviors ranged from being withdrawn
to being interested in activities to anger). London displayed a range of behaviors when
frustrated (e.g., throwing the crayons and putting self in a time-out). London’s cognitive

-- 62 of 545 --

34 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
functioning appeared to be intact when London could focus on Marty’s face. Marty
inquired about development milestones such as talking, walking, and play activities to
compare London’s development to typical developmental functioning, although it seemed
speech development was limited compared with other 4-year-old children. Finally, Marty
assessed for environment factors such as peer interactions, SES, medical illnesses, living
arrangements, social interactions, exposure to violence, and parenting styles.
Assessment Task 3: Clarify the Problem(s)
Marty shared these observations with London’s parents and stated that another problem
may need to be evaluated prior to addressing the behavioral issues. While London’s
aggressive behaviors need attention, Marty wants to rule out any medical issues. Marty
wants London’s parents to make an appointment for London to see a pediatrician and
have a hearing test conducted to rule out any hearing issues before addressing the
behavioral issues.
Assessment Task 4: Explore Coping Skills, Resources, and Supports
Marty speaks with the parents about several referrals of pediatricians since London has
not had a well visit recently. London’s parents indicate that they are living with maternal
grandparents and rely on friends for transportation and on medical assistance. Together,
they investigate pediatricians who are providers with their plan. Marty explores how
the guardians currently react to London’s hostile behaviors and offers possible new
responses to integrate, such as looking at London to see facial expressions.
Intervention Task 1: Normalize and Educate
At appropriate times, Marty normalizes how the parents must be feeling during their
discussions with Marty (e.g., frustration, not feeling like good parents, fearing a possible
medical condition, worry about finances). Marty also provides some education into
what happens at a wellness visit to the pediatrician and insight into age-appropriate
developmental tasks of 4-year-olds.
Intervention Task 2: Explore Options, and Intervention; Task 3: Develop a Plan and
Obtain a Commitment
Marty informs the parents that the well visit and hearing test need to be completed to
rule out any medical issues before proceeding with behavioral intervention. Together, the
guardians and Marty develop a time frame to contact a pediatrician, evaluate health care
options, and schedule a follow-up appointment after the medical appointment is completed.
Intervention Task 4: Prepare Documentation, Follow Up, and Provide Referrals
Marty documents the assessment and plan as agreed upon, including the hearing and
pediatric referral, and schedules a follow-up visit with London and her guardians.
In the end, London was medically assessed as having a 90% hearing loss in both
ears. The behavioral symptoms were the reason for the mental health referral but, after
the holistic assessment and intervention, it was determined that the priority for crisis
assessment was medical intervention. Marty could not have addressed the behavioral
issues effectively if the medical issue (i.e., hearing loss) was not addressed first.

-- 63 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	35
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 1.3
Treating the Whole Person: The Need for Medical and Mental Health Collaborations
(continued)
Discussion Questions
1. What other environment variables could have been explored to develop a holistic
plan of action for London?
2. What educational information could also be provided to the parents?
3. What could Marty do if the parents refused to have London’s hearing evaluated?
4. Aside from this case study, what other medical conditions could have symptoms
that could be misdiagnosed for mental health issues?
5. Are there other referrals that could be made to assist the family?
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
During the early part of my clinical career, I fought the
medical model. I worked in agencies where the medical
model was the foundation and often little attention was
given to psychosocial, let alone spiritual and religious,
issues. I soon became frustrated that all my training
and focus on mental health concerns were secondary,
at best. As coordinator of a mobile crisis team in
Baltimore, I worked with psychiatrists, case workers,
psychiatric nurses, and mental health counselors.
I became aware that many medical issues mimic mental
health symptoms, but I continued to be frustrated with
the lack of understanding for addressing mental health
issues in crisis situations.
I have learned over the years not to fight the
medical model because, while professing to treat
the whole person, I might miss an important aspect
of the treatment for the client. I learned the
importance of collaborating to treat the whole
person. Over the years, I observed medical issues often
resembling mental health symptoms and came to realize
that if medical issues are not ruled out, the mental
health treatment plan could be totally inaccurate. I grew
more aware of this in my private practice, where I was
referred individuals in crisis, many of whom continued
on my caseload for long-term counseling.
My practice over the last decade, although
independent, has been with a family medical doctor
in a rural area. One case stands out as a good example
of the need for collaboration with other professionals
to provide treatment for the whole person. I was
referred a young man about 10 years ago after a
recent discharge from the hospital for attempting to
kill a family member. At the time, he was 12 years old.
He had been diagnosed with an unspecified psychotic
disorder; had been hospitalized multiple times per year
for suicidal or homicidal behaviors; had been with
multiple mental health counselors; and had a list of
medical issues, including type 1 diabetes and unassessed
“cognitive abilities.” These issues did not allow him to
monitor his diabetes without assistance from others. In
addition, he lived many years being severely abused and
neglected by his biological parents and siblings, and his
charts indicated that his biological mother was a heavy
substance user during her pregnancy. He was eventually
adopted into a loving family but only after many years
of maltreatment in foster homes. Early on, I spoke to
his family and asked if he ever had been evaluated for
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). My observation of his
interactions, facial features, and processing, as well as
the history of his early upbringing, made me wonder
whether FAS had anything to do with his cognitive
abilities and presentation. At the same time, I could
tell he was a very insightful child—more insightful than
others his age and even some adults. I referred him
to Children’s Hospital where he received a diagnosis
of FAS. The need to integrate the development and
environmental factors in his treatment plan were crucial.
Ten years later, he lives in a residential community.
I see him not only for stabilization of his psychosis but
also for PTSD, relationship issues, and to assist his team
in the goal for him to become more independent. It
is imperative for his team and me to work together
on all these issues. Often, he presents with a sluggish,

-- 64 of 545 --

36 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
OTHER MODELS OF CRISIS ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION
Learning Objective 1.7 Apply other models of crisis assessment and intervention to
crisis situations.
Let’s now examine other approaches or models of crisis assessment and intervention,
including the ABC-X and double ABC-X models of crisis, elements of stress and crisis,
and ecological and contextual considerations.
The ABC-X and Double ABC-X Models of Crisis
The ABC-X and Double ABC-X models of crisis were developed through research with
families, but the concepts outlined in the models may be generalized to individuals or
to larger groups or communities. From his studies of families experiencing separation
and reunion as a result of World War II, Reuben Hill (1949, 1958) postulated the ABC-X
model of family crisis (see Figure 1.1). According to this theory, there is an interaction
among a provoking stressor event (A), the family’s resources (B), and the
meaning that the family attaches to the stressor event (C). The crisis (X), a
state of acute disequilibrium and immobilization of the family system, is an
outcome of this interaction.
Hill’s original ABC-X model continues to provide a framework for
much research in stress and crisis; however, a few scholars (Boss et al.,
2017; McCubbin & Patterson, 1982) expanded the model. Among the
better-known variations of Hill’s work is the double ABC-X model of crisis
proposed by McCubbin and Patterson (1982). Writing from a systems
orientation, which assumes that systems naturally evolve and become
more complex over time, McCubbin and Patterson considered recovery
and growth following crisis. The concept of adaptation was introduced to
describe lasting functional changes that occur to meet the demands of a
crisis or stressful event. According to these scholars, Hill’s original model
withdrawn affect and behaviors. His cognitive abilities
during these times seem more disorganized and
incoherent than his normal baseline. My first thought,
if I did not know his medical issues, would be that
he is depressed and possibly having current racing
thoughts—a mental health focus. However, my first
question is not about mental health. In knowing his
medical issues and his inability to monitor his diabetes
(developmental assessment), my first question is,
“When was the last time you checked your blood
sugar?” followed by, “What was the reading?” Then,
we usually take a few minutes to check his blood sugar
again and, in most instances, his observed “depressed
mood” is the result of a blood sugar reading in the
range of 40–50. The next step is not to continue with
mental health discussions but to contact his residential
counselor, who waits for him in the waiting room,
and follow the treatment plan outlined by the facility
to raise his blood sugar to an acceptable level before
any mental health counseling can occur. Medical
concerns must be addressed prior to any mental health
counseling. At the end of each session, I complete a
form for the agency that includes any medical issues
addressed during the session, my consultation with
team members, and actions I have taken.
I have learned the importance of collaboration
and the need to address medical issues. Of course, some
professionals believe they are more knowledgeable
about the human condition than others. That is okay.
My goal is to help the client. However, over the years,
in collaborating with other medical professionals,
often on my initiating contact, I have witnessed
them reach out more and include mental health
updates in their treatment plans. Perhaps we are all
seeing that treating the whole person involves many
professionals.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 1.4
This video applies the ABC-X
Model to the concept of raising
resilient teens. The application
offers an example of (A) pre-
cipitating factors, (B) resources,
(C) perceptions, and (X) degree
of stress or crisis. How can you
apply a personal or professional
situation to the ABC-X Model?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=-VeexQUhU7I

-- 65 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	37
was somewhat incomplete in that it outlined only those factors that contributed to a
crisis or breakdown in functioning. Following a state of disequilibrium or incapacitation,
additional stressors may accrue and additional resources may be identified and acquired.
Subsequently, new perceptions that consider the original event and related hardships or
stressors are formulated, along with the application of resources and coping strategies
to meet the needs of those stressors.
According to McCubbin and Patterson (1982), there is a “double A” factor that
includes Hill’s original concept of a provoking stressor plus the buildup of further
stressors that must be addressed. These stressors may include unresolved issues
related to the crisis-provoking event, changes that occur unrelated to the event, and
any consequences of attempts to cope (Bush & Price, 2020). The “double B” factor
refers to resources available at the time of the provoking stressor along with tangible
and intangible resources that have been acquired or strengthened. Fortified coping
resources would be included in this concept. The “double C” factor refers not only
to perceptions and meanings assigned to the original provoking stressor but also to
accumulated stressors, resources, coping, and the entire situation. Perceptions are
influenced by religious beliefs, family values, cultural values, and how the situation
may have been reframed. In the model proposed by McCubbin and Patterson, the
original crisis (Hill’s X factor) constitutes a beginning point, while adaptation (“double
X”) occurs later in time. Adaptation is an outcome variable involving changes in
functioning and perception. More than the simple reduction of stress, adaptation is
the degree to which long-term change has occurred in response to the demands of
stressor and crisis events.
McCubbin and Patterson (1982) referred to positive long-term changes that occur
in response to crises as bonadaptation. It was their contention that following crises, some
individuals and families do not merely return to their previous states of equilibrium;
instead, they are better able to function and handle stress and crisis events. While
McCubbin and Patterson referred to positive adaptation as bonadaptation, others have
labeled this concept stress-related growth (Park et al., 1996) or posttraumatic growth
(Tedeschi & Calhoun, 2004).
FIGURE 1.1 	The ABC-X model of family crisis.
Perception
Event or Situation
Crisis
Low
Degree of
Stress High
Resources

-- 66 of 545 --

38 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Elements of Stress and Crisis Theory
Let’s now examine elements of stress and crisis theory, including provoking stressor
events, resources, meaning or perception, and coping.
PROVOKING STRESSOR EVENTS 	Boss et al. (2017) categorized stressor events and
situations by source, type, and severity. Sources are either internal (i.e., originating
within the family) or external (i.e., attributable to someone or something outside the
family). Examples of internal stressors include partner violence and chemical
dependency. These stressors begin within the family and are accompanied by changes
in the way the family functions. Partners and family members often adopt various roles,
behaviors, and communication styles in their attempt to cope with and survive the
actions of the abusive or addicted person. As familiar coping strategies become
increasingly inadequate, families cease to function effectively and healthily. “Crises” in
these families are rarely a one-time occurrence.
Another example of an internal stressor is infertility. Within the context of the family
life cycle, most couples expect to conceive and carry a pregnancy to term. Infertility is
considered an internal stressor because the inability to achieve a successful pregnancy
originates with one (sometimes both) of the partners as opposed to something outside of
the family. It can become a crisis situation because the partners face psychological and
relationship changes that affect the way they function. In response to this crisis, many
couples can redefine their relationships and reframe their meanings of pregnancy and
parenting; unfortunately, however, many couples do not respond well and ultimately
separate.
External stressors originate outside the family but affect functioning, nonetheless.
Examples of external stressors include natural disasters, terrorism, financial decline due
to the stock market, and the rising costs of goods and services. Some external stressors
are attributable to forces of nature (e.g., hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes), some to
humans (e.g., violent crimes, job termination), and some to a combination of the two.
Individuals and families typically have less control over external stressors than they do
over internal stressors. For example, families have little control over the stock market.
However, the ramifications of a declining stock market could have a substantial influ-
ence on a family’s future.
As with internal stressors, however, the degree to which crises caused by external
stressors are experienced is contingent on available resources and the meaning attached
to the stressor event. In the United States, hurricanes and tornados (external stressors)
annually affect normal functioning and trigger crises for thousands of families that
experience deaths, injuries, or various losses. Families who seem to be the most resilient
and to have the least difficulty recovering from this crisis are those with available
resources such as social support, housing, and financial assets.
Beyond classifying stressors by their source and type, Boss (2006) described
stressor situations according to their duration and severity. Some stressors are onetime
events, happen suddenly, and resolve quickly; these are considered acute stressors.
An automobile accident, for example, might disrupt a family’s equilibrium as broken

-- 67 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	39
bones heal and alternative transportation is used but, ultimately, the family’s balance
is restored. Other stressors, such as lifelong illnesses, infertility, and poverty, persist
over long periods of time and are considered chronic. Families caring for aging family
members may experience chronic stress and may face disequilibrium and crisis each
time the family member’s health takes a turn for the worse. The crisis is triggered by
changes in health but is the result of additional demands for financial, social, and
other resources as well as the perception and meaning the family attaches to the older
adult’s decline. Finally, it is important to consider whether a stressor situation is an
isolated event or part of an accumulation of stressor events. It is often the case that
any one stressor event may not be enough to trigger a crisis, but the cumulative effect
of the pileup of stressors taxes resources, disrupts equilibrium and functioning, and
results in crisis.
RESOURCES 	Resources may be defined as traits, characteristics, or abilities that can be
used to meet the demands of a stressor event and that can be available at the individual,
family, or community level. Resources may be tangible (e.g., food, clothing, shelter) or
intangible (e.g., social support, self-esteem). When resources are adequate to meet the
demands created by a stressor situation, the crisis is less likely to be perceived as
problematic—and less likely to lead to trauma. Two types of resources are important:
those that are available and used to mediate the initial stressor and those that are
acquired, developed, or strengthened after a crisis (McCubbin & Patterson, 1982).
Individual resources may include finances, education, health, and psychological
qualities. Family resources include the internal, systemic attributes of cohesion and
adaptability, along with resources such as financial management, communication skills,
compatibility, and shared interests. Community resources include external supports,
such as social networks, on which the individual or family can draw.
MEANING OR PERCEPTION 	Whether a stressor event results in crisis depends not only
on available resources but also on the meaning attached to the event. The meaning and
perception of the event is the main determination of whether an event becomes a crisis.
The meaning attributed to a stressor event is subjective and comes from the way it is
appraised through both cognitive and affective processes. Factors contributing to this
qualitative variable include the ambiguity associated with the stressor situation, denial,
and the belief and value orientation of the individual or family. Ambiguity occurs when
facts cannot be obtained. It is often the case that specific information about the onset,
development, duration, and conclusion of an unpredictable stressor event is unavailable.
When information is unavailable, individuals may be uncertain in their perception of
who is included in their families or social support systems. With limited understanding
about who is in and who is out, it becomes difficult to ascertain how various roles,
rules, and functions will be carried out. Whereas sometimes stressors themselves are
ambiguous because data are not available, at other times facts are available but are
ignored or distorted. The resulting denial may be a useful coping strategy in the short
term but may be damaging if it prevents further action during a crisis (Bush &
Price, 2020).

-- 68 of 545 --

40 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
COPING 	In his original ABC-X model, Hill (1949, 1958) considered coping behaviors as
part of the family’s resources (represented by “B”) to be used in response to demands of
a stressor event (“A”). While many researchers agree that coping behaviors are a subset
of available resources, coping itself is a separate construct, often interacting with both
resources (“B”) and perception (“C”). Any effort taken to deal with stress may be
considered coping. Thus, coping is a process that requires cognitive as well as behavioral
activities (Bush & Price, 2020). Cognitively, people experiencing stressor events must
appraise what is happening and assess any potential for harm. They must also evaluate
the consequences of possible response actions. Following appraisal, three types of
coping responses may be used: direct actions, intrapsychic mechanisms, and efforts to
manage emotions.
Direct actions are those behaviors that typically are thought of as “fight, flight,
or freeze” responses. Examples include acquiring resources, asking for help, and
learning new skills (Bush & Price, 2020). These actions are used in relation to the
environment to master stressors and are thought of as problem-focused coping
strategies. Emotion-focused coping strategies, conversely, involve mechanisms used to
change feelings or perceptions when there is little that can be done to change a stressor.
Intrapsychic responses are those that are often thought of as defense mechanisms
(e.g., denial, detachment) and allow people to alter their interpretations of the stress-
provoking situation (Boss, 2006; Bush & Price, 2020). Additional emotion-focused
strategies are used to manage emotions generated by the stressor. Examples include
the use of resources such as social support or of alcohol and drugs. Obviously, specific
coping responses are neither adaptive nor maladaptive; they are simply efforts to
manage.
Ecological and Contextual Considerations
Boss (2006) and Collins and Collins (2005) suggested that stress and crisis are affected by
contextual factors. Collins and Collins advocated a developmental–ecological perspective to
conceptualizing crises. Some crises are triggered by stressor events that are developmental
in nature; that is, these developmental crises are expected events in the lifespan of the
individual or family. However, regardless of whether the stressor event is developmental
or situational, lifespan variables must be considered to determine their meaning and
impact on the stress or crisis situation.
In addition to considering developmental factors, Collins and Collins (2005)
maintained that the context provided by environmental factors such as interpersonal
relationships, community resources, and society at large must be recognized. This
approach suggests that each crisis is unique since the ecological determinants for each
person will be unique. Therefore, crisis counselors need to be aware that even though
many of the clinical considerations and approaches may be similar for a specific crisis
and for many individuals experiencing that crisis (e.g., sexual assault), the person in
crisis will experience the crisis differently than someone else due to the unique and
personal ecological determinants. In essence, do not simply generalize and implement
a generic approach to a particular crisis without first assessing the client’s unique
ecological factors. Complete Think About It 1.2.

-- 69 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	41
Think about the things in your life that have created stress. Were they developmental or ecological? How did
these stressors affect you?
THINK ABOUT IT 1.2
CASE STUDY 1.1
The Nguyens: A Natural Disaster Affects a Family System
Stressor events are those occurrences—positive or negative, predictable or unforeseen—
that provoke change in the functioning of a system. They may be categorized as
normative or non-normative. The Nguyen family has experienced several provoking
stressors, some of which they chose, others that they did not.
Stressors may be categorized by source, type, and severity, and they should be
considered within the external context. The external context includes variables such as
culture, history, education, and heredity over which the Nguyen family has no control.
Crisis counselors who work with the Nguyens need to explore the family’s Vietnamese
culture as well as possible additional cultural issues related to being part of an immigrant
community along the Gulf Coast of the United States. Imbedded in these considerations
is the fact that the Nguyens chose to leave Vietnam for the United States some 30 years
after the Vietnam War. What kinds of social prejudices and biases does this couple face
simply by being Vietnamese? Are there additional biases that they endure by virtue of
being immigrants in a post-9/11 U.S. society?
The Nguyens’ situation is complicated by their SES, another component of their exter-
nal context. Prior to the hurricane, they were making a living in the shrimp industry. They
had few bills and no debt; however, they also had no medical insurance. On those rare occa-
sions when they required medical attention, they were able to use community public health
resources. In the aftermath of the hurricane and the tough economic times that followed,
numerous public nonprofit health agencies were forced to close their doors, making it dif-
ficult for the Nguyens to access prenatal care. When their daughter was born with a birth
defect, they found it necessary to travel to a larger city to receive care for her needs. Thus,
they incurred transportation and lodging expenses, further affecting their delicate SES.
Boss (2006) proposed a similar contextual approach to the study of stress and crisis,
stating that “factors in addition to the stressful event influence family vulnerability or
breakdown” (p. 28). According to Boss, stress is mediated by contextual dimensions,
which may be either internal or external. The internal context comprises three dimensions
that may be controlled or changed: the structure of the family, psychological elements
such as perception and assessment, and philosophical elements such as values and
beliefs. The external context comprises environmental or ecosystemic dimensions over
which there is no control. External influences on stress and crisis include historical,
economic, developmental, hereditary, and cultural contexts. Now analyze the stressor
events experienced by the Nguyen family as Case Study 1.1 continues and concludes.

-- 70 of 545 --

42 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Having lost their livelihood as shrimpers to the hurricane, the Nguyens were forced
to look for work elsewhere. They were fortunate to have a rather large social support
network as well as acquaintances who helped them find employment once retail outlets
began to reopen in the months after the hurricane. Unfortunately, the retail jobs they
found paid little more than minimum wage and did not include medical insurance. The
Nguyens’ educational background and minimal fluency in English made it difficult for
them to pursue higher-paying jobs.
The Nguyens were also influenced by internal contextual factors—those factors
that originate within the family and are accompanied by changes in the way the family
functions. When they chose to leave their family and friends in Vietnam to move to the
United States, the structure and definition of their family became less clear, particularly
given the limited opportunities they had to return for visits. They also were forced to
wrestle with issues related to caring for their aging parents. Once the Nguyens were
living in the United States, their family structure changed further when they became
parents themselves.
For the Nguyens, a relatively young couple, becoming parents could be considered
a “normative” stressor—something normal, predictable, and developmental in nature.
The stressor of becoming parents could also be considered volitional, as a degree of
choice was involved. Conversely, non-normative stressors are those that are unexpected.
A catastrophic event such as the hurricane and all its ramifications should certainly be
classified as non-normative. For the Nguyens, having a child with spina bifida is also a
non-normative and nonvolitional stressor, and its lasting implications make its presence
chronic.
To ameliorate their situation, the Nguyens have several resources, derived from
both internal and external contexts, on which they may rely. Although they left friends
and family behind to move to the United States, they are members of a large immigrant
community. From this community, they receive a tremendous amount of social support.
In addition, the Nguyens were able to use public community resources for health care
and for other basic survival needs in the weeks and months after the hurricane. The
Nguyens possess strengths such as initiative, resourcefulness, and a strong work ethic
that have helped them to be resilient in the face of their stressors.
Discussion Questions
1. Apply the task model of crisis assessment and intervention to the case of the
Nguyens and develop a treatment plan for intervention.
2. What sources of resilience and support can the Nguyens harness to cope with their
circumstances?
3. What additional developmental or situational crises are likely to occur in this fam-
ily in the years ahead? How can you help prepare or inoculate them to better adjust
to those circumstances?
Table 1.2 provides some helpful resources for dealing with various crisis
circumstances the counselor may encounter. Then read Voices from the Field 1.4, which
discusses responses in the wake of a school shooting.

-- 71 of 545 --

Chapter 1 • Basic Concepts of Crisis Intervention 	43
General Crisis Intervention Hotlines for Youth (dealing with conflicts, family stressors,
suicide, runaway youth, drugs and alcohol, homelessness, and so on)
• National Mental Health Hotline: dial 988
• Boys Town Suicide and Crisis Line: 1-800-448-3000 (voice)/1-800-448-1833 (TDD)
• Covenant House Hotline: 1-800-999-9999
• National Hopeline Network, Suicide & Crisis Hotline: 1-800-442-HOPE
Child Abuse Hotlines
• ChildHelp USA National Child Abuse Hotline: 1-800-4-A-CHILD (voice)/1-800-2-A-CHILD (TDD)
• National Child Abuse Hotline: 1-800-25-ABUSE
Domestic Violence Hotlines
• National Domestic Violence/Child Abuse/Sexual Abuse Hotline: 1-800-799-SAFE (voice)/
1-800-787-3224 (TDD)/1-800-942-6908 (Spanish speaking)
Substance Abuse/Alcoholism Hotlines
• Alateen: 1-800-352-9996
• SAMHSA’s National Drug Information Treatment and Referral Hotline: 1-800-662-HELP
Poison Control Centers
• Poison Control: 1-800-222-1222
Sexual Assault Hotline
• National Sexual Assault Hotline: 1-800-656-4673
Suicide Prevention Hotlines
• National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-TALK/1-888-628-9454 (Spanish speaking)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
• Provides resources for stress and coping, as well as grief and loss specifically during the
COVID-19 pandemic (https://www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/stress-coping/index.html)
Mayo Clinic
• Resources for building resiliency (https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/
resilience-training/in-depth/resilience/art-20046311)
TABLE 1.2 Crisis Resources
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 1.4
Chardon High School
(continued)
Jason M. McGlothlin
The day after the shooting at Chardon High School in
February 2012, I volunteered to work with the students
who witnessed the shooting as well as the students’
families. I met with two students for about an hour and
a half each and a family for about 2 hours. I listened
to their graphic and detailed reports of what happened
and saw the tears they shed. I heard the worries they
had about returning to school and the condolences for
their classmates who were injured and dead. I heard the
countless statements of reaching out to others and of “I
hope 	is okay” and “I need to call 	’s family.” I
share this story not to discuss what I did but the effect it
had on me. Listening and seeing such tragedy, such raw

-- 72 of 545 --

44 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
emotion and devastation, had a great impact on me not
only as a professional but also as a person. I remember
coming home that day and giving my 6-year-old an
extra-long hug and listening to him explain the shooting
because his teachers talked about it at his school.
However, seeing these students reach out to
others and care for their community instilled in me
a sense of hope. The notion of self-care, burnout
prevention, and taking care of self is critical. However,
crisis intervention is a roller coaster of emotions for
counselors. Counselors quickly become immersed
in the emotional state of the crisis, and then leave.
We all need to find a unique way to take care of
ourselves.
SUMMARY
A crisis is a precipitating stressor event or
situation. If the crisis is perceived as leading
to distress, and diminished functioning when
the distress is not relieved by familiar coping
resources, a person may experience trauma. Many
individuals and families are resilient and benefit
from having met the challenges of a previous or
current crisis. How well an individual or family
adapts following a crisis is often determined not
only by the nature of the crisis event itself but also
by the presence or absence of other stressors, the
availability of tangible and intangible resources,
and how the entire situation is perceived. Crises
may occur during normal, developmental
transitions during the lives of individuals and
families, by situational events that often are
sudden and unexpected, or by existential issues
that are related to purpose and meaning. It is not
uncommon for a crisis event to be perceived as
fitting into more than one of these categories.
Crisis 	intervention 	begins 	with 	an
assessment of the provoking event, responses
to the provoking event, and the contextual
variables that influence the situation. While
there are times when a crisis counselor’s
response to a crisis appears indistinguishable
from traditional counseling, crisis intervention is
generally thought to be different from traditional
counseling because of the occurrence of a crisis
event. Paraprofessionals and other mental health
professionals provide crisis intervention services,
often working in teams where each professional
may focus on a particular area of expertise.
Complications 	of 	working 	in 	crisis
situations and with clients in crisis can take a
physical, emotional, spiritual, and professional
toll on crisis counselors. Each crisis has its own
complications. Whether it is miscommunication
with resources and agencies, waiting for
follow-up from other parties, dealing with the
realities of a lack of resources, or seeing clients
“take a step back” in dealing with the crisis,
counselors need to remain professional and
patient. Counselors need to rely on their training,
skill, and knowledge to focus on the basic skills in
building a therapeutic relationship with people.
A 	task 	model 	of 	crisis 	assessment
and intervention comprises four essential
crisis assessment tasks: (1) Address Safety,
Stabilization, and Risk; (2) Follow a Holistic
Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Assessment Approach;
(3) Clarify the Problem(s); and (4) Explore Coping
Skills, Resources, and Supports. These tasks are
followed by four essential crisis intervention
tasks: (1) Normalize and Educate; (2) Explore
Options; (3) Develop a Plan and Obtain a
Commitment; and (4) Prepare Documentation,
Follow Up, and Provide Referrals.
It is important when reading the remainder
of this text to consider the various options for
self-care while helping others manage a crisis—
proactive ways to avoid burnout and vicarious
trauma; manage personal emotions during highly
emotional crisis situations (e.g., when working
with suicidal clients); and ensure optimal
physical, cognitive, and psychological presence
when working with clients in crisis. Working with
others in crisis is not easy, but it is immeasurably
rewarding. Counselors need to stay abreast of
their own well-being to help others effectively.

-- 73 of 545 --

45
PREVIEW
When responding to a crisis, counselors must act promptly and safely; thus, prepared-
ness is essential to best practice prior to a crisis occurring as well as during emergency
situations. A vital part of crisis preparedness is attention to counselor safety and security.
This chapter presents an overview of safety and security procedures and related issues
of concern during crisis intervention.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completing this chapter, readers will be able to:
2.1 Explain why it is important for crisis counselors to take a proactive approach to
safety.
2.2 Describe the role of collaboration in safely managing a crisis.
2.3 Describe workplace safety issues related to crisis counseling, including high-risk
clients, physical counselor safety, and working with individual clients in crisis.
2.4 Describe professional counselor responsibilities and skills related to workplace
safety.
THE IMPORTANCE OF PROACTIVE APPROACHES TO SAFETY
Learning Objective 2.1 Explain why it is important for crisis counselors to take a
proactive approach to safety.
In addition to an emotional and psychological toll, a crisis event can produce safety
and security concerns. Basic safety precautions by the crisis counselor when working
with high-risk or dangerous clients can reduce the chances of harm to the counselor,
client, crisis workers, and others. The ultimate success of crisis intervention depends
on planning, training, and the preparedness of team members. A proactive and safety-
conscious plan should be in place prior to the actual crisis. Even though most plans will
need to be flexible because every crisis is unique, a preliminary plan is better than no plan.
2 	Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations
James Jackson, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, Latofia Parker,
and Bradley T. Erford*
C H A P T E R
* We thank Charlotte Daughhetee for contributions to the first three editions of this chapter.

-- 74 of 545 --

46 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Although some professional counselors are naturally inclined toward preparedness
and plan for every reasonable contingency, many counselors have good intentions about
developing an emergency plan but most never seem to follow through with preparations
to completion. Indeed, most crisis plans are developed in response to a crisis. However,
it is essential for agencies, schools, universities, institutions, and communities to have
a crisis plan in place prior to a crisis occurring. When a crisis event occurs, particularly
a large-scale disaster that affects many people, crisis teams must be ready, with well-
defined roles, resources, and training. Unfortunately, while crises have huge impacts on
systems and communities, they are usually low-priority items with respect to planning
and resources.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA; 2021) stresses that crisis
planning is an ongoing cycle of planning, organizing, training, evaluating, and
improving. These components can be used as a framework when setting up safety plans
for personal individuals and team safety. Chen et al. (2013) found that communities that
facilitated collaborative partnerships between private and public organizations were the
most resilient when faced with a crisis or disaster event. It is better to have a plan in place
to be able to revisit and revise than to not have any plan at all.
Hughes and Gilmour (2010) researched the concept of work safety and climate.
Community mental health workers, particularly those who work with clients at high risk
for violent behavior, would benefit from increased safety training and general attention
to safety issues in the workplace to create an atmosphere where safety is attended to
and valued. Hughes and Gilmour reported that most workers who attended voluntary
training on managing violent clients felt better prepared and safer because of such
training. Flannery et al. (2011) stressed that safety training for new professionals is an
important priority. Ongoing training should be provided to address the use of self-
defense, appropriate restraint practices, and restraint-free procedures. Additionally, they
recommend communication skills training, supervision, and mentoring.
Crisis teams are also essential in educational settings and comprise personnel
within the school or university who have appropriate expertise (see Chapter 13;
see also Brock, 2013). School and university crises can involve events such as the
death of a student or faculty member, violent occurrences within the community, or
large-scale disasters as well as a crisis experienced by a single student. Schools and
universities are often at the center of a community or neighborhood, so a crisis that
affects a school or university has a ripple effect within the larger community and vice
versa. As recent events show, schools and universities must be prepared for a wide
range of crisis events, including threats and actions of violence. Threat assessment
teams on campuses are essential and should incorporate input from all pertinent
stakeholders (see Chapter 13).
COLLABORATION AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT
Learning Objective 2.2 Describe the role of collaboration in safely managing
a crisis.
As part of a crisis team, counselors contribute to the success of crisis intervention through
collaboration with other crisis workers. Ultimately, this collaborative spirit enhances
public safety.

-- 75 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	47
A crisis team comprises workers from across the community or organization who
come together in response to a crisis event. Mental health providers are an essential
component of any crisis team, and all members of a crisis response team should work
together toward the same goal, which is to advance the recovery process following
a disaster. Survivors of crises need access to medical care, food and water, shelter,
mental health services, basic safety, and sometimes religious/spiritual connections; the
realization of recovery is possible only when there is interagency cooperation.
It is important to remember that each crisis worker has a unique role. In the event
of large-scale emergency situations (e.g., natural disasters, terrorism, civil unrest), the
safety and security of the area will be maintained by law enforcement, in some cases
with the assistance of National Guard troops or federal agencies. Law enforcement is
responsible for the physical safety of the community. Firefighters and medical personnel
provide rescue and first-aid assistance. These first responders will collaborate with crisis
counselors by referring clients in need of immediate mental health evaluation services.
In addition to collaboration as team members during a large-scale disaster or major
crisis, counselors may also collaborate with law enforcement officials regarding a crisis
with an individual client. For example, law enforcement may be involved in welfare
and well-being checks in situations where a client has become an immediate threat to
self and to others. Wilcox (2015) states that it is beneficial for those in law enforcement
to receive training in the assessment and management of individuals diagnosed with
mental disorders; however, this is not their first priority. Counselors and the community
should know that the role of the law enforcement officer is to maintain safety—personal
safety for themselves and their partners as well as for the community. They are not
counselors, and their policies, practices, and trainings are focused on safety. Law
enforcement intervention is sometimes the first step in a process that results in treatment
for individuals in acute mental health crisis.
SAFETY ISSUES
Learning Objective 2.3 Describe workplace safety issues related to crisis
counseling, including high-risk clients, physical counselor safety, and working with
individual clients in crisis.
Even as they are working collaboratively to achieve public safety, crisis counselors must
also be aware of their own safety and take proactive steps to ensure a secure and effective
counseling environment.
High-Risk Clients
When clients are a danger to themselves or others, crisis counselors may work alone
or in partnership with local authorities to ensure everyone’s safety. Law enforcement
is usually involved when a client presents a threat to public safety, as with high-threat
homicidal and violent clients. Clients who pose a danger to themselves and others may
need to be hospitalized. (See Chapter 6 for information on voluntary and involuntary
hospitalization.) Counselors should not transport such clients to the hospital and should
instead enlist the client’s family or friends if the client is low or moderate risk and is
voluntarily entering an inpatient unit. The only exception is when a crisis counselor
is part of a specialized crisis team for which transportation is the expectation.

-- 76 of 545 --

48 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Even as part of a crisis response team, at no time should a counselor accompany a
high-risk client without another team member. In these situations, several commonsense
procedures should be followed:
• The counselor should make sure the car does not have any objects that could be
used as weapons, and car keys should always remain in the possession of the
counselor.
• The client’s belongings should be packed in plain view of the crisis team member,
and the client’s bag should be placed in the trunk of the car.
• The client should be seated where the counselor can see them, and the client should
wear a seat belt that also serves as an extra barrier and restraint.
• If a client decides to leave the car, the counselor should not physically prevent the
client from leaving. However, if the client leaves and poses a risk to self or others,
it is crucial for the counselor to contact law enforcement or the community service
board (depending on the mechanism in the state, Commonwealth, or territory) who
can provide another layer of assessment and involuntary hospitalization assess-
ments and/or execute an emergency petition.
A high-risk client who needs to be involuntarily hospitalized will likely need to be
transported to the hospital by a family member, a crisis response team, an ambulance, or
law enforcement. If a high-risk client suddenly leaves a counselor’s office, the counselor
should not attempt to physically stop the client and should notify law enforcement for
assistance. The counselor can assist by offering information to authorities as to what the
client was wearing, the direction the client was heading, and the brand,
model, color, and license plate of the vehicle the client used (if appropri-
ate). Having updated information on client address and emergency con-
tact person is essential to give to law enforcement.
Because counselors work closely with hospitals and medical
personnel during intervention and treatment of suicidal and homicidal
clients, a strong working relationship between mental health providers
and local authorities is essential for effective crisis intervention. It is the
policy of most police departments, during the transport of a person who
is high risk, to provide a restraint (e.g., handcuffs) for the safety of the
person, the public, and the law enforcement officer. As noted earlier, law
enforcement officers are not counselors; they are sworn to protect the
public. They are also armed with their service weapons, so a person who
is suicidal or homicidal being able to gain control over a law enforcement
officer’s weapon is potentially harmful to not only the client but also to
the law enforcement officer and the public. Chapter 6 provides important
information regarding assessment of suicidal and homicidal ideation.
Physical Safety
Given the likelihood that crisis counseling often takes place in the field, counselors are
likely to find themselves in hazardous surroundings and therefore must be aware of
safety procedures for their own security and the well-being of their clients. According
to FEMA (2021), first responders (e.g., firefighters, police, paramedics) are on the front
lines of disaster and crisis and face danger from numerous threats, including damaged
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 2. 1
In this video, a counselor seeks
a consultation with another
counselor to discuss her
concerns about her safety when
dealing with a court-ordered
client. What other proactive
steps would you put into place
to make your safety a priority?

-- 77 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	49
infrastructure; secondary collapse; unfamiliar surroundings; unstable structures; falling
or tripping hazards; falling material or flying objects; exposure to hazardous materials;
decontamination; and exposure to smoke, dust, fire, noise, electrical hazards, contami-
nated air and water, and dangerous equipment.
Crisis counselors with disaster response teams (e.g., Red Cross, critical incident
stress management) may not be on the front lines of disaster initially but may still be in
dangerous areas and should be aware of potential hazards. After the primary response,
counselors may be out in the field and should be careful around damaged structures
and other hazards. It is imperative that mental health field workers obey all field safety
guidelines established by the emergency management team. Crisis counselors should
follow the recommendations for medical evaluations and screenings established by
federal or local response agencies after exposure to hazardous materials.
In addition to personal physical safety, crisis counselors who arrive at a disaster
management scene after initial first responders will be working with clients who are in
a state of disbelief and intense grief and who may be unpredictable in their behaviors
due to uncontrollable circumstances. The mental health of the community members in
a disaster situation will likely be unknown to the crisis counselors, making situations
unpredictable and unknown. It is important to gather as much information as possible
in the precrisis briefings regarding environment, unique circumstances of the disaster,
persons affected, resources available, and community support members who may be
able to intervene.
Crisis counselors may be part of community or state crisis response teams and
they may be one of the initial responders to a mental health emergency. As with other
medical emergencies, crisis counselors may have limited presenting information about
the clients. Mental health emergencies can result in unpredictable client responses. In
many situations, someone other than the client may have contacted the crisis response
team (e.g., family member, community, school, neighbor), often causing client resistance
to a helping response. Clients may also experience intense fear, anger, and powerlessness
during the initial crisis and may project those feelings onto counselors.
Clients experiencing crises are sometimes reluctant to leave their homes and
belongings, which may put their own lives and the lives of others at risk. In these situations,
counselors may only be able to offer information about disaster relief services and basic
safety. Counselors must be aware of their surroundings and the context of interactions
with survivors. It is easy for counselors to become complacent with misguided ideas
such as “I’m a helping professional—who would hurt a person trying to help someone
else?” The reality is that individuals who perceive they or someone they care for is being
threatened (e.g., physically, mentally, spiritually) may go into fight, flight, or freeze
mode, thereby creating a precarious situation for counselors and other crisis workers.
Safety at school locations requires a great deal of forethought by the school’s crisis
intervention team. Staff must ensure all students are accounted for and safely returned
to their guardians. This means taking attendance during evacuations and introducing
a checkout system for student departures, such as when parents and guardians are
required to pick up all children being sent home because of a crisis situation. Child safety
is a critical issue during crises. Chapter 13 provides a great deal more information on
school safety. Now read Voices from the Field 2.1 for insights on dealing with physical
safety.

-- 78 of 545 --

50 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Individual Clients in Crisis
Individual clients in crisis can present an increased risk for the counselor, particularly a
sole practitioner in private practice. One of the most potentially compromising settings
for a counselor is an isolated private practice. Reeves (2016) noted that a vulnerability
of sole private practitioners is the location of their practices, which might be secluded
from others; this becomes particularly challenging without an adequate prescreening
or assessment process to identify the potential types of risks clients may pose. Reeves
identified important purposes and benefits for practitioners assessing risk at the outset
of the therapy process, including:
• Knowing what is being assessed and what questions are most important to ask
• Providing information that is clear and can inform the evaluation process
Matthew J. Paylo
As the mental health director at a women’s maximum-
security prison, I was familiar with managing aggressive
behaviors. It seemed like a daily occurrence that my
staff was asked by prison personnel to aid in the
deescalation of an individual who was managing a
specific stressor or rebelling against the restrictiveness
of the prison setting in general. As a director, I often
used professional development training to help new
mental health staff deal with various crisis situations
specific to the prison setting. Later, I would realize I still
had a few things to learn about managing crises myself.
One Saturday in November, I found myself trying
to get ahead on evaluations and paperwork, and I was
the only mental health staff member in the prison.
A correctional officer contacted me regarding Delia, a
woman who initiated a dispute with another woman
on her wing. The correctional officer had managed
to lead her off the wing and into a holding cell. He
reported that she was screaming and clearly agitated
by the situation. Delia had been involved in our anger
management program, and I recalled that she had
recently head-butted a sergeant. Thus, the staff had
limited tolerance for Delia’s actions and behavior.
When I got to the scene, I evaluated the envi-
ronment and deemed it was safe to enter and engage
the woman. Another correctional staff member asked
if I wanted to enter the cell; having worked with the
prisoner for over 6 months, I did not hesitate. Assessing
on the continuum of escalation, I had surmised that
Delia was not just anxious or defensive but was acting
out and using intimidation and posturing to relay
her level of frustration. I spoke her name softly and
respectfully inquired about the precipitating event.
Using my already existent relationship with Delia,
I transitioned her to focus on communicating verbally
instead of acting out physically. Trying not to overre-
act to her language and threats, I attempted to show
her empathy on how difficult this situation must have
been for her. Avoiding a power struggle with Delia was
another aim of mine and she seemed to be deescalating
slowly (i.e., she was no longer pacing in the cell and her
fists were no longer clenched).
Yet on reflection, I remembered that I was
standing not off to the side but directly in front of Delia.
This face-to-face posture was an obvious point that
I had missed at that moment. Her eyes gazed at the floor
and when she raised them toward me, she reacted to
my stance in a less than positive way. She immediately
stated, “Who the f*** do you think you are trying
to control me? You can’t stop me from leaving. I’ll
take you out.” At that moment I realized my posture
was intimidating, and I moved two quick steps to my
left. Delia immediately threw a right-handed hook as
I moved just out of her reach. The correctional staff
flooded the cell.
The point of this story—the same point I have
relayed to my staff and students—is that even if you are
saying all the right things in the right way, nonverbal
communication (posture, positioning, affect, facial
reactions, etc.) is often more important and can set the
tone for the entire interaction.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 2.1
Dealing with an Aggressive, Hostile Woman in a Prison Setting

-- 79 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	51
• Documenting the evidential factors upon which our evaluation is based
• To delineate the boundaries of the therapeutic contract
• To ensure compliance with specific risk management protocols
• To guide case conceptualization discussions in supervision
• To promote clients’ understanding and engagement in treatment
• To provide an opportunity for risk assessment that has the potential to promote
insight and potential for change (p. 22)
A counselor practicing alone at home faces additional risks due to the isolation
from others and allowing clients to gain the counselor’s personal information. Even
counselors who have solo practices in multipurpose buildings with other people nearby
are at risk, as the other occupants in the building may not be aware of calls for help.
Often, such multipurpose office buildings provide a false sense of security. The counselor
may feel safe because of people and activity in adjacent rooms; however, the workers in
adjoining suites are focused on their tasks and are not attuned to the needs and potential
risks of the private practitioner next door. Having other people in the building does little
to help if a counselor decides to see clients in the evening after the other offices have
closed and the workers have gone home. For example, counselors who provide services
for school-age children often see clients in the evening hours after school.
Counselors should always have a clear escape route that cannot be blocked by
chairs or coffee tables, remove objects from the office that could be used in an attack,
install panic alarms, and consider carrying pepper spray. If a client becomes threatening,
the counselor should remain calm and attempt to redirect the client, thereby defusing the
threatening situation. In any situation where the escalation is becoming unmanageable,
safeguarding the counselor’s personal safety and that of peers is the most prudent deci-
sion. Often this means allowing clients to leave or leaving the situation and immediately
contacting authorities or others trained to intervene.
Although private practitioners rely upon referrals for much of their livelihood, it
is prudent to consider who is referring the client and to obtain as much information as
possible from the referral source. New clients should be screened carefully with as much
initial information that can be provided: presenting problem, any current diagnosis, cur-
rent symptoms or behaviors leading to concern, current and history of level of risk to self
or others, referral source, and emergency contact information.
Ask why the client is seeking counseling now to determine whether there is a recent
crisis event in the client’s life. Be alert for information regarding past incidents of self-
harm or violence. Pay attention to the client’s tone of voice and any verbal cues that the
potential client might express, such as “You must get lonely by yourself in that office.”
Safety procedures for new clients could include having another person present in the
office when seeing a new client. Some factors can indicate a greater risk for dangerous
behavior from a client seeking private-practice counseling services. Signs for concern in a
client include a history of violent behavior, a psychiatric or forensic history, intoxication,
erratic speech and behavior, and sexual posturing and insinuation. Additional warning
signs include a history of self-harm and abuse, vengeful or paranoid statements, and
recent changes in the client’s situation or support system (Reeves, 2016).
Whenever possible, counselors should get a thorough history, preferably from the
referral source, before seeing a client. Of course, this is not often the norm for crisis centers.
Once again, the dangers of self-referred clients and those referred by nonprofessionals

-- 80 of 545 --

52 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
are evident because it often is not possible to get such a history. Prescreening is often a
luxury. With many crisis situations, the amount of information gathered prior to making
the first appointment varies and may be rather limited. Thus, having a safety plan in
place prior to seeing clients is strongly advised.
Counselors in private practice must be prepared to manage additional types
of risk beyond those associated with the referral and intake processes. Reeves (2016)
notes that clients experiencing chaos who present for services benefit from a counseling
process that balances client autonomy with sufficient containment and boundaries
to provide clients with a sense of stability and predictability. To best address risk in
the counseling process, Reeves proposed moving beyond a binary perspective of risk
toward a multidimensional perspective that invites counselors to consider factors such
as boundary management, personal biases, fear and anxiety, and protocols that might be
incongruent with philosophy of a therapeutic approach. Rather than considering risk as
something to be “managed and minimized,” Reeves suggested that risk might be better
conceptualized “as an important aspect of therapy that, with care and attention, can
provide a fertile space for clients to explore the issues that have brought them to therapy
and consider key points of change and insight” (p. 8). Now read Case Study 2.1, which
considers safety precautions for counselors, then complete Think About It 2.1.
CASE STUDY 2.1
Safety Precautions for Counselors
Ellery is a part-time sole practitioner, a professional counselor who sees clients in the
evenings from 5:00 to 9:00 p.m. at an office building. On most nights, Ellery is the only
person in the building. Ellery is trying to build a practice and has been networking and
promoting the practice as practicable. Ellery receives a voice mail from someone named
Mr. Smith, who explains that he is looking for a counselor. Ellery returns his call, and
the following conversation takes place.
Ellery: 	Hello, is this Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith: 	Yes, that’s me.
Ellery: 	This is Ellery Jones. I’m returning your call.
Mr. Smith: 	Oh yeah, the counselor.
Ellery: 	You left a message saying you want to set up a counseling
appointment? I’m calling to see if you are still looking for
a counselor and what you are seeking a counselor for to
determine if I am able to assist you.
Mr. Smith: 	Great, yes, I found your name and picture on that site about
counselors and I thought you looked nice. So I decided to
call you.
Ellery: 	Can you give me an idea of why you are interested in
counseling?

-- 81 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	53
SPECIAL ISSUES RELATED TO SAFETY AND THE COUNSELOR
Learning Objective 2.4 Describe professional counselor responsibilities and skills
related to workplace safety.
According to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA; 2015), 20%
of workplace injuries take place in health care and social service settings; 50% of these
injuries are due to assaults and violent incidents from patients and clients. The actual rate
may be much higher, since research shows that assaults of this type are often unreported.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021) Census of Fatal Occupational
Injuries, of the 5,333 fatal workplace injuries that occurred in the United States in 2019, 761
were intentional injuries by another person. This census report suggested workers with
the highest risk of violence against them are delivery drivers, health care professionals,
public service workers, customer service agents, and law enforcement personnel. The
reason health care and social service workers are at a higher risk for workplace violence
is due to multiple factors, including working with a client population that has a history
of violence and/or substance abuse, facility design that impedes visual contact with
other workers, poor lighting, and a lack of means to communicate for help during an
emergency.
Mr. Smith: 	Well, my girlfriend just broke up with me and I’m pretty upset
about that. I can’t believe she would do this to me after all
we’ve been through. I guess I shouldn’t be surprised, women
always let me down. I’ve been in counseling before and I know
how it works. I’ve got plenty of money, so you don’t have to
worry about me being able to pay your fees.
Ellery: 	So, you want to seek counseling to discuss the recent loss of
this relationship.
Mr. Smith: 	Yeah, I know I’ve got to get a handle on this before I spiral out
of control. My last girlfriend called the cops on me when
I confronted her new boyfriend, and I don’t want that to
happen again. I really want to handle things differently this
time. I know I have to change how I react to things like this.
Discussion Questions
1. Should Ellery take on Mr. Smith as a client? Explain.
2. If yes, what safety precautions should Ellery take?
3. How might Ellery’s desire to increase client numbers get in the way of screening?
Think about why a counselor might be reluctant
to terminate a counseling relationship with a
dangerous client. What ethical considerations should
be implemented if a counselor chooses to terminate
such a relationship? What safety precautions should a
counselor put in a personal safety plan?
THINK ABOUT IT 2.1

-- 82 of 545 --

54 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Factors that can increase a client’s risk for violence to self and others include long
waits in emergency departments, the feeling that one has limited control over their
current situation, a lack of support from family and friends, a sense of hopelessness,
and a pattern of impulsivity. Additionally, budget considerations may leave facilities
understaffed and the staff overworked. Combined with a high turnover rate among
workers, these factors create a dangerous work environment and a high risk for assault.
According to the U.S. Department of Labor (2019), the most effective protections offered
by employers is a zero-tolerance policy on workplace violence. This policy includes all
workers, patients, clients, visitors, and contractors, with no exceptions.
What effect does workplace violence have on mental health workers? According to
OSHA (2015), workers who have experienced a violent incident may have:
• Short- and long-term psychological trauma
• Fear of returning to work
• Changes in relationships with coworkers and family
• Feelings of incompetence, guilt, and powerlessness
• Fear of criticism by supervisors or managers (p. 22)
Mental health workers who have been assaulted should have access to debriefing
and counseling to address trauma and stress concerns. It is very important that workers
who have experienced a violent incident find support and care as soon as possible to
mitigate the shock and distress that may result from such an episode. When an incident
occurs that includes injury, death, or near misses, the U.S. Department of Labor (2019)
suggests the following:
1. Determine who needs to be notified, both within and outside of the organization.
2. Include all workers who were involved in the incident in the investigation.
3. Identify the underlying issues leading to the incident, such as the initial incident
and response.
4. Collect and review other information, such as training records and past incident
reports, that may be relevant to review.
5. Investigate near misses for potential future issues or why the near misses did not
lead to the same outcome.
Mental health providers working in forensic inpatient units (e.g., health care
institutions to which incarcerated patients have been diverted) have an increased risk
of harm from violent clients. Such clients may require physical restraints, and staff at
inpatient units must be trained in proper restraint methods. Staff training should focus
on using therapeutic methods to deescalate a violent client and on empowering the
client to take ownership of treatment so that the need for restraint can be reduced (see
Chapter 4; see also Simon, 2011). Inpatient mental health workers should be cognizant
of the fact that federal policy requires that alternatives be attempted before restraints are
used and that restraints be used only when necessary. In addition, a client can remain
in restraints for only a defined amount of time, and a restrained client must be assessed
in a timely manner. Freeman and Sugai (2013) point out that recent advocacy efforts
have encouraged many states to reexamine state laws regarding restraints and to use
restraint and seclusion as a last resort. All of these instances also resulted in a call for the
integration of trauma-informed practices in the workplace, which is also recommended.

-- 83 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	55
Trauma-Informed Treatment
Trauma-informed treatment has emerged in recent decades due to an increasing
awareness of the long-term effects of traumatic events on individuals. According to the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA; 2014), trauma
from past events can arise when a client does not feel safe or supported in a therapeutic
environment. A trauma-informed therapeutic environment engages all participants in
a collective approach to treatment. Resilience and hope are fundamental elements of
this approach. Substance use disorder, eating disorders, depression, and anxiety can be
current symptoms that are connected to previous trauma; however, most clients who seek
counseling for such issues may not realize that these presenting problems
are connected to earlier trauma in their lives. Trauma-informed treatment
calls for mental health practitioners to work in a collaborative manner to
empower clients and families and to promote resilience. SAMHSA puts
forth six key principles for working from a trauma-informed perspective:
• Safety
• Trustworthiness and transparency
• Peer support
• Collaboration and mutuality
• Empowerment, voice, and choice
• Cultural, historical, and gender issues
With an understanding of the possible long-term effects that can emerge
from a previous trauma, counselors can work with clients from a more per-
ceptive, informed, and strengths-based perspective. The SAMHSA website
has many resources on creating trauma-informed therapeutic environments
and provides useful information on trauma-informed treatment (www
.samhsa.gov/nctic/trauma-interventions). Complete Think About It 2.2.
Think about the ways a counselor’s previous trauma
might impede work with clients. How might this
previous trauma manifest itself in the session? What
should a counselor do if experiencing emerging
trauma while working with a client? What should
you do if you become aware that a counseling
colleague is becoming impaired due to a previous
trauma?
THINK ABOUT IT 2.2
Counselors Most at Risk
Flannery (2015) indicated that inpatient settings and residential house counselors are
most at risk for assault from clients. Counselors-in-training who are young and with
less experience are also at increased risk. Female counselors are just as likely as male
counselors to be assaulted. Violent incidents increase because inpatient and residential
clients are likely to be diagnosed with severe psychopathology and because staff
members spend more time with clients. Counselor education programs should directly
address the concept of safety and security, especially prior to internship placement.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 2.2
This video role play and
information provided by the
Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services (SAMHSA)
Disaster Technical Assistance
Center (DTAC) demonstrates
effective crisis counseling skills
by Crisis Counseling Assistance
and Training Program (CCP) staff
with tips for working with angry
survivors. What was effective in
decreasing the woman’s anger
in this video?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=528pfiNJt7o&t=290s
Watch from 03:33 to 06:44

-- 84 of 545 --

56 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Violent clients pose a real threat to counselors, and some form of aggressive client
behavior is likely to occur during every mental health provider’s career. Kivisto et al.
(2015) found that three out of four psychologists surveyed had experienced harassment
from clients, and one in five had been threatened.
According to the American Mental Health Foundation, data on worker assaults
in recent years indicate that clients most at risk for assaulting mental health workers
include those with a history of violence, a history of substance abuse, and a diagnosis of
schizophrenia (Flannery, 2015). Counselors should also take note of any loss of reality
testing, such as delusional thinking or hallucinations. Impulse control issues (e.g., mania,
intoxication) are also risk factors for violence. Every counselor, regardless of setting,
should institute safety rules and abide by them. To assume that violent client behavior
“couldn’t happen here” is to put oneself in peril.
Stalking
Another danger faced by mental health providers is the threat of being stalked by a
client. Purcell et al. (2005) surveyed 1,750 psychologists and found that 19.5% reported
being stalked by a client. More recently, Kivisto et al. (2015) found that one in seven
psychologists surveyed had been stalked. Most stalking incidents involved male
outpatient clients stalking a female psychologist. Most of the stalkers had a diagnosis
of a personality disorder or psychotic disorder; however, some of the stalkers were
diagnosed with substance use, major depressive disorders, or anxiety disorders or had
no previous clinical diagnosis.
Purcell et al. (2005) found that clients who stalk were motivated by a need for
intimacy, infatuation, resentment or revenge, or a misinterpretation of the therapeutic
relationship as a friendship or romance. They stress that mental health providers must
be very clear about the nature of the therapeutic relationship and set firm boundaries,
preferably in writing. Setting boundaries should include not allowing contact between
sessions, not extending session length, keeping personal information private, not friend-
ing clients on social media, and not placing personal objects (e.g., family photographs)
in the office, which may give the client too much personal information or may create an
atmosphere of familiarity.
Cyber stalking has become a major threat as well. Personal information about
practitioners is readily available on various websites, and clients can harass counselors
using social media and online forums to stalk and verbally attack practitioners.
When clients cannot respect the nature of the therapeutic relationship and
continually violate boundaries, the counseling relationship should be terminated and
the client referred for a psychiatric evaluation. In extreme cases, the counselor may
have to obtain a restraining order for self-protection. As always, counselors should
seek supervision and consultation and should clearly document all events, actions,
and decisions.
In-Home Counseling
Some agencies offer in-home counseling, especially to clients who have low incomes,
homebound, or older and those who may have difficulty finding transportation to

-- 85 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	57
counseling centers. In-home counseling is a highly effective service delivery method, but
it brings with it increased safety concerns. In-home services should never be conducted
alone; counselors should be accompanied by co-counselors or behavioral aides. In-home
counseling agencies should make it a practice for counselors to check in by phone prior to
each session and after leaving the client’s home. When conducting in-home counseling,
counselors should familiarize themselves with the community and the environment prior
to the actual session. Where are the building exits? Is there adequate lighting? At what
time of day is the session scheduled? Who will be home when a session is scheduled?
If the counselor feels uneasy about the environment, the counselor should leave the
premises. See Case Study 2.2, which addresses in-home counseling safety issues, then
read Voices from the Field 2.2.
CASE STUDY 2.2
Ensuring the Safety of Young Clients
For the past 3 months, you have been seeing an 11-year-old client referred for behavioral
concerns by the special education teacher at an elementary school located in a small, rural
community. Your client has demonstrated several temper outbursts with his teachers
and has also been in fights with boys in his class who he claims were “making fun” of
him. The client is large for his age and has cognitive and other developmental delays,
and the principal and the special education teacher want him to learn strategies for
emotional regulation and anger management. He lives on a small farm with his father
and grandfather, both of whom agree that he would benefit from interventions focused
on his behavior; consequently, these counseling goals are stated in his individualized
education plan (IEP). Because his father and grandfather have expressed concerns about
his behavior at home, you have been seeing the client at home as well as at school. These
sessions have gone well; he has readily engaged in the therapy process, rapport is clearly
in evidence, and you, his father and grandfather, and the school are pleased with his
progress.
Sitting outside on the back porch during today’s home session, however, a different
concern arises. The client tells you that his father and grandfather sometimes beat him
with a belt when he is “bad.” He lifts his shirt to show you “where it hurts,” and you
see his back and stomach covered with dark bruises, many of which clearly show the
outline of a belt buckle. You realize your client needs you to take action to protect his
safety; at the same time, you are aware that the father and grandfather, both large men,
are inside the house.
Discussion Questions
1. How will you act to ensure the safety of your client, while at the same time
maintaining your own personal safety?
2. What is your responsibility as a mandated reporter?
3. What will you do next?

-- 86 of 545 --

58 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Research and Recommendations on Client Violence
Jussab and Murphy (2015) state that client violence is not uncommon and may
be underreported; therefore, the significance of the violent incidents may not be
appropriately acknowledged and tracked. Counselors who have suffered a violent
incident with a client must often continue to work with the client, or at least work in
the same facility. The long-term effects of close proximity to a source of trauma and the
inability to distance oneself from an attacker can contribute to increased burnout and
stress. Mueller and Tschan (2011) report that fears and anxiety around the attack often
linger and that mental health workers who have suffered an assault are prone to lower
levels of job satisfaction and may begin to question their professional competency.
Jussab and Murphy (2015) examined the aftereffects of client violence on
counselors. They identified three main themes with six subthemes that may emerge
after an experience of client violence. The first main theme is “processing the moment
to moment experience of client violence” (p. 290). Embedded within this main theme are
the subthemes of experiencing fear and having an inner dialogue about what to do to
contain the incident. One of the counselors who participated in the research commented:
Relying on therapeutic skills to deal with the violent incident brought a
sense of foolishness and the inner dialogue highlighted frustrated failure as
she registers her disappointment with the usefulness of her clinical engage-
ment skills in the midst of the incident. (p. 291)
James Jackson
“Mom, it’s an insurance salesman” is the typical
reaction from children answering the door when
I make an initial home visit with a client family.
This reaction is not surprising since my outward
appearance in terms of physical features (i.e., a
middle-aged White male), my business casual attire,
and my briefcase mark me as an outsider who appears
different from most who call upon this home. Over
the years of providing in-home counseling services to
children and families as part of my contract work with
the Department of Human Resources, I have grown
accustomed to this reaction. Scheduling changes for
client sessions are an expected aspect of this work
as clients’ lives are impacted by systemic forces
outside their control; minimum-wage employment
does not often offer much flexibility in terms of work
schedule, and unreliable—or absent—transportation
is a common challenge faced by many.
Many of my clients are amazingly effective at
coping with limited resources and thrive while focusing
on taking life day by day, adapting as needed. So, when
a regularly scheduled weekly session is changed due to
a work schedule conflict, I appreciate that the client still
wants to have the session, although at a time much
later in the day after the client gets home from work.
Safety never enters my mind. I have been to this client
family’s apartment several times in the past. It is located
in an older subsidized housing complex made up of
regimented brick buildings that appear almost identical
in the daylight; strange how different it looks, and
feels, by night. “Why did I have to park so far away?”
I wonder to myself as I walk alone on the dark, cracked
sidewalk past the silent windows of the buildings,
streetlights broken or dimly buzzing. Suddenly, I am
aware. I clutch my briefcase a little tighter, realizing my
reaction offers no real security. I am aware that I do not
feel entirely safe, and even as the realization strikes me,
I begin thinking about my client’s family members who
live and sleep here each night. How safe do they feel?
What steps are they taking to minimize risk? I resolve
to invite them to discuss safety planning as part of our
work together—and to engage in intentional planning
for my own safety as well.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 2.2
Reflections on Personal Safety During In-Home Counseling

-- 87 of 545 --

Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	59
The second main theme is “professional vulnerabilities and needs as a result of
client violence” (Jussab & Murphy, 2015, p. 290). The questioning of one’s competency as
a practitioner and the need to get appropriate support from supervisors and coworkers
are the subthemes for this theme.
Finally, the third main theme is “the ruptured therapeutic relationship” (Jussab
& Murphy, 2015, p. 290). Within this theme, the subthemes include rejection of the
client or accepting the client through formulation. Client acceptance could be regained
through empathy and a process of examining the reasons for the client outburst. The
resultant emotional and psychological harm experienced by a counselor in this situation
would often go unnoticed by supervisors. Thus, it is imperative for supervisors and
organizations to be mindful of the inner turmoil experienced by counselors who have
suffered a violent attack from a client.
Jussab and Murphy (2015) make the following recommendations for managing the
aftereffects of a violent incident committed by a client:
1. Practitioners should be aware that client violence happens infrequently,
sporadically, and is usually perpetrated by a lone client.
2. Practitioners should engage in intentional self-care.
3. Practitioners should examine and accept emotional and psychological distress.
4. Practitioners should be alert to coworker distress and provide support.
5. Workplaces should examine safety policies and procedures.
Jussab and Murphy (2015) specifically note that even low levels of violence in a
facility should not be tolerated. Their research indicates that practitioners need to process
the experience of a violent client incident within a context of safety and support. Jussab
and Murphy also assert that each incident be reported so that a clear picture and accurate
statistics can emerge regarding this workplace safety threat. Failure to do so leads to a
state of passive acceptance of violence and an increased risk of burnout and workplace
violence within the profession.
This concept of passive acceptance of violence was also noted by OSHA (2015) as
a factor in the high risk for violence to health care and social service workers. If clients
perceive that acting out and being aggressive are tolerated and will not be reported,
they are more likely to engage in such behavior. Passive acceptance of low-level violence
fosters an undercurrent of threat and undermines safety for workers as well as the
therapeutic process of clients.
See Case Study 2.3, which provides an example of workplace safety considerations
for counselors, then read Voices from the Field 2.3.
CASE STUDY 2.3
Counselor Safety
Jules works as a college counselor at a small university counseling center that has one
other counselor on staff. The counseling center is in the basement of a campus office
building that is vacant each day by 6:00 p.m. Jules and a colleague have an unwritten
safety rule that they will not schedule appointments later than 4:30 p.m. Jules occasionally
breaks this rule when working longer term with a trusted client. One day a married
student named Nova calls to inquire about marriage counseling; the partners, Nova and

-- 88 of 545 --

60 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Patton, are disagreeing about many issues and they want couples counseling to improve
communication. Jules suggests several possible appointment times, but Nova works and
cannot possibly come in until 6:30 or 7:00 p.m. Since the case seems straightforward, Jules
agrees to meet the couple at 7:00 p.m. for an initial session.
When Jules unlocks the counseling center door and admits the couple, Jules
immediately feels anxious. Patton’s appearance seems unkempt, and Patton does not
make eye contact with Jules. Jules and the couple proceed into the office, fill out intake
forms, and go over informed consent. Although Patton is quiet, Patton appears to be
amenable to treatment, signing all documentation. Jules feels increasingly uneasy and for
the first time realizes that the office is arranged with the clients blocking the only door.
Patton stares at the floor while Nova explains to Jules that they have been disagreeing
because Patton has a diagnosis of schizophrenia and refuses to take medication. Nova
hopes that through couples counseling Patton will become more compliant with
medication and they can learn to communicate and interact more positively. Jules
maintains an appearance of calm and listens to Nova while Patton remains silent.
When Jules finds out from Nova that Patton is under the care of a psychiatrist,
Jules explains to the couple that before any relationship work with Jules can begin, it is
necessary that all medical issues be addressed. Jules further explains that it would be
inappropriate for Jules to work with the couple unless Jules was working collaboratively
with the psychiatrist who is caring for Patton. The couple agrees to make an appointment
with the psychiatrist the next day, and Jules has them both sign releases in case the
psychiatrist wishes to communicate. Jules escorts the couple from the counseling center
and breathes a sigh of relief as the door locks behind them.
Discussion Questions
1. What was Jules’s initial mistake?
2. How could Jules have handled the situation differently?
3. What factors might have caused Jules’s complacency about safety?
4. What safety plan changes should Jules and the colleague institute?
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 2.3
Knowing Your Client’s History and Avoiding Retraumatization
James Jackson
After hearing various accounts of an 8-year-old
client’s explosive behavior that was occurring in
multiple settings, I was determined to assess firsthand
the troubling pattern of outbursts. My consultation
with client treatment team members and caregivers
confirmed that a behavioral assessment was indicated,
so I planned to conduct the assessment in the group
room of the care facility where most of the outbursts
had been reported. Upon my arrival, I received further
information from the direct care facility staff, who
indicated the client was required almost daily to be
placed in the “time-out room,” and that after her
daily visit to the room, the client was able to maintain
appropriate behavior the remainder of the day. This
was my first time visiting this particular care facility, and
I was pleased that video surveillance cameras located in
the group rooms made it possible for me to conduct the
assessment from a monitoring room without interfering
with the client’s normal routine. I used a structured
behavioral observation template for recording client
behaviors and noted the time each behavior occurred.

-- 89 of 545 --

While the focus of this chapter has been the safety of the counselor, clients who
initiate violent incidents are also at risk. They are, of course, at risk for harm to themselves
while in the act of lashing out violently. Moreover, once a client has engaged in violence,
the client will then be labeled violent, which may set off a self-fulfilling prophecy effect
that will influence the client’s behavior and treatment in the years to come. Now complete
Activity 2.1 to practice thinking about safety precautions in various counseling settings.
I began my observation as the client entered
the group room with her aide. The client appeared
appropriately engaged with the other group members
and was completing her assigned task, which included
a coloring activity, with minimal redirection. After an
hour of observing, I was beginning to wonder if this
might be one of those rare days when the client was
able to consistently maintain appropriate behavior.
However, just as the group was transitioning to a new
activity, the client threw her crayon to the floor and
said, “No, I wanna keep doing this.” Her aide picked
up the crayon and tried to hand it back to the client,
but she refused and proceeded to crumple the paper
she had been working on. The aide informed the
client that she would now have to go to the “time-out
room,” took the client by the hand, and calmly led
her from the group room into the next room with the
designated time-out area; I watched with interest, as
the care staff had indicated that this intervention was
used almost daily.
I saw the aide lead the client (who seemed rather
complacent) to a corner of the room to what appeared
to be a lit storage area with a windowed door. Although
the client now began to resist, the aide was able to force
the client into the storage area and quickly shut the door,
holding the doorknob tight so the client could not open
the door. The client became visibly upset and began
beating the plywood and cinderblock walls with her
bare fists, yelling epithets at the aide while demanding
to be released. “Not until you calm down,” replied the
aide, keeping both hands on the doorknob. Watching
in shocked disbelief as this scene began to unfold on the
video monitor, I recalled the client’s history of repeated
traumatic experiences, as well as seizures of unknown
origin. Immediate safety concerns for my client flooded
my mind, followed closely by liability concerns.
In this chapter, we have reviewed a variety of safety
concerns for counselors and have pointed out that,
while some settings may have a higher potential for
danger, counselors in all settings should be aware of
safety issues and have safety policies and plans. In small
groups, identify potentially dangerous situations in the
following settings. Also, for each setting, identify some
security policies and procedures that would improve
safety.
• Pre-K–12 school counselor’s office
• University counseling center
• Inpatient psychiatric hospital
• Sole practitioner private practice
• For-profit counseling agency
• In-home counseling program
ACTIVITY 2.1
SUMMARY
Working in crisis situations, counselors are at
an increased risk for their personal safety and
well-being. Proactive, preventive crisis planning
and awareness of crisis safety protocols are vital.
Collaboration, planning, and training with first
responders and other crisis workers increase
safety and improve crisis intervention services.
Counselors in solo practices are at a high
risk for potential physical assault by violent
clients. Private practitioners are cautioned
Chapter 2 • Safety Concerns in Crisis Situations 	61

-- 90 of 545 --

62 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
to screen new clients carefully, particularly
if these potential clients have been referred
by nonprofessional sources or if the clients
have self-referred. In addition to screening,
counselors should design their offices for safety:
they should install panic alarms, remove objects
from the office that could be used in an attack,
and have an exit strategy in the event of a
violent incident.
Counselors 	who 	work 	in 	inpatient
and residential treatment facilities are at the
greatest risk for assault from a client, and new
professionals and young trainees in such facilities
are more likely to be assaulted. The effect of these
attacks can result in trauma, doubts about one’s
effectiveness as a practitioner, complacency, and
burnout.
Research indicates that therapeutic support
for counselors who have been assaulted is
essential for the psychological well-being of
the counselor and organization. Administrators
should review safety procedures, should not
tolerate even low levels of violent behavior from
clients, should provide debriefings when safety
issues occur, and should revise safety plans as
needed with staff input.

-- 91 of 545 --

63
PREVIEW
Crisis planning is never perfect, but it does provide a framework for appropriate
responses and decision making in crisis situations needing immediate responses. Pre-
pared counselors well versed in crisis procedures and processes can provide ethical and
effective interventions in all types of crisis conditions. This chapter examines the ethi-
cal and legal considerations related to preventive measures, federal legislation, sentinel
court findings, and relevant applications of best practice regarding privacy matters in
crisis counseling. Crisis counselors need to be particularly aware of state and federal
laws and professional ethics that govern and advise clinical practice in crisis situations.
The discussion focuses on prevention considerations; the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA); the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA); appli-
cation of the Tarasoff decision; negligence and malpractice; documentation and record
keeping; informed consent; confidentiality; termination in crisis intervention; and tech-
nological, spiritual, and multicultural considerations.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
3.1 Describe steps counselors can take to prevent ethical and legal problems.
3.2 Describe HIPAA, a federal law that protects sensitive mental health information.
3.3 Explain why counselors working in the higher education settings must comply
with a different set of federal guidelines (FERPA).
3.4 Describe the effects of the Tarasoff v. Regents court case on the duties of
counselors.
3.5 Describe special ethical, legal, and other considerations related to crises.
3 Ethical and Legal Considerations
in Crisis Counseling
Paul F. Hard, Laura L. Talbott-Forbes, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry,
and Bradley T. Erford*
C H A P T E R
*We thank Mary L. Bartlett for her outstanding contributions to the first three editions of this chapter.

-- 92 of 545 --

64 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
PREVENTION CONSIDERATIONS
Learning Objective 3.1 Describe steps counselors can take to prevent ethical and
legal problems.
It is far more effective and economical to prevent a problem rather than to correct it.
Primary prevention of ethical and legal issues in counseling is a far more effective strat-
egy than the costly and distressing efforts to address an ethical or legal lapse after it
has occurred. Counselors can focus on five areas to foster core prevention: (1) wellness,
(2) continuing education, (3) peer supervision and consultation, (4) ethical decision-
making models, and (5) an understanding of federal laws (discussed later in this chap-
ter) and state laws applicable to crisis intervention. We explore each of these areas next.
While there is no panacea to prevent ethical or legal violations, when these five areas
are synthesized into the counselor’s professional worldview, best practices follow and
act as a shield for both client and counselor.
Wellness
The American Counseling Association (ACA) Task Force on Impaired Counselors
( Lawson & Venart, 2005) observed that counselors working in disaster or crisis circum-
stances are particularly vulnerable to secondary trauma, vicarious trauma, and compas-
sion fatigue. Because such a compromised condition may leave the counselor vulnerable
to ethical or legal lapses, attention to the well-being of the counselor is vital as a preven-
tive measure (Malinowski, 2014).
A seminal work by Pearlman and MacIan (1995) noted 10 helpful strategies
for crisis counselors to use to promote and maintain wellness: (1) discussing cases
with colleagues; (2) attending workshops; (3) spending time with family or friends;
(4) travel, leisure time, hobbies, and movies; (5) talking with colleagues between
sessions; (6) socializing; (7) exercising; (8) limiting caseloads; (9) developing one’s
spiritual life; and (10) receiving supervision. Prevention strategies also helped alle-
viate stress-related problems among health care professionals during the COVID-19
pandemic (Heath et al., 2020), demonstrating that wellness and self-care are vital
to counselors.
The care counselors provide to others is only as effective as the care they give
themselves. While self-care and wellness practices are imperative for crisis coun-
selors, these practices are not yet mapped and incorporated into the Council for
Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (2024) standards.
In addition, challenges exist related to the underlying assumption that counselor
educators are themselves models of self-care and wellness for counselors-in-training
(Moate et al., 2016). For example, counselor educators navigating experiences of
COVID-19–related stress struggled to balance their roles as educators, professional
counselors, and supervisors, often neglecting their own self-care (Harrichand et al.,
2021). In addition, clinical and nonclinical staff were at greater risk of mental dis-
tress because they worked longer hours, and the potential of becoming exposed to
COVID-19 had a negative impact on morale. These conditions led to stress, anxiety,
burnout, and depressive symptoms and an increased need for sick or stress leave
(Xiaoyun & Fenglan, 2020). This affected the care of patients, the health of counsel-
ors, and the delivery of mental health services during the crisis.

-- 93 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	65
Continuing Education
Continuing education is required by certifying and licensing bodies to help counselors’
practice remain both competent and current. Many such entities also require that a por-
tion of the continuing education be related to ethics to ensure that counselors continue
to be versed in current ethical issues and decision-making models. Counselors should
participate in continuing education to effectively compare their professional behavior
with the standard of care and routinely review professional codes of ethics as part of
their ongoing personal education. Counselors practicing in isolation without peer contact
are at higher risk for impairment, and in-person continuing education is an important
component in counselor wellness (Hard, 2020). This need for peer contact also includes
supervision and consultation.
Peer Supervision and Consultation
Peer supervision and consultation are essential to ethical instruction and practice (Corey
et al., 2019; Remley & Herlihy, 2020), and counselors should prepare for crisis situa-
tions by preestablishing sources of in-person and online supervision and peer consul-
tation. Engaging in peer consultation when confronted with ethical concerns exposes
those concerns to colleague input and enhances protection for both the counselor and
client. Avoiding conversations related to ethical dilemmas out of shame or fear often
results in negative outcomes. By contrast, pursuing open and honest dialogue about
client challenges reduces the likelihood of negative outcomes that may occur when one
works in isolation. When counselor educators and supervisors neglect their own self-
care and wellness practices, their ability to model ethical practices and work effectively
is compromised.
Remote supervision requires mindfulness of power differentials and technological
communication nuances. While the supervision relationship is complex under normal
circumstances, dynamic core elements include the relationship between supervisor and
clinician, rapport building, and boundary negotiation. Experienced clinicians under-
stand the limits of their roles, responsibilities, and accountability and the purpose of
the counseling relationship. More challenges occur during individual and group online
communication of the complex nature of assessing and making decisions about another
person’s condition.
One benefit of the pandemic transition to digital platforms was reduced travel
time; this was especially beneficial for people located in rural areas. Cameron et al. (2020)
found that remote supervision via videoconferencing provided increased confidence,
new learning strategies, and reduced feelings of isolation for clinicians in rural areas.
Miller (2020) found that telephone and e-mail discussions enhanced the supervision
experience.
Online platforms provide advantages for some counselors, especially when dis-
tance and timing make supervision unfeasible. The online process may allow for greater
selection among supervisors. Online platforms also allow real-time reviewing of infor-
mation, enhancing opportunities for reflection, dialogue, and professional preparation.
The main negative of online supervision is difficulty managing and being fully
attentive to counselors who perform poorly. Poor performance may raise ethical and
safety issues because it is difficult to observe weak spots and inappropriate procedural

-- 94 of 545 --

66 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
issues in a virtual context. Importantly, online counseling potentially increases the pos-
sibility of missed diagnoses. Counselors have the ethical duty to transparently commu-
nicate about the differences in in-person and online delivery by attending to issues like
Internet buffering, frozen screens, loss of connections, and interpretation of multidimen-
sional data that assist with the flow of communication and interactions. For example,
the inability to see body language, potential for disrupted eye contact, use of silence as
a technique, challenges to being fully present, altered voice characteristics, and physical
appearance can contribute to the lack of fluency in online interactions.
At least one face-to-face meeting assists in establishing rapport with clients
and supervisors alike, allowing for the negotiation of boundaries. Supervisors may
sense that counselors they are assisting may be missing some unmet needs or have
formed blind spots in the therapeutic relationship that should be addressed. As
we discuss further in this chapter, one’s confidence with using an online platform,
technology issues, consent, privacy, and confidentiality have placed the counseling
field in uncharted territory.
Ethical Decision-Making Models
The American Counseling Association (ACA) Code of Ethics (2014) provides guidelines on
key areas of counselor decision making. However, the code provides little direction on
the process counselors should follow when making ethical decisions. One way that coun-
selors practice soundly is by rooting their ethical decisions in a theoretical model. In fact,
section I.1.b of the code recommends that counselors “use and document as appropriate
an ethical decision-making model” (p. 19). The code also outlines some components of
an effective decision-making model.
There are a variety of ethical decision-making models a counselor can use. The
counselor should determine which model to use consistently based on personality, val-
ues, expectations, the treatment setting, client base, and available time (Corey et al., 2019;
Remley & Herlihy, 2020). Regardless of the model chosen, counselors should apply the
core principles of autonomy, nonmaleficence, beneficence, justice, fidelity, and veracity
when making ethical decisions.
Sentinel work by Forester-Miller and Davis (2016), titled A Practitioner’s Guide to
Ethical Decision Making, is the basis for the ethical decision-making standards of the ACA
Code of Ethics (2014, section I.1.b). The practitioner’s guide outlines a seven-step decision-
making model: (1) identify the problem, (2) apply the ACA Code of Ethics, (3) establish
the parameters of the dilemma, (4) generate all possible courses of action, (5) consider
the consequences of all options and select a course of action, (6) evaluate the course of
action selected, and (7) implement the course of action.
A sampling of models provided by Corey et al. (2019), Remley and Herlihy (2020),
and Sheperis and Sheperis (2015) includes the following:
• Beneficence model: Uses an A-B-C-D-E worksheet that includes the steps of assess-
ment, benefit, consequences and consultation, duty, and education.
• Feminist model: Creates a gender-equal ethic that is based on nonsexist moral
principles such as holistic, intuitive, emotional, compassionate, personal, and con-
textual processing styles. The model calls for involvement of the client at every
stage of the decision-making process.

-- 95 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	67
• Social constructionist model: Uses an interactive process that places the deci-
sion in the social context and involves negotiating, conceptualizing, and possibly
arbitrating.
• Transcultural integrative model: Includes cultural factors counselors can use in
a variety of settings with client populations. It emphasizes principles that link all
cultures, such as altruism, responsibility, justice, and caring.
Any of these ethical decision-making models can support counselors in making effective
decisions.
While no two models are the same, all include some form of the following
constructs: (1) identify the problem, (2) check your feelings, (3) identify potential
issues (e.g., cultural, spiritual, familial), (4) review relevant professional codes, (5)
know laws and regulations, (6) involve the client in the process, (7) obtain peer or
supervisor consultation, (8) consider courses of action, (9) consider the implications
of decisions, (10) choose a course of action, and (11) follow up with a supervisor,
legal counsel, and the client.
It is important to understand that a counselor’s decisions must also always abide
by the parameters set forth by state and federal legislation that govern mental health
practice. Now respond to the ethical dilemma provided in Activity 3.1.
Using the seven steps in the Practitioner’s Guide to
Ethical Decision Making (Forester-Miller & Davis, 2016)
noted previously, address the following ethical issue:
Ryder has just entered treatment with you
for substance use disorder. Ryder reports
that a previous therapist used drugs with
Ryder; the case manager who brought
Ryder to the session confirms this. The
client is reluctant to “hurt” the old thera-
pist, and the case manager doesn’t want
to “rat” on a coworker.
How would you handle this based on the Forester-Miller
and Davis model? Search the web for an alternate
model and address the same case with it. Describe
how your outcomes or processes are different using
the alternate model.
ACTIVITY 3.1
HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT
Learning Objective 3.2 Describe HIPAA, a federal law that protects sensitive
mental health information.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, also known as the
Kennedy-Kassebaum Bill, is federal legislation that was implemented to address numerous
perceived shortcomings in the management of information in the health care industry.
It was the first federal legislation to protect automated client records, and it mandated
that all electronic transactions include only HIPAA-compliant codes, provide security
provisions, and require national provider identification numbers. The current version
of the legislation covers a wide range of areas that impact both the health care industry
and patients (HIPAA, 2011; Hebda et al., 2019).

-- 96 of 545 --

68 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
What Is HIPAA?
In the 1970s and 1980s, the American public perceived that health care information was
not controlled and protected by the health care industry to the degree that it should be,
in view of the increasing ability during those years for data to be compiled, manipulated,
and used to negatively affect individuals and families. As a result of several high-profile
security breaches and misuse cases and the resulting pressure on Congress, the legisla-
tive branch created health care information handling and protection standards of their
own and communicated to the health care industry that these rather restrictive standards
would be implemented if the health care industry did not solve the problem on its own.
The health care industry subsequently promulgated standards for informa-
tion handling, management, and control that met congressional approval. Congress
enacted these standards and HIPAA (Public Law 104-191) went into effect in 1996,
including four areas of legislation: (1) privacy requirements (the specific rules for
which would be subsequently constructed), (2) electronic transactions, (3) security
requirements, and (4) national identifier requirements (Corey et al., 2019; Hebda
et al., 2019; Pozgar, 2018; Remley & Herlihy, 2020; U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services [DHHS], 2002).
However, the version of HIPAA that became law in 1996 did not include privacy
rules. Congress instructed DHHS to dictate privacy rules for the health care industry
within 3 years. The 3-year period was provided to give the health care industry a chance
to develop privacy rules for their own profession, submit the privacy rules to Congress,
and obtain congressional approval. This did not occur, and in the absence of such legis-
lation, DHHS followed the requirement of the 1996 act and implemented standards for
privacy of individually identifiable health information, referred to as the Privacy Rule,
which became effective in 2003. A few of the privacy provisions are as follows:
1. Patients must be able to access their records.
2. Patients have the right to request and/or make corrections to their records.
3. Patients must be informed of how their personal information will be used.
4. Patient information may not be used for marketing purposes without prior consent.
5. Health insurers or providers must designate a privacy officer and train employees
(Pozgar, 2018).
The Privacy Rule is still in effect and can be located at the HIPAA website of the DHHS
Office for Civil Rights (Corey et al., 2019; Hebda et al., 2019; Remley & Herlihy, 2020).
The Privacy Rule seeks to balance the concept of individual privacy against the
need for medical professionals to have access to information to best do their jobs. It
establishes that the right to privacy about medical information is not absolute and
therefore puts the onus on designated health care providers to protect the informa-
tion they collect, use, and transmit. The Privacy Rule and other aspects of HIPAA
govern information that contains personal identification categorized as protected
health information. The protected health information must be treated according to
the standards and procedures established by HIPAA whenever it is created, trans-
mitted, or received in any form whatsoever: electronic, paper based, or by means of
oral transmission. In short, if information contains individually identifiable mate-
rial, it is considered protected health information and is fully controlled by HIPAA
(Pozgar, 2018; Remley & Herlihy, 2020).

-- 97 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	69
Those who collect, use, or transmit protected health information and who are
covered under the requirements of HIPAA are referred to as covered entities. HIPAA
defines covered entities as health plans, health clearinghouses, and health care pro-
viders. Health care provider is sometimes used to refer to covered entities. Health care
provider refers to a wide variety of health professionals (including counselors) in
private and public practice who provide medical care and public health services—
such as primary care, disease diagnosis, and public education—and are paid by a
third party (Wilensky & Teitelbaum, 2023). HIPAA defines many terms that relate to
the health care arena and establishes standards through the Privacy Rule that define
how individuals and organizations in health care are to collect, use, transmit, and
handle protected health information.
Counselors also need to be familiar with the HIPAA Security Rule, which took
effect in April 2005. The Security Rule requires that covered entities maintain three
safeguards—administrative, physical, and technical—so that electronic protected health
information remains confidential, secure, and integral. An example of an administrative
safeguard is the clear identification by an organization of which employees or classes
of employees can have access to protected health information. An example of a physi-
cal safeguard is the placement of workstations of those who have access to protected
information away from high-traffic areas, with computer monitors shielded from direct
view of the public. This safeguard has affected the way in which counseling settings are
architecturally designed and how workstations are set up. An example of a technical
safeguard is ensuring that information systems housing protected health information
are secured against intrusion (Pozgar, 2018). See Case Study 3.1, which considers a situ-
ation where protected information was accessed and misused. Also read Voices from
the Field 3.1.
CASE STUDY 3.1
The Misuse of Protected Information
River had to pick up her 14-year-old, Rowan, early from school due to a plumbing
problem that closed the school early. Since River, the custodian of client records for
an outpatient mental health center, was scheduled to work for several more hours,
River allowed her daughter to complete her homework at the work desk near her. Since
River had to run charts to clinicians at various times, Rowan was left unsupervised.
Bored, she began browsing through patient charts that had been left on the desk and
through client records on River’s computer (Rowan gained access with the password,
posted inside River’s desk drawer). Rowan even went as far as to prank-call clients who
had been tested for HIV, pretending to be with the clinic and reporting false results. One
client died by suicide after receiving Rowan’s call that she was HIV positive.
Discussion Questions
1. List the HIPAA violations committed in this case study (based on an actual 2003
incident).
2. Who is liable in this case? Why?

-- 98 of 545 --

70 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
How HIPAA Affects Crisis Counseling
Crisis counseling differs from the kinds of services that are typically provided by health
care workers. Crises such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and homicides typically occur
quickly and often in unanticipated ways, so counselors must respond immediately to
stabilize the situation and provide a way for people to move forward. There may be
limited time to obtain HIPAA-required releases when critical care is needed, or it may
be impossible to obtain such releases because of severe injury, unavailability of family
members, or other unforeseen consequences of the disaster. According to DHHS (2022b,
2022c), HIPAA is not intended to interfere with the provision of emergency medical
care associated with declared emergencies such as hurricanes, and covered health care
providers may exercise their professional judgment and act if such actions are in the best
interests of the patient.
Actions permitted by health care providers may include disclosure of individually
identifiable medical information to government officials at the local, state, or federal
level; police; first responders; public health officials; or anyone whom the health care pro-
viders deem necessary to best serve the patient. In any case, the federal government has
the authority to waive sanctions and penalties associated with violations of the Privacy
Rule, even in cases where a public health emergency is not declared (DHHS, 2022b).
At the same time, it is important for crisis counselors to work under the direction of the
point agency (e.g., Red Cross, Green Cross, Federal Emergency Management Agency)
during a crisis. Well-intentioned counselors who make decisions that counter the point
agency may do more harm in some circumstances.
For work with clients who are a serious threat to safety, the HIPAA Privacy
Rule allows disclosure of protected health information under the “Serious Threat
to Health or Safety” provision. Release of information to anyone whom the health
care provider reasonably believes may lessen the threat to health or safety (includ-
ing the target of the threat) is allowed; however, in the case of a threat to health and
safety, release of protected health information to law enforcement is allowed only
when the information is needed to identify or apprehend an escapee or a violent
criminal (DHHS, 2022a).
In cases where a crime has occurred or where law enforcement officials are
investigating a suspected crime, covered entities are allowed to disclose pro-
tected health information under the “Law Enforcement Purposes” provision of
HIPAA. This provision sets out conditions in which disclosure of protected health
information may—and, in some circumstances, must—be made (DHHS, 2022a).
Gina Palmer
HIPAA and social media do not mix. With the popu-
larity and pervasiveness of social media in our every-
day lives, it is easy to see how patient privacy can be
breached without even realizing it. My rule is to never
post messages or comment about work in any way;
never post pictures from work and never “friend” any
current or past patients via social networking sites. For
any other related concerns, the normal client boundar-
ies and ethics of disclosure still apply.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.1
HIPAA and Social Media

-- 99 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	71
Disclosure of protected health information to law enforcement is allowed in the
following circumstances:
• In response to a court-ordered warrant, subpoena, or summons
• In response to an administrative or investigative demand by law enforcement
• When a request for protected health information is limited to information required
to locate a suspect, fugitive, material witness, or missing person
• To apprehend a perpetrator of a crime against the member of a covered entity’s
workforce
• To apprehend a violent criminal
• To report child abuse or neglect (no consent required)
• To report adult abuse, neglect, or domestic violence (if the individual agrees or it
is required by law)
• To report the death of an individual when death is suspected to be a
result of criminal conduct
• To report a medical emergency
• To comply with federal security activities associated with national
security
• When a request is made by a correctional institution or official having
lawful custody of an individual
Professional counselors should distinguish permissive aspects of the
Privacy Rule (i.e., “may” be released) when other statutes such as state
privilege laws may be more restrictive. That is, while the Privacy Rule may
indicate conditions in which protected health information can be disclosed,
other statutes, such as state privilege laws and organizational policies, do
not allow disclosure. In such cases, the client’s private health information
should be protected. See Case Study 3. 2, which considers how the HIPAA
Privacy Rule applies to the sharing of protected health information. Also
see Case Study 3. 3, which examines a protection of privacy issue.
CASE STUDY 3. 2
HIPAA and Protected Health Information
Kalani is a licensed professional counselor at a community mental health center (CMHC).
A physician at a local hospital requested a substance use evaluation on a current patient.
No cooperative agreement exists between the hospital and the CMHC. When Kalani
arrives at the hospital, the charge nurse provides the patient’s chart and invites Kalani to
sit in the records area to review the patient information prior to seeing the patient. Kalani
sees the patient, performs the evaluation, obtains all the necessary releases, and leaves
documentation with the physician. While there, the physician asks Kalani to see another
client, and the charge nurse provides the other client’s chart.
Discussion Questions
1. What, if any, violations of the HIPAA Privacy Rule have occurred here?
2. If violations were committed, who is liable?
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 3. 1
In this video, a school
counseling intern encounters
an attorney requesting student
counseling files and consults
with a supervisor. What HIPAA
requirements prevent you
from disclosing information
demonstrated in this scenario?

-- 100 of 545 --

72 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
FAMILY EDUCATION RIGHTS AND PRIVACY ACT
Learning Objective 3.3 Explain why counselors working in higher education
settings must comply with a different set of federal guidelines (FERPA).
In 1974, Congress passed the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), also
known as the Buckley Amendment, prompted by concerns about privacy violations and
the inclusion of immaterial comments and personal opinions in educational records
(Rainsberger, 2019; Sutton, 2015). Confusion regarding HIPAA and FERPA continues
to be of concern as institutions of higher education and governmental partners struggle
to strike a balance between the two federal laws. This is of particular concern for coun-
selors who work in an educational environment and are providing direct mental health
services. Counselors who work in an educational environment should remain current
in their understanding of federal privacy regulations, the content to be disclosed in the
educational record, and the need to document student mental health needs (Goodwin,
2016; Hope, 2022; U.S. Department of Education, 2022; DHHS, 2021).
What Is FERPA?
Essentially, FERPA (20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 CFR Part 99) gives parents certain rights to
their child’s educational records until the child is 18 years of age (an “eligible student”).
After this point, the right to privacy regarding the contents of the educational records
is provided to the eligible student, thus denying parental access without consent (U.S.
Department of Education, 2022). All schools, public or private, that receive federal fund-
ing must follow FERPA or face the loss of federal funds (Edwards, 2018). According to
CASE STUDY 3.3
Protection of Privacy
Rose is a person transitioning from male to female. She is living in a shelter after her
home was destroyed by coastal flooding. Rose disclosed her transgender status to the
shelter counselor and requested special accommodations for privacy. The counselor left
Rose’s documentation visible on the desk while tending to other clients. A shelter worker
inadvertently saw the note and, attempting to be of help to the counselor (and to Rose),
mentioned the special needs request to other shelter workers. Rose’s circumstances were
then made known to other shelter residents, resulting in objections from the community
and embarrassment to Rose.
Discussion Questions
1. How are privacy regulations for client privacy to be observed in disaster shelter
circumstances?
2. What minimum expectations for privacy should a client have in a disaster shelter?
3. In circumstances of a breach of information, what steps should be taken to sanction
these actions?
4. Who should be sanctioned and how?
5. What can be done to minimize the damage of a breach of privacy?

-- 101 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	73
the DHHS and the U.S. Department of Education (2022), a parent or an eligible student
has the right to inspect and review the student’s educational records. Additionally, the
parent or eligible student who believes an educational record to be inaccurate may ask
the school to amend the record. If a school refuses to amend an educational record, the
parent or eligible student can request a formal hearing and may place in the record a
statement about the information being contested.
Schools must obtain written permission to release information; however, FERPA
allows the release of information in certain situations—for example, when a student
transfers to another school and there is a legitimate educational interest or when financial
aid is being requested, a judicial order has been issued, or there is an emergency. Parents
are to be notified when records are transferred to other schools and may receive cop-
ies of those records upon request (Edwards, 2018). Under FERPA, colleges may release
educational records, such as grades and financial records, to parents of college students
claimed as dependents on parental tax forms. The release of student records to parents
occurs either when the parent shows tax record proof that the student is a dependent
or when the student signs a waiver allowing the release of records to parents (Elliott
et al., 2014). See Case Study 3.4, which focuses on the statutes that apply to a student’s
counseling records.
Prior to FERPA, educational institutions could be quite lax about how they com-
municated student information. In fact, Senator James L. Buckley of New York was moti-
vated, in part, to introduce this legislation due to such abuses of confidential material
(von Feigenblat et al., 2015). Schools were known to reveal contents of student records to
parties who had no educational interest or need to know. FERPA has served to advance
professionalism in educational institutions, while at the same time securing students’
rights to privacy and confidentiality.
CASE STUDY 3.4
Student Counseling Records
Wylie, a student in a clinical mental health counseling program, is completing an intern-
ship in a mental health center. The center has an outreach program at the local high
school, and its counselors have been given space to work in the school’s counseling
office. Wylie has been working with Skye, a 10th-grade student who was referred for
trouble concentrating and declining grades. Skye’s teacher and parents are very inter-
ested in Skye’s progress in counseling and check in with Wylie frequently. After three
sessions, Skye reports depression since an older sibling died by suicide 4 months ago
while at college. Skye’s teacher is heading Wylie’s way for an update.
Discussion Questions
1. Are Skye’s counseling records covered by HIPAA? By FERPA? Or both?
2. Do any factors complicate this case regarding access to counseling records by
Skye’s parents, Skye, or school faculty?

-- 102 of 545 --

74 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
FERPA contains a provision that exempts certain personal records. Records that are
exclusively in the possession of the counselor and are not revealed to others are excluded
from FERPA (Elliott et al., 2014). These records include those made by school personnel,
such as counselors, who keep such records in their “sole possession.” Due to this exemp-
tion, counseling case notes are not considered part of the educational record and do not
have to be revealed (Rainsberger, 2019). Now read Voices from the Field 3.2 and 3.3.
Cindy Wiley
Your first priority as a counselor is to protect your
client—in this case a school-age student, Shiloh, has
come to you in crisis, trusting in you to alleviate pain
while guarding and maintaining confidence. When a
student presents in such a state, it is hard to remind that
student, and yourself, that while what you talk about is
confidential, there are exceptions to that confidentiality.
I think most counselors are afraid that the counselor–
student relationship, which is paramount, will be ruined
even if confidence is appropriately breached for the
safety of the student. If worded in a manner that ade-
quately portrays your concern and need to involve other
resources, most students will understand. What students
will ultimately remember is that you genuinely care for
them and their well-being. In a state of crisis, most stu-
dents are truly asking for help. Your job is to make sure
that you “circle the wagons” to support them.
Counselors in any setting have the responsibil-
ity to convey to clients the limits of confidentiality in
the beginning of any counseling relationship rather
than when an emergency is experienced where the
limits may be broken. Providing this information at
the beginning of the relationship allows counselors
to establish boundaries and shared responsibility for
information relayed in sessions. The ACA Code of Ethics
(2014, A.2.a, Informed Consent) states:
Clients have the freedom to choose
whether to enter into or remain in a coun-
seling relationship and need adequate
information about the counseling process
and the counselor. Counselors have an
obligation to review in writing and verbally
with clients the rights and responsibilities
of both counselors and clients. Informed
consent is an ongoing part of the counsel-
ing process, and counselors appropriately
document discussions of informed consent
throughout the counseling relationship.
Therefore, even in circumstances where a client is
unable to give consent (e.g., due to detox, resistance),
the information should be addressed. In the event of
a refusal or inability to sign, a counselor can indicate
“client refused to sign” or “client was unable to sign.”
This shows you still met your professional responsibility.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.2
Protecting Confidentiality During a Crisis
Yulanda Tyre
Accidental death is one of the leading causes of mortal-
ity among college students 18 to 24 years of age. These
occurrences can have a devastating ripple effect for a
campus community. During my first year of work as a
college counseling center director, the student body
experienced the loss of a popular athlete in a tragic
motor vehicle accident. The incident happened on a
summer night, allowing students to pour out onto
the university quad to grieve and express condolences
together. It was immediately evident that many stu-
dents experienced the event as a crisis. The request for
counseling services among students increased, along
with department requests for counseling staff to speak
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.3
The Importance of Crisis Training for University and College Staff

-- 103 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	75
How FERPA Affects Crisis Counseling
According to the U.S. Department of Education (2020a), an emergency
situation creates an exception, and schools may release information from
general, medical, or mental health records to protect the health and safety
of others. It is important to note that this exception is only for the time
of the emergency and is not blanket consent to release student informa-
tion. The information may be released to appropriate individuals who are
tasked with protecting health and safety, such as law enforcement officials,
medical personnel, and public officials. Law enforcement officials hired
by schools are considered school officials and therefore have an “educa-
tional interest” and are permitted to view records. Threatening remarks
made by a student and overheard by school personnel can be reported to
appropriate officials because such remarks are not considered part of the
educational record.
These policies apply to higher education settings as well, with the following addi-
tions. Regarding disciplinary actions and rule violations, the results of a disciplinary
proceeding may be released to an alleged victim even if the perpetrator has not been
found guilty of violating rules or policies (U.S. Department of Education, 2020c). If a per-
petrator has been found guilty of violating rules or policies, the institution may disclose
the results of a disciplinary hearing to anyone. Most colleges and universities have their
own campus police; investigative records of campus law enforcement are not subject to
FERPA and may be released to outside law enforcement without student consent. Now
read Case Study 3.5, which considers whether HIPAA or FERPA were violated when
student information was released by a university.
CASE STUDY 3. 5
FERPA Violation or Not?
A female student attending a public university in Oregon accused three players from the
university basketball team of raping her in March 2015. One of her attackers had been
suspended from a previous college team over similar allegations. The female student
received counseling at the university’s counseling clinic. Nothing was done to the three
athletes until May 2015 (well after basketball season), when university administration
removed them from the basketball team and expelled them from the university. When the
to small groups of students and faculty on topics of
death, grief, coping skills, and resilience in the days
following the event.
Mortality rates among traditional-age college
students support the need for effective crisis inter-
vention planning and training among counseling
center staff and university professionals who support
the emotional well-being of students. Crisis plan-
ning and implementation provides opportunities for
collaboration with trained places of worship, doctors,
independent professional health care providers, and
organizations like the Red Cross, National Alliance
on Mental Illness, public health departments, and
other community organizations. Training is crucial to
addressing the negative short- and long-term emo-
tional and biological effects of a crisis for a college-
age student during what can be a pivotal stage of
development.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 3. 2
In this video, a counselor dis-
cusses confidentiality, includ-
ing federal laws that apply
to crisis counselors and when
confidentiality must be broken.
Are there other times when
confidentiality must be broken?

-- 104 of 545 --

76 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
In situations concerning health and safety, higher education institutions may
disclose educational records to a parent if the student is involved in a health or
safety issue or is under 21 years of age and has violated the school’s drug and alco-
hol policies. Also, according to the U.S. Department of Education (2021), “a school
official may generally share information with parents that is based on that official’s
personal knowledge or observation of the student.” Therefore, in situations where a
student’s behavior involves the health and safety of self and others, school officials
can communicate with parents. In fact, a school official may report concerns about
student behavior to anyone, although it is wise to make such reports only to campus
personnel, such as administrators, counselors, or campus police, who can intervene
appropriately with the student (Chan, 2018).
For mental health practitioners working with college-bound students and families
prior to enrollment in an institution of higher education, transition work should help the
student and parents in the early college selection process become familiar with mental
health and supportive services at each college being considered. If, for example, your
client is in addictions recovery, the client should know whether the institution has a
Collegiate Recovery Community and whether the student can connect with others in
recovery to maintain sobriety (Brown et al., 2018). Even universities within the same
geographic region can have vast differences in the types of services provided. The pro-
active counselor will participate with the student and family in reviewing the college
for services that best match the mental health needs of the young adult in transition to
a university setting (Chan, 2018).
All institutions of higher education should address changes in a student’s mental
health status and provide a clear path for advocacy that identifies and supports students
at risk. Student support programs, mental health interventions, and resources should
be available to address these concerns, especially during a crisis (Burke, 2018). Students
should be proactive about their mental health, particularly during a pandemic or other
crisis, and should seek help when feeling mentally distressed. Violence, substance use,
suicide, and other at-risk behaviors bring national attention to mental health problems
on campus, and institutions must offer a diverse repertoire of services to help address
student needs. For example, services can be offered by counseling centers, health centers,
or integrated programs. The real challenge is keeping up with demand for services on
campus (Chan et al., 2015). Now read Voices from the Field 3.4.
female student learned that the coach had recruited one of the athletes despite his history
of sexual assault, she filed a suit against the university for negligence and emotional dis-
tress. The university accessed the female student’s counseling records and sent them to its
attorney. University officials contended that since the female student went to the health
clinic, the records belonged to the university and further held that the claim of emotional
distress (a medical condition) entitled the school to her medical records under FERPA.
Discussion Questions
1. Did the university violate FERPA or HIPAA?
2. What facets of this real-life case are operative in the decision of whether a violation
has occurred?

-- 105 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	77
The Application of HIPAA and FERPA to College and
University Student Records
In higher education institutions, the interaction between HIPAA and FERPA can be
very confusing and frustrating to parents, staff, and faculty members. Wise et al. (2011)
explained that HIPAA contains an exemption that excludes FERPA-covered records
from HIPAA regulations. However, treatment records such as university student coun-
seling case files are exempt from FERPA but may be covered by HIPAA. The interplay
between HIPAA and FERPA has yet to be fully understood, and higher education insti-
tutions currently interpret HIPAA and FERPA in different ways. Figure 3. 1 summarizes
information from Wise et al. on when HIPAA and FERPA are invoked, overlap, and do
not apply in university training clinics, specifically. FERPA was never intended to block
the information flow between higher education institutions and others concerned about
Mary Ann Bodine Al-Sharif
Even before COVID-19 was a reality, many university
administrators were struggling with the ability to find
resources to provide mental health services for stu-
dents. The COVID-19 pandemic only heightened a
tragic awareness of what I already knew about the
state of college student mental health: It is failing.
For the most part student mental health concerns
do not develop just because a student is in college.
Many students were dealing with these concerns long
before they entered the university doors. Poor men-
tal health is a societal issue that presents in higher
education; however, higher education is ill prepared
for the demand. Already strained budgets have been
further impacted by difficulty with recruitment and
retention due to the pandemic causing budget cuts to
higher education. It is without question that students
will continue to present in mental health crises on col-
lege and university campuses, but higher education is
quickly running out of resources to put a bandage on
this growing social issue. Administrators can only work
with the resources they are provided, so as funding
runs low and community resources become limited,
students suffer.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3. 4
The Administrative Struggle with College Student Mental Health
FIGURE 3. 1 When do HIPAA, FERPA, both, or neither apply to college/university training clinics?
HIPAA
The college/
university
clinic only treats
nonstudents
AND
is a
covered
entity
BOTH
The college/university
clinic treats
both students and
nonstudents
AND is a
covered entity
OR treats only
students AND
is a covered
entity
The college/university
clinic only treats
students AND is
not a covered
entity AND the
students’ records
are “education”
records, not “treatment”
records
FERPA
Neither: The college/university clinic treats only nonstudents
AND is not a covered entity.

-- 106 of 545 --

78 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
student health and safety. Therefore, faculty, staff, and administrators who are troubled
about the welfare of a student may contact the student’s family or other entities and
express general observations about health and psychological concerns, while protecting
the privacy of the student’s medical or mental health records (Chan et al., 2015).
College and university settings focus on providing prevention services to students
and, as a result, students are a captive audience for counseling services as colleges and
universities strive to provide easily accessible, quality mental health services (Chan,
2018). Many college and university students needing mental health services do not seek
assistance for a variety of reasons (Eisenberg et al., 2015). This finding is problematic,
as suicide is the second-leading cause of death among college-age students (American
Association of Suicidology, 2021; Eisenberg et al., 2015).
The convergence of HIPAA and FERPA makes it difficult to determine when these
statutes apply to student clients, how they affect student-client rights, and how they affect
counselors and their supervisors. It is important for university clinics to follow all HIPAA
requirements. Doing so is particularly confusing at university counseling training facilities
and requires even more diligence because clients are also often students at the university
(Chan et al., 2015). Counselors who inadvertently transfer a client’s mental health record
(e.g., clinical treatment notes) to an educational record or file without the client’s consent
have failed to maintain the confidentiality of the mental health record and increased who
can access the record. Therefore, this unfortunate transfer could mean that the counselor and
supervisor violated federal law and caused significant harm to the client. Confidentiality
and record keeping are covered in more detail later in this chapter. Complete Activity 3.2,
which asks you to apply FERPA as a school counselor. Then complete Think About It 3.1.
It is not uncommon for school counselors to contact a
parent once it is determined that the child is a potential
threat to self. Consider the following example:
Counselor: 	Hello, Mrs. Smith. This is Ms.
Collins. I’m your daughter Jill’s
school counselor. Today your
daughter’s teacher, Mrs. Ramirez,
found a note Jill had written that
suggests she is feeling suicidal
and may have a plan to kill her-
self. I met with Jill and believe
she is having passing thoughts
of suicide but do not believe she
has a current plan. It is school
policy for me to contact a parent
to pick up the child and make a
referral for further assessment.
Parent: 	I can’t come right now. I’m in the
middle of a meeting. Jill has been
talking about suicide for several
weeks since her father left us.
I think she is just seeking attention.
Counselor: 	Yes, Jill mentioned she is feeling
very sad about her father leav-
ing, and this is why she is con-
sidering suicide as an option.
We take all reports of poten-
tial suicide seriously to ensure
student safety and require that
the student be seen for follow-
up before returning to school. I
realize this is inconvenient, but I
truly believe your daughter is in
emotional distress.
Parent: 	Thanks for your concern, but I
really don’t think it’s that serious
and I simply can’t leave work right
now, especially since my husband
left. I can’t risk losing my job.
Discuss how the conversation in this scenario will
continue from this point. Consider who you might also
need to speak with if the parent continues to resist.
Reflect on the limitations and latitude FERPA allows and
how to proceed.
ACTIVITY 3.2

-- 107 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	79
THE TARASOFF V. REGENTS DECISION
Learning Objective 3.4 Describe the effects of the Tarasoff v. Regents court case on
the duties of counselors.
In the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), counselors are charged with recognizing trust as an impor-
tant component of the counseling relationship, and counselors are obligated to facilitate
a trusting relationship through the maintenance of client confidentiality. However,
disclosure is required “to protect clients or identified others from serious and foreseeable
harm or when legal requirements demand confidential information must be revealed”
(section B.2.a). This standard was adopted as part of counseling practice after the landmark
California Supreme Court case of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California (1976).
As context for the Tarasoff case, in 1969 Prosenjit Poddar was seen by a psychologist
on a voluntary outpatient basis at the University of California, Berkeley. Poddar confided
his intent to kill a woman he claimed to be his girlfriend, a woman the psychologist sur-
mised to be Tatiana Tarasoff, when she returned from Brazil. Alarmed by the disclosure,
the psychologist contacted the campus police and then began proceedings to have Pod-
dar committed for a psychiatric evaluation. In the interim, police picked Poddar up and
questioned him. The police found Poddar to be rational, and he did not demonstrate risk
in their presence. He promised not to have contact with Tarasoff, so the police released
him. The psychologist followed up on his concerns with a letter to the campus police
chief in which he again expressed his concern; however, the supervisor of the psycholo-
gist requested that the letter be returned, ordered all case notes destroyed, and ordered
that no further action be taken.
Poddar did not return to see the psychologist, nor was he committed or evaluated
by any additional mental health professionals. Furthermore, no one contacted Tarasoff
or her family to alert them that a threat had been made. Two months later, Tarasoff
was stabbed to death by Poddar; her parents sued the University of California Board of
Regents (Corey et al., 2019; Remley & Herlihy, 2020). Initially, a trial court ruled that the
university was not liable because Tarasoff was not the patient in this case, and therefore
it had no duty of care toward her. Upon appeal, however, the California Supreme Court
ruled there are some circumstances in which a therapist should break confidentiality,
specifically when such a disclosure is necessary to avert danger to the client or oth-
ers. This act of breaking confidentiality when disclosure is necessary to avert danger is
known as the duty to warn.
What Was the Effect of Tarasoff v. Regents?
Part of what makes this case and the duty to warn/protect complicated is that there
have been many interpretations of this case ruling. An examination of the various state
laws demonstrates that how and when a counselor should break confidentiality differs
depending on the circumstances and, since many states depend on court rulings rather
Think about the ACA Code of Ethics, HIPAA, and
FERPA. What potential conflicts immediately come to
mind when you consider working in a crisis or disaster
situation? How might these conflicts change as the cri-
sis becomes less acute? How might you address these
conflicts?
THINK ABOUT IT 3.1

-- 108 of 545 --

80 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
than statutes to guide the actions of a counselor, this issue is not clear across all jurisdic-
tions (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2022). Additionally, many legal experts
are unable to give specific guidance as to when counselors should alert the police or an
identified victim regarding a threat to a person’s life. While some courts have limited
the application of the duty to warn to situations in which victims are identifiable, subse-
quent decisions have indicated that the duty to warn extends to unknown victims, which
further complicates the matter. Another confusing part of this ruling involves the terms
duty to warn and duty to protect, which are often used interchangeably by professionals.
Legal definitions of the terms duty to warn and duty to protect are established by state
legislation and state court rulings, so these definitions vary from state to state. Coun-
selors must be aware of the laws applicable to the states in which they are licensed and
in which they intend to practice. Generally speaking, the duty to warn and the duty to
protect represent degrees of what is essentially the same duty. First, the duty to inform
someone of a danger or hazard with the idea that informed persons will take action to
protect themselves (this is the duty to warn) and, second, the duty to protect someone
by taking an action that reduces the danger or hazard to that person directly (this is the
duty to protect).
For example, when a counselor makes a telephone call to a family member whom a
client has threatened, the counselor does so under the concept of duty to warn. If, on the
other hand, the counselor arranges to have a client hospitalized who has threatened to
harm themself, that action is taken under the concept of duty to protect, since it consists of a
direct action (hospitalization) that makes it less likely that the client will execute the threat.
In the Tarasoff case, the victim was not protected, and the appellate court ruled
that the health care provider should have taken steps to protect the victim. In addition,
in Gross v. Allen, a 1994 California appellate court case, the court ruled that the Tarasoff
concept applied not only to cases in which clients threaten homicide but also to cases in
which clients threaten suicide, so reasonable measures are expected to be taken in cases
of threatened suicide (Erford, 2023).
The Tarasoff ruling, in fact, establishes a duty to protect and not just a duty to
warn. The ruling and interpretation of the Tarasoff principle for counseling profession-
als involves the awareness of the protective measure as a legal obligation to warn an
intended victim of potential harm. For example, case outcomes have indicated that the
duty to warn is extended to those who are foreseeably endangered by a client’s con-
duct, including people who are unintentionally injured by the client, whole classes of
students that have been threatened by the client, bystanders who may be injured by the
client’s act, and individuals whose property is threatened by the client (Corey et al., 2019;
Remley & Herlihy, 2020).
Furthermore, in Ewing v. Goldstein (2004), the court ruled that in California, a thera-
pist could be held liable for failure to warn when the information regarding the client’s
potential to harm another person is obtained from family members who may be partici-
pating in counseling with the client. The precedent established from this case requires a
counselor to weigh the credibility of the person offering the information. Additionally,
Remley and Herlihy (2020) point out that the Tarasoff principle is not applied in every
jurisdiction of the United States; specifically, Texas has rejected it.
When a decision is made that a client is a danger to another person or persons, the
counselor must then determine what the necessary steps are to prevent the harm from
occurring. After notifying the potential victim or contacting appropriate authorities as

-- 109 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	81
needed to ensure the intended victim’s safety, the counselor must take other steps to pre-
vent harm, which can include continuing to work with the client on an outpatient basis.
This option is considered less restrictive, whereas the option to pursue an involuntary
commitment would be considered very restrictive.
These decisions are challenging for most counselors. Therefore, it is highly recom-
mended that counselors seek peer supervision and consultation on a regular basis, but
particularly whenever the issue of breaking confidentiality becomes a factor in practice.
This principle is known as the duty to consult principle and can assist crisis counselors in
decreasing liability issues in similar cases. Counselors should not practice in isolation,
should practice according to reasonable standards, and should maintain accurate docu-
mentation to be able to verify when and why a decision to break confidentiality was
made, particularly as it relates to the duty to warn (Knapp et al., 2017).
How Tarasoff v. Regents Affects Crisis Counseling
Collins and Collins’s (2005) seminal work on the Developmental-Ecological Model of Crisis
Intervention identifies three goals for a crisis worker dealing with a potentially violent
individual:
1. Ensure that the client remains safe, reduce lethality, and stabilize the environment.
2. Help the client to regain short-term control.
3. Connect the client with appropriate resources.
The course of accomplishing these three goals, however, is balanced against the coun-
selor’s decision that a duty to warn exists and confidentiality must be broken in part to
accomplish those very goals. Counselors working with people in crisis often encounter
unique circumstances when a duty to warn or protect prevails.
The Tarasoff case and deliberations surrounding a counselor’s duty to warn have
become a routine aspect of counselor education and are an expected consideration in
the standard of care. Counselors, however, should be cautious when broadly applying
the duty to warn since various states may apply this principle differently and others
have enacted no law like the Tarasoff decision. Johnson et al. (2014) reported that, while
34 states have an actual duty to warn in statute or common law, 11 states give permission
to warn (which may not shield the counselor from liability) and six states have no such
statute or common law guidance.
Furthermore, in those states that have some form of Tarasoff law, the health care
providers to whom it may apply (counselor, physician, etc.) may vary widely, and these
providers are often poorly informed of their state’s law on the matter. For example,
Pabian et al. (2009) queried psychologists representing four states regarding their knowl-
edge of legal and ethical obligations to clients in imminent danger, which resulted in
alarming findings: (1) the majority were incorrectly informed about their state’s law and
believed that they had a legal duty to warn when they did not or (2) they assumed that
warning was the only available legal option when other options were available that did
not impinge on client privacy.
While the principles of duty to warn and duty to protect are useful, counselors
should not assume that Tarasoff applies without explicitly researching their state law.
Counselors should be aware of the changing nature of legislation and of the pertinent
regulations for their own state.

-- 110 of 545 --

82 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Interestingly, Houser and Thoma (2012) noted that, even though counselors in
Texas may not break confidentiality to warn or protect a person whose life has been
threatened by another, counselors are mandated to report suspected child abuse and
have the option of reporting positive HIV results to various entities.
Likewise, the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) indicates that counselors are “justified in
disclosing information to identifiable third parties, if the parties are known to be at seri-
ous and foreseeable risk of contracting the disease” (section B.2.c). The ACA Code of Ethics
further stipulates, however, that counselors must confirm the diagnosis and assess the
client’s intent to inform the third party about the disease or to participate in any behavior
that may be harmful to an identifiable third party. The word justified, as compared with
required, warrants consideration; in addition, counselors are encouraged to evaluate their
own thoughts about whether they will agree to work with, and how they will effectively
work with, clients who are HIV positive. It is also important to keep in mind that not
every exposure to HIV results in harm, thus making the process of determining how to
proceed a gray area that a counselor must navigate carefully.
When dealing with this and other precarious issues, counselors are wise to stay
informed about specific statutes in their jurisdiction that have been passed regarding the
duty to warn and third-party conversations and, of course, to review the guidelines of con-
fidentiality periodically with clients and seek supervision and consultation as needed (Corey
et al., 2019; Remley & Herlihy, 2020). Case Study 3.6 takes a closer look at the duty to warn.
CASE STUDY 3.6
Assessing When to Implement a Duty to Warn
Ridley, a retail employee, escaped harm from a building during an active shooter inci-
dent. A few months later, Ridley began experiencing symptoms of posttraumatic stress
disorder and was sent to counseling through an employee assistance program when
Ridley’s supervisors noticed an increase in conflicts with coworkers. In the most recent
session, Ridley became agitated and shouted to the counselor, “I hate my boss and
coworkers—I’m going to kill them all,” after which Ridley abruptly left the session.
Discussion Questions
1. Does this incident indicate a duty to warn?
2. What Tarasoff criteria are met or not met?
3. How should the counselor proceed?
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS RELATED TO CRISES
Learning Objective 3.5 Describe special ethical, legal, and other considerations
related to crises.
In this section, we examine special ethical and legal considerations related to crises,
including negligence and malpractice, documentation and record keeping, informed
consent, confidentiality, and termination in crisis intervention. We also discuss spiritual
and multicultural considerations and crisis intervention in a technological world.

-- 111 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	83
Negligence and Malpractice
Once a counselor and a client have entered a professional relationship, the counselor
has assumed a duty of care toward the client. Providing the best care is an issue of
competence, and counselors are responsible to ensure their decision-making process is
sound and driven by evidence-based practices. Generally, when poor treatment inter-
ventions are selected, a counselor’s competence may be called into question (Remley
& Herlihy, 2020).
A breach of duty owed to another is considered negligence; negligence that occurs
in a professional setting is malpractice. Professional negligence results when a counselor
departs from the usual standard of practice that is expected of professionals in a similar
situation (Corey et al., 2019). References to legal and ethical issues that can arise during
practice are discussed throughout the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), particularly in section
I. In section I, matters related to standards and the law, ethical decision making, and
conflicts between ethics and laws are addressed.
Malpractice is established if the court finds that a counselor has breached a profes-
sional duty, failed to take appropriate action (omission), or did something that should
not have been done (commission) relative to the standard of care (Remley & Herlihy,
2020; Scott & Resnick, 2012). A standard of care is clinical treatment that does not depart
from what a reasonable and prudent counselor with similar training and in a similar
situation would carry out (Corey et al., 2019; Zhang & Parsons, 2016). The challenge of a
standard of care is that the “standard” may vary by court rulings. To prove malpractice,
four factors (the four Ds) must be present: “a dereliction of duty that directly results in
damages” (Scott & Resnick, 2012, p. 540). In the event of a lawsuit, a counselor’s only
defense is documentation in the case file that proves that the counselor conformed to the
standard of care. A means of protection is to never practice without having professional
liability insurance.
Common reasons for counseling-related malpractice suits include issues
around documentation, informed consent, client abandonment, premature termi-
nation, sexual misconduct, and failure to control a dangerous client (Corey et al.,
2019). While the primary cause of litigation for counselors continues to be inap-
propriate relationships with clients, the inappropriate handling of suicide crisis is
a close second (Bartlett & Forbes, 2015; Remley & Herlihy, 2020). According to the
Healthcare Providers Service Organization (HPSO; 2021, 2022), proper documenta-
tion is crucial in legal action and is often the only source of evidence in a case; in
fact, good documentation can keep a counselor out of court. Specifically, in crisis
situations risk management concerns will focus on documentation, record keeping,
informed consent, confidentiality, and termination. It is prudent for counselors to
be familiar with risk management strategies, regardless of the client’s situation
(Zhang & Parsons, 2016). Basic elements of risk management include being client
centered, being clinically appropriate, being supportive of treatment and the thera-
peutic alliance, having a working knowledge of legal regulations and issues, and
remembering to do no harm (Simon, 2012). For example, Bartlett and Forbes (2015)
state that “suicide litigation has resulted in many of the largest settlements awarded
to plaintiffs; the act of suicide is deemed preventable by law, and as a result lawsuits
brought against practitioners are pervasive” (p. 27). Read Voices from the Field 3.5
and complete Think About It 3.2.

-- 112 of 545 --

84 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Emmett Poundstone
When providing crisis counseling, two major elements
are necessary to avoid litigation. First, the counselor
must have the necessary education/training, experi-
ence, and credentials to provide crisis counseling. If
there are any doubts, the counselor should consult
with an individual who has more credentials or the state
regulatory board. Second, the counselor must provide
adequate documentation regarding the counseling ser-
vices. If a counselor has any doubts about activities, it is
advisable to consult with an attorney who has mental
health experience.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.5
Avoiding Litigation When Providing Crisis Counseling
Think about the following article on boundary viola-
tions. Read the ACA legal case Failure to Properly Moni-
tor and Supervise Services Treating Counselor Who
Continually Failed to Establish Professional Boundar-
ies and Who Developed a Personal Relationship with
the Client found at https://www.hpso.com/Resources/
Legal-and-Ethical-Issues/Counselor-Case-Study-Failure-
to-properly-monitor. After a review of this case, discuss
the following questions: What errors did the counseling
supervisor make? How should the counseling supervi-
sor have initially intervened? What are your thoughts
on having supervision of supervision? What errors did
the treating counselor make? What are your thoughts
on the resolution of this case? Should there be a risk
management recommendation for university-employed
counselors?
THINK ABOUT IT 3.2
Examine the following case note entries. Rewrite these
entries to improve them.
1. Client says doing better today.
2. Client’s appearance is good.
3. Client went to the doctor as requested.
4. Client began new medication last week.
ACTIVITY 3.3
Documentation and Record Keeping
There is a useful old saying in the helping professions, “If it’s not written down,
it didn’t happen.” A counselor may have done everything right with a client, but
failure to document means that no evidence exists of the counselor’s actions and
decisions. Documentation is an essential part of the standard of care of the counsel-
ing relationship, as discussed in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014, section A). Appropri-
ate professional documentation and record keeping display diligence and promote
client welfare (Bond & Mitchels, 2014; Luepker, 2012). While client welfare is a
counselor’s main purpose, there is no denying that documentation can either help
or hurt a counselor in legal cases (HPSO, 2022; Welfel, 2016). For improvements in
charting, see Documentation Do’s and Dont’s (HPSO, 2021), which lists many effective
documentation practices. Good documentation is particularly crucial in crisis situ-
ations such as suicide, homicide, mandated reporting (e.g., children, older adults,
and vulnerable persons), and disaster relief where the risk of litigation increases.
Complete Activity 3.3, which asks you to rewrite case note entries.

-- 113 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	85
Zhang and Parsons (2016) suggest that client records should include identifying
data, background/historical data, diagnosis and prognosis, treatment plans, informed
consent, progress notes, and a termination summary. Diagnoses are seldom provided
in a true crisis because it would be inappropriate to diagnose prematurely. Incorrect
diagnoses lead to inappropriate treatment plans. Outside of a true crisis, counselors
document a client’s diagnosis and whether it was reported by the client or received with
the referral (e.g., if the client was discharged from a hospital). It is important to indicate
by whom and when the diagnosis was provided so that no confusion exists that the
diagnosis was given by a party other than the counselor.
It is crucial that a risk assessment be conducted on every client, regardless of
the stated presenting problem. If the assessment produces any degree of lethality
(either stated or observed) it is equally important to justify the actions taken and to
follow up in subsequent case notes on the status of the risk.
In addition, inappropriate information should not be included in client records,
meaning anything that is not treatment related and that could be problematic if viewed
by others. Such information includes personal opinions, discussions of a third party,
sensitive information, and any past criminal behavior. However, in cases of threats to
self or others, documentation of follow-up assessments should be included in the client’s
records (Corey et al., 2019; Remley & Herlihy, 2020; Zhang & Parsons, 2016).
The requirement to maintain and secure client records is not limited to ACA; it is
also endorsed by organizations such as the American Mental Health Counselors Associa-
tion, American School Counseling Association, American Association for Marriage and
Family and Therapy, American Psychological Association, and National Association for
Social Workers.
Counselors must keep documentation of their interventions with clients. Admit-
tedly, crisis conditions (e.g., a disaster site) are not always conducive to writing case
notes, but counselors working with clients in crisis need to clearly document exact dates,
pertinent details, assessments, and treatment decisions. It is important to remember
that although case notes must be succinct, they should never be vague. Case notes must
be specific enough to demonstrate that the treatment reflected prevailing standards of
care. The documentation must clearly illustrate the session with details that capture the
essence of what occurred and validate treatment decisions. The need for client files to
be in a locked and secured location applies during crisis events and providing for con-
fidential file storage in crisis situations must be addressed in crisis planning (American
Red Cross, 2022; Kolski & Jongsma, 2014).
Another consideration is that crisis responders are transitioning to the use of on-
site and cost-effective electronic health records (EHRs) to meet the real-time data capture
needs of vulnerable clients. Portable EHR systems employed in a crisis must be adaptable
to situational changes and available to the provider in multiple languages (Glasgow et al.,
2012) because disasters do not discriminate by geography. The ability of the EHR to docu-
ment mental health data is an efficient and patient-centered approach in the field. The use
of EHR is not limited to community-based disaster relief settings but has the potential for
daily use in hospital emergency departments, where mental health emergencies are likely
to present (Furukawa, 2011). This evolution in medical record keeping produces new
legal and ethical considerations for counselors responding to crisis situations. Complete
Think About It 3.3, which pertains to documenting in a mass disaster, and read Case
Study 3.7, which looks at a client’s privacy rights in relation to documentation.

-- 114 of 545 --

86 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Think about being in a mass disaster situation. How
would you keep records when in the field after a flood,
tornado, or house fire? You are given the choice of
documenting client information with an EHR system
or on paper-based forms. Which option would you
choose, and why? What would the advantages and
disadvantages be of each documentation approach
for you as the crisis counselor? What legal and ethi-
cal issues might you need to consider when comparing
both approaches?
THINK ABOUT IT 3.3
Informed Consent
Clients enter counseling without much information about what will take place. They
may in fact often have many misconceptions about the process of counseling and the
nature of the counseling relationship. Clients must enter counseling freely and be fully
informed of what to expect in the counseling relationship. Informed consent occurs when
clients understand all the possible risks, benefits, and potential outcomes of counseling
(Remley & Herlihy, 2020). The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that “counselors have an
obligation to review in writing and verbally with clients the rights and responsibilities of
both counselors and clients” (section A.2.a). The ACA Code of Ethics further specifies that
the counselor must explain to the client “the purposes, goals, techniques, procedures,
limitations, potential risks, and benefits of services; the counselor’s qualifications, cre-
dentials, relevant experience, and approach to counseling; continuation of services upon
the incapacitation or death of the counselor; the role of technology . . . ” (section A.2.b).
Informed-consent forms should also include an explanation of office policies, fees, billing
CASE STUDY 3.7
Privacy Rights Records
When Jeff was 16 years old, he saw a counselor for conduct issues. During one of those
sessions, Jeff volunteered that he had tried on his sister’s undergarments. Ten years
later, Jeff is experiencing a life crisis. His estranged partner is suing for custody of their
children, and Jeff is concerned that his childhood counseling record may be discoverable
by the court.
Discussion Questions
1. If you were Jeff’s adolescent counselor, how might you have best documented the
issue described?
2. What information should and should not be entered into the clinical record?
3. Can you offer any reassurances regarding the retention and availability of the older
record?
4. If you were the current counselor, how would you record this disclosure about
previous counseling?
5. What information should Jeff’s attorney be aware of regarding his rights of
confidentiality?

-- 115 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	87
arrangements, record keeping, the right to refuse treatment, and the potential effect of
refusal. Both client and counselor must sign the informed-consent form for it to become
part of the counseling record.
In a crisis or large-scale disaster, obtaining informed consent will rarely involve
papers and a clipboard (American Red Cross, 2022). Documented consent in such cir-
cumstances may be impossible, impractical, or delayed at a minimum. For example, a
counselor may be called on to provide support to someone wrapped in a thermal blanket at
the scene of a disaster standing in front of the ruins of their home. Counselors should intro-
duce themselves, explain their role, describe the general limitations of confidentiality, and
ask permission to speak with the client. The counselor may ask a few practical questions:
• “What are you not comfortable with me disclosing when I contact those you have
asked me to?”
• “How do you want me to identify myself and my association with you when I
call?”
• “If I contact a person who does not answer the phone, may I leave a message and
identify myself?”
If a crisis victim refuses intervention, the counselor should withdraw, offering to be
available if future service is wanted. If the client agrees to speak with the counselor, consent
needs to be reassessed throughout the exchange and may be withdrawn at any point should
the survivor elect to discontinue (American Red Cross, 2022). The privacy of the client
should be protected as much as the circumstances of the disaster allow. Protecting privacy
may involve moving the survivor from more trafficked areas or moderating one’s voice to
minimize the likelihood of being overheard. Often the counselor may be asked to contact
others on the survivor’s behalf, such as community resources or loved ones. The counselor
should clarify with the survivor that they give consent for the contact, who
they wish to have contacted, and what specific information to share, being
mindful to share only the minimal amount necessary. If a client is unable
to sign, the crisis counselor should note why there was no written consent.
The COVID-19 pandemic and online services created an awareness of
even more informed consent challenges when one considers the harmful
effects of pandemic-related stress, including changes in the quality and pat-
terns of sleep, difficulty concentrating, increased use of substances, mental
health disorders, and suicide (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2020b; Thakur & Jain, 2020). Clients became even more vulnerable due
to the negative effects of social isolation, pandemic-related anxiety, life-
style changes, economic problems, fear of poverty and homelessness, and
instances of COVID-19–related discrimination compound mental health
distress (Fiorillo & Gorwood, 2020; Litam, 2020; Litam & Hipolitio-Delgato,
2021 ; Litam & Oh, 2020 ), making informed consent even more challenging
to navigate.
Confidentiality
Gladding (2017) defined confidentiality as “the professional, ethical, and legal obliga-
tion of counselors that they not disclose client information revealed during counseling
without the client’s written consent” (p. 34). The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that
“counselors disclose information only with appropriate consent or with sound legal
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 3. 3
In this video, a new counselor
seeks supervision for boundary
crossing. The supervisor offers
a best practice strategy for
decreasing boundary violations.
What other strategies could
assist in decreasing such
issues?

-- 116 of 545 --

88 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
or ethical justification” (section B.1.c). As noted earlier, in situations where a client is a
danger to self or others or where the professional counselor is mandated by law to report
abuse or is required by a court of law to disclose information, confidentiality can be
legally breached ( HPSO, 2021 ). In situations other than these, a client must give consent
for the release of information. Client records are confidential, and they must be kept in
a secure and locked location for a specified time in accordance with professional ethical
standards and the legal requirements of the state and HIPAA and FERPA regulations
( Zhang & Parsons, 2016).
In crisis and disaster circumstances, provisions for confidentiality are certainly
more challenging; however, the ethical standards and requirements of the profession still
apply. Counselors should be aware of the latitude that may be allowed for confidentiality
in difficult circumstances yet strive to ensure the protection of client information. For
example, it may be difficult for a university to conceal the names of students who were
victims of a sexual assault as the media may acquire the names and report details of the
incident before a university spokesperson can make an official statement. While univer-
sity law enforcement officers generally work in conjunction with other local and state
authorities, it is not always possible for the details to remain sealed. Furthermore, it is
also impossible to prevent media sources from listening to police and hospital scanners
and reporting information that is potentially false ahead of the justified facts.
Finally, there are numerous special considerations when providing services to
school-age children. Many of these considerations are addressed later in the book (espe-
cially in Chapter 13). But for now, it is essential to understand that crisis counseling with
children can become quite complicated. Surely, counselors need to convey to children in
developmentally appropriate language what confidentiality means as well
as its limitations. Parents and guardians are often hypervigilant and over-
protective during crisis interventions, so counselors must be clear about
boundaries and limitations while still establishing rapport, a therapeutic
alliance, and intervening to benefit the child.
Another important ethical consideration for school counselors is
ensuring all students are accounted for and safely returned to their guard-
ians. This means taking attendance during evacuations and introducing a
checkout system for student departures, such as when parents and guard-
ians are required to pick up all children being sent home because of a crisis
situation. As specified in Chapter 13, school crisis intervention teams need
to think about how these elements of crisis management will be imple-
mented before a crisis actually occurs. Now complete Activity 3.4, which
focuses on client confidentiality. Then read Voices from the Field 3.6 and
3.7 and complete Think About It 3.4.
You have just determined that your client is a potential
suicide threat and must break confidentiality and notify
someone to discuss a plan of safety. Decide whom you
will contact and exactly what you will discuss. Write a
narrative of the conversation you will have with both
the client and the person(s) to whom you will be dis-
closing. Consider how much you may disclose, what
guidelines you are given by the ACA Code of Ethics to
handle this scenario, and what other sources you might
consult to determine how to guide your conversations.
ACTIVITY 3. 4
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 3. 4
In this video, a young student
tells her counselor she has
been hurting herself. The
counselor reviews the limits of
confidentiality and next steps.
Are there others who need to
be informed in this situation?

-- 117 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	89
Dr. Mary Bartlett
It is no small matter to break confidentiality, so it
is important not to do so without first consulting
another counseling professional regardless of how
long you have been practicing. Two important things
to remember are to avoid practicing in isolation,
especially when working with a client who is having
suicidal thoughts, and to document the conversation
you have with another professional as input received
in consultation about the case. This helps to ensure
you are following best-practice guidelines and have
considered all angles before breaking an important
trust with your client even if ethically obligated to
do so.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.6
Confidentiality and the Suicidal Client
Think about potential breaches of confidentiality. Read
the ACA legal case Alleged Breach of Confidentiality
found at www.hpso.com/risk-education/individuals/
legal-case-study/Alleged-Breach-of- Confidentiality.
After reviewing this case, discuss the following
questions: What would you have done differently?
How would supervision have helped? How would peer
consultation have assisted this counselor? When would
a conversation with an attorney have been appropriate?
THINK ABOUT IT 3.4
Erin Shifflett
When providing counseling services in a disaster mental
health capacity, you may find yourself facing a variety
of ethical challenges. One issue to consider is the fea-
sibility of ensuring confidentiality in potentially chaotic
situations. Bear in mind that many first responders with
whom you will be working may request access to infor-
mation to maintain the welfare of those being helped
collaboratively. Approach these requests from a treat-
ment team perspective to ensure clients feel informed
and empowered at a potentially disempowering and
confusing time in their lives.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.7
Confidentiality During Chaotic Circumstances in the Field
Termination in Crisis Intervention
Because crisis intervention is generally brief and focused on immediate needs, crisis
counselors must use appropriate termination skills with clients. Appropriate termina-
tion should not only bring closure for the crisis counseling relationship but also bolster
the goals and plans laid out in the crisis counseling process. A distinction should be
made between termination and abandonment. Appropriate termination may decrease
the allegations of perceived abandonment by a client.
Termination occurs when a counselor or a client decides to end the counseling
relationship. According to section A.11.c of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), professional
counselors terminate cases when the treatment goals have been reached and the client
no longer needs counseling, when the client is not being helped by further counseling
or might be harmed by further counseling, when the client or someone associated with
the client poses harm to the counselor, or when the client does not pay counseling fees.

-- 118 of 545 --

90 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
In those circumstances where clients need further counseling services after termination,
the counselor provides the client with referral information for other appropriate mental
health providers. Unfortunately, lack of attention to termination documentation can
lead to lawsuits based on abandonment (Corey et al., 2019). A final termination sum-
mary should be added to the client file. Bond and Mitchels (2014) recommend that this
summary include the reason for termination, a summary of progress, the final diagnostic
impression, a follow-up plan, and other pertinent information. Now, complete Think
About It 3.5.
Think about termination documentation. How would
the termination summary for a client in a disaster
response setting differ from the termination sum-
mary for a student graduating from a university? How
would the termination summary for a client in a disaster
response setting differ from the termination note for a
client discharged from a clinical mental health center?
When a client has a suicide crisis and does not return
to the clinical mental health center following hospi-
tal discharge, how would the final client contact be
documented?
THINK ABOUT IT 3.5
When a client is neglected, deserted, or negligently terminated, the counselor has
committed abandonment of the client. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) prohibits abandon-
ment; section A.12 states, “Counselors do not abandon or neglect clients in counseling.
Counselors assist in making appropriate arrangements for the continuation of treatment,
when necessary, during interruptions such as vacations, illness, and following termi-
nation.” Special considerations for termination at university counseling clinics would
include times when a student drops out of school, leaves school for medical purposes, is
placed on academic probation or conduct suspension, or graduates from the institution.
A counselor must think about myriad factors when considering or faced with ter-
minating a therapeutic relationship. Counselors should discuss the process of termina-
tion with the client during the first appointment and have clinical documentation of this
discussion. While a discussion about termination at the outset of the therapeutic relation-
ship does not prevent unforeseen circumstances for termination, it better prepares the
client and goes far in the preservation of the counseling relationship. The following list
highlights a few of the many circumstances that increase a counselor’s risk of malpractice
due to abandonment:
• The counselor is no longer receiving compensation from the client for professional
services.
• The counselor recognizes that a referral might be in order.
• Therapeutic goals are no longer being achieved.
• The counselor is abruptly unavailable.
• The counselor fails to follow up after a client’s hospital discharge.
• The counselor does not respond to a client’s request for crisis treatment.
• The counselor allows managed care to dictate termination.
• The counselor lacks clinical coverage during planned absences (i.e., vacation time).
• Records do not verify outreach efforts to a client who breaks or misses appointments.

-- 119 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	91
• A high-risk client drops out of treatment.
• A client is “fired” or refused treatment.
• A client is not notified in writing that a case is being closed.
• The client’s record indicates a failure to review/consult/refer.
• Another treatment team member or staff member’s notes do not verify that a treat-
ment plan is being followed.
For further information on client abandonment, see ACA (2014), Corey et al. (2019), and
Remley and Herlihy (2020).
Corey et al. (2019) recommend that clients be given written information about the
closure plan, including contact information for other counselors or resources. If a cli-
ent misses appointments and stops coming to counseling, the counselor should send a
follow-up letter expressing interest in the client’s welfare and asking the client to contact
the counselor by a specified date if the client wants to resume counseling. If a termination
letter is to be sent to the home of the client, written consent to send any information to
that address should have been obtained during the informed-consent process. Similarly,
written consent to leave any information on a client’s phone should have been obtained
during intake. The written consent should state the specific address or phone number for
which the client has granted permission. The counselor should document all attempts
to contact a client. Case Study 3.8 focuses on the factors a counselor must take into con-
sideration when terminating a therapeutic relationship.
CASE STUDY 3.8
Termination Considerations
Alex lost a home and two family members in a series of tornadoes that recently swept
across the state. Alex began to experience symptoms of acute trauma and approached
you for care as a disaster relief counselor. You began seeing Alex regularly since arriv-
ing at the disaster site. Alex has engaged well therapeutically and appears to be making
progress. You were notified by the Red Cross that your term of service will be up in a
week and need to terminate with each of your assigned cases at the location. When you
mention discontinuing services, Alex becomes distressed.
Discussion Questions
1. What obligations do you have to Alex?
2. How will you ensure Alex’s continued recovery?
3. To what resources can you refer Alex?
4. Which ACA ethical standard(s) is(are) applicable in this case?
As mentioned previously, termination in a mass crisis or disaster circumstance
should be understood from a special perspective. Formal assessment, admission, and
ongoing counseling normally are not possible under such circumstances. According
to the American Red Cross (2022), ongoing care and provision of counseling services

-- 120 of 545 --

92 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
should be referred to local counseling services, case managers, and area providers
to avoid therapeutic abandonment. An example of how such a conversation would
occur follows:
Counselor: 	I’m glad we had the chance to work together these past few
weeks since your home was destroyed. I understand this has
been a very surreal and overwhelming time for you.
Client: 	I don’t know what I would have done without you.
Counselor: 	Well, actually you did a lot of the work to move forward
under difficult circumstances and have a lot to feel proud of.
You have devised a plan of recovery for yourself, are in the
process of securing more permanent housing, and have been
able to return to work with transportation assistance. All of
this means our work together has reached the right conclusion.
At this time, I’d like to suggest community resources you may
access for longer-term recovery support.
The severity of responses to mass crisis may have long-lasting effects for some.
Psychological distress may remain high long after crisis counseling support services
have been provided to those affected. This begs the question: What ethical responsibility
do counselors have to ensure a healthy transition from crisis counseling to appropriate
community-based treatment services once the additional support has been removed?
There is some uncertainty about this limit of responsibility; therefore, many counseling
training programs include crisis intervention coursework. For those who are already
in practice, it is recommended they seek some training in crisis response counseling to
explore whether they want to work with crisis populations or how they will work with
a person who has survived a mass disaster and is referred to them for support (Norris
& Rosen, 2009).
Spiritual and Multicultural Considerations
To dismiss discussions surrounding a client’s religious or spiritual views related to a
crisis is to devalue the client’s worldview and not treat the entire person. Often, clients
may entertain ideas that tragedy has come about because of God’s wrath or disfavor.
Counselors should be prepared to safely explore these concerns. This requires that coun-
selors examine their own religious or spiritual biases and understand that many survi-
vors have symptoms of secondary trauma of a spiritual nature (Zalaquett et al., 2009).
Disaster workers might hear clients question whether their sin had brought the disaster
upon them. Furthermore, disaster counselors may have to contend with remarks from
volunteers working the crisis who may express such concepts of judgment to clients
(Hard, 2020).
If the disaster occurs in a school system where the common separation of church
and state is stressed, counselors must take that into consideration. Keep in mind that
according to the U.S. Supreme Court, the First Amendment as applied to public schools
was intended for public schools to not sanction or support a specific religion or faith over
others. Counselors must find a balance between honoring the guidelines of the state and
recognizing (and honoring) the needs of clients, regardless of where the tragedy took
place (Remley & Herlihy, 2019).

-- 121 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	93
In the case of a counselor responding to a person’s life crisis, perhaps related to
suicide, an examination of personal religious beliefs is essential to ensure maintaining a
value-neutral assessment. Failure to take a nonjudgmental stance may result in further
risk to the client; by assuming that the client has the same moral or religious beliefs,
counselors may foster shame and anger in the client who then may withhold pertinent
information needed to assess the level of lethality (Granello & Granello, 2007). Even
secular counselors should exercise sufficient latitude to explore these questions with
clients; doing less results in a failure to meet the needs of the client.
Research indicates that marginalized populations may find that predisaster norms
set the tone for the postdisaster reality. Therefore, contrary to popular belief, disaster is
not a social leveler, and underrepresented groups may find that their circumstances have
declined (Hard, 2020). Persons in the sexual, affectional, intersex, and gender-expansive
communities (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning [LGBTQ+]) may become
further marginalized following a disaster. As Hard (2020) observed, while national ser-
vice organizations (e.g., American Red Cross) may have LGBTQ+–affirming policies,
individual volunteers may be from less accepting backgrounds, thus requiring coun-
selors to act as diversity advocates on behalf of LGBTQ+ victims. Therefore, counselors
should be versed in multicultural sensitivity and make efforts to indicate their sensitivity
to multicultural issues.
The counselor’s respect for cultural diversity should not vary according to setting,
whether in a school, private practice, or university setting, which is often a multicultural
microcosm. For example, Asian culture has a focus on time orientation that is either
past or present (e.g., valuing ancestral wisdom and present experience; Hays & Erford,
2023). In contrast, Native American culture tends to be present oriented (i.e., focusing
on the present experience; thinking about the present) when exposed to traumatic cir-
cumstances. These cultural variances require that counselors be aware of how time ori-
entation and similar factors influence the crisis response of clients in order to accurately
assess current mental status and needs (Remley & Herlihy, 2020). At the same time, it is
important to note that the above observations are trends that do not necessarily apply
to all persons within these cultures. Therefore, we should not place all persons from a
perceived culture into the same template but assess individuals in accordance with their
unique cultural perception. Understanding differences is important but making deci-
sions based on assumptions may not be helpful.
In addition, some cultures are more socially focused rather than individually
focused. Responses from people of these cultures will be directed toward what is most
beneficial to the community’s best interest. People from different cultures will vary in
terms of eye contact, body language, affect, willingness to discuss personal matters, and
in their response to authority figures. Ethical practice requires the development of mul-
ticultural competence among counselors; therefore, counselors are responsible for being
well versed in multicultural competencies when serving others (ACA, 2014; Remley &
Herlihy, 2020).
Crisis Intervention in a Technological World
Technology influences crisis intervention. In an age where many adolescents and adults
seem always to have smartphones in hand, crises are reported immediately to authorities
and help is often obtained quickly and in some instances in real time (e.g., via Skype or
Zoom). Crisis intervention information and resources can be accessed quickly on one’s

-- 122 of 545 --

94 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
smartphone. Social media such as Facebook and Twitter provide opportunities to share
experiences of a crisis in real time. It is also obvious that social media holds the possi-
bility for quickly spreading misinformation. So, counselors must be aware of accurate
information in real time to help clients navigate anxieties caused by false information.
Additionally, a client in crisis can have easier access to a counselor or other mental health
providers via text messages, e-mail, and other modes of electronic messaging. Impor-
tantly, evidence supports the effectiveness of tele-mental health for addressing depres-
sion, anxiety (Rees & Maclaine, 2015), and posttraumatic stress disorder (Turgoose et
al., 2018). Videoconferencing, online forums (Kaur et al., 2016), smartphone applications
(Kerst et al., 2020), text messages, and e-mails (Torniainen-Holm et al., 2016) are useful
communication methods for mental health services.
Furber et al. (2014) found that both text messaging and phone-based psychotherapy
were beneficial resources for clients in crisis. According to Almond and Budden (2012),
text messaging is seen as a positive tool during hostage negotiation, suicide prevention,
and general crisis intervention. Sude (2013) found that text messaging used in mental
health practice increases the responsiveness of counselors to clients, allows clients to be
more candid in their communication, is helpful to clients who prefer this method of com-
munication, and may create a more connected feeling between client and counselor. The
limitations of texting in practice include ethical concerns such as boundary issues, main-
taining confidentiality, and potential for a diminished therapeutic relationship because
the client and counselor are not face to face.
Technology also has influenced online crisis counseling services. Gary (2010)
reported that online crisis counseling services are a valuable resource for clients in crisis
who are geographically isolated, self-sequestered, or have limited access to face-to-face
counseling (e.g., transportation problems, work release time). In a meta-analysis of the
literature regarding online counseling, Richards and Vigano (2013) found positive client
perceptions of online counseling with benefits in the areas of client anonymity, conve-
nience, and client disinhibition. Conversely, although the digital domain may enhance
speed and access to services, danger of the swift spread of disaster-related rumors and
disinformation and exposure to those who prey on the vulnerable remain problematic.
Counselors must stay attentive to new technological tools that can help them support
clients in times of crisis and promote counselor and client safety.
Miller (2020) expands on the caveats of digital consultations versus face-to-face ses-
sions. The virtual sessions may be more beneficial in certain circumstances when there
is a danger that those who already have reduced access to health care (e.g., materially
disadvantaged, less able to navigate the changes to health care delivery, and less digitally
fluent). However, the digital divide also may increase polarization in mental health care.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, tele-mental health services were practical, time-
and cost-effective, and appropriate for the support of clients, family members, and
counselors (Smith et al., 2020), when increased mental health symptoms were observed
among diverse populations. In particular, tele-mental health allowed isolated and remote
clients access to services that were otherwise unavailable (Xiaoyun & Fenglan, 2020).
Furthermore, expanding telehealth to include mental health reduced interpersonal con-
tact and the spread of COVID-19 by reducing risk exposure of noninfected individuals
in waiting room areas.

-- 123 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	95
However, the use of technology during the pandemic was not all positive. Pro-
viders assumed that clients had Internet and computer access, could relate to the new
method of care delivery given the technology-mediated relationship, and that the con-
venience and cost-effectiveness of providers working remotely would be beneficial,
without determining the holistic cost to the patient. While the social isolation brought
on by the pandemic may have reduced the viral spread, it also led to reduced access
to family, friends, and other support systems and created feelings of loneliness, anxi-
ety, and depression. Unmanaged mental health symptoms may have lengthened the
health effects on patients, adding to the potential cost burden of managing the disease.
Therefore, protocols for those with COVID-19 should address both the physiological and
mental health needs of clients.
Now read Voices from the Field 3.8 for further insights into the use of telehealth
counseling during the pandemic. Finally, Table 3.1 provides additional resources for
further study and training.
Emily Tucker, LPC, NCC
How did the pandemic change the way you prac-
tice and what were your initial concerns? Initially
the greatest concern was how to navigate scheduled
appointments while also honoring the safety con-
cerns and mandated business closures. Fortunately,
our administrative staff was responsive and assisted
in communicating ongoing changes to clients and to
each therapist. During the first month or two of the
pandemic, appointments were handled over tele-
phone or telehealth platforms such as HIPPA video,
TheraPlatform, Zoom, or SimplePractice. These are just
a few examples of the hundreds of telehealth platforms
available today.
What was the most challenging administra-
tive issue you encountered when moving from
face-to-face versus telehealth? Initially, finding
and evaluating telehealth platforms quickly while also
coordinating schedule changes, new client intake, doc-
umentation, and other daily responsibilities felt over-
whelming. The complete shutdown occurred within a
few days, so there was a very limited time frame in
which these important decisions had to happen. My
counseling practice had to adapt and had to do so prac-
tically overnight. Peer resources, networking groups,
and national and state agencies provided some clarity
and guidance regarding these changes and the neces-
sary order of importance. Personal health and safety
from possible exposure to a novel virus was paramount,
followed by maintaining continuity of care and con-
nection with clients as a nearly equal second. This pri-
oritization allowed some grace and time for providers
to explore and transition to the best telehealth plat-
form or method of providing telehealth services. Some
providers, due to necessity in the client population or
due to service type (e.g., working with children and
families or those in crisis), were able to maintain an in-
person practice with very specific prevention protocols
in place. As time progressed, guidance increased for
those meeting in person. Consent forms for in-person
COVID-19 risk waivers were provided as well as similar
informed consent documents for telehealth. In sum-
mary, action came first with a priority on continuity of
care and maintaining client contact followed by various
options to notate, document, and address liabilities and
concerns of clients’ insurance companies and providers.
What are the greatest liabilities and ethical
concerns you faced when crisis counseling? That is
an in-depth question because as a former crisis phone
counselor I feel there are many layers to this answer.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 3.8
Telehealth Counseling and the COVID-19 Pandemic
(continued)

-- 124 of 545 --

96 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
In that setting (i.e., crisis telephone hotline) I focused
on responding to clients in crisis where they were in
that moment. Connecting, communicating support,
reflecting, exploring, and assessing for suicidal ide-
ation were critical. This included discussing how and
when the caller intended to act. This suicide assessment
process required a delicate balance of gentle directive
questions, reflective listening, and unconditional posi-
tive regard. Ideally, this balance honored the feelings
of the client while helping me internally navigate my
own reactions and fears for an actively suicidal client.
Concerns for liability were coupled with our roles
as listener and holder of a safe place for the client to
process their thoughts and feelings. This discussion
typically included complicated and often polarizing
feelings related to an inner experience of despair,
helplessness, and isolation coupled with an urgency for
relief from the intense emotional pain they are experi-
encing. As the listener and support person for someone
in this much pain, a therapist or call center volunteer
must maintain some inner sense of calm, curiosity, and
connection with the client. Thus, self-care and self-
awareness are critical to best serve our clients.
Liabilities also include documentation of location
(including address), confirmation of privacy of the cli-
ent, and review of consent and exceptions to confi-
dentiality. As therapists providing telehealth services,
we are required to first clarify to our clients’ reasons
we as counselors would have to break confidential-
ity while also seeking to navigate creating a sense of
trust and safety. Building rapport with each client is
essential. This is no different from face-to-face settings.
The additional piece when working with someone via
a telehealth platform is that we must confirm the
location, address, and contact information of our cli-
ent at the onset of every contact in case information
is disclosed that requires immediate intervention (i.e.,
an actively suicidal client discloses immediate intent,
means available, and intention to harm self or others
during a call). Without ascertaining the address and
location as well as an emergency contact, we are far
less able to ensure an outcome that protects the client
and honors the therapist’s ethical and legal obligations.
Essentially, it is difficult to send help to someone when
we do not have their location.
Additional concerns surrounding liability included
clients traveling or returning home, especially at the
onset of the pandemic. In early 2020, each state
required a licensure process unique to that state. A
few states had mutually reciprocal agreements so that
counselors could practice in either state, but this was
not the case in my home state. Fortunately, the emer-
gency guidelines put in place at the federal level and
in many (but not all) states were generous about relax-
ing interstate practices and distance-counseling restric-
tions. Organizations like Person Centered Tech and IFS
Telehealth Collective helped organize the overwhelming
amount of legal, administrative, and ethics data as a
resource for therapists struggling to continue serving
their out-of-state clients while also complying with all
laws and ethical considerations. All in all, the transition
to telehealth had moments of discomfort and anxiety, as
well as opportunities to develop and grow as a therapist
and a human being. I have embraced the transition to
telehealth and am grateful for this opportunity to con-
tinue connecting throughout a very challenging time.

-- 125 of 545 --

Chapter 3 • Ethical and Legal Considerations in Crisis Counseling 	97
SUMMARY
Legal and ethical matters can be confounding for
counselors in the best of circumstances. In times
of crisis, it is even more imperative that coun-
selors be well acquainted with legal and ethical
obligations. Crisis counselors may often find
their normal coping mechanisms overwhelmed
during disaster or crisis interventions. When the
counselor’s normal coping is impaired, lapses in
professional judgment may occur. The preven-
tion of ethical and legal entanglements is far
preferable to remediation of problems following
a lapse in behavior or judgment. This chapter
discusses preventive considerations for crisis
counselors, including wellness recommenda-
tions, continuing education, supervision and
peer consultation, and ethical decision-making
models.
HIPAA was enacted to address many per-
ceived failings in the management of information
in the health care industry. FERPA was enacted
to address concerns about privacy violations and
the inclusion of immaterial comments and per-
sonal opinions in student educational records.
HIPAA and FERPA have not only added layers
of protection to client records but also increased
the complexity of counselor responsibility in
protecting both the client’s and their own inter-
ests. HIPAA and FERPA have provisions for
crisis situations, but confidentiality is still cen-
tral to ethical practice, even during times of cri-
sis. Crisis counselors must be familiar with the
particulars of HIPAA and FERPA, including
when they apply and overlap, as well as other
legal requirements in their state. Furthermore,
TABLE 3.1 Resources for Additional Study and Training
American Counseling Association (ACA): The ACA offers written and interactive resources
through their website. ACA’s Knowledge Center: Mental Health Resources: Trauma and Disas-
ter webpage (https://www.counseling.org/knowledge-center/mental-health-resources/trauma-
disaster) provides links to a variety of disaster mental health and trauma resources. The ACA Store
(https://imis.counseling.org/store) also provides resources. A single chapter may be downloaded
from the Stebnicki text and studied for continuing education credit, and the text by Webber and
Mascari is also available here and is a valuable resource:
• Stebnicki, M. A. (2021). Counseling practice during phases of a pandemic virus. American
Counseling Association.
• Webber, J. M., & Mascari, J. B. (2018). Disaster mental health counseling: A guide to preparing
and responding (4th ed.). American Counseling Association.
American Red Cross: The American Red Cross offers disaster mental health training and certi-
fication for mental health professionals as well as graduate students who wish to be called for
service in disaster and crisis circumstances.
• American Red Cross. (2017). Disaster health and mental health volunteers. https://www
.redcross.org/volunteer/volunteer-opportunities/disaster-health-mental-health-volunteer.html
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA): SAMHSA offers
online training modules in disaster and crisis counseling through their Distance Technical Assis-
tance Center (DTAC).
• SAMHSA. (2020). Online DTAC training courses. https://www.samhsa.gov/dtac/
education-training

-- 126 of 545 --

98 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
counselors should consult an attorney to remain
current on the legal and standard of care aspects
in crises.
Other areas of ethical and legal concern for
counselors include the duty to warn, duty to pro-
tect, negligence, and malpractice. The 1976 case
of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California
is the impetus behind many duty to warn laws.
This chapter discusses the impact of this case
on crisis counseling, when such duty may exist,
and its implications. A breach of duty owed to
another is considered negligence; negligence that
occurs in a professional setting is malpractice.
In the often-chaotic circumstances of crisis and
disaster counseling, counselors should avoid
these pitfalls.
The matters of documentation, informed
consent, confidentiality, referral, and termina-
tion may be considered commonplace in nor-
mal, more structured practice settings. However,
counselors must attend to such matters of ethi-
cal concern or legality whether the counselor is
working one-on-one with a client in a suicide
crisis or intervening with clients in a large-scale
disaster.
Counselors must examine their own reli-
gious or spiritual biases and understand that
often survivors may show symptoms of second-
ary trauma of a spiritual nature. They should
also be aware that marginalized populations
may find that predisaster norms set the tone for
postdisaster reality and that their circumstances
have declined following a disaster.
Despite the many potential pitfalls of social
media, technology has had an influence on cri-
sis intervention including almost instant access
to interpersonal and professional support. Tele-
mental health has been beneficial to those in
remote locations by providing access to services
they may not have otherwise been able to obtain.
This access has been particularly noted during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Planning, prepared-
ness, and a commitment to legal and ethical
practices in all situations will ensure that coun-
selors maintain standards of care, whatever the
situation.

-- 127 of 545 --

99
PREVIEW
This chapter provides an overview of the fundamental skills for effective crisis
intervention work. The skills discussed here focus on Ivey et al.’s (2022) microskills
hierarchy. At the heart of this hierarchy is the basic listening sequence, an interrelated
set of skills that not only foster the development of rapport with clients but also aid in
the identification of interventions to help achieve a successful resolution to the client’s
crisis state. Examples of the skills in use as well as practice exercises to foster individual
skill development are provided.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
4.1 Apply essential crisis intervention microskills.
4.2 Identify basic attending skills including eye contact, body position, vocal tone,
and use of silence.
4.3 Identify the basic listening sequence including asking open and closed questions
and reflecting skills.
4.4 Describe basic deescalation skills to help clients regulate emotions.
ESSENTIAL CRISIS INTERVENTION MICROSKILLS
Learning Objective 4.1 Apply essential crisis intervention microskills.
A reasonable question at this point is, “What is the difference between basic counseling
skills and crisis counseling skills?” Simply put, the difference is less about what the
counselor does or the techniques and strategies employed and more about contextual
application, or where and in what situation skills are applied. The essential foundational
skills necessary for effective crisis intervention work are indeed the basic tools on
4 	Essential Crisis Intervention Skills
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry*
C H A P T E R
* Special thanks to Joseph “Chip” Cooper for his outstanding contributions to the first two editions of this
chapter.

-- 128 of 545 --

100 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
which the success of interventions may depend, whether the counselor is doing crisis
or traditional counseling. It is important to stress that these skills will help create the
counselor–client relational conditions necessary for positive change (i.e., therapeutic
alliance). The skills covered in this chapter are basic counseling skills applied to crisis
situations, and these basic skills form the foundation for the use of more advanced
counseling skills. For example, just as is the case in traditional counseling, when
working with clients in crisis, it is essential to listen, be empathic, and respond skillfully.
Counselors also must make sure the information received from the client is accurate to
create an appropriate treatment plan or referral for the client.
That said, a primary difference in crisis and traditional counseling is that crisis
counseling is time-limited or at least limited to the time required to stabilize the
crisis situation. That may take a single session required to hospitalize an actively
suicidal client or several brief sessions in the field when helping someone cope with the
ramifications of a natural disaster. Thus, crisis counseling tends to be more directive than
traditional counseling (depending on the theoretical approach used) and can involve
information giving, probing questions, and even direct or indirect confrontations.
Finally, the focus is on the immediate issue that is causing the instability for the client
so the counselor must differentiate immediate issues (risk) that are the priority from
longer-term issues that may be documented for postcrisis therapy.
These basic skills provide the client with alliance-building constructs such
as empathic understanding, genuineness, and acceptance and greatly facilitate the
development of a safe therapeutic environment. These basic skills also aid in establishing
rapport and developing an effective therapeutic alliance with the client. Rapport can
be understood as a harmonious or empathetic relationship. In crisis intervention work,
the development of rapport starts with the initial contact and continues throughout
the process. The crisis counselor’s primary concern should be fostering this rapport to
develop a cohesive and supportive relationship with the client. How crisis counselors
conduct themselves is crucial, as this may be the client’s first encounter with a counselor
and this interaction may either encourage or discourage the client from seeking
counseling in the future or from following up when a proposed crisis plan is developed.
The crisis counselor’s ability to gain a client’s trust is paramount in a crisis intervention
since the counselor must ask the client sensitive questions to gather information for
referrals or crisis planning.
As noted earlier, the skills covered in this chapter focus on Ivey et al.’s (2022)
microskills hierarchy—a set of verbal and behavioral responses that facilitate the process
of counseling and alliance formation, regardless of the crisis counselor’s theoretical
orientation. For some, this chapter may be a review of the basic skills taught in a skills
course, while for others it may be the first consideration of these skills. Either way, it is
always important to continuously be aware of and apply effective skills, since doing so
is the hallmark of effective crisis counseling.
Ivey et al. (2022) present these skills as a hierarchy that is organized in a systematic
framework. At the bottom of the hierarchy are the basic attending skills, such as patterns
of eye contact, body position, vocal tone, and silence. A bit farther up the skills hierarchy
is the basic listening sequence, which includes asking open and closed questions, using
reflecting skills, and summarizing. In this chapter, each of these basic skills is reviewed,
along with practical examples of the skills in use.

-- 129 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	101
ATTENDING SKILLS
Learning Objective 4.2 Identify basic attending skills including eye contact, body
position, vocal tone, and use of silence.
Good communication involves more than just verbal content; crisis counselors
communicate with more than just words. Most meaningful communication takes place
nonverbally. The next time you engage someone in conversation, take a moment to
pay attention to all the nonverbal cues your partner is giving you. What does the facial
expression say to you? What is conveyed by the eyes? Does your partner have a closed
or open body stance? Although important in social relationships, these attending skills
are even more important in the counseling relationship. Bedi (2006) surveyed clients
who received counseling and asked them to identify the specific counselor behaviors
that most helped to form a working alliance. Following validation and education,
clients ranked nonverbal gestures, presentation, and body language as the next most
important alliance-building factors. These nonverbal attending behaviors communicate
a counselor’s interest, warmth, and understanding to the client; they include eye contact,
body position, tone of voice (vocal tone), and silence.
Eye Contact
Maintaining good eye contact is how a crisis counselor conveys interest, confidence,
and involvement in the client’s story (Egan & Reese, 2019). Through eye contact,
clients know a counselor is focusing on them and fully committed to the helping
process. Moreover, for those clients who have difficulty with closeness, making eye
contact can be an important vehicle of change. However, good eye contact is not the
same as staring your client down. There should be natural breaks in eye contact; eye
contact should be more of an ebb and flow as you collect your thoughts and listen to
the client’s story.
In addition, it is essential to be sensitive to differences in how eye contact is
traditionally expressed across cultures. For example, whereas direct eye contact is usually
interpreted as a sign of interest in the White culture, some Asian and Native American
groups believe direct eye contact is a sign of disrespect (Hays & Erford, 2023). Some
Black clients may maintain greater eye contact when talking and less eye contact when
listening, and many Black men will not look directly into the eyes of an authority figure
because in the Black cultural context avoiding eye contact shows respect for authority
figures (e.g., parents, teachers, older people).
For clients who are overly fragile or under much stress and pressure, direct eye
contact may increase their level of anxiety. For example, imagine counseling a client in
crisis, a 20-year-old college student who states she was sexually assaulted last night. As
she tells you what happened, you notice she stares down at the floor and often avoids
your eye contact. Should you confront her on her lack of eye contact and ask her to look
at you directly when she speaks? Of course not. Her lack of eye contact is probably due
to her feelings of shame and anxiety and is serving an emotion-regulation function.
In a crisis, especially if a client is feeling overwhelmed or ashamed or is experiencing
paranoia, be aware that a client who avoids your eyes is probably doing so as a protective
mechanism. This reaction is normal in a crisis.

-- 130 of 545 --

102 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
So how do you determine how much eye contact to maintain with a client?
Unfortunately, no universal rule or criterion exists for what is considered either
appropriate or inappropriate eye contact. As already noted, eye contact varies among
cultures and is influenced by the intensity of emotions involved in the crisis situation.
A good guideline to follow is to maintain a moderate amount of eye contact while
monitoring your client’s level of comfort and to adjust your eye contact accordingly
(Young, 2017). Also, it is helpful for you to become aware of your own attending
behavior so you can understand how this behavior may affect the counseling
relationship. Professional counselors must be particularly aware of their use of eye
contact during crisis counseling sessions. It is important to use eye contact and other
nonverbal attending behaviors to reduce anxiety and deescalate anger and agitation.
Complete Activities 4.1 and 4.2 to gain a deeper understanding of your own attending
behaviors.
Form pairs. One person takes the role of listener, while
the other takes the role of speaker and is to talk about
anything of interest for about 5 minutes. During this
time, the listener should maintain eye contact with
the speaker as would occur normally in everyday con-
versation. After 5 minutes, each pair should process
the experience. What feedback does the speaker have
regarding the listener’s level of eye contact? Was it
too much? Darting? Too little? Empathic? What was
most comfortable? Based on the feedback, do the
exercise again, but this time have the listener try to
incorporate some of the feedback received about level
of eye contact. Process the activity again, and then
switch roles.
ACTIVITY 4.1
Body Position
As with eye contact, your body position should convey to the client your interest and
involvement. Face the client and adopt an open, relaxed, and attentive body posture, as
this will assist in putting your client at ease. Counselors should not cross arms and legs
and should not sit behind a desk or other barrier. In addition, Egan and Reese (2019) rec-
ommend that the counselor lean slightly toward the client, as this communicates that the
counselor is listening to the client and interested in what the client has to say. Slouching
in a chair or leaning away from the client may be perceived by the client as lack of interest
or boredom.
The physical distance between counselor and client should also be taken into
consideration; getting too close can be overwhelming and uncomfortable, whereas
being too distant can make the counselor appear aloof and may be awkward for the
client. Although in Western cultures the average physical distance for conversation
is typically 2 to 4 feet, this comfort zone will vary from client to client (Young,
2017). When in doubt, you could let the client arrange the chairs at a distance that
feels comfortable. However, keep in mind that this option is not always desirable.
For example, in a crisis setting, you may be faced with a client who is paranoid or
experiencing homicidal or suicidal ideation. Would you want to be within hitting
or kicking distance of this client? Also, it would not be a good idea to have this
client sitting between you and the door. Use your best judgment. By considering
body position, you can create a safe environment for both you and your client. Your
safety should always be a priority. You should never do anything that makes you

-- 131 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	103
Vocal Tone
Have you ever had an experience when you are engaged in conversation with some-
one and find yourself becoming increasingly anxious and tense, regardless of the
topic? The next time this happens, pay attention to your partner’s tone of voice,
for you may be unconsciously responding to the emotional tone conveyed in your
partner’s voice. Emotions are frequently conveyed via tone of voice. The pitch,
pacing, and volume can all influence how a client responds emotionally to a crisis
counselor.
There is much to be said for a calm and soothing voice in times of distress, espe-
cially when the client is in a crisis. Do not underestimate the power of this attribute; your
control and calmness may be among the greatest benefits to your client in crisis. Your
voice can do much to help create a soothing and emotion-regulating atmosphere for the
client. Learn to use your voice as a therapeutic tool. For example, if your client is overly
agitated, it is often helpful to speak more slowly and in a soothing tone, as this will help
your client to slow things down and begin to focus.
Also be aware of your own internal process and how your tone of voice is conveying
your own emotional state when working with a client in crisis. It is not uncommon for
your own rate of speech to increase when you hear something that causes you to feel
anxious, such as a client who discloses homicidal ideation to you. If your client is agitated
and using pressured speech and your speech also begins to race, your rate of speech
could exacerbate your client’s state.
To convey a sense of empathic understanding, it can be helpful to emphasize
specific words used by your client. This technique of giving increased vocal emphasis to
certain words or short phrases is called verbal underlining (Ivey et al., 2022). For example,
consider the difference between “You were very hurt by your husband’s actions” and
“You were very hurt by your husband’s actions.” In the latter comment, the counselor
places the emphasis on the word very to help reflect the intensity of the client’s experience.
Again, modulate your voice tone to comfort clients and deescalate the anxiety, anger,
or agitation clients in crisis might feel. Now complete Activity 4.3, which considers the
vocal subtleties in the spoken word.
This activity will help you become aware of how your
clients might perceive your overall pattern of nonverbal
communication. Begin by forming pairs. One person
will be the communicator and will face the other
person, who will serve as the mirror. For the next
5 minutes, the communicator can talk about anything
and, throughout this time, the mirror is to nonverbally
mirror each gesture, facial expression, eye contact, and
movement of the communicator. It is important that
the mirror not attempt to interpret the message that
is being sent by the communicator but just to mirror
the perceived nonverbal communication. At the end
of 5 minutes, each pair should process the experience.
What was it like to see your nonverbal communication
mirrored back to you? Did you learn anything about
how you come across to others? Is there anything you
would want to change or do more of? Switch roles and
process the activity again.
ACTIVITY 4.2
feel uncomfortable or jeopardizes your physical safety. Use your body posture and
physical space to comfort clients and deescalate the anxiety, anger, or agitation a client
in crisis might feel.

-- 132 of 545 --

104 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Silence
Beginning crisis counselors often have difficulty using silence with clients. They want
to keep talking to fill in any lapses or void in the session, usually to mollify their own
anxiety and discomfort with a client in crisis. Or worse, counselors will engage in a
monologue or resort to lecturing or teaching the client. However, constantly interven-
ing or throwing a barrage of questions at a client in crisis can feel overwhelming and
intrusive to a client who is already feeling overwhelmed. Clients in crisis need space to
think, sort out their thoughts, and process what is happening. The counselor needs that
time as well. This point cannot be overemphasized: Silence is important for both clients
and professional counselors. It is essential for crisis counselors to develop comfort with
silent pauses.
Many beginning counselors are afraid to use silence because they believe silence
conveys their incompetence as a counselor. However, the opposite is true. Silence, if used
appropriately and at the right time, can convey acceptance and empathic understanding.
In essence, the message of silence is “I am here for you if you need me, yet I respect
your need to take your time with this.” Review Case Study 4.1, which looks at the use
of silence in a crisis interview.
In small groups, assign one person to be the speaker.
Instruct the speaker to talk in a normal tone of voice
for a few minutes about anything of interest. Have the
other group members close their eyes as they listen to
the speaker, paying close attention to the tone of voice,
pacing, volume, and so on. After 2 or 3 minutes, stop
and have the listeners give feedback on the speaker’s
voice. What was their reaction to the tone, volume,
accent, rate of speech, and other characteristics? After
this processing, repeat the activity, but this time have
the speaker make changes in voice tone, volume, or
pacing to deliberately create different reactions. How
did the listeners respond to the changes in vocal
qualities? What were the listeners’ emotional responses
to the various vocal qualities? Finally, have the listeners
imagine themselves as a client in crisis. What types of
vocal qualities would they prefer to hear?
ACTIVITY 4.3
CASE STUDY 4.1
Using Silence in Counseling
The following exchange between Aden and the counselor illustrates how important
silence can be in a crisis. Aden is an adult who presented to counseling with severe
symptoms of depression, suicidal ideation, and an attempted suicide yesterday with an
overdose of sleeping pills.
Aden: 	I just want to die. All of the emotional pain, sadness, and
humiliation. I just had another miscarriage, my third one,
and I’m almost certain I’ll never have children. (Pauses for
15 seconds to think) On top of that, my partner is growing more
distant too, and I worry they might leave me for someone to
have a family with.

-- 133 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	105
Egan and Reese (2019) developed a conceptual framework for active nonverbal
listening using the acronym SOLER, which helps counselors remember key nonverbal
techniques that convey that they are physically and psychologically present with clients:
SOLER
S: → 	Squarely face the client. Sitting facing the client gives the impres-
sion of attentiveness and engagement.
O: → Adopt an open posture. An open posture can show that you are
available to listen, whereas crossed hands or legs can convey
unavailability. Appropriate posture includes sitting with your
hands either by your side or resting on your lap if you are writing.
L: → 	Lean (slightly) toward your client to convey your interest in
and engagement with them.
E: → 	Make eye contact. Maintain appropriate and culturally sensitive
eye contact to convey your interest and engagement.
R: → Stay relaxed. Try to be relaxed and natural with your client. This
helps put them at ease. Fidgeting or maintaining a rigid stance
can convey the impression you are not comfortable with your
client.
Counselor: 	So, you’re also feeling worried about how this is going to impact
your marriage and whether your partner will want to be with you.
Aden: 	(Silence for 30 seconds as she looks down and to the right) Yes, but
I realize that if my partner truly cared for me, they would not
leave. I think maybe they’re just as hurt and in as much pain
as I am. It’s my own insecurities, really. (Pauses for 15 more
seconds) And if my partner did want to leave, then maybe
they’re not the right person for me to be with. Maybe I deserve
better than that.
Counselor: 	(Silence for 20 seconds as the counselor gathers her thoughts) So,
a couple of things are at work here. First, your partner’s
behavior could represent grieving, and your insecurities may
have distorted how you’ve been making sense of that grieving
behavior. And second, you realize that what’s important for
you is to be with someone who truly and genuinely cares for
you and is committed to the marriage.
Discussion Questions
1. How effective was the counselor’s use of silence?
2. What alternative responses may have also been helpful?
3. Put yourself in the position of the client. What would you have been thinking to
yourself during the periods of silence?
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.1
In this SAMHSA training seg-
ment, crisis workers knock on the
door of a couple who have been
impacted by a natural disaster.
The role play shows essential
attending skills such as rapport
building and empathy to create a
trusting relationship. What SOLER
techniques and attending skills
were used to create this trust?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jRPkSFhzM2U
Watch from 02:47 to 05:59

-- 134 of 545 --

106 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
SOLER techniques help convey a counselor’s genuineness and respect toward the client
and put the client at ease. When applying SOLER, reflect on the extent to which your
posture communicates availability and openness to your client, and adjust accordingly.
Observe yourself on video during counseling role plays. Remember to relax!
THE BASIC LISTENING SEQUENCE
Learning Objective 4.3 Identify the basic listening sequence including asking open
and closed questions and reflecting skills.
The basic listening sequence represents a set of interrelated skills used to achieve three
overarching goals: (1) to obtain an overall summary and understanding of the client’s
presenting issue; (2) to identify the key facts of the client’s situation; and (3) to identify
the core emotions and feelings the client is experiencing (Ivey et al., 2022). In short, these
skills allow you to understand the structure of your client’s story. Using these skills, you
will not only convey empathy, respect, warmth, and congruence to your client but also
lay the foundation for your understanding of the client’s issues and the development of
subsequent interventions to help achieve a successful resolution to a crisis state.
The basic listening sequence involves the ability to ask open and closed questions
as well as the reflecting skills—paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, and summarizing. An
explanation and overview of these skills, examples of each skill in use, and some brief
exercises to help you practice these basic listening skills follow. But first, read Voices
from the Field 4.1.
Joseph “Chip” Cooper
Crisis intervention requires us to be both reflective
and active in our interventions, and it is important to
know when to use each. Here is an example of the
need to be active: I once had a client in crisis who set
her shirt on fire while sitting in the waiting room as
I was getting her file and preparing for the session.
This was not a time to reflect and listen! We put out
the fire; made sure she was not injured; and then
actively assessed suicidal/homicidal intent and safety
issues and developed a plan of action, which called
for her to be hospitalized. I had to take an active and
directive role in ensuring her safety. Crisis counseling
often requires us to be quick on our feet, explore
alternatives, and actively assist our clients in dealing
with their problems.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 4.1
Reflective and Active Interventions
Asking Open and Closed Questions
Questioning is a primary skill that allows crisis counselors to gather important and
specific information about clients. Questions allow counselors to make an accurate
assessment of their clients’ issues and to guide and focus clients so they can make the
most effective use of the counseling session. However, the use of questioning can be a
double-edged sword. Used inappropriately, questioning can impede communication
and block client disclosure. Drilling clients with questions can give too much control to
the crisis counselor. Moreover, bombarding clients with questions could confuse and
frustrate them as well as increase their level of anxiety.
Crisis counselors do not want counseling sessions to sound like an interrogation,
although many of the initial intake questions are used to gather information and are

-- 135 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	107
therefore necessary in crisis intervention. Counselors must be careful to appropriately
pace the questions to guard against increasing clients’ stress levels. Thus, crisis counselors
need to be aware of how to use questions appropriately and pay close attention to the
types of questions used to gather information. The two types of questions, open and
closed questions, are examined next.
OPEN QUESTIONS 	Open questions usually elicit fuller and more meaningful responses
by encouraging the client to talk at greater length. Open questions typically begin with
what, how, could, would, or why and are useful to help begin an interview, elaborate the
client’s story, and bring out specific details (Ivey et al., 2022). With open questions,
the client can choose the content and direction of the session and take more control. The
following guidelines illustrate the use of open questions for crisis workers:
1. To begin the interview: “What would you like to talk about today?” “How can I be
of help to you today?” “Tell me why you’ve come in today.”
2. To elicit details: “Give me an example.” “What do you mean by ‘just give up’?”
“What do you usually do when you’re feeling down?”
3. To enrich and deepen: “Tell me more.” “What were your feelings when that
happened?” “What else is important for me to know?” “In what ways does that help?”
4. Focus on plans: “What are some things you can do to stay safe?” “Who are some
people you can call when you feel this way again?” “How will you make that happen?”
Finally, be careful when using why questions and “leading” questions. Questions
that begin with why often cause the client to intellectualize and can lead to a discussion
of reasons. In addition, why questions can cause the client to become defensive, feel
criticized, or feel “put on the spot.” When this happens, it is not uncommon for the client
to become more guarded and to shut down.
For example, think back to a time when you were younger and your parents asked
the question, “Why did you do that?” How did you feel and what was your reaction?
Take a moment to consider the following: “Why do you hate yourself?” versus “You say
you hate yourself. Help me understand that.” Which of these approaches would you
prefer your counselor to use?
In addition to making clients become more defensive, why questions can also lead
clients to feel more hopeless and despondent, as in this example:
Counselor: 	Why do you continue to go back to a man who abuses you?
Client: 	I know, I know. It sounds pathetic.
Counselor: 	What draws you back to your partner? (An alternative open question)
Another roadblock to the use of effective questions involves leading questions.
Leading questions often contain a hidden agenda because the answer or expectation
is already imbedded within the question. Although well intentioned, these types of
questions place too much power in the hands of the crisis counselor and tend to push
the client in a preconceived direction. Here are a couple of examples of leading questions:
“You did not really want to kill yourself, did you?” or “Don’t you think you will feel
better if you stop drinking?” Guard against the use of these types of questions. Crisis
counselors want to hear a client’s story as the client understands and experiences it. Open
questions allow the counselor the opportunity to achieve this end without imposing
values and expectations on the client. Next, complete Think About It 4.1.

-- 136 of 545 --

108 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Think about your questioning skills. How can you use
open and closed questions effectively in your work
with clients during and outside of a crisis? Self-monitor
conversations with friends, colleagues, students, and
clients. What types of questioning techniques do you
use, and in what proportion? How can you improve?
THINK ABOUT IT 4.1
CLOSED QUESTIONS 	Closed questions can be used when crisis counselors need to
obtain very specific, concrete information and get all the facts straight. Such questions
typically either elicit a yes/no response or provide specific factual information, such as
the number of drinks a client consumes in a week or the age at which the client began
experiencing symptoms. In contrast to longer-term counseling, where information is
gathered more slowly and the treatment plan develops over many weeks, crisis
counseling often requires quick and focused responses. Thus, closed questions are very
useful and in fact necessary in crisis counseling because the counselor must gather
specific information to aid in the prompt assessment of the problem and development
of a plan of action (James & Gilliland, 2017). Here are some examples of closed questions:
“Are you thinking of killing yourself?”
“When did these symptoms begin?”
“Do you have a family member or friend to call on when you are feeling over-
whelmed?”
“How old were you when this traumatic event occurred?”
As seen in the above examples, closed questions are good for obtaining the necessary
details to aid in assessment and intervention when a client is in crisis. It is not unusual
for crisis sessions to integrate many closed questions for gathering pertinent information
related to the crisis. It is important to obtain the details needed for an assessment before
pursuing more open-ended answers since a counselor is never sure how much time one
will have with a client. At the same time, crisis counselors should still guard against the
overuse of closed questions, which can cause clients to shut down and simply wait for
the next question to answer.
Many agencies require the completion of a crisis intake form that includes questions
that a client is required to answer. One way to approach such questions and concurrently
get more information from the client on the presenting issue(s) is to use a question-tree
format. This format ensures that a crisis counselor asks the (surface) questions required
for the crisis intake as well as follow-up questions that may provide insight into the
client’s issue that would contribute to a more effective crisis plan. Using this format,
the counselor asks the client a required closed question first, then proceeds with specific
follow-up questions that are dependent on the unique situation of the client and allow
for more detail. For example:
Counselor (Initial Question): 	When did you first start using cocaine?
Client: 	When I was 15 years old.
Counselor (Follow-Up Question): 	Tell me what was happening in your life
when you were 15 years old, when you
first started using.

-- 137 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	109
There is a category of closed questions that is similar to leading questions and
should not be used. Referred to as negative interrogatives (James & Gilliland, 2017), they
are closed questions that are used in a subtle way to coerce the client into agreeing with
you. Questions that begin with don’t, doesn’t, isn’t, shouldn’t, aren’t, and wouldn’t often
suggest a command for the client to do something. For example, “Shouldn’t you stay
away from her?” or “Isn’t it a good idea to stop drinking?” imply the client should agree
with the crisis counselor and do something different. For counselors who want to work
collaboratively with clients, a better way to ask this question would be as follows: “You
stated earlier that one of the problems that brought you in today is your drinking. Would
you like some information on how I can be of help to you with that?” Next, review Case
Study 4.2, which shows how open and closed questions can be fluently integrated.
CASE STUDY 4.2
Effective Use of Open and Closed Questions during an Interview
The following dialogue provides a brief example of how the crisis counselor uses a
blend of open and closed questions to obtain important information about Dakota, who
just discovered a partner is having an affair and is planning on leaving the relationship.
Dakota presented with substantial suicidal ideation.
Dakota: 	I’ve gotten to where I can’t even sleep at night. My mind just
races, and I can’t stop thinking about everything.
Counselor: 	Tell me more about some of the thoughts you have been
having as you lay in bed unable to sleep. (Open question to
facilitate exploration and information gathering)
Dakota: 	That I will never be in a happy relationship again. That my
partner never really cared about me and just used me. That
this pain will never stop. I wonder how I can get my life back
together on my own.
Counselor: 	You wonder if you will find peace again without your
partner and want so much for this pain to go away. (Empathic
paraphrase) What are some of the feelings you have been
experiencing? (Open question)
Dakota: 	Mainly down, angry, and depressed. Like I said, I’ve been
thinking of checking out—ending it all. I feel this tremendous
pain inside my chest, very hurt and sad, I guess. I feel like my
partner never really cared about me and is just so selfish.
Counselor: 	You’re feeling very hurt and betrayed. When did you begin
experiencing these symptoms? (Closed question to identify
timeline of symptoms)
Dakota: 	I would say about 3 months ago, when I found out about the
affair, but they have gotten much worse over the last month.

-- 138 of 545 --

110 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
As Case Study 4.2 demonstrates, the crisis counselor began with open questions to
encourage exploration and to help identify the client’s thoughts (e.g., “I will never be in
a happy relationship again”) and feelings (e.g., anger, grief, and hurt) associated with
the breakup of the relationship. The crisis counselor then moved to closed
questions to obtain more specific information regarding the duration of the
symptoms and the counseling experience.
OPEN VERSUS CLOSED QUESTIONS 	As mentioned earlier, in crisis interven-
tion work, crisis counselors often need to use closed questions to quickly
identify and bring out specific details to seek the resolution of the crisis
state. However, they can often obtain the same information by asking open
questions, so counselors should try to refrain from moving too quickly into
a closed questioning approach unless they are unable to obtain the infor-
mation otherwise.
Consider the examples of closed questions and their open question
counterparts in Table 4.1. Notice in the examples in the table that you can
probably get all you need to know, and much more, by a subtle change in
the wording of your questions to make them more open in nature. Now
complete Activity 4.4 for some additional practice.
Counselor: 	You say they have gotten worse over the last month. What
do you make of that? (Open question to identify client’s
understanding of the progressing symptoms)
Dakota: 	Well, when I first found out about the affair, I would talk a lot
with my friends and family, but I felt like they were getting
sick of hearing me complain all the time. So lately I have just
been trying to tough it out and deal with it on my own.
Counselor: 	And is this the first time you’ve sought counseling for this?
Dakota: 	Yes.
Discussion Questions
1. How effective was the counselor’s use of open and closed questions?
2. What alternative responses by the counselor might also have been helpful?
3. Put yourself in the position of the client. What counselor responses would have
elicited even better or more informative responses by the client?
Take a moment to practice changing these questions
from closed to open questions.
1. Why did you quit your job?
2. Do you think you should stop using drugs?
3. Do you get 8 hours of sleep a night?
4. Did you feel angry with them?
5. Don’t you think there are other ways for you to
cope with your anger?
ACTIVITY 4.4
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.2
In this SAMHSA training
segment, crisis workers assist a
couple who have been impacted
by a natural disaster. The role
play shows effective use of
open questions and other basic
skills. What other questions
or counseling skills could you
integrate into the session?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jRPkSFhzM2U
Watch from 06:00 to 08:05

-- 139 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	111
Reflecting Skills
Reflecting skills are a set of interventions used to help stimulate clients’ exploration of
their thoughts and feelings related to the presenting problems. At the most basic level,
reflecting skills are a form of active listening that conveys to the client your interest in
and understanding of what the client may be struggling with. Thus, reflecting skills
allow counselors to convey empathy, genuineness, and acceptance to clients, which in
turn facilitates the creation of a sense of safety. Moreover, reflecting skills stimulate a
deeper exploration and understanding of the problem so that the client can examine the
issues more objectively. The reflecting skills covered here are paraphrasing, restating,
reflecting feelings, and summarizing.
PARAPHRASING 	When counselors paraphrase, they feed back to the client the essence
of what the client just said. By paraphrasing, the counselor reflects the content and
thoughts of the client’s message. In other words, the crisis counselor is mirroring back
to the client, in a nonjudgmental way, an accurate understanding of the client’s
communication and the implied meaning of that communication. Thus, paraphrasing is
a reflecting skill used to convey empathic understanding and to facilitate the exploration
and clarification of the client’s problems (Ivey et al., 2022).
It is important for counselors to be sure the paraphrased information is accurate
by checking with the client. Some clients in crisis may not feel they can refute what is
being said, or their crisis state may impede their ability to completely follow the session.
However, paraphrasing gives these clients permission to approve or disapprove of the
accuracy of the paraphrase and its implied meaning, thereby increasing their control.
In crisis counseling, adding, “Is that correct” or “Did I hear you right” allows for both
accuracy and for clients to gain some control over situations where they may not have
held control. When the counselor paraphrases the client’s information inaccurately and
does not seek affirmation by the client, the counselor may define the actual primary
presenting problem inaccurately, which in turn may change the direction of the session
and/or interfere with the development of the most appropriate treatment plan for the
client. The importance of verifying understanding is compounded when the client needs
the counselor to use a more directive approach due to the severity of the crisis.
Closed 	Open
Were you afraid? 	What feelings did you experience?
Are you concerned about what you will do if
your partner returns?
How do you think you may react if your
partner returns?
Do you see your drinking as a problem? 	What concerns do you have about your
drinking?
Have you thought about hurting yourself? 	Tell me how you thought about hurting
yourself?
Do you need help? 	What help do you need?
Were you angry or sad? 	How did you feel?
TABLE 4.1 Open versus Closed Questions

-- 140 of 545 --

112 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Young (2017) proposed that reflecting skills are important because
they provide the counselor with a way to do the following:
1. Communicate empathy.
2. Give feedback that enables the client to confirm or reject the impres-
sion being given.
3. Stimulate further exploration of what the client has been experiencing.
4. Capture important aspects of the client’s story that may have been
overlooked or covert. (pp. 123–124)
Thus, paraphrasing, if used appropriately, is a powerful therapeutic
tool. Appropriate use means crisis counselors must develop the ability to
take the essence of the client’s statement and reflect back those thoughts and
facts in their own words . When the counselor uses paraphrasing accurately,
the client will continue to explore and elaborate. On the other hand, the
counselor should not parrot back to the client what has been said. Parroting
back would be a simple word-for-word restatement, not a paraphrase.
Consider this example:
C lient : 	I feel so put down and disrespected by my partner. He is just
like my father in a lot of ways. He was verbally abusive and
full of anger. I never really felt important to him. Why do I let
him treat me this way?
C ounselor : 	You feel put down and disrespected by him. Is that correct?
As you can see from the above paraphrase, the crisis worker simply parrots back
what the client has said, which adds little and keeps the focus superficial. A better
response would be:
C ounselor : 	Although you are trying to understand this pattern of hurt and
disappointment that you’ve experienced from the important
men in your life, it sounds like you’re blaming yourself for
this. Am I hearing that correctly?
To develop your paraphrasing skills, you may find it helpful to first identify the
key words or content that captures the essence of your client’s concern. Once you have
the key content in mind, try to translate it into your own words. Examples of a client’s
statements, the possible key themes or words, and the resulting paraphrase follow.
EXAMPLE 1
Client: 	I’m so fed up with them. I try and try to get through to them, and they
just shut me out.
Possible key themes or words: 	fed up , being shut out , failed efforts to connect
Paraphrase: 	You are at your wit’s end with this. Despite your efforts to connect,
you come up against a closed door. Is that correct?
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4. 3
In this video, the counselor
demonstrates an effective use of
a paraphrase in crisis counseling
by adding the stem, “Is that
accurate?” This stem allows for
both a check for accuracy and
for clients to gain some control
over situations. Practice add-
ing this stem in some informal
conversations and track the
response from the recipients.

-- 141 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	113
EXAMPLE 2
Client: 	Exactly, and that’s why I’ve been thinking about leaving the relationship.
I know I deserve much better, but I just keep going back. I can’t seem to make that
first move.
Possible key themes or words: 	leaving the relationship, being stuck, hesitation, self-
worth
Paraphrase: 	Although a part of you knows this is not the way you want to live
your life, it is still difficult to break out of this cycle. Is that right?
Think about the following client statements and try to
identify the key themes or words. Then, based on these
key themes or words, develop a paraphrase of your
client’s statement.
1. “I don’t know what to do with my life. I hate
my job and everything seems so meaningless.
I can barely muster the energy to get out of bed
in the morning. Sometimes I just want to sleep
for days.”
2. “I’m still in shock that my partner is having an
affair. I really can’t believe it. I thought we had
the perfect marriage. How could I have been so
stupid to not see this was happening? I feel like
such a fool.”
3. “I can’t tell if I am coming or going. I can’t
sleep, I have nightmares, and I feel like a zombie
throughout the day. I am so tense my body
aches. No matter what I do, it just keeps getting
worse.”
ACTIVITY 4.5
As you can see from these examples, identifying the key words or themes can aid in
your ability to develop accurate paraphrases that convey the essence of your client’s
meaning without coming across as superficial. Complete Activity 4.5 to practice your
paraphrasing skills.
RESTATING 	Often restatements can be confused with the skill of paraphrasing. In crisis
counseling, the skill of restatements is intended to focus or direct the priority of the
crisis and include the client’s exact words. A client may be in such emotional turmoil
that many themes may emerge in the session. The counselor should understand the
priority is first on risk issues followed by the issues that led to the risk. The underlying
issues would be secondary for crisis work and the focus of long-term counseling goals
once the primary risk is identified and addressed.
For example, a crisis counselor may be working with a client who is suicidal due
to an estrangement. Risk assessment (suicidal ideation) would be the primary focus
in crisis work. In these situations, the counselor may need to direct the focus of the
session. A restatement may be short, perhaps a single word or brief phrase to focus on
the priority.

-- 142 of 545 --

114 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
For instance, consider the following:
Client: 	I have not been able to sleep or concentrate ever since my
parent found out I was gay and kicked me out of the house.
I just do not see a future for me and have been having
thoughts of wanting to die.
This statement has many issues to be explored: the revelation, the estrangement, the
change in baseline functioning, and the desire to die. In crisis work, the restatement
would be a short phrase of the client’s exact words, “wanting to die,” to direct the session
on the risk assessment.
Restatement: Your life has changed dramatically, and you want to die.
REFLECTING FEELINGS 	A wealth of research attests to the usefulness of accessing and
working with feelings and emotions in counseling (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 2006).
Naming and identifying a client’s feelings can serve several important functions
(Young, 2017). By reflecting feelings, a crisis counselor can help the client become aware
of the emotions experienced in relation to the issue at hand. This awareness can increase
the client’s level of self-awareness and deepen self-disclosure. In addition, reflecting
feelings can have a positive impact on the therapeutic relationship, and research has
shown the quality of the therapeutic relationship to be one of the strongest predictors of
counseling outcomes (Horvath et al., 2012). Moreover, it is not necessarily the specific
theoretical approach of the counselor but the strength of the therapeutic relationship
that is associated with the successful achievement of a client’s counseling goals.
The therapeutic relationship should be characterized by an experience of mutual
liking, trust, and respect between the client and the counselor. In addition, counselor
qualities such as accurate empathy, unconditional positive regard, and genuineness
greatly contribute to the development of the helping relationship. Thus, the reflecting
skills play an important role in the development of this vital working alliance by
conveying these “relationship enhancers” to a client (Young, 2017). As with paraphrasing,
reflecting feelings can promote the development of accurate empathy and help to create
a safe environment for the client. Also, verifying the accuracy of the reflected feelings—
for example, by adding “is that correct” or “did I hear you right”—ensures accuracy
and enables clients to gain some control over situations where they may not have felt in
control. Now read Voices from the Field 4.2.
Joseph “Chip” Cooper
Clients often come to counseling in crisis. They may be
feeling overwhelmed, confused, think they are going
“crazy,” or, in more serious cases, feeling suicidal or
homicidal. In these situations, our own anxiety might lead
us to become overly directive, give unwanted advice, or
drill clients with questions. However, I have found doing
the opposite is the key. In other words, using reflecting
skills in these situations can go a long way to help a client
become more emotionally regulated. Simple paraphrases,
reflecting feelings, and even silence can help the client
to feel understood, accepted, and safe. And clients are
more likely to take the risk of changing and developing
a healthy plan of action when they feel safe.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 4.2
Reflecting Your Way through a Crisis

-- 143 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	115
To reflect feelings, a crisis counselor must be able to recognize and put words to
those feeling states observed in the client. What is the best way to practice reflecting
feelings? One way is to work on becoming more aware of your own feelings and being
able to accurately name them. Doing so will help you accurately recognize and name
the feelings clients may be experiencing. For example, when people are asked, “How
are you feeling right now?” the most common responses are “fine,” “good,” and “okay.”
Notice, however, that these responses do not reflect feelings and do not provide any
understanding of what a person may actually be feeling.
It is important to be able to not only correctly identify and name the core feelings
we all experience as humans (e.g., anger, sadness, fear, surprise, joy, love, disgust)
but also accurately recognize and name our moment-to-moment feeling states that
represent the finer shadings of those core emotions. For example, some of the finer
shadings of the word anger are irritated, bitter, enraged, frustrated, and furious. By
increasing your feelings awareness and feelings word vocabulary, you will be able
to identify and respond to a client’s feelings more easily and correctly. Again, due
to the nature of individuals in crises, it is important to confirm the accuracy of your
reflections.
How does a counselor identify a client’s feelings, especially if these feelings are not
explicitly stated? When clients do not state their feelings directly, counselors may still be
able to infer these feelings either from the context of a client’s communication or from
the client’s nonverbal behaviors (e.g., facial expression, posture). Thus, it is important
to attend to not only what is being said but also how it is being communicated. The
following practical tips will aid you in identifying and reflecting a client’s feelings (Evans
et al., 2017; Ivey et al., 2022):
1. To aid in identifying a client’s feelings:
a. Pay attention to the affective component of the client’s communication.
b. Pay attention to the client’s behavior (e.g., posture, tone of voice, facial
expression).
c. Use a broad range of words to correctly identify the client’s emotions.
d. Silently name the client’s feeling(s) to yourself.
2. To aid in reflecting feelings to a client:
a. Use an appropriate introductory phrase: “Sounds like . . . ” “Looks like . . . ”
“You feel . . . ” “It seems . . . .”
b. Add a feeling word or emotional label to the stem: “Sounds like you’re angry.”
c. Add a context or brief paraphrase to help anchor or broaden the reflection. This
context should add the link or meaning for the perceived feeling: “Sounds like
you’re angry at your parents’ refusal to put you in their will.”
d. Pay attention to the tense. Present tense reflections can often be more powerful
than past tense reflections: “You feel angry” versus “You felt angry.”
e. Do not repeat the client’s exact words (parroting).
f. Reflect mixed emotions: “You’re feeling both angry and hurt about your parents’
behavior toward you.”
g. Check out the accuracy of the reflection of feeling with the client: “Am I hearing
you correctly? Is that close? Have I got that right?”

-- 144 of 545 --

116 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Consider the following example:
Client: 	I just sit around the house wondering what to do. We used
to spend time with my partner’s friends, but they know that
we’re no longer together. So, there is no one for me to really
spend time with. I really miss them, and my own friends seem
so busy. I would hate to burden them with all my problems.
Counselor: 	You’re feeling both sad and lonely right now, and you’re
concerned you may be just another burden on your own
friends. Is that about right? (Reflection of feeling with check for
accuracy)
Client: 	Yes, I don’t want to bring everyone down with all my
problems.
There is one last point to consider when reflecting feelings. Whereas in traditional
psychotherapy the focus is often on uncovering feeling after feeling by attempting to
unearth a core issue, in crisis intervention work, the task is quite different. Thus, guard
against going too far with uncovering feelings, as this could exacerbate the client’s crisis
state with overwhelming emotions. Strive for a balance of skills to build rapport, and
when you do reflect feelings, be sure to keep the focus directly related to the client’s
presenting concerns (James & Gilliland, 2017). Complete Activity 4.6, which gives you
an opportunity to practice identifying feelings so you can develop accurate reflections
of feelings. Then complete Think About It 4.2.
Take a moment to read each of the following vignettes
and identify the feelings embedded within the client’s
communications. Once you have identified the feelings,
come up with your own reflection of feelings.
1. “I don’t know what to do. My partner keeps
working late into the night, and I feel like I never
get to see them. When we do get some time
together, they are moody and reserved. To make
matters worse, I saw a charge on our credit card
statement to a local hotel. I think they are having
an affair.”
2. “Ever since I was mugged, I’ve been having a
hard time. Because of the nightmares, I can’t
sleep at night, and I’m exhausted all day. On top
of that, I’m panicky and nervous all the time.
I worry I might be losing my mind.”
3. “I can’t believe what my father did. He stole all
the money from the trust fund my grandmother
had willed to my brother and me. I’ve been call-
ing him day and night, and he won’t return my
calls. I might have to get a lawyer, but I don’t
know how I’m going to afford it. Why would he
do this to us?”
ACTIVITY 4.6
Think about your skills in identifying and reflecting
feelings. How skilled are you at identifying your feelings
and the feelings of friends, colleagues, and clients?
How skilled are you at reflecting those feelings? Self-
monitor conversations you have over the next week and
practice identifying and reflecting the feelings of others.
THINK ABOUT IT 4.2

-- 145 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	117
SUMMARIZING 	The final skill in the basic listening sequence is summarizing, a process
through which a crisis counselor can begin to put together the key themes, feelings, and
issues that the client has presented. By distilling the key issues and themes and reflecting
this back to the client, counselors can begin to help clients make sense of what may have
originally seemed to be an overwhelming and confusing experience. In addition, when
clients are feeling overwhelmed and are flooded with anxiety, they will often go on
tangents in many directions, making it difficult for the crisis counselor to keep up. When
this occurs, brief summaries are often a useful tool to help refocus the client and reintroduce
some structure into the session, which will help modulate the client’s (and the counselor’s)
anxiety. Thus, a summary not only is used to end a session or to begin a new session by
recapping the previous session, but it also can be used periodically throughout the session,
helping to keep a focus and put together the pertinent issues at hand for the client.
So, when should a crisis counselor summarize? Although much will depend on
the client and the content being discussed, Evans et al. (2017) offered a number of useful
suggestions to help determine when a summary is in order: (1) when your client is
rambling, confused, or overly lengthy in comments; (2) when your client presents a
number of unrelated ideas; (3) when you need to provide direction to the interview;
(4) when you are ready to move the client from one phase of the interview to the next;
(5) when you want to end the interview; and (6) when a summary of the prior interview
will provide you an opening to the current interview.
When summarizing, you do not have to report back to the client every single
disclosed detail. This would, of course, require a prodigious memory. The key is to
capture the important elements, content, feelings, and issues and to reflect these back
to the client in a concise manner. The following three types of summaries are particularly
relevant to crisis intervention counseling:
1. Focusing summaries are often used at the beginning of the session to pull together
prior information the client has given and to provide a focus to the session. “Last
time we met you were having trouble sleeping, having nightmares and feeling
panicky throughout the day. We identified some coping skills and relaxation
exercises for you to use. Tell me how these have worked for you so far.”
2. Signal summaries are used to signal to the client that you have captured the essence
of the topic and that the session can move on to the next area of concern. Signal
summaries help to provide both structure and direction to the session. “So before
we move on, let me make sure I understand things correctly. You discovered your
partner is having an affair . . . .”
3. Planning summaries help provide closure and are used to recap the progress, plans,
and any recommendations or agreements made. Such summaries are good for
ending the session on a positive note and for providing a sense of direction for
the client. “Let’s take a look at what we’ve covered today. Ever since you were
mugged, you’ve been having panic attacks and nightmares. We covered some
coping techniques and relaxation exercises for you to practice between now and
the next time we meet . . . .” (Young, 2017, pp. 161–163)
So, to put it all together, here is one more example of a summary statement: “Let
me see if I understand you correctly. Yesterday you found out your son has been using
cocaine for the last 6 months and has stolen money from you on several occasions. You
are experiencing a mixture of feelings, especially shock and anger, and you are worried

-- 146 of 545 --

118 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
he might turn out to be an addict like your parent was. However, you are determined
to do all you can to not let that happen. How about discussing some possible directions
we can go in from here?” Note that this summary captures the key issues and feelings
without being too wordy and offers a transition for the counselor and client to begin
identifying some action steps to take. Case Study 4.3 provides an example of reflecting
skills in practice.
CASE STUDY 4.3
Integrating Paraphrasing, Reflected Feelings, and Summarizing
The following dialogue between Beck and the crisis counselor demonstrates the skills of
paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, and summarizing:
Beck: 	I really thought things were going well with my partner, so it
came as a complete shock when I found out about the affair.
Counselor: 	You were really blindsided by this. (Paraphrase)
Beck: 	Exactly! And I’ve been trying to push away the pain, but I can’t
seem to stop thinking about it. Sometimes I just want to strangle
them for putting me through this. Other times I want to die!
Counselor: 	Even though you want so much for the pain to go away, it
is still there, especially your hurt and anger. Is that right?
(Paraphrase with a reflection of feeling)
Beck: 	Yes, and sometimes I can’t tell which is worse, my anger or
just the hurt I’m going through. I sometimes lie in bed at night
and wish something terrible would happen to my ex. I’m not
saying I want to kill them or anything, but I just want my ex to
suffer like I’m suffering.
Counselor: 	And this reflects the intensity of your grief right now, wanting
to see your ex suffer, too. (Reflection of feeling)
Beck: 	Very true.
Counselor: 	So, in essence, you never expected something like this to
happen to you, and it has been difficult for you to tough it out
and to push away the pain, grief, and anger that you have been
feeling. Is that about right? (Summary with check for accuracy)
Discussion Questions
1. How effective was the counselor’s use of paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, and
summarizing?
2. What alternative responses may also have been helpful?
3. Put yourself in the position of the client. What counselor responses would have
elicited even better or more informative responses by the client?

-- 147 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	119
DEESCALATING CLIENT EMOTIONS
Learning Objective 4.4 Describe basic deescalation skills to help clients regulate
emotions.
There are four primary objectives when counseling agitated clients: safety, client
emotion management to regain control, avoidance of physical restraint, and avoidance
of escalating coercive interventions. Richmond et al. (2012) reviewed the literature on
verbal deescalation of agitated patients and suggested the following guidelines for
environment, people, and preparedness:
• Physical space should be designed for safety.
• Staff should be appropriate for the job.
• Staff must be adequately trained.
• An adequate number of trained staff must be available.
• Objective scales should be used to assess agitation (pp. 18–20)
Richmond et al. (2012) also determined that 10 domains of deescalation exist
that help practitioners in their care of agitated clients. These domains and the key
recommendations associated with them appear in Table 4.2.
Domain 	Recommendations
Domain 1: Respect personal space. 	Respect the client’s and your personal space.
Domain 2: Do not be provocative. 	Avoid iatrogenic (body language) escalation.
Domain 3: Establish verbal
contact.
Have only one person verbally interact with the client.
Introduce yourself to the client and provide orientation
and reassurance.
Domain 4: Be concise. 	Be concise and keep it simple. Repetition is essential to
deescalation.
Domain 5: Identify wants and
feelings.
Use free information to identify wants and feelings.
Domain 6: Listen closely to what
the client is saying.
Use active listening.
Domain 7: Agree or agree to
disagree.
Domain 8: Lay down the law and
set clear limits.
Establish basic working conditions. Limit setting must be
reasonable and done in a respectful manner. Coach the
client in how to stay in control.
Domain 9: Offer choices and
optimism.
Offer choices. Broach the subject of medications. Be
optimistic and provide hope.
Domain 10: Debrief the client and
staff.
Debrief the client. Debrief the staff.
Source: Based on Richmond et al. (2012).
TABLE 4.2 The Domains of Deescalation and Associated Recommendations

-- 148 of 545 --

120 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Types of Aggression
It is important to remember that the association between agitation and aggression is
not fully understood in causal terms (Nordstrom & Allen, 2007). Richmond et al. (2012)
summarized four different types of aggression and suggested that each type required a
different style of intervention: (1) instrumental aggression, (2) fear-driven aggression,
(3) irritable aggression based on boundary violations, and (4) irritable aggression based
on chronic anger. Instrumental aggression is generally used by people who have learned
that they can get their way through threats or actual violence. So, if a client makes an
overt threat, unspecified counteroffers should be used. For example:
Client: 	If I don’t get what I want, I’m gonna hurt someone bad.
(Might be countered with . . . )
Counselor: 	That is not a good idea.
Client: 	Why not?
Counselor: 	Let’s not find out. Now, you were saying that . . .
In fear-driven aggression, the client is on the defensive and may behave aggressively
to protect against being hurt. In such situations, the counselor should give the client
plenty of personal space, three to four times the normal space, and match the client’s
pace and rhythm until the client is fully focusing on the content of the discussion rather
than the internal state of fear. For example:
Client: 	I’m so angry! I’m so angry!!
Counselor: 	I can help you calm down and fix things. I can help you calm
down and fix things.
Irritable aggression stems from two causes: boundary violations and chronic anger.
Irritable aggression based on boundary violations is usually displayed by individuals who
have experienced some humiliation or interpersonal violation and are trying to put
their world back into some semblance of order. For example, a close friend may have
betrayed the client and the client is struggling to regain self-integrity and self-esteem
while perceiving that life and other individuals are unfair. Usually, the best approach
in this instance is to agree with the client that anger is a justifiable emotion, in principle,
but that the resolution to the problem cannot occur while enraged. For example, “I want
to know more about your situation and help you, but I can’t until you get control over
your emotions so we can talk about it and figure out what to do and what not to do.”
Finally, irritable aggression based on chronic anger is displayed by clients who are angry
at the world and seem to be looking for ready excuses to “lose it.” Their behavior is
characterized by erratic and unrealistic demands aimed at relieving the pressure they
allow to build up. They create fear and confusion through feigned or real attacks. When
interacting with an escalated, chronically aggressive client, it is essential not to appear
defensive or startled but to respond in an emotionless manner, repetitively offering choices
and options for resolving or deescalating the situation. Let the client know that when they
are willing to cooperate, you are more than willing to work with the client. Set firm limits
but be prepared to engage in physical restraint, if required. Unfortunately, chronically
aggressive patients often push the limits by doing the opposite of what you have asked.

-- 149 of 545 --

Chapter 4 • Essential Crisis Intervention Skills 	121
Handling Aggression
The National Association of Social Workers (NASW; 2017) notes that reasoning with
angry, out-of-control people is not likely possible. In such cases, deescalation becomes the
primary goal. Reasoning and problem solving are possible only after deescalation occurs.
Deescalation requires the counselor to remain calm, even when one is frightened and angry.
Professional counselors are well advised to practice deescalation interventions repeatedly
until they become automatic. NASW provides recommendations on a practitioner’s
physical stance and verbal interventions when faced with an aggressive client.
Regarding physical stance:
1. Never turn your back . . .
2. Always be at the same eye level . . .
3. Allow extra physical space . . .
4. Do not stand full front to client. Stand at an angle so you can sidestep away if
needed.
5. Do not maintain constant eye contact.
6. Do not point or shake your finger.
7. DO NOT smile. This could look like mockery or anxiety.
8. Do not touch . . . physical contact [is easily misinterpreted] as hostile or threatening.
9. Keep hands out of your pockets, up and available to protect yourself . . .
10. Don’t be defensive, judgmental . . . or parental . . . . (pp. 1–2)
Regarding verbal deescalation interventions:
1. . . . [C]almly bring the level of arousal down . . .
2. Do not get loud or . . . yell . . . Wait until [they] take a breath; then talk. Speak calmly
at an average volume.
3. Respond selectively; answer all informational questions [but] . . . DO NOT answer
abusive questions.
4. Explain limits and rules in an authoritative, firm, but always respectful tone. Give
choices . . .
5. Empathize with feelings but not with the behavior . . .
6. Suggest alternative behaviors where appropriate . . .
7. Give the consequences of inappropriate behavior without threats
or anger.
8. Represent external controls as institutional rather than personal.
9. If you assess that de-escalation is not working, STOP! You will know
within 2 or 3 minutes . . . Tell the person to leave, escort [them] to the
door, call for help, or leave . . . and call the police. (p. 2)
Defusing Through Reflection
Finally, at a more basic level, when reflecting feelings, a useful way to help
defuse a client in an emotional crisis state is to also reflect the client’s stated,
or unstated, need or goal that is implied within the context of their narrative.
Because of the interpretive aspects, checking for accuracy is also important
with this skill. The formula for this would be: “You feel ________ because
________ and you want (or need) ________.” For example:
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 4.4
Although this training video
reenactment is made for law
enforcement, it demomstrates
excellent use of deescalation
techniques to effectively inter-
vene in a mental health crisis.
As part of a crisis response
team, can you identify the
steps that were effective in
this intervention?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=JERkZoWGLWQ
Watch from 00:00 to 04:49

-- 150 of 545 --

122 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Client: 	Every time I do something for her, it’s not good enough and she
puts me down. (Yelling) It’s all I can do to keep from killing her!
Counselor: 	You’re feeling so angry and hurt right now because she puts you
down, and you really want to be more respected and valued in
your relationship. Is that correct?
Here is another example:
Client: 	(Sobbing, holding herself, and rocking and shaking) I can’t take
it anymore. After my husband and daughter were killed in
the car accident, everything just fell apart for me. I just think
maybe I should be dead too.
Counselor: 	You’re feeling so much pain and grief because of the loss of your
family, and you want so much to find your own peace now.
Is that how you feel?
Deescalation is about transferring calmness to the client and showing genuine
interest in what the client has to say. Be respectful, set clear limits, and trust that you have
supplied the conditions that allow the client to want to respond positively. If the client
possesses a weapon, do not be a hero and try to deescalate the situation; simply comply
(NASW, 2017). In a crisis, the above interventions can go a long way to helping your
client feel safe with you, to diffuse overwhelming emotions, and to set the groundwork
to begin working on a plan of action.
SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed the basic counseling
skills used in crisis intervention work. Using
these skills will help counselors develop a
relationship with clients and create a safe
therapeutic environment. Nonverbal attending
behaviors such as appropriate eye contact, body
position, and tone of voice communicate interest,
warmth, and understanding to the client. Be sure
to face the client and adopt an open, relaxed,
and attentive body posture while maintaining
culturally appropriate eye contact. Tone of voice
should be steady and clear and should be used
to convey a sense of safety, warmth, and security
for the client.
The skills covered in the basic listening
sequence include asking open and closed
questions, paraphrasing, restating, reflecting
feelings, and summarizing. The basic listening
sequence enables counselors to gather important
information about the client’s issues and to
develop trust and rapport. This allows the
crisis counselor to begin the collaborative
process of determining a plan of action for the
client. Open and closed questions are used to
gather information, to aid in assessment, and
to provide focus and direction to the session.
Paraphrasing is used to mirror back to the
client, in a nonjudgmental way and in one’s own
words, an accurate understanding of the client’s
communication. A restatement is intended
to focus or direct the priority of the crisis and
include the client’s exact words. Reflecting
feelings is used to convey an understanding of the
client’s emotional experience. In crisis situations,
the use of these skills should be checked for
accuracy. Summarizing puts together the pieces,
helping the client make sense of what may have
originally seemed to be an overwhelming and
confusing experience. Summarizing can also
be used to keep the session focused, to provide
direction to the interview, and to provide closure
to the session by reviewing the progress, plans,
and any recommendations/agreements made.
By using these skills appropriately, you create
the necessary conditions for positive change.
Four primary objectives when counseling
agitated clients include safety, client emotion
management to regain control, avoidance of
physical restraint, and avoidance of escalating
coercive interventions.

-- 151 of 545 --

123
PREVIEW
This chapter covers crisis counseling with individuals who are grieving, models and
theories of grieving, and assessment components in determining when the loss affects
an individual to the point where daily functioning is interrupted. The chapter addresses
how timing, the cause of death, and the role the relationship played in a person’s life all
mediate the mourning process and discusses what distinguishes “normal grief” from
“complicated grief.” The chapter also focuses on how the mourner’s belief system (e.g.,
faith, spirituality, religion) and cultural influences are integral to coping, preventing
dysfunction, and finding meaning in life after a loss. Finally, this chapter includes the
appropriate process to follow when providing a death notification.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completing this chapter, the reader will be able to:
5.1 Describe historical and current perspectives and models of grief work.
5.2 Describe cultural factors in grief work, ambiguous loss, and disenfranchised
grief.
5.3 Understand factors that mediate the grief process in different types of loss.
5.4 Describe effective interventions with various types of grief and across the
lifespan.
5.5 Assess difficulties in the grieving process.
5.6 Understand the components required for effective death notifications.
HISTORICAL AND CURRENT PERSPECTIVES AND MODELS OF
GRIEF WORK
Learning Objective 5.1 Describe historical and current perspectives and models of
grief work.
Over 3 million Americans die each year (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2023b), leaving behind millions of partners, parents, siblings, children, friends,
coworkers, and extended family members to mourn their losses. Factors that determine
whether the death will cause a significant crisis event that impairs daily functioning
5 	Loss, Grief, and Bereavement
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry and Bradley T. Erford
C H A P T E R

-- 152 of 545 --

124 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
include how the person died (e.g., whether it was sudden and unexpected or the result
of a prolonged or chronic illness); cultural and spiritual influences of the bereaved;
individual temperament; life circumstances; unresolved issues connected with the death;
previous experiences with death and loss; and the order of death (e.g., whether it is a
grandparent at the end of a long life or a young person just starting out in life).
Of course, grief and loss reactions are not solely related to issues of death and dying.
Feelings of loss may occur after many developmental or situation-related changes. This
chapter focuses on many different types of losses people encounter but does not address
every type of loss specifically. Although there has been an increased deployment of crisis
counselors to respond to natural disasters, acts of terrorism (e.g., on September 11, 2001),
hostage situations, and school shootings, it is more likely that a counselor will intervene
with a client or family experiencing a recent death or a situational or developmental
loss that affects the individual or family, such as divorce, job/career loss, ability/health
loss, and aging issues around loss. More recently, losses connected with COVID-19-
related issues (e.g., loss of physical connections from supports, absences from loved ones
during special events and milestones, job-related losses, lack of freedom of choices, and
isolation) have affected the lives of individuals in the United States and globally.
Each person responds differently to loss. This chapter does not define major and
minor losses, as it is truly the perception of the loss for the individual that determines
whether the loss becomes a crisis. More importantly, when developing a crisis plan or
offering a referral, crisis counselors should attempt to understand how a loss can impact
and cause other losses and how these multiple losses are perceived by the person
experiencing the loss. For example, the loss of a spouse of 40 years may not be the main
crisis event for the survivor, although it may be the presenting issue that brought the
client into crisis counseling. Rather, multiple losses may have occurred in relation to the
death that may cause dysfunction for the client. Perhaps the couple cared for an adult
child with disabilities and now the remaining spouse will not be able to do so alone;
perhaps the loss of the spouse puts the family in financial crisis; or perhaps the loss of
the spouse creates an existential crisis for the survivor as to what purpose exists without
the other person. It is important to understand how a presenting loss may influence other
parts of life for the bereaved person to determine how to best intervene.
Working with grieving clients is an important part of both crisis counseling and
traditional counseling. Many people seek counseling specifically to help them cope with
a recent loss. But far more frequently the client has been in counseling for a while for issues
unrelated to death and then experiences the death of a family member or has memories of
a previous death. At such points, what was previously career counseling or couples
counseling may become crisis intervention as the counselor helps the client through the
impact of the death. For some clients, that will be all that is needed and they will return to
their previous treatment plan. However, for other clients, more extensive counseling may
be necessary to help them make sense of the loss and find meaning in life once again.
Lindemann’s Approach
In what is perhaps the first research conducted on sudden death, Erich Lindemann (1944)
studied the 1942 Cocoanut Grove nightclub fire in Boston and intervened with many
of those who lost someone in the fire. Lindemann identified three tasks of mourners:
(1) emancipation from the bond to the deceased, (2) readjustment to a life in which the

-- 153 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	125
deceased is missing, and (3) formation of new relationships (Berzoff & Silverman, 2004).
Like Viktor Frankl’s (2006) later work with concentration camp survivors, Lindemann
observed feelings of intense guilt in many people who survived the fire. Adjustment
required letting go of the deceased. Lindemann believed that grief was resolved when
the mourner severed the relationship with the deceased and moved on to form new
attachments. For many years, Lindemann’s work remained the main resource on
bereavement.
The Death Awareness Movement: Kübler-Ross
Beginning in the 1960s, Elizabeth Kübler-Ross was credited with creating the death
awareness movement. Her work, including On Death and Dying (2014) and Death: The
Final Stage of Growth (1997a), affected a core change in attitudes toward and education
about the dying process and helped to reduce the taboo surrounding the discussion of
death in the United States. Kübler-Ross was famous for her work with terminally ill
patients, which led to her developing the following five stages of dying:
• Stage I: Denial. “Not me.” “I am not dying.” “A miracle will happen.” Such
comments are typical reactions to being told of a terminal illness. According to
Kübler-Ross, denial serves a protective function in the initial stages by cushioning
the blow that death is inevitable.
• Stage II: Rage and anger. “Why me?” The seemingly arbitrary nature of the news
of one’s impending death almost always causes one to erupt into anger and rage.
Such anger is often targeted at those who are living and will survive or perhaps
a higher power for handing down the death sentence. Kübler-Ross believed such
feelings were not only acceptable but also inevitable.
• Stage III: Bargaining. “Yes, me, but . . . ” In the bargaining stage, one begins to
accept the inevitability of death. But one bargains for more time, often by offering
to do good deeds or change in a specific way.
• Stage IV: Depression. “Yes, me.” The depression stage is the beginning of accep-
tance. Initially, the person mourns previous regrets and losses, but this turns into
an acceptance of the impending death and what is referred to as preparatory grief.
During this time, the dying person begins to face any unfinished business and
prepares to let go peacefully.
• Stage V: Acceptance. “Death is very close now, and it’s all right.” Some people can
cope with the news of a terminal illness and work through the anger and sadness
to reach an emotional equilibrium that allows them to live out their final weeks
and months with inner peace.
Although Kübler-Ross’s model was originally presented as a sequential stage
model, the stages of death and dying have since been adapted as more of a spiral, moving
forward and then circling back over time. Kübler-Ross (2014) also warned that what
people experience is far more than mere stages. It is not enough to identify the stages,
she wrote, “It is not just about the life lost but also the life lived” (p. 216).
Kübler-Ross’s five stages of death and dying have given countless caregivers a
framework in which to understand dying patients. Many counselors base grief counseling
on these early works on death and dying. They are presented here with the following
caveats: Kübler-Ross’s work does not apply to catastrophic or sudden death because

-- 154 of 545 --

126 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
there is no time to say goodbye and the dying person is not able to go through the stages.
Nor did Kübler-Ross, in her writings, consider the stages to be concrete or contiguous;
rather, her work was based on observations of common emotions experienced by people
amid the dying process (Kübler-Ross, 1997a, 1997b, 2014; Kübler-Ross & Kessler, 2014).
A person’s ability to cope with major life stressors in the past is predictive of the
way the person is likely to cope with chronic illness and face death. Other factors that
facilitate the process of death acceptance include having lived a full life, harboring few
regrets about the way in which one lived, being able to talk frankly about the terminal
illness with family and medical personnel, holding hope for a life after death, having a
close relationship with a significant other, and being concerned for one’s children and
close friends. Fear at the end of life seems to be mostly related to how people view the
actual process of their dying: anxiety surrounding their pain and being able to cope with
it, their desire not to become a burden to their family, existential issues connected with
their death (meaning, purpose, unresolved issues), and their uncertainty about how
loved ones will survive after they are gone.
Kübler-Ross did not believe that everyone reached the stage of acceptance over
death, but firmly believed in open communication, with supportive physicians and family
members telling the person about the impending death and facilitating the process of
emotional adjustment as much as possible. With terminally ill patients, adequate pain
management can be the most frequent predictor of emotional adjustment at the end of life.
Multiple parallels exist between the stages of death and dying and the ways in
which people adapt to other losses in life (e.g., ending a relationship, leaving a job,
experiencing any other sudden crisis). Kübler-Ross (2014) wrote that the stages of dying
“apply equally to any significant change (e.g., retirement, moving to a new city, chang-
ing jobs, divorce) in a person’s life” (p. 145). Furthermore, she believed that if people
could accept the ultimate knowledge of their own death and integrate this knowledge
into their lives, they could learn to face challenges and losses productively
and face death with peace and joy as the final stage of growth.
Over the years, a broader approach to death education has focused on the
unique needs and perspectives of the individual. Workshops, support groups,
and end-of-life planning all serve to educate individuals about transitions at
the end of life. Berzoff and Silverman (2004) categorized death education as
prevention (i.e., preparing for the inevitable), intervention (i.e., dealing with
the immediate), and postvention (i.e., understanding the crisis or experience).
A good example of effective death education was an event sponsored by a local
church that offered a 5-week workshop that examined the music of Brahms’s
Requiem along with Kübler-Ross’s five stages of death and dying. Such work-
shops often help reduce death anxiety. Assess your reaction to Kübler-Ross’s
perspectives by completing Activity 5.1. Then read Voices from the Field 5.1.
Draw a circle and divide it into slices like a pie, based
on your feelings about death (e.g., grief, regret, hope,
sadness). The size of each slice should depict the
amount of the emotion you feel. How do the sizes
of your slices differ from those of other counselors or
clients? What implications might your findings have for
the counseling process?
ACTIVITY 5.1
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 5.1
Filmed in 1983, this rare video
segment shows Dr. Kubler-Ross
working with young children
who have been diagnosed
with a terminal illness. What
stages of her grief cycle can
you identify?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jTxOiq3V7Bw
Watch from 31:18 to 35:39

-- 155 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	127
Worden’s Task Model of Grieving
In a significant move away from stage theories, J.W. Worden (2018) proposed a task
model of grieving that empowers the bereaved to accomplish the following four tasks:
• Accept the loss. After a period of disbelief, the person must begin to accept that
the death is real. A pervasive sense of shock, numbness, or unreality may be felt
for a long time. A sudden death, or a death far away, makes it particularly difficult
to grasp that death has occurred. As people begin to work through this task, they
start to accept the reality of the facts surrounding the death of their loved one and
the meaning behind the loss, and to accept that the person is not coming back.
People who remove pictures or otherwise avoid any reminders of their loss hinder
themselves from the task of accepting the loss.
• Experience the pain. Working through the pain of grief is the second task that
Worden believes people must undertake. Some people may dissociate from the
pain, immersing themselves in work, cleaning, and other methods of keeping busy.
Monica Band
As a community mental health professional, I am
used to expecting the unexpected. Sometimes I meet
clients at the office, but most of the time I travel into
the community, visiting or searching for clients who
may not have a permanent residence. The only thing
consistent about my day is checking the schedule in
the morning. On this particular day, I was scheduled
to see a client whom I had met several times before.
My initial purpose for meeting with him was to discuss
his medication compliance and assess for risk, due to
his history of suicidal ideation and medication-hoarding
behavior.
I arrived at the client’s apartment and we sat
down at the kitchen table. The client looked as if he
had not slept and avoided eye contact, which differed
from the baseline I was used to experiencing. I picked
up on the client’s nonverbal behavior and asked him
immediately if something was upsetting him. “He’s
gone and I didn’t get to say good-bye . . . ” the client
tearfully said as he used both hands to cover his face.
The client slumped over in the chair and began to
hyperventilate.
In a calm voice, I asked him for more information.
He was silent and stared at the wall with his eyes darting
back and forth, as if he was searching for answers.
I repeated his name, which seemed to snap him back
again into reality. He fixed his gaze on me. I will never
forget how he looked at me. The client touched his
chest and grasped his shirt, as if he was in physical pain.
The client’s close friend died from a fatal
shooting. The police and medical services arrived
at the scene, but it was too late. He later found out
from the police officer what happened. The death was
unexpected. The way in which the client’s friend died
also enraged and concerned the client. As he shared
the details of his experience, he presented with denial
and anger. The client’s anger was directed toward
whomever shot his friend. He shared some memories
of his friend and explained that he was “funny” and
“gentle.” He smiled as he shared these memories, but
the smile was quickly wiped away by sadness. I gave
the client time to express his thoughts and feelings.
I consulted with my supervisor. I conducted a risk
assessment of the client due to his recent loss, his
history of suicidal attempts during depressive episodes,
and his living alone with minimal support. The client
required more stabilization, and he agreed to a further
assessment by Emergency Services. He was hospitalized
then discharged to outpatient mental health.
When I returned to the office, I debriefed and
processed with my supervisor. That day made me think
of my own mortality and the fragility of life. When
I got home, I made sure I let people in my life know that
I love them and gave my parents a hug. I think I had to
do that for my own self-care.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 5.1
Impact of Death on the Living

-- 156 of 545 --

128 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Others may feel overwhelmed by their sorrow. Recognizing and labeling the pain
rather than avoiding it helps them to move forward through the pain and grieve
successfully.
• Adjust to an environment without the person. To accomplish this task, people must
learn to continue on despite the loss. While it is impossible to clearly delineate
precisely what has been lost, the void of grief is often deep. Coming home to an
empty house, missing the communication and companionship of a loved one, and
celebrating special holidays, birthdays, and milestones in other people’s lives can
all serve to increase the pain associated with loss. To successfully work through
this task, mourners must learn to cope and adjust to the many voids left after the
loss of a loved one.
• Reinvest emotional energy in other relationships. Grieving persons are called on
to emotionally relocate the lost person and to move on with life, while still honor-
ing their loved one. Worden (2018) considers it a “benchmark of a completed grief
reaction” when the person is “able to think of the deceased without pain” (p. 46).
Like a physical illness or wound, grief takes time to heal. Therefore, Worden does
not assign time periods to grief. Parkes and Prigerson (2009) indicate that widows may
take 3 or 4 years to move through the grief process and achieve stability in their lives.
During that time, they work to return to a level of equilibrium. Grieving requires effort,
and those who do not take the time to work through the tasks of mourning delay the
grief process (Worden, 2018). Worden’s task model has also been extended to losses
other than death.
Delayed or masked grief reactions can complicate the mourning process. According
to Worden (2018), grief that is repressed or denied can result in aberrant behavior or
can cause physical symptoms. He notes that pain can be a symptom of repressed grief
and that many people who are treated for somatoform disorders are really experiencing
the pain of loss. This is particularly noticeable if the physical symptoms are like those
experienced by the deceased. Similarly, unexplained depression, acting-out behavior
on the part of adolescents, and overly intense grief reactions that occur after seemingly
minor losses can all be indications of repressed grief. Thorough assessment and clinical
skills are required to identify the problem.
Attachment and Loss
Drawing on the classic works of Ainsworth, Parkes, Winicott, Seligman, and others,
John Bowlby (1982, 1983, 1985) produced a three-volume series that became the seminal
work on attachment and loss. Bowlby (1983) noted four phases of the mourning process:
(1) numbing, which lasts from a few hours to a week; (2) yearning or searching for the
lost figure, lasting for months or even years; (3) disorganization or despair; and (4) some
degree of reorganization.
The numbing phase is often expressed as being stunned or shocked at the news of
a death. The yearning or searching phase is seen by Bowlby (1985) as normal and may
result in efforts by the bereaved to locate the lost person. Such searching may include
motor restlessness—the inability to slow down or to control continuous movement—or
scanning the environment. The bereaved may develop a sense that the person is present
with them or may construe sights or sounds to be an indication that their loved one
is near.

-- 157 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	129
Disorganization or despair often takes the form of irritability or bitterness. Self-
reproach is also common and can be intense and unrelenting. Anger associated with grief
must be discussed. Anger falls along a continuum from anger to rage to violence. Anger
that is externalized, spoken, and processed is less likely to manifest itself in negative
behaviors, which can mask the underlying feelings of grief and loss.
Bowlby (1982) noted that in most instances of disordered mourning, the loss was
almost always of an immediate family member—most notably, a parent, child, or spouse.
In other words, the strength of the attachment bond and the closeness of the relationship
profoundly affect the grieving process. Bowlby saw mourning as a time of transition
during which mourners adapt to the loss, reorganize their lives, and find new roles for
themselves. During this period, it is necessary for the bereaved to experience sadness
and despair, and thus much work must be done by the bereaved. Where one previously
defined oneself as part of a couple, being single again is a new role. Those once connected
to a mother as a child now see themselves as orphans. Bowlby noted that this redefinition
of self is a painful but necessary process. The bereaved can reestablish themselves and
develop plans only when they have recognized that their loved one will not return.
Pathology tends to result when people do not take the time to grieve or do not
grieve properly, resulting in devolution of the natural process of mourning into clinical
depression. Loss can be a provoking agent that increases the risk of an emotional disorder
developing, or the person may have a preexisting vulnerability that increases the
sensitivity to loss. Either can result in a pattern of disorganized mourning. Bowlby (1983)
noted that depression-prone individuals deal with death differently than do those who
do not become depressed. Numbness, for example, is common to all mourners. After
the initial few days or a week of numbness, however, the healthy mourner may begin to
talk about the pain and suffering of the deceased and express frustration at not having
been able to do more to help. In contrast, depression-prone mourners may experience
numbness that lasts indefinitely and may dissociate themselves from feelings of grief.
UNDERSTANDING GRIEF
Learning Objective 5.2 Describe cultural factors in grief work, ambiguous loss, and
disenfranchised grief.
In the fifth edition, text revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2022), bereavement is narrowly defined
as the loss of a loved one with whom one has had a close relationship, as opposed to
the broader term, grief, which applies to any loss circumstance. Mourning is a healthy
and normal reaction connected with a loss and should not be identified as pathology
nor require medical intervention. Even though there are many similarities, every grief
experience is different. Grief reactions vary by culture, individual, and relationship to
the deceased. Spiritual and religious beliefs may affect the grieving process as well. All
these factors should be considered as mediators of the mourning process.
Cultural Factors in Grieving
Cross-cultural research has found similarities in intrapersonal experiences of grief. In
a classic study of 78 different cultures, Rosenblatt et al. (1976) found that people in all
cultures express grief through tears, depressed affect, anger, disorganization, and difficulty

-- 158 of 545 --

130 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
performing normal activities. In Western culture, grief is an intensely personal experience
that affects not only the individual but also the entire family system and, in some situations
(e.g., September 11, natural disasters, school shootings), entire communities.
Although every culture has “rules” for acceptable grieving that prescribe the
behavior that is expected and allowed, cultural variations regarding grief also exist. For
instance, widows in some Middle Eastern cultures are expected to become incapacitated
by their demonstrations of grief, whereas widows in Bali are strongly discouraged from
crying (Hays & Erford, 2023). In many Hispanic cultures, it is believed that the deceased
wants something from the living. An awareness of cultural variations in mourning
should lead a culturally competent crisis counselor to ask clients about their cultural
traditions, rituals related to death, spiritual and religious beliefs and practices, grief
responses that are culturally proscribed or prohibited, and what the clients expect their
continued relationship with the deceased to be like.
In collectivist societies, death affects the entire village or community. For example,
bereavement, known as sorry business, is a very important part of Australian Aboriginal
culture (Hays & Erford, 2023). Funerals can involve entire communities, and the
expression of grief can include self-injury. The grieving relatives may live in a specially
designated area, called the sorry camp, for a period. The relatives may also cut off their
hair or wear white pigment on their faces.
Crisis counselors must be aware of how culture may affect the grief process and
how that impact may also cause misunderstanding and differences within family
and support systems. Crisis counselors should attempt to understand the unique cultural
perspective of the loss and the grief of the client to provide an effective treatment plan
or referral. Consider your own cultural background in relation to death and dying by
completing Think About It 5.1.
Think about your own religious, cultural, and ethnic
background in relation to death and dying. Is there a
tradition, ritual, or attitude that is different from others
who do not share your background? What is different
about it? What do you say to explain the tradition or
ritual to others who are unfamiliar with your custom?
THINK ABOUT IT 5.1
Ambiguous Loss and Disenfranchised Grief
Boss (2016) defined ambiguous losses as losses that may be unknown and without
resolution. Knight and Gitterman (2018) noted the importance of understanding grief
resulting from ambiguous losses. Ambiguous grief is often connected with ambiguous
losses (e.g., missing persons, deployment, incarceration, and chronic conditions such as
cognitive impairments). These losses often have a lack of finality since the actual loss is
not as evident as a loss from a death.
Ambiguous losses are often not recognized by others as sharing similar grief reac-
tions, thus leading the grief to becoming disenfranchised. In disenfranchised grief, the
ability to move past the loss may be delayed. When a loss is not recognized by others,
the ability to move and heal may be impacted and there may be a lack of support and
resources from others. Individuals who experience an ambiguous loss may not have the
same ability to grieve as those who experience losses due to deaths. Many models of
grief often include a closure stage, which is often not experienced with ambiguous losses.

-- 159 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	131
Knight and Gitterman (2018) identify six factors associated
with ambiguous losses that are important for the crisis counselor to
consider. (1) The loss is often unacknowledged or minimized by others.
(2) Feeling-laden responses to the loss may be dismissed, misunderstood,
or even criticized by others in the community or the person’s support
system. (3) There is a lack of support by others for the loss. (4) Grief
reactions and opportunities may be discouraged. (5) Reactions of others
may demonstrate lack of belief or even critical condemnation of feelings
surrounding the loss. (6) The grief reactions associated with the loss are
often stigmatized by others.
With ambiguous losses, the primary mission of the crisis counselor
is to understand the perception of the loss, the stressors connected with
the loss, the ambiguity surrounding the loss, and how the stress and
ambiguity affect the individual and the system and to offer resources
and supports. Boss (2016) suggested counselors can address ambiguous
losses by (1) exploring the meaning associated with the loss, (2) allowing
individuals to regain control of the ambiguity of the loss, (3) exploring a
new identity for the one grieving the loss, (4) normalizing thoughts and
feelings and validating their own ambiguity, (5) evaluating attachments
with the loss, and (6) exploring larger purposes.
Long-term effects of living with ambiguous loss can include
depression, anxiety, guilt, ambivalence, and interpersonal conflict. Each
client heals at their own pace. After an ambiguous loss, the client may
take years, even decades, to develop the perspective necessary to become
centered again and to create a healthy and fulfilling life. For couples
experiencing an ambiguous loss, it is not uncommon for partners to
initially reach out to each other in their pain, but since each person is apt
to grieve differently and at a different pace, the couple may begin to find
fault and blame each other. An example of an ambiguous loss through
miscarriage and infertility is provided in Case Study 5.1.
CASE STUDY 5.1
Miscarriage and Infertility: Ambiguous Losses
Aisha and her partner had been desperately trying to have a baby but were recently
told that Aisha would never be able to conceive or carry to term. In addition, Aisha was
facing the possibility of a diagnosis of cancer. It was too much to bear, and after a day
spent drinking with her partner and friends to calm down, Aisha went home and “tore
the kitchen apart,” broke her arm against the wall, swallowed a bottle of antianxiety
medication the doctor had prescribed, and then called her mother, who assisted Aisha in
getting help. What followed for Aisha was a self-described “week of hell”—a trip to the
emergency department, a stomach pump, a nurse who rebuked her, saying, “You tried
to kill yourself. You don’t deserve sympathy.” This humiliation preceded commitment to
a private psychiatric hospital, a court hearing to “determine her sanity,” and the require-
ment that, before leaving the hospital, Aisha schedule an appointment with a counselor.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 5.2
In this video, four youth share their
experiences with having a family
member incarcerated and how this
one identified loss can multiply into
losses across their lives. The video
also reveals the youths’ resilience
and healing. Can you identify
other groups who may experience
ambiguous losses?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=hm9d_O3aoDU
Watch from 00:00 to 03:31
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 5.3
The loss of a pet can be a devastat-
ing experience and one that is often
not seen through the lens of other
types of losses or viewed by others
as a “real or important” loss. This
video explains disenfranchised grief,
responses and reactions, and coping
skills. What are other examples of
disenfranchised grief? How can coun-
selors assist in working with clients
with disenfranchised grief?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=S9Qu2FMja9A
Watch from 00:00 to 03:40

-- 160 of 545 --

132 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
When working with women who have recently miscarried or are coping with
infertility, hollow reassurances and suggestions about the future are ineffective.
Empathy, being with the person as they experience the pain, and being a witness to
their grief will help them cope with the loss and move the grieving process forward.
The loss of the ability to have children is like the loss of the future. In Aisha’s case,
discussed in Case Study 5.1, the professionals failed her. A nurse shamed her suicide
attempt. Later, a psychiatrist and a counselor gave her platitudes instead of helping her
come to terms with and process her loss. Even the physician who gave Aisha the bad
news failed to ensure she received adequate counseling. He ignored how she felt about
the prospect of living life without children. Once Aisha was able to define the loss she
was feeling—the need to nurture a baby—she was able to find an appropriate outlet by
volunteering to rock babies in the hospital nursery. Years later, she was able to see that
there were benefits to not having children of her own. She and her partner were able to
take trips their friends could only dream of. Her partner was able to fill his parenting
need by coaching a basketball team. The couple ruled out adoption but was able to build
a fulfilling life that included friends and nurturing other people’s children.
The problem was that no one was listening to Aisha. No one had grasped the totality
of her pain. “I just want someone who can understand what I am going through,” she
cried. From the moment she learned she could never bear children, Aisha was grieving
the loss of future plans that would never be realized. She would never be a mother,
never hold her infant, and never have a family. All those holidays, birthdays, and years
stretching out ahead of her, alone and without a child.
She feared that her husband would leave her for someone younger who could give
him children and that she could never look at children again without being reminded of
her loss. All she had ever wanted was to be married and raise a family. Now that dream
was shattered.
How to go on? Why go on? The existential questions stretched like open fields for
miles in front of her—questions that were not easily answered by the meaningless mantra
of well-meaning friends and relatives: “You can adopt” or “Relax, you’ll get pregnant.”
More than losing her footing, Aisha had her future plans yanked right out from
under her in one horrible afternoon. She needed time just to accept the reality of her
loss before she could even start to think about the future. It was months before she was
able to accept the diagnosis. It was even longer before Aisha could start to dream again
about the color, the texture, and the design she would weave into the rug of her new life.
Discussion Questions
1. What are some losses experienced by the couple and by each individual in the
couple?
2. What makes Aisha’s loss ambiguous?
3. What are the primary and secondary considerations a professional counselor
would need to address?
4. How can you better help Aisha to grieve and move on to a healthier, more vital life?
5. With a peer as a client in this situation, role-play implementation of the task model
of crisis assessment and intervention presented in Table 1.1.

-- 161 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	133
When helping clients adjust to an ambiguous loss, the first step is to acknowledge
the depth of the loss, not to minimize the pain. In Case Study 5.1, Aisha felt isolated
because none of her friends knew what to say. In addition to her grief over the loss of
the future she had envisioned, Aisha felt depressed and hopeless about her future. When
hope is gone, the risk of suicide increases. Coping with this type of loss involves helping
people clarify the missing role and then find other outlets and activities that provide a
meaningful substitute. Now complete Activity 5.2, which focuses on helping you become
more sensitized to the way grief and coping with grief are hidden in U.S. culture.
Looking for Death
In U.S. culture, grief is frequently hidden. Look for per-
sonal and cultural images of grief and coping with grief
in the media and your immediate environment. Discuss
your findings with the class or a peer.
ACTIVITY 5.2
MEDIATORS OF THE GRIEF PROCESS
Learning Objective 5.3 Understand factors that mediate the grief process in
different types of loss.
Bowlby’s (1983) classic research compendium noted five conditions that affect the course
of grieving and should be used in a crisis intervention assessment: (1) the role of the person
who died, (2) the age and sex of the bereaved person, (3) the cause and circumstances
surrounding the death, (4) the social and psychological circumstances affecting the
bereaved at the time of the loss, and (5) the personality of the bereaved, especially as it
relates to one’s capacity for making attachments and for coping with stressful situations.
The role of the person who died and the circumstances surrounding the death are examined
in the sections that follow. We also discuss complicated versus uncomplicated grief.
Relationship: The Role of the Person Who Died
Just as every relationship in a person’s life is unique, so, too, is every death. The closeness of
the relationship, whether the person who died was a partner of 30 years or a distant uncle,
is a key ingredient in how the death is perceived and mourned and what the length of the
grieving process will be. It is important to define the unique attachment or loss associated
with the death so that if a referral is needed, this information can be transferred as well.
Some of the most difficult deaths to accept are those of people to whom we are the
closest: our children, our parents or guardians (especially if the death is experienced by
a child), and our partners. The death of a sibling, too, can have a tremendous effect on a
family. Each of these relationships is discussed in more detail below. Crisis counselors
are encouraged to consider other deaths that may be particularly difficult to accept.
DEATH OF A CHILD 	The death of a child reverses the natural generational order of death
and can have a devastating influence on the entire family. Children play multiple roles
in their parents’ and guardians’ lives—socially, psychologically, and genetically. The
death of a child disrupts the parents’ or guardians’ attachment not only to the child in
the moment but also to their dreams and expectations for the future, as well as to the

-- 162 of 545 --

134 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
child’s place in the generational structure of the family. Epidemiological studies have
found that the death of a child leaves parents more susceptible to depression, illness,
and premature death due to changes in the immune system.
When there is a death in the family, parents or guardians are not the only grievers.
Siblings, too, may be distraught by the loss and experience survivor guilt. Often,
parents’ or guardians’ coping responses may be functional for them but may have a
negative influence on partners or surviving children. Sometimes a parent’s or guardian’s
behavior toward surviving children may change. The grieving process is determined
to a large extent by the quality of the parents’ or guardians’ relationship. Depression,
marital discord, and separation are likely to result in additional psychological fallout
for the remaining children. Previously well-adjusted siblings often develop symptoms
of anxiety, school refusal, depression, and severe separation anxiety. Some parents or
guardians may withdraw from their surviving children, while others may turn to another
child as a stand-in for the deceased. Both coping styles are fraught with problems.
A stable, secure environment in which both parents or guardians nurture each other as
they go from one stage of grieving to the next, while also helping their surviving children
to express and cope with their own feelings, seems likely to foster the best outcome.
Although research is sparse on losing an adult child, parents who lose an adult
child are at a significant disadvantage as very few other people experience this type of
loss. The loss of an adult child can bring about concerns of parents who expected to be
cared for in their later years and can lead to loss of a sense of meaning and purpose in the
parental role. Regrets and survivor guilt should be explored. Since the loss of an adult
child is not an anticipated loss, more complicated grief reactions may occur. Understand-
ing the perception of the bereaved who lost an adult child is essential. Research on this
topic is sparse and dated but suggests three interventions health care providers may offer
when working with those who have lost an adult child: (1) storytelling by the bereaved,
(2) active listening by the counselor, and (3) use of metaphors.
DEATH OF A PARENT OR GUARDIAN 	Children mourn differently than adults. How
children mourn depends on their age, level of cognition, emotional development,
relationship to the deceased, and the quality of the support network available to them.
Clinicians working with children need to account for these factors when developing
individualized treatment programs for bereaved children or adolescents. Five- to
7-year-olds are especially vulnerable due to lowered cognitive ability to understand
fully the concept and permanence of death. Complications may result, and these
children may develop a fear of losing the other parent. Preadolescents and adolescents
are strongly influenced by their peers and the need to belong. They may feel isolated
and different from their friends who have not experienced the death of a parent.
Particularly vulnerable are teenage daughters who lose their mothers.
SIBLING LOSS 	Losing a sibling at any age or stage of life is difficult. But often the loss
of a sibling is a silent loss. When a sibling dies, parents or guardians are often viewed as
the primary mourners, and sibling grief is often forgotten. In fact, when a sibling dies,
one loses more than the relationship; one loses a part of oneself. A 60-year-old client
whose brother had recently died said, “It was like losing my hard drive” because no
one else shared the childhood memories and experiences, nor was there anyone to talk
to about the parents or guardians, family history, and other childhood recollections.

-- 163 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	135
The effect of sibling loss is complicated by factors like the age of the child, the inabil-
ity to accept death, and the inability to discuss emotions. The death of a child can disrupt
the entire family system. Ultimately, it is the way parents or guardians cope with the
death that is most relevant to the surviving children’s ability to cope. Whenever there is a
question of whether a child should be referred for counseling or not, err on the side of cau-
tion and seek professional help with someone experienced in child psychology and grief.
At any age, the grief associated with the loss of a sibling should be explored. Young
adolescents and teens who appear to be coping well may be presenting a facade. This
failure to grieve can have a deleterious effect on normal childhood and adolescent devel-
opment and may even affect future coping.
Somatic symptoms are particularly common in children experiencing grief and
loss. Stomachaches, headaches, and loss of appetite are common. It is also common for
young children to regress to an earlier form of behavior during this time. Sleep distur-
bances, nightmares, and enuresis may occur, as might a drop in school performance, lack
of concentration, and school refusal. Adolescents may begin using alcohol or drugs as
a way of self-medicating to cope with their feelings. Professional help should be sought
for substance use problems or for any grief that turns into severe depression or is accom-
panied by hopelessness or suicidal ideation.
Adults who experienced the loss of a sibling earlier in life should be asked about
the impact of the loss. It is not uncommon that the “forgotten survivor” was not able to
work through the loss of their sibling in childhood and the loss had a profound impact
on the life of the surviving sibling. When an adult experiences a crisis due to the loss of
a sibling later in life, it is important to allow the survivor to share their perception of the
death, their relationship, unresolved issues, regrets, guilt, or other issues of the death
that may lead to complicated grief.
LOSS OF A PARTNER 	The loss of a spouse or partner can be devastating. The effect is
compounded when the person is an older adult. More than 75% of deaths occur in the
over-65 age bracket (Erford, 2017). Therefore, the death of a partner frequently occurs at
a time when losses associated with health, retirement, and decreased independence and
mobility have a cumulative effect. Guilt, remorse, disappointment, sadness, and anger
may be a normal part of the grieving process. Especially at the end of life when losses are
frequent, a bereaved person may not have enough time to work through the death of a
loved one before another loss occurs. Such back-to-back losses are called grief overload.
THE LOSS OF ANIMAL COMPANIONS 	Pets can play important roles in people’s lives by
reducing loneliness and isolation, providing a purpose in life, and even replacing the
loss of human social contact. For some people, losing a pet can be as difficult as losing a
family member. For these reasons, pet loss is included in this discussion of grief and
loss. More than 62% of American households and 70% of families with children live
with pets. Pets have become so common in the United States that more people now live
with a pet than live with children (American Pet Products Association, 2021). Grief over
the loss of a pet can be magnified due to lack of support by society for this loss. As with
other types of loss, the primary goal of counseling is to validate the person’s loss; reduce
the pain, regret, guilt, and sadness that follow the death of a pet; and help the person
resume a healthy level of functioning. Some people may decide to get another pet, while
others may take the time to reassess the commitment necessary to care for another pet.

-- 164 of 545 --

136 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
For children, however, the loss of a pet is frequently their first experience with
death. If handled sensitively, this loss can provide a valuable opportunity to learn
about death and to be involved in the grieving process. Children may express anger at
their parents, guardians, or veterinarian for not being able to save their pet. They may
also express fear and concern that others may be taken from them as well. Burial or
other rituals are particularly important for children and help them feel involved in the
grieving process.
Cause of Death
It seems to be human nature to scan the obituaries looking for causes of death. An imme-
diate flurry of questions results when someone dies. How did the person die? When?
How long did the person know of an impending death? What did the person do to
prevent it? What happened? By gathering the details associated with the cause of death,
questioners are distancing themselves from death and assessing the potential likelihood
of the same type of death happening to them. Such distancing does nothing to help the
bereaved and often leaves the bereaved feeling alienated and alone. By blaming victims
for their demise (e.g., “He smoked cigarettes,” “She didn’t wear a seat belt,” “They had
a family history of heart disease”) or projecting blame onto others, people are reassuring
themselves by saying, “This will never happen to me.” The effect of this reaction is to
leave the bereaved feeling alone in their grief. To be supportive, crisis counselors should
acknowledge that the death could have happened to any one of us.
TERMINAL ILLNESS 	When the dying process has been prolonged by treatment for a
chronic, long-term illness, families may have to grapple with difficult financial, legal,
religious, and ethical decisions about treatment. Questions about who makes the final
decision, what the patient would want, how long to continue life support, and other
ethical issues may arise. An extended illness can deplete a family’s financial and
emotional resources.
Helping families shift from the fighting spirit so necessary to battle an illness and
adopt an attitude of acceptance or “letting go” can provide a valuable opportunity to
create the sacred space in which the dying person can approach life’s end on personal
terms. When the focus shifts from curative efforts to end-of-life care, dying persons
should have the following four needs met: (1) freedom from pain: physically, the focus
should be on comfort care and reducing fear; (2) legal and ethical issues: they should have
the opportunity to put affairs in order, to allow a natural death, and to experience a more
humane transition; (3) emotional support: they deserve to have a sacred space in which
acceptance of the coming separation from their loved ones is acknowledged, they are
given the opportunity to grieve, to make amends, and to say goodbye to loved ones; and
(4) social support: they deserve to have people around them, to have family support for
themselves and for the other members of their family (Corr et al., 2019; HelpGuide, 2020).
In their work with dying people and their families, crisis counselors can be
instrumental in creating the space necessary to allow families to experience appropriate
end-of-life care. Over the past few decades, the hospice movement has provided many new
resources and opportunities to facilitate end-of-life decisions, provide quality care, and
help people experience a good death. In his book Dying Well, Ira Byock (1998), a physician
and former president of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, tells

-- 165 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	137
the story of his own father’s death from pancreatic cancer. The family gathered at his
father’s bedside, providing comfort care and medication for pain, sometimes laughing
and sometimes crying as they recounted stories from their childhood. As his father drew
his last breath, the family held his hands, complete in the knowledge that these were
precious moments and that they were honored to be sharing this final experience with
their beloved father. They remained in his room for an hour, crying and holding each
other, before calling the mortuary. As Byock reported, “It was real, and yet so unreal. Dad
was dead. The world had forever changed, yet it still turned; the sun still came up” (p. 24).
As more and more people forgo heroic efforts at life’s end and elect instead to allow
a natural death, social workers and crisis counselors will be called on to help families
through the transition from medical interventions to palliative care and, eventually,
death. Crisis counselors can help families share their feelings about the complicated
situation, consider different options, and accept the ambivalence that can result from
the conflicting emotions, including relief that the person is no longer suffering. Crisis
counselors may be instrumental in helping family members deal with any guilt or regrets
over their actions and eventually come to peace with the loss.
SUDDEN DEATH 	Sudden death creates special problems for survivors. Unlike a death
following a prolonged illness, sudden death denies family members, friends, and
coworkers the opportunity to come to terms with unfinished business, to prepare for
the loss, and to say goodbye. Sudden loss often leads to intensified grief. The world as
the survivor knew it has been shattered. Concurrent crises and secondary losses such as
lost income, a lost home, or even the loss of spiritual beliefs may also occur. Several
factors should be taken into consideration when working with survivors of sudden loss:
(1) natural versus human-made losses (e.g., heart attacks and tsunamis are examples of
natural causes; hostile actions and bombings are human made); (2) the degree of
intentionality (e.g., accident vs. drunk driving); and (3) how preventable the death was.
SUICIDE, HOMICIDE, AND COMMUNITY LOSSES: SCHOOL SHOOTINGS, TERRORIST ATTACKS,
AND NATURAL DISASTERS 	Losses connected with suicide, homicide, and various types
of community-wide disasters pose unique grief issues. These issues are discussed in
more detail in other chapters of this text, especially Chapters 12 and 13.
Normal versus Complicated Bereavement and the DSM-5-TR
Bereavement, which most people experience several times over a lifetime, is a normal
response to the death of a loved one. Prolonged or complicated bereavement occurs
when symptoms are of unusual duration or severity and interfere with life activities.
Both conditions are defined and addressed below. The DSM-5-TR (American Psychiatric
Association, 2022) now recognizes persistent complex bereavement disorder as a mental
disorder.
NORMAL BEREAVEMENT 	According to DSM-5-TR, bereavement occurs after losing
through death someone with whom a close relationship existed. The grieving
encompasses a range of reactions. Normal reactions to the death of a loved one can
include some symptoms that may mimic a major depressive episode such as sadness or
somatic symptoms, although the symptoms and duration can be expected to vary across

-- 166 of 545 --

138 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
cultures. In general, bereaved individuals experience symptoms of depression, but the
experience of the symptoms does not persist or cause significant clinical disruption to
normal life. Classic somatic symptoms that a mourner may experience include
interrupted sleep, lack of energy, and appetite disturbances. These symptoms are also
found in depression, and yet clinical depression differs from the sadness of grief in
several important ways. Any guilt associated with grief tends to be very specific to the
loss and does not permeate all areas of life, as depression does. Neither does grieving
generally lower the self-esteem of the bereaved.
The American Psychiatric Association (2022) cautioned against attaching a
diagnosis of major depressive disorder to an individual who is experiencing bereavement
even if the symptoms mirror the criteria, since in most cases the individual is exhibiting
a normal grieving response. Indeed, even the diagnosis of other specified depressive
disorder is cautioned for symptoms related to bereavement. Rather, a diagnosis of other
specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder (e.g., persistent complex bereavement
disorder) should be considered for complicated grief or bereavement.
Depression may co-occur with bereavement, particularly if the person has a
previous history or diagnosis of clinical depression. Only in those cases of risk to self
or others should a referral for medication be suggested. Referral for medical treatment
should be made only when the loss affects the normal functioning of the individual and
the loss is perceived as exceeding current coping skills or resources.
Crisis counselors are crucial when assessing and referring individuals in their
immediate grief. The grief process is a normal process, and often individuals do not want
to feel the normal reaction to their loss. However, to move forward in the healing process,
it is important to experience the feelings associated with the loss and not to deaden the
feelings through medication. Doing so will only prolong or delay the grief process.
COMPLICATED BEREAVEMENT 	Although most bereavement reactions fall into the “normal”
category, will quickly resolve, and will soon return the bereaved to previous levels of
functioning, 10–15% of people experience more enduring grief reactions (American
Psychiatric Association, 2022). Individuals displaying symptoms of normal bereavement
may subsequently be identified with complicated bereavement. Prior to the DSM-5-TR,
complicated bereavement was categorized by the severity and duration (exceeding 2 months)
of symptoms and was often inappropriately diagnosed as major depressive disorder.
To help differentiate between normal and complex or complicated grieving as
well as describe how bereavement can significantly affect life, the American Psychiatric
Association (2022) introduced a new category of disorder to the DSM-5: “other specified
trauma- and stressor-related disorder” (309.89). The diagnosis of other specified trauma-
and stressor-related disorder can be applied to individuals who have experienced a
death that causes significant distress and clinical impairment and whose symptoms
align with severe and persistent grief and mourning; the specifier “persistent complex
bereavement disorder” would be applied in such instances. Other specified trauma- and
stressor-related disorder (specified by “persistent complex bereavement disorder”) is
applied most often to individuals who meet the following diagnostic criteria (American
Psychiatric Association, 2022):
1. “The individual experienced the death of someone with whom there was a close
relationship” (p. 789).

-- 167 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	139
2. At least one of these symptoms has persisted more often than not, with clinical
impairment, in an adult for at least 12 months following the death (at least 6 months
for a child): persistent yearning for the deceased; intense sorrow in response to the
death; preoccupation with the deceased; preoccupation with the circumstances of
the death.
3. At least six of these symptoms have persisted more often than not, with clinical
impairment, in an adult for at least 12 months following the death (at least 6 months
for a child): difficulty accepting the death; experiencing emotional numbness;
difficulty in positive reminiscing; bitterness or anger related to the loss; self-
blame; desire to die; difficulty trusting others; feeling detached; feeling life is
meaningless; confusion about one’s role in life; reluctance in pursuing life goals.
4. The individual is experiencing significant occupational, social, or other impairment.
5. The bereavement reaction conforms to cultural, religious, or age-appropriate
norms.
Individuals who present with complicated grief reactions often benefit from early
interventions that may decrease the need for longer-term counseling and medication
management. Perception of the relationships, different causes of death, personality of the
bereaved, roles associated with the death, and other mediators can increase the length of
time for and complicate the bereavement process. For example, a married woman who
loses her partner of 50 years can be expected to experience bereavement for years just
as a father who lost his only son in a tragic school shooting may experience grief over a
longer period.
Difficulties in differentiating between perpetual grief and pathology led to the
diagnostic criteria of persistent complex bereavement disorder now included in
DSM-5-TR. When experiencing complicated grief, the reactions to the grief can be so
long lasting and severe that an individual has difficulty recovering from the loss and
returning to normal functioning. Temporary dysfunction is normal when experiencing
losses. However, when the functioning level becomes so affected over a period of time,
perpetual grief may evolve into complicated grief, hindering the normal functioning of
various aspects of life.
Clinicians must carefully assess the symptoms of their bereaved patients to
distinguish between the normal depressive reactions to death and other losses and the
more prolonged symptoms of grief associated with persistent and complex bereavement,
major depressive disorder, or posttraumatic stress disorder. However, when a person
is in the early stages of grief and mourning, it would be ineffective and potentially
harmful to prematurely refer clients for medication treatment or render a diagnosis that
does not consider the normal reactions to a loss, unless the client is experiencing severe
dysfunction.
INTERVENTIONS FOR GRIEF AND LOSS
Learning Objective 5.4 Describe effective interventions with various types of grief
and across the lifespan.
In the past decade, growing controversy over the effectiveness of grief work has led to
closer scrutiny of the empirical evidence. Several articles published in notable journals
suggested that grief work with normal bereavement could do more harm than good.

-- 168 of 545 --

140 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Despite limited research on effective interventions for the grieving process, it has become
common practice to help clients “work through” their grief. This is not to suggest that
there is a linear, preferred method or way to do this; rather, as memories and thoughts
come up, the bereaved client addresses the feelings, accepts them, and moves on.
Worden (2018) noted that one of the most important benefits of grief counseling is
educating the client about the dynamics of the grieving process. Crisis counselors should
help clients understand that there is no set time period for the mourning process, that
sadness and grief are normal, and that the process is not linear but rather comes and
goes like waves, in particular with developmental milestones where the loved one is
no longer around to share in the experiences. Specifically, holidays, birthdays, and the
first-year anniversary may be particularly difficult. Some people may also experience
increased sadness during the change of the seasons and may not feel appreciably better
until an entire year has gone by and anniversary dates begin to include new memories
of life after the loss of their loved one.
An effective intervention is to help the bereaved person realize that such times may
be difficult and encourage them to plan ahead for additional support during holidays,
birthdays, and anniversaries of the death. This can normalize the resurgence of grief
symptoms and the reactions. Exploring these personal dates can allow a person to have
control over the next wave of grief associated with the loss and become preventive.
Restoring Life’s Meaning
Helping people focus on recreating a meaningful existence is the most important
function of the grieving process. Hope gives us the courage to live, even in conditions
of despair. Hope is an orientation of the spirit. The biggest job of the crisis counselor
when working with bereaved clients is to help them make sense of the loss, accept the
changes that they did not wish for or create, and restore meaning to their lives. Working
on meaning and purpose often becomes the goal of long-term counseling after the crisis
is stabilized.
Spirituality, religion, and faith-based practices are also an important part of a
person’s coping strategies and help to give life meaning. Having a spiritual connection or
influence can often help people transcend suffering and adapt to life’s difficulties when
they occur. Crisis counselors, who may or may not be grounded in a religious tradition
of their own, must approach clients with respect and dignity without proselytizing about
their own faith and with recognition of the boundary between crisis counseling and
spiritual counseling. By following a theoretical model that addresses issues of spirituality
and religion, crisis counselors can improve client rapport and more accurately assess
and work with people in all stages of development and with diverse types of crises.
Acknowledging a person’s belief system can also provide a source of strength and
support and shed light on areas in which matters of faith may be contributing to suffering.
Some examples in which adherence to religious doctrines may add to the pain mourners
experience might occur surrounding issues of suicide, gay or lesbian relationships, and
married interracial couples.
Many individuals have a faith story that illustrates (or narrates) their spiritual
beliefs, and these stories are often brought up in the counseling session. Understanding
the influence of faith or spirituality is integral to the crisis planning or referral process.
This understanding starts with the counselor asking the client how faith or spirituality

-- 169 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	141
has influenced the client’s life, how it has or has not been helpful, and whether the
client has relied on faith or spirituality in a past crisis. Clients need to know that it is
okay to address their spiritual, philosophical, and moral dilemmas in the counselor’s
office. Unfortunately, counselors might avoid the discussion of faith and spirituality
with clients for fear that clients will perceive such questions as an attempt by counselors
to impose their beliefs.
Spiritually competent crisis counselors who have effectively incorporated
spirituality into their counseling practices can appreciate a richer assessment of the whole
person (i.e., mind, body, and spirit), a deeper rapport, and a fuller understanding of the
person’s beliefs, goals, and life’s purpose. Jahn and Spencer-Thoms (2014) reported those
who were grieving the loss of a loved one who also reported having spiritual experiences
claimed integrating their spiritual experiences had been helpful in their grieving process.
In addition, people who identified with a particular religious belief system but who may
be skeptical about counseling in the first place reported being more comfortable with the
counseling process if the clinician incorporated spirituality and meaning making into
the assessment process.
FICA 	Crisis counselors should be familiar with the stages of faith development as well
as cognizant of ethical boundaries related to discussing spiritual issues with clients.
Being aware of one’s own spiritual attitude and keeping that attitude out of the
counseling process, is crucial. People want and need to be able to discuss aspects of
their faith with clinicians. In recognition of that need, Christine Pulchaski, a physician,
developed the FICA Spiritual Assessment Tool (Borneman et al., 2010) to understand
whether a patient’s religion and spirituality influences their holistic care. FICA includes
the following four components:
1. Faith, Belief, and Meaning: Do you consider yourself a spiritual or religious per-
son? Where do you find meaning in life?
2. Importance and Influence: How important is your faith to your life? How do your
beliefs help you to cope in times of stress?
3. Church and Community: Are you a part of a faith-based or religious community?
If so, what type of support does this community provide?
4. Apply and Address: How would you like me to address or apply this information
in our work together?
Using the FICA spiritual assessment is just one way to assess the importance of
spirituality and seamlessly incorporate it into the therapeutic process to provide a richer,
more integrated, and more positive experience for the client. Crisis counselors should
also understand the developmental stages of faith.
FDT 	Faith development theory (FDT) is a cognitive–structural model of spiritual and
religious development that counselors can use to assess the client’s stage of spiritual
growth and development and to identify any developmental crisis that may be
occurring. FDT is nonsectarian and allows clinicians to “work with the client’s faith
structures without having to endorse or challenge specific religious beliefs” (Parker,
2011, p. 112). Fowler’s (1995) model of faith development views faith as a universal
human activity that manifests differently over the course of a lifetime. The stages range
from childhood to later life, with most people growing through the stages

-- 170 of 545 --

142 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
developmentally, although not all will achieve the final stage in which faith is
universalized. According to Fowler, FDT incorporates the following six stages:
• Stage 1—Intuitive–Projective Stage. An egocentric stage that is most often seen
in childhood (age 3 to 7 years), where fantasy and reality are intertwined. The
imagination is powerful, and images can be either positive and enforcing of values
or destructive and terrorize the child (e.g., monsters in the closet at night). The
emergence of concrete operational thinking and the child’s desire to know how
things work and to distinguish between what is real and what is imagined often
marks the transition to Stage 2.
• Stage 2—Mythic–Literal Stage. A narrative is used to give meaning to life at this
stage, where logic, cause-and-effect relationships, and a sense of justice begin to
emerge as well as the beginnings of taking another’s perspective. The child begins
to take on the beliefs, stories, and symbols of the community or family. Story
making becomes a way of making sense of the world. In this stage, a person may
become too literal, and goodness and evil may be seen as a strict duality.
• Stage 3—Synthetic–Conventional Stage. Personal identity is formed at this stage,
and self-worth is determined by the approval of others. Generally, the development
of personal identity occurs in adolescence, but for many it may provide the faith
balance they hold for the rest of their lives. Fowler (1995) refers to this stage as
a conformist stage in which faith and values mesh nicely with the expectations
and judgments of others. When the emergence of autonomy gives rise to critical
reflection on how one’s beliefs and values were formed, or how one loses faith
in leaders or the establishment, the transition to Stage 4 may begin. Leaving
home, establishing one’s own identity, and other experiences that result in self-
examination of values are also likely precursors to transitioning to Stage 4.
• Stage 4—Individuative–Reflective Stage. The recognition at this stage of the world-
views and experiences of others leads to critical reflection on one’s own beliefs and
outlook. For some, this critical reflection occurs in young adulthood, with the rise
of responsibility for personal beliefs, attitudes, commitments, and lifestyle. For
others, it occurs later in life (late 30s to 40s), if at all. Highlights of Stage 4 include
tension between individuality and group membership; a recognition of injustice
(sexism, racism, nationalism); demythologization of symbols; and a broadening of
one’s worldview.
• Stage 5—Conjunctive Stage. This stage moves beyond the logic of prior stages. In
it, one begins to view truth as multidimensional and relative. The exceptions lead
one to search for deeper spiritual meanings and a justice worldview that extends
beyond family, state, or religious denomination. There is a danger that people in
this stage may become cynical or passive, firmly planted in the physical world and
unable to transcend or to act upon their newfound beliefs. Those who can act are
likely to put their efforts toward creating a better world.
• Stage 6—Universalizing Faith Stage. Although Fowler (1995) believed this stage is
rarely achieved, those who do reach this level of faith development believe in the
inclusiveness of all beings. They may rise above religious boundaries and social
or political structures, and they may become radicalized in their attempts to help
humanity. People in this stage recognize the impermanence of everything, are free
of ideological bonds, and are sometimes honored and revered for their beliefs.

-- 171 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	143
By understanding the stages of faith development, the crisis counselor is better able
to assess the effects of the crisis on the client and to help the client identify and work
through any faith stage transition that coincides with the ongoing crisis. Identifying the
client’s stage of faith development can lead to an identification of transitions between
stages in contrast to stable periods, and it can help determine how current life crises may
be intersecting with faith stages in a beneficial or disharmonious way.
Physical and spiritual crises can happen in life at any time. Helping clients
recognize and distinguish a faith stage transition from a life crisis can help normalize the
experience, provide a manner of looking at the two crises separately, and help the client
understand the effect one has on the other. For example, a client who is proceeding with
a divorce and then learns of being excommunicated from their religious institution of 20
years must come to terms with the loss of not only a marriage but also a supportive faith-
based community. Helping clients to separate the two types of grief and acknowledge
and work through the loss of each can help this client move forward and perhaps find
others who are struggling with similar issues. Complete Activity 5.3 to gain further
insight into how you can integrate spirituality into grief work with clients. Then complete
Think About It 5.2.
Consider Fowler’s stages of faith development. What
stage best fits your spiritual development? Are you
currently in a stable period or in a period of transition?
How has your faith affected other areas of your life
(e.g., work, relationships, decision making)? How
might your stage of religious or spiritual development
positively affect your role as a crisis counselor? What
might be some limitations?
ACTIVITY 5.3
Think about how you might use the FICA spiritual
assessment tool and Fowler’s stages of faith
development. How comfortable are you incorporating
these tools in your clinical work? How is meeting the
client’s spiritual needs part of your responsibility as
a clinician? How will you listen for clues to spiritual
suffering and approach clients about spiritual issues?
How do your own religious and spiritual issues affect
your work with clients around death and dying?
THINK ABOUT IT 5.2
COVID-19 and Other Pandemics
COVID-19 has affected the lives of individuals and communities globally. This health
emergency became a leading cause of death worldwide in 2020 (Zhai & Du, 2020). The
losses connected with the pandemic are too numerous to detail. The overwhelming
number of deaths, inability for caregivers and family members to remain in their
caregiver roles, inability to offer physical and emotional support for their loved ones
in illness and death, and inability to offer the type of final closure as in pre-COVID-19
times has initiated new forms of losses. Frontline workers and first responders were
deployed until exhaustion, endured longer than normal separation from their own
families to assist with others needing their care, and were repeatedly exposed to
COVID-19 variants.

-- 172 of 545 --

144 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Losses from celebrating normal milestones mounted (e.g., graduations, birthdays,
weddings, funerals, holidays). Changes in religious practices, such as not being able to
be present in faith-based centers for a long time, caused additional losses for individuals
and families. Loss of jobs leading to financial stressors increased economic strains that
affected individuals and families. Existential losses (e.g., freedoms, belonging, indepen-
dence, and personal choices), social isolation, restricted individual health care choices,
and the long-term health effects of COVID-19 led many clients into crisis.
Understanding the impact of COVID-19 from the client’s perspective is essential.
Even considering the issues that have been divisive within society, the crisis worker
must strive to see the crisis from the individual’s perspective and work to assist the
client in their perceived crisis. Increased demand to address increased mental health
symptoms and individuals at risk means that crisis counselors must establish boundaries
and healthy coping strategies to decrease burnout and fatigue.
Assisting individuals in identifying their losses and developing strategies and
resources to adapt to the chronic pandemic will be an essential part of any crisis plan. The
concept of loss adaptation is more appropriate to apply to the pandemic than loss coping.
Adaptation allows individuals to adapt to continuous situations posed by the pandemic
rather than coping, which often implies working through it with a time limitation.
Identifying underlying meaning attached to the loss(es) will be helpful in meaning
reconstruction and integrating coping skills to adapt to future situations. Identifying
sources of resilience and social support will be beneficial to clients to empower grievers’
adaptations to future crises (Zhai & Du, 2020). With the unknown future, and often
perceived lack of control and powers, assisting clients who experience a crisis connected
to the pandemic will be helpful to prepare clients for future crises. Indeed, the lessons
learned during the COVID-19 pandemic will be useful in approaching new pandemics
and crisis situations that may arise.
Interventions
Grief is an individual, subjective experience with many different facets. There is no
single model of grief counseling because grief work must consider the importance of
culture, background, religious and spiritual issues, and family history as well as the
individual qualities, circumstances, and personality of the mourner. Helping people
focus on recreating a meaningful existence or moving toward a new meaning becomes
the most important function of the grieving process.
By considering individual grieving styles, crisis counselors can tailor appropriate
interventions for client needs. Doka (2005) identified a continuum of grieving styles ranging
from intuitive to instrumental. People who are intuitive respond to grief affectively,
whereas instrumental grievers are more likely to react cognitively or behaviorally.
Doka (2005) suggested that recovery from a loss may not be possible or desirable and
instead described amelioration of grief, a return to similar (or better) levels of functioning
with diminished pain. The bereaved maintain connections to the deceased through
memory, biography, legacy, and spirituality. Crisis counselors face the challenge of
helping the bereaved celebrate connections while avoiding potential problems such as
an inability to grow or move forward.
The emotional impact of the loss of a family member, especially the death of a
partner, can linger for years, even decades, depending on circumstances, age, cause of

-- 173 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	145
death, social support, and other mediators. Because loss of a family member can have
detrimental effects on the health and mental health of survivors, a thorough assess-
ment that includes the physical, psychological, cognitive, and spiritual effects of the loss
should be conducted with these clients.
Crisis counselors should routinely ask how their clients found out about the death.
Especially in sudden loss, including suicide, the survivors should be encouraged to talk
about what happened as often as possible, to have their reactions validated and believed,
and to be with others who have been through similar experiences. It is not helpful to
tell clients that they need medication or should not think about the death. Nor is it
helpful to refer clients to support groups prematurely. Grassroots organizations such
as Compassionate Friends, Parents of Murdered Children, and Mothers Against Drunk
Driving can offer support and information for survivors.
For the treatment of complicated grief, cognitive-behavioral therapy is effective.
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy also showed promise in helping people to accept
what has happened to them and stay focused in the moment without dwelling on the
past or worrying about the future. Mindfulness-based practices such as meditation,
focused breathing, and body scans can also help people in crisis reduce their distress
and can promote long-term well-being (Humphrey, 2009).
Writing a life history or creating a personal narrative as one approaches the final
stage of life can help give life meaning and can provide a valuable integration of the
totality of one’s life. Butler (1963) was the first to describe the universal occurrence of life
review in older people. Butler noted that the “looking-back process” was set in motion by
the nearness of death, coupled with the additional time available for self-reflection that
is a by-product of retirement. Dreams and thoughts of death and of the past are reported
to increase in the seventh and eighth decades of life.
Congruent with Erikson and Erikson’s (1998) psychosocial crisis of stage 8 (i.e.,
integrity vs. despair), depending on the environment and the individual’s character,
life review can increase reminiscences and mild nostalgia, which can result in adaptive
and positive integration of one’s life or it can result in increased anxiety, depression, and
despair. Those who cannot integrate, comprehend, and realistically accept their lives as
adequate run the risk of inner turmoil, increased rumination, depression, and possibly
suicide. Erikson suggested that it is not the process of life review but the achievement of
integrity that promotes successful aging.
Other classic interventions such as logotherapy (Frankl, 2006); narrative therapy
(Neimeyer, 2001); expressive therapy through art, music, or journaling; mindfulness
meditation (Davidson et al., 2003); and other types of counseling that address spiritual
needs can all contribute to meaning making and can be effective tools for working with
people in crisis. As in all therapy, the role of the crisis counselor is to provide empathy,
detect suffering and address it, normalize grief reactions, gather enough information
to determine the type of grief experiences and other issues that complicate the grieving
process, and provide psychoeducation about what lies ahead in the next stage of
development. Counselors who can do this in a culturally and spiritually competent
manner can help relieve a client’s distress and improve that person’s quality of life, no
matter what the crisis or which stage of faith development the person is experiencing. In
general, the mourning process concludes when the person feels more hopeful, experiences
a renewed interest in life, can discuss the loss without extreme emotion, and responds
to condolences with gratitude rather than avoidance. Read Voices from the Field 5.2.

-- 174 of 545 --

146 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Group Support
Short-term bereavement support groups can sometimes provide positive adjunctive
support to individual grief work, especially when the type of loss results in feelings of
isolation (e.g., suicide, homicide, HIV, miscarriage, infertility). As with all therapeutic
groups, clients should be screened prior to participation to ensure that they are
appropriate for the group. Parents who have lost a child should not be put in groups
Randall M. Moate
One of the primary tenets of Buddhist philosophy is the
idea that suffering is a part of the human condition.
While at first glance this idea may sound bleak, it is not
intended in that way. Simply put, this idea refers to the
notion that whatever brings us pleasure or happiness
also has the capacity to bring us pain. Another way
to understand this idea is to consider the things that
fill up our lives with meaning or happiness, such as
careers, personal interests, family, children, friendships,
romantic relationships, possessions, good health, goals,
and personal values. While the presence of these things
gives our lives meaning, purpose, and pleasure, loss
of any of them can create a void that causes fear,
confusion, and sadness. How we experience loss and
grief is personal to each of us, yet experiencing loss
and grief is something that is common to all humans.
This is something that binds us together as part of the
human experience.
As a counselor, something that I have had
to overcome is a natural reaction to want to dive in
and pull my clients out of their grief. When someone
has experienced a loss and is submerged in grief, my
initial reaction is, “How can I help my client feel better
as soon as possible?” In other words, I want to help
my client move out of the sad or painful place and
bring my client toward a happier place in the present.
What I have come to learn is that this is precisely the
wrong thing to do. Clients experiencing acute grief, or
a vacuum of meaning after a major loss, need space
and time to grieve and to settle into this painful space.
I have found that clients will move forward from their
grief and loss on their own time when they are ready
to do so. Attempting to move clients from this place
before they are ready is almost guaranteed to turn out
badly. It has been my experience that clients resent, or
take poorly to, feeling ushered out of their state of grief
by their counselors.
When working with clients who have experienced
loss and grief, I have found that these individuals
want several things. They want me to listen deeply to
their story, experience a compassionate and human
connection with me, and sense that I have understanding
and empathy for their experience. But how does
one achieve these things? To counter my knee-jerk
reaction to want to dive in and save my clients, I have
developed a personal maxim I use in counseling that
I call “less is more,” which refers to less questioning,
less intervention, less technique, and less direction on
my behalf. This results in my coming across to my client
as being more helpful, more compassionate, and more
understanding. Clients in deep grief are not looking for
a magic solution from me. In truth, even if they were,
I possess no magic solutions or answers that could fill
the void from their loss. What I can do, however, is
listen carefully to my clients, help them sit with their
grief, and through my body language and presence
communicate a sense of compassion and respect.
Perhaps the most valuable thing I do when
working with a client who is experiencing grief, or coping
with loss, is share hope. Sometimes after major losses
and when grief is at its apex, a client may experience
a loss of hope. From the perspective of the place that
they are in, it seems as if things will never get better.
I have witnessed some of my clients make profound
changes in their lives and overcome huge obstacles.
I hold onto these memories in a special place within me,
as they remind me that people are resilient and have the
capacity to change. Amidst the despair, confusion, and
sadness my client may present during sessions, these
memories act as a lighthouse for me and orient me
toward a sense of hope and optimism. I then, in turn, try
to act as a lighthouse for my clients and help orient them
toward the hope and optimism I feel for their situation.
While I rarely find it appropriate to verbalize this during a
session, I believe that my clients can sense it nonetheless.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 5.2
Working with Clients Experiencing Loss and Grief

-- 175 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	147
with those who have miscarried. People who have lost a grandparent should not be
grouped with people who have lost a spouse or a child. As much as possible, the makeup
of support groups should be homogeneous.
Looking ahead to Case Study 5.2, which follows later in the chapter, Shayna felt
comfortable in a support group for young adults (age 23–29 years) who had lost a
spouse, fiancé, sibling, or parent. During each week of the 6-week group, clients were
asked to process a different aspect of their loss. In week 1, clients were asked to talk
about the person they lost. In week 2, they were asked what surprised them most about
the grieving process. In week 3, they had a type of “show and tell,” with each person
bringing in an object and explaining its relationship to the person they had lost. Week 4
was devoted to rituals, and each person in turn lit a candle as they spoke of rituals that
had proved helpful. During the final two sessions, the group members processed their
feelings toward one another and the connections they had made, vowing to continue
meeting outside of the group environment. As with all other groups, it is important to
screen clients beforehand for readiness for the group experience. In general, most people
will not be ready to join a support group in the first month after a loss.
Support groups for suicide loss survivors should help members focus on the unique
elements of their loss. Many survivors are eager to know why their loved one ended
their life, so reconstructing the final days, looking for clues, and talking about their last
telephone call may be integral to the grieving process. It is important to indicate that
there may never be an answer to the survivor’s “why” questions. It is more important
to be able to understand why the loss is keeping the survivor from healing and moving
forward without the loved one. Common questions to help achieve this understanding
could focus on the survivor’s perception of role: “What does it mean to you that your
oldest child is not alive?” or “What does it mean to you that your child died by suicide?”
Absolving guilt is another important aspect. Processing these feelings together
as a group helps normalize the feelings so that the guilt frequently begins to dissipate.
Another distinctive goal of survivor support groups is to prevent future suicides.
Family members and friends of a person who has completed suicide are more likely to
attempt suicide themselves. The reason is unclear, but it may be that once the taboo of
suicide has been breached, it becomes an acceptable alternative to life. Another possibility
is that the survivor empathizes with the other’s despair. Whatever the reason, individual
and group interventions with survivors of suicide loss should have a goal to prevent
future suicides.
Working with Children
According to Worden (2018), “the same tasks of grieving that apply to the adult
obviously apply to the child” (p. 235). But such tasks must be modified to meet the social,
cognitive, emotional, and developmental stages of the child. Preparing children, first-
time funeralgoers, or people from cultures not familiar with the concept of viewings and
funerals in traditional American society for what to expect can help decrease additional
crisis or anxiety. A child attending a funeral for the first time may have extreme reactions
to specific funeral customs (e.g., open caskets, touching the dead body, graveside burial),
but if explained appropriately, these customs can help the healing process.
Following the death of a parent or guardian, children need support, continuity, and
nurturance. In a 2-year study of 125 schoolchildren who experienced the loss of a par-
ent, Worden (2001) found that 80% were coping well by the first or second anniversary

-- 176 of 545 --

148 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
of their parent’s death. The stability of the remaining parent was the greatest predictor
of the level of a child’s adjustment to a parent’s death. Based on the study, the following
needs of bereaved children were identified:
1. Bereaved children need to have their questions answered in an age-appropriate
way. They need to know that they were not responsible in any way for their
parent’s or guardian’s death. Frequently asked questions on children’s minds
include the circumstances surrounding the death: “How did my mother [father,
parent, guardian] die?” “Where is my dad [mom, parent, guardian] now?” If the
parent or guardian died from disease or cancer, the concept of contagion may
need to be explained to children who think they might contract their parent’s or
guardian’s illness: “Will it happen to me?”
2. Children need to feel involved. Developing a ritual, allowing children to be involved
in the funeral, and including them in decision making are important. For example,
having a child place a memento in the casket, light a candle, or help decide which
clothing a surviving parent will wear allows a child of any age to be included in
the rituals of mourning.
3. Children’s routines should be kept as consistent as possible. This can be difficult
for the grieving parent or guardian, but research shows these children do better
when they know what to expect, can rely on the remaining parent or guardian
for support and nurturance, and have families that exhibit an active rather than
a passive coping style. Families in which the surviving parent or guardian is not
coping well, is young, is the father, becomes depressed, or begins dating within
1 year of the spouse’s death are likely to have children who have more anxiety,
lower self-esteem, and less self-efficacy and who exhibit more acting-out behavior.
4. Children need a way to remember the deceased. Photographs, scrapbooks, and
memory books filled with stories or pictures of the deceased can all help children
remember. Such books may be referred to again and again as they grow older.
Due to their limited life experiences and coping skills, children may have more
difficulty mourning than adults. Children’s reality is often formed through fantasy and
play. They are likely to fill in the blanks with assumptions or partial truths suited to
their developmental age. They have a limited understanding of the world around them;
therefore, they need playtime to act out their feelings of anger, anxiety, or fear.
If a child regresses or participates in acting-out behavior, a thorough assessment
may be in order. A screening instrument for identifying bereaved children who are
at increased risk can be found in Worden’s book Children and Grief: When a Parent
Dies (2001). Useful interventions for helping children of all ages come to terms with
their grief include play therapy, expressive art therapies, peer support groups, camps,
and bibliotherapy with books such as Tear Soup (Corr & Balk, 2011) or Waterbugs and
Dragonflies (Stickney & Nordstrom, 2010).
Mourning may be a lifelong process for children who lose a parent or guardian.
Feelings may be reactivated during adulthood when life events (e.g., weddings, other
deaths or losses, reaching the same age as the parent or guardian who died) trigger
the memory of loss. Recognition of these potentially vulnerable times allows people
to actively plan their grief work. Psychoeducation may mean simply explaining that
the bereaved may reexperience the intensity of the grief at various milestones or
developmental achievements. This knowledge may assist the individual in knowing this

-- 177 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	149
to be a normal possibility and potentially decrease future crises related to the original
loss. See Table 5.1 for suggestions and techniques on counseling grieving children and
adolescents. Also read Voices from the Field 5.3.
General Developmental Considerations
• Children typically do not perceive death as reality until approximately age 7 years.
• Before age 2 years, the child’s concept of death is primarily “out of sight, out of mind.” Some
theorists would argue that if a child is capable of love, then that child can experience some
sort of grieving.
• Children age 2 to 7 years (Piaget’s preoperational stage) experience death as magical,
egocentric, and causal. They see death as temporary, see a possibility of reviving the dead, see
the dead person as living in a box underground, think their own thoughts or actions caused
the death, think death is like sleep, and have an inaccurate estimate of lifespan (e.g., they may
think people live over 150 years).
• Children age 7 to 12 years (Piaget’s concrete operations stage) have a concept of death
that is curious and realistic. Children are interested in details of death; begin to internalize
the universality and permanence of death; conceptualize that all bodily functions stop; can
comprehend thoughts of an afterlife; and can estimate accurately how long people live. They
think of death’s occurrence in specific observable, concrete terms, and they believe that very
old, severely impaired, and extremely awkward people are those who die.
• Adolescents age 13 years and older (Piaget’s formal operations stage) have a concept of death
that is self-absorbed. They understand mortality and death as a natural process. Coming to
terms with death is a primary task of adolescence. Denial of one’s own death is strong; they
feel omnipotent. They are more comfortable talking about death with peers than with adults.
• Some children may experience guilt about the death (they may have wished the person dead),
so it is important to convey the following:
• Thoughts do not kill.
• No one is perfect. (Give them permission to be imperfect.)
• All people die at some point.
• Also help children who experience guilt remember the following:
• Good times with the deceased
• Meaningful relationships with the deceased
• Guilt may be displayed in many ways, including forgetting, inattention, and aggression.
Dos and Don’ts When Counseling Grieving Children and Adolescents
Do
• Tell the truth (e.g., “I don’t know” is an okay answer to “why” questions).
• Maintain structure, rules, and limits to provide security.
• Hug.
• Have adult caretakers save special items from the deceased person to give the client later
(e.g., a collection, a bible, a sweatshirt).
• Be a good role model (e.g., don’t be afraid to cry in front of the client; it lets the client
know that you care and that it is okay to cry).
• Talk about loss and death before a significant death occurs, if possible.
• Help the client make decisions about attending the funeral (if the death is recent).
• Tell the client they did not cause the death by angry thoughts or words.
TABLE 5.1 Counseling Grieving Children and Adolescents
(continued)

-- 178 of 545 --

150 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
• Reinforce that the client will be taken care of and remind the child about available resources.
• Recognize that children and adolescents express grief physically. They flush out the wound by
beating, pounding, or running it out.
• Allow younger clients to select the play activities needed to work through their grief.
• Be prepared to listen to the client’s beliefs on religion and spirituality.
• Let the client talk about feelings through drawings.
• Give the client something to do to help combat helplessness, such as plant a tree to remember
the person or write a story about the person.
• Suggest bibliotherapy.
• Use third person when talking to a child or adolescent—doing so is less threatening (e.g., say
“Many children/adolescents feel . . . ” instead of “Do you feel . . . ?”)
• Look through photo albums with the client.
• Allow the client to share precious moments.
• Talk about the loss whenever the client brings it up.
• Answer only what is asked. Let the client decide what they are ready to hear.
• Expect children to regress somewhat: clinging, fear of the dark, etc.
• Talk about the cause of death to children in understandable terms (e.g., “Your father died
because his heart could not work anymore”).
Don’t
• Underestimate the client’s grief.
• Try to protect the client from feeling pain.
• Assume that the client will respond to the loss as you would.
• Worry about saying the “right words.”
• Try to find something good about the death (“Aren’t you glad mommy isn’t in pain anymore?”).
• Associate lack of tears with lack of grief. Some children and adolescents do not cry, which does
not mean they are not equally affected.
• Push the client to talk about the loss.
• Worry about crying in front of the child. Tears give the child permission to be real too.
• Shut the client out by excluding them from conversations about the deceased, death-related dis-
cussions, and grief-promoting rituals.
• Be overly simplistic about the death, focusing on heaven and not the loss.
• Demand maturity as a substitute for grief (e.g., “Now you are the man of the house”).
• Allow the client to be the emotional caregiver to the parents or guardians.
• Worry about the client’s appetite.
• Use abstract language to soften the death. Use the words died and dead. Avoid words like lost,
sleeping, gone to another place—these are all contexts that the person could possibly return
from.
• Promise you will not die.
• Be afraid of initiating talk about the death. Refer to the deceased by name.
• Assume that the client will always want to talk about the death. Children in particular handle bits
and pieces of grief at a time.
• Single out the grieving student (if counseling takes place at school); rather, treat the student the
same as other peers.
• Equate death with illness.
Counselors should communicate with young clients using concrete terms they understand,
establish a good rapport with young clients, and answer questions factually. They should avoid
philosophical interpretations and fantasy stories. Finally, if a counselor does not know the answer
to a question, admit it. Children appreciate honesty.

-- 179 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	151
Family Interventions
When a death occurs in a family, all members should have the opportunity to share the
effects of the death. Often, families mistakenly assume that if there was limited contact
then the death may not cause concerns for the other family members. Connectedness,
communication, and mutual support and respect among members of the family seem
the most likely to engender a balanced response to the loss. Two extremes run the risk
of developing dysfunctional patterns: (1) families in which grief is avoided and pain is
hidden and (2) families that cannot eventually work together to pick up the pieces and
begin to form new attachments. Such patterns can affect the family for generations to
come. Finding meaning in the loss can help family members begin to heal.
DIFFICULTIES IN GRIEF COUNSELING
Learning Objective 5.5 Assess difficulties in the grieving process.
Let’s now turn our attention to difficulties that may arise in the grieving process. These
difficulties may include dealing with survivor withdrawal due to overwhelming feelings
and counselor self-care that may require debriefing or counseling for the counselor.
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
For many years, I have worked with COPS-Kids (Concerns
of Police Survivors-Kids) during National Police Week,
which is held each May in Washington, DC. During this
time, COPS-Kids provides group counseling to hundreds
of children who lost a parent or parents in the line of
duty. It was not uncommon to have a child in a group
one year and see the child again a few years later in
another group. That was what happened with Macy.
I never knew how a simple statement of normalizing
a future grief reaction could empower a young person
and prevent further crisis until I saw Macy again.
Macy was in my middle school group when I first
met her. Her father was killed in the line of duty just a
year earlier. She was able to share many fond memories
of her father and was experiencing what appeared to
be normal grieving around his absence in her life. In
the group counseling she attended, we talked about
upcoming events where deceased fathers or mothers
(or both) would not be present to share in their
sporting, academic, religious, or other developmental
achievements. I can recall telling all my groups that often
the death of our loved ones can affect us at every life
transition and event, even later into our lives. Moreover,
I explained that the intense grief reactions we had at
the time of the death that we believed we had worked
through can come back and we can reexperience those
intense feelings we experienced when the death first
impacted our lives. I also spoke about other feelings
that were not present at the death but that could come
up for the first time, like resentment and jealousy, and
feelings toward others not connected with the death.
I was hoping to prepare the children for events and to
normalize any retriggering of feelings in life.
Three years later, Macy was in my high school
group. She spoke to the group about her intense
feelings of grief and new feelings of resentment toward
her peers and God when her father was not with her at
her eighth-grade graduation, father–daughter dance,
and Confirmation or when he was not there to help her
with her basketball skills when she tried out for the high
school team. Macy said she remembered what I had
said 3 years ago, and it was those words that allowed
her to understand that what she was reexperiencing
was normal grief in response to a new event and to talk
it through with her supporters.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 5.3
The Power of Normalizing and Preparing for Future Grief Reactions

-- 180 of 545 --

152 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Withdrawal
When the survivor feels that no one understands or when the circumstances of the
death or loss are so rare that no one in the survivor’s social network has experienced
such a loss before, the result can be withdrawal and isolation. This loss of empathy and
connection causes the person to withdraw to make sense of the tragedy. The person may
be overwhelmed with feelings of loss, guilt, anger, shame, or vulnerability. And yet no
one in the person’s support network can share in the specific form of loss. The person
feels alone and, in this aloneness, may lose faith in beliefs. An example of withdrawal
is presented in Case Study 5.2. Then complete Activity 5.4, which asks you to consider
your views on end-of-life issues, followed by Think About It 5.3.
CASE STUDY 5.2
A Case of Bereavement-Related Withdrawal
Shayna, a woman in her mid-20s, presented for counseling several months after the death
of her fiancé, Eliza, from a rare viral infection. While hospitalized for the virus, Eliza
had a heart attack, lapsed into a coma, and died several days later. She was 25 years old.
Shayna was distraught, as was Eliza’s family. The death was completely unexpected—
and making sense of it was deferred for months as they awaited autopsy results. It was
only after the autopsy that they discovered that a rare and fatal virus had crystallized in
Eliza’s organs, and one by one her organs failed. Even then, the cause of death was not
fully comprehensible. It did not make sense.
Eliza’s mother and father were in their 40s; her younger brothers and sisters still
lived at home. Her death was out of chronological order. Shayna was sad and could not
stop searching for answers. She sought out her minister and a psychic, and she even
attended new-age healing sessions in her efforts to make sense of the tragedy. She had a
large support network of college friends and coworkers of her own age. While initially
supportive of her grief, many of her friends had never experienced the death of a loved
one and, one by one, they stopped asking about her loss and began to focus instead
on their latest career moves, graduate school plans, and other day-to-day activities.
Shayna stopped returning their calls. She began to isolate herself from friends and family
and, other than going to work, did not leave her house. Shayna reported, “No one can
understand what I am going through.” She could no longer relate to the trivial matters
that made up the drama of her young friends’ lives. “Only someone who has experienced
death can appreciate the fragility of life,” Shayna said.
Shayna’s counseling focused on building a bridge back to her life. At first, her days
were filled with yearning to have her fiancé back, while at night she dreamed about
her but could not communicate with her. Each morning she awoke sad and frustrated.
Those first sessions early in counseling were very painful as Shayna recounted the story
of her fiancé’s death. Nothing could be done to help except to be present, empathic, and
bear witness to her pain. This gave her comfort in the knowledge that someone else was
accompanying her on this painful journey. She was not alone.

-- 181 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	153
It has been said that we all come into the world in the
same way, but the way we die is different for everyone.
Think about all that you have read in this chapter.
What experiences have you had with grieving families
or people who are facing their own deaths? Which of
the experiences that you have read about here would
be the most difficult for you? Which would be easier?
How could you best educate yourself in preparation for
addressing future clients’ needs surrounding issues of
death and dying that might arise in the course of your
professional work?
ACTIVITY 5.4
Counseling included discussion of the unconscious needs reflected in Shayna’s
dreams and the importance of establishing rituals to honor her fiancé. Each night she
would light a candle and talk to Eliza’s picture. This gave her comfort and a newfound
way to communicate with her. Shayna also talked about the goals they had for the future.
She decided to continue on the same path for a while and to move ahead with one of their
goals—to get a dog. The puppy proved to be a source of solace and support.
Shayna continued to go to work as an accountant, although she had many physical
symptoms including anxiety, waking up in the middle of night, loss of interest in food
and daily routines, and poor concentration. Cognitive-behavioral therapy helped her
identify and rate her anxiety. Shayna learned how to do breathing exercises to regulate
her breath and ward off panic attacks and how to conduct a simple body scan meditation
at night to help her relax and get back to sleep.
Gradually, Shayna began to confide in two coworkers who checked in with her
regularly. The trust and support she found in these two women helped her begin to
integrate the trauma into her life and start to reconnect with the community. When
she was ready, she participated in a support group, run by a local hospice specifically
for young people who were widowed or had lost siblings or significant others. Finally,
Shayna found a group of people of her own age who could relate to her and she began to
tell her story in an empathic, supportive environment. “I no longer feel like I’m a freak,”
she said. “I looked at the people in that room and realized that every person has baggage.
Everyone has some trauma or some deep dark secret that they’re living with. I’m not
alone.” Within a year, Shayna was ready to continue on the path she had set for herself
prior to the death. She applied to graduate schools, was accepted, and the following year
moved to New York.
Discussion Questions
1. What symptoms of grief did Shayna exhibit?
2. What facts surrounding the death of her fiancé made recovery more difficult?
3. What questions would you ask about Shayna’s life to help in your clinical decision
making?
4. What type of treatment would you recommend?
5. With a peer as a client in this situation, role-play implementation of the task model
of crisis management and intervention presented in Table 1.1.

-- 182 of 545 --

154 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
Counseling the Crisis Counselor
Working with grieving clients can raise some of our own issues surrounding grief, loss,
and mortality. To avoid secondary (vicarious) traumatization or compassion fatigue,
counselors learn to establish healthy boundaries, seek supervision, and recognize
transference (Kanno & Giddings, 2017). Appropriate self-care is particularly important
for crisis counselors (see Chapter 14).
When working with grieving clients, Worden (2018) warns against cutting
counseling short because of the counselor’s own frustration or anger. He offers that
nothing is more frustrating for a crisis counselor than not being able to help a client; yet,
in the case of the death of a loved one, there is nothing a counselor can do about the death.
Participating in a client’s grieving process has a profound effect on crisis counselors,
who must make sure that their own issues do not get in the way. Worden is particularly
concerned about three areas that might affect a crisis counselor’s ability to be helpful:
(1) counselors who have had a similar loss that they have not worked through,
(2) counselors working with a client’s loss when they fear a similar loss of their own (such as
the death of a parent or child), and (3) existential fears resulting from the counselor’s failure
to come to terms with their own mortality. The last issue can be addressed if counselors are
willing to explore their own history of loss and fine-tune their death awareness.
Clinicians working with dying patients frequently have difficulty with one or more
types of death. Perhaps one of the most important traits for crisis counselors to possess
is knowledge of their own limitations and recognition of their own unresolved issues. By
recognizing that not every counselor can work with every issue, they are better prepared
to help those they can help and provide appropriate referrals for those they cannot.
Counselors who do grief work or who work with dying clients should (1) recognize their
own limitations and accept these limitations with compassion and without judgment,
(2) work to prevent burnout by practicing mindfulness meditation and active grieving,
and (3) know how to ask for help, seeking supervision when necessary (Halifax, 2011;
Renzenbrink, 2011; Worden, 2018). Working in pairs, when possible, can help relieve some
of the stress.
EFFECTIVE DEATH NOTIFICATIONS
Learning Objective 5.6 Understand the components required for effective death
notifications.
Historically, crisis counselors seldom acted as first responders in the death notification
process, although in their personal lives, death notifications were inevitable. Often
Think about your own history of loss and grief. Grief
counseling is not the place for counselors to work out
their own unresolved grief issues, and those who find
themselves in acute grief should first seek their own
counseling before trying to help others. People who
have worked through their own grief successfully can be
instrumental in helping others work through theirs. Think
back on your earliest experience with death. How old
were you? How did you feel? What helped you to cope
with the loss? Now think of a more recent loss you expe-
rienced. Again, what coping skills did you develop? Look
into your future. What do you expect will be the most dif-
ficult death for you to accept? How will you cope? What
thoughts arise when you think about your own death?
THINK ABOUT IT 5.3

-- 183 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	155
when the notification is for someone in their own life, all the counseling skills one has
learned and practiced may not be as effective as one would expect. In a professional role,
counselors traditionally have become involved with clients after a death notification to
assist individuals in dealing with the grieving and healing process. In crisis intervention,
it is likely that a crisis counselor will intervene when the death of a loved one causes so
much stress to the surviving significant other that it affects the person’s normal daily
functioning and, in some cases, increases suicide lethality.
It is also possible in every crisis situation outlined in this text that a counselor may
be called to give a death notification or provide support for someone who is the primary
death notifier. As counselor roles and job opportunities in the community become more
diverse (e.g., in police departments, fire departments, military settings, religious set-
tings, chaplaincies, crisis centers, hospitals, and other agencies such as Red Cross, Green
Cross, and Hospice), the likelihood of participating in a death notification increases.
With the increase of counselors working with first responders during national crises
(e.g., hurricanes, September 11 terrorist attacks), counselors have been placed in the role
of giving death notifications or taking part in giving death notifications more frequently.
Even if a counselor intends to work in a private practice, it is possible they may
be asked to assist with a death notification or be consulted about how to tell another
family member about a death. No two death notifications are the same due to the actual
event, unique relationships, ecological determinants, and the developmental level of
and perception of the death by the survivors. However, the level of preparedness of the
crisis counselor in the notification process may affect the notification, how a survivor
responds during the crisis state, and whether a person seeks professional counseling
in the future.
Although no crisis counselor who provides a death notification can ever be
fully prepared for the response of the person receiving it, several components form
the foundation for an effective death notification. As outlined in the training protocol
for the Maryland State Police (Jackson-Cherry, 2009; Kanable, 2010; Page, 2008)
and adapted for the training of crisis counselors for this section, death notifications
should be provided in person and in pairs, in an appropriate time frame with accurate
information, in plain language, and with compassion. In preparation, complete Activity
5.5 and Think About It 5.4.
Take a few minutes and reflect upon a time when you
were notified of a death. Who died? Who provided the
death notification? What were the circumstances? How
was the death relayed to you? What were some of your
initial feelings or thoughts? What kind of influence did
the actual process of the death notification have on
you? What made the notification process helpful? What
could have made the death notification process better?
ACTIVITY 5.5
Think about your own personal losses and where you
are in the grief process. If you were called on to issue a
death notification or act as a support counselor in one,
could you be present for the bereaved and provide the
necessary support?
THINK ABOUT IT 5.4

-- 184 of 545 --

156 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
In Person and in Pairs
Whenever possible, death notifications should be made in person, not by telephone.
The human presence during the notification of the death of a loved one is essential. The
presence of a crisis counselor can be crucial if the survivor has a reaction that requires
assessment of self-risk or the need for immediate medical attention. Crisis counselors can
assist clients during the initial shock, which may be devastating and demobilizing and
may interrupt intact normal thought processes. Counselors can also help the survivor
formulate a plan for informing others close to the deceased.
It is helpful to work in pairs in case questions need to be answered, multiple survi-
vors are present with various needs (age and developmental appropriateness), and as a
safety precaution for the notifying team members. If possible, when there are children in
the same room, take the specified adults into a private area to notify them of the death.
It would be helpful for the crisis worker to have information on hand to share with those
receiving the notification on the grieving process and developmental grieving of children.
Team members may be a combination of law enforcement officers, chaplains,
professional counselors, pastoral counselors, medical staff, clergy, school counselors,
case managers, other family members, or friends of the victim. For example, in homicide
or suicide cases, the team ordinarily would consist of law enforcement and possibly a
clergy member and/or a professional counselor. Many crisis response teams work in
collaboration with law enforcement agencies; in these situations, members of the crisis
team may be called on to be present at the notification. In a hospital setting, the team may
consist of a medical doctor, nurse, chaplain, professional counselor, and a social worker.
In a school setting, the team may consist of the school counselor, administrator, and
teachers. In the military, depending on the branch of service, the team would consist of a
Casualty Assistance Officer and possibly a chaplain. If the family is living on the military
installation, a professional from the family support center may also be involved in the
notification. Depending on the setting and circumstances of the death in each example,
outside professional counselors may be included to assist with any crisis situation or
death notification.
In our society, family members do not always live in the same community or even
in the same state as one another, which makes the process of the death notification being
done in person sometimes impossible. Depending on the setting, crisis counselors may
not be able to offer an in-person notification. In these circumstances, contact can be made
with a medical examiner, law enforcement department, religious clergy, or friend or
family member in the survivor’s home area to deliver the notification in person to the
next of kin. In other cases, these persons may be called to act as a physical support while
the notification is done by phone.
In Time and with Accurate Information
Timeliness of a death notification is essential so that an individual is informed in person
by the appropriate individual rather than by hearing it from a third party. At the same
time, it is imperative to first verify the accuracy of the information to be sure that correct
information regarding the correct person is being given to a survivor. This must be done in
a short amount of time, given the nature of the event. For example, in law enforcement cases
it is important that relatives (next of kin) be notified in a timely manner and with accurate
information so that they do not see or hear the news of the death on the television or radio.

-- 185 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	157
When a death occurs on campus or in a school, it is also important for those closest
to the deceased to be notified initially. In these instances, it would be preferable for
administrators, crisis counselors, and faculty to receive the information first to prioritize
who should be notified (e.g., team members, classmates, close friends) and in what manner
(e.g., small groups, team players, homerooms, listservs). This also allows for those giving the
notifications to be able to assess whether more intervention is needed for some individuals.
Prior to any event, agencies and school settings should designate a contact person or
alternate person who will be responsible for collecting and dispensing information. Even
if a team is formed to gather information, only one person should be designated as the
communicator so that differing accounts or information are not relayed. Inaccurate or
differing information from several sources could cause confusion, chaos, or panic.
Accuracy of the information does not necessarily mean a crisis counselor has to
have the full details, as this depends on the situation. For example, the sudden and tragic
death of one of our graduate students was reported by a student to faculty the morning
following the incident. Although essential to provide information in a timely manner,
it would have been premature to inform other students without receiving confirmation
of the student’s death from the family member or another firsthand source. At the same
time, it was not as crucial to have the details of the circumstances (e.g., drunk-driving
case) as it was to confirm and provide accurate information as to the identity of the stu-
dent so that we could formulate a response to the students. For other situations, more
detailed information may be needed at the time of the death notification.
It is essential to make an accurate notification. Mistaken death notifications may
cause undue trauma and, in some cases, have caused medical complications for the
person being informed. Before the notification, move quickly to gather information
by contacting family members for confirmation and to issue condolences. Be sure that
the victim’s identity has been confirmed. If administrators need to report the death via
electronic communications, be sure the entire name of the deceased has been verified
(first names alone are not sufficient) to prevent any further chaos or generate rumors.
For example, in the above situation, all the students could not be contacted individually,
although faculty advised students in their classes. The student listserv needed to be used.
When using a listserv to provide follow-up on associated events (e.g., services, memorial
services), the one person appointed to communicate information should provide frequent
updates and give first and last names in all correspondence. It should not be assumed
just because previous e-mails were sent out that all previous messages were read by the
receivers. Messages may seem redundant, but accuracy should be consistent.
Correspondences with university administration (Vice President for Academic
Affairs, President, Dean, Student Services) should be made to ensure university policies
are followed. Contact with the Campus Ministry and Counseling Center should be made,
and these services should be relayed and made available to students, faculty, and staff
in an appropriate time frame.
Evaluating the uniqueness of the situation is imperative in order to provide any
other interventions. In the university student case, the student was enrolled in a practicum
placement. Contact with the on-site supervisor was necessary not only for notification
but also to ensure a plan for the deceased student’s clients. Furthermore, the religious
beliefs of the family needed to be explored and conveyed to the students before their
attendance at the funeral service. In this example, flowers were prohibited, and there were
specific expectations due to religious beliefs during the service, including prohibiting

-- 186 of 545 --

158 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
any outward expressions of emotions that were believed to prevent the passing of the
deceased from this world to the next. In the end, students needed an extra debriefing
with faculty after the service to work through their unexpressed grief. Now, read Voices
from the Field 5.4, which discusses how mistakes can be made during a death notification.
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
In working with a police department counseling center
during an internship experience, I was asked to ride
along on my first death notification to provide added
support. A briefing was conducted with the team as
we traveled to a small rural town. When we reached
our destination, the team leader knocked on the front
door, which was opened by an older woman. After the
leader introduced us, he asked the woman if she was
Mrs. Smith. “Yes,” she replied. The leader continued,
“I’m sorry to be the one to inform you that there was a
car accident and your husband, Bill, was killed. He did
not survive his injuries.” She appeared visibly shocked
and started to sob uncontrollably. As we sat down to
continue to talk, another woman came running from
the adjacent yard. The leader turned to the woman and
said, “Would you be willing to stay with Mrs. Smith
until we can contact her family? Her husband, Bill, was
in a car accident and died.” This woman also began
shaking and sobbing and said, “This is my mother-in-
law. I’m also Mrs. Smith and Bill is my husband. My
husband, Bill, is her son.” At this time, we knew we had
the correct family but the next of kin we were inform-
ing was not the correct person.
In all our preparation, we did not go over the
unique issues that we may encounter in a small rural
town. In this case, most of the family members lived
on the same street, many sharing the same names. In
not asking for the complete name of the woman we
were notifying and not asking the relation of Bill to
her, we not only gave devastating news of her son’s
death (not her husband’s death) but then gave a less
than full and compassionate notification to the actual
wife of the deceased. We did follow through with
debriefing and put into practice necessary procedures
to ensure a mistake like this never happened again.
This is one reason why I believe counselors should be
prepared to assist with death notifications and why it
is imperative to include this information in the text.
I think of this family often and wonder about the impact
of this notification on them, as it still weighs heavy on
my mind over 20 years later.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 5.4
Learning from Mistakes
In Plain Language
It is important that the death notification be given to the survivor in a calm, direct,
and simple manner by the crisis counselor. Too much or vague information can cause
survivors to panic before getting the full, accurate information. A crisis counselor can
demonstrate care by stating the notification in clear and concise language. For example,
“I have some very bad news to tell you” or a similar statement allows a brief but crucial
moment for the survivor to prepare for the shock. The follow-up statement should also
be provided in plain language, such as “Your daughter, Jill, was in a car crash and she
was killed.” It is important to avoid vague statements such as Jill was “lost,” “hurt,” or
“passed away.” It is important to include a definitive conclusion of what occurred, such
as “ . . . and she was killed” or “ . . . there were no survivors” to prevent conveying a
message of false hope of survival. It is important to refer to the victim by name to provide
another level of verification and to personalize the deceased.
One of the most important gifts a crisis counselor can offer to a survivor is the gift of
the crisis counselor’s control and calmness during the death notification. Overemotional
crisis counselors can increase the potential for panic or chaos. Survivors often have many
questions, and some questions may be asked multiple times. As with a child’s experience

-- 187 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	159
with a death notification, survivors will often repeat the same question for verification of
facts. It is crucial to patiently answer questions about the circumstances regarding the death
that a crisis counselor may be privy to, such as the location of the deceased’s body, how
the deceased’s body will be released and transported to a funeral home, and whether an
autopsy will be performed. However, the sharing of this information should always take into
consideration the developmental stage and clinical assessment of how much can be handled
by the survivor at the time of the notification. Oftentimes, crisis counselors may not know
the answer to a question, and it is better for them to acknowledge this to survivors than to
give false information. It is important for crisis counselors to state that they will attempt to
find the answers to the questions they cannot answer. If there are questions counselors have
offered to explore, it is imperative that the counselors follow up directly with the survivor,
even if another agency or office will be contacting the survivor to provide the information.
With Compassion
Presence and compassion may be the only resources crisis counselors can provide during
the initial death notification process. It is important for them to accept the survivor’s
reactions and emotions to the death notification and also important to recognize their
own emotions associated with the notification. Although overemotional crisis counselors
can increase confusion and possible panic with survivors, it is better for a crisis counselor
to express appropriate emotion than to appear cold and unfeeling.
It is also important to relay to survivors that death is a personal event and that
due to the unique situation, they may feel various emotions, including sadness, anger,
frustration, relief, and guilt. Normalizing the vast array of emotions that survivors may
experience during the grief process is important. Print resources that reveal the grieving
process, reactions to grief, explaining death to a child (if appropriate), and referrals
for mental health counseling or a funeral home may be helpful and can be left with
the victim. Imposing personal religious beliefs is not helpful and could be harmful.
Statements such as “This was God’s will,” “She led a full life,” and “I understand what
you are going through” do not demonstrate compassion or regard for the person’s
unique grief experiences associated with loss.
It is essential to take time to provide information, support, and direction to the survivor.
Never simply provide a death notification and leave. It is important to offer information
about funeral planning, the normal grief process, and referrals for counseling. The bereaved
may not be ready for counseling at that moment but may need it in the near future.
In addition, it is not recommended that the crisis team provide the survivor with
the victim’s personal belongings during the death notification. Survivors often need
time before accepting the victim’s belongings, but eventually survivors will want to take
possession of them. Likewise, crisis counselors should never transport survivors (to the
hospital or home or to other agencies) unless law enforcement is a part of the notification
team. No one can ever truly predict the emotional reaction to the death of a loved one,
and the safety of the crisis counselor is always a priority.
Follow-Up
Crisis counselors should always leave their names and phone numbers with survivors, or
information on a referring counselor, and a follow-up contact with the survivor should
be scheduled for the next day, since most funeral arrangements must be made soon after

-- 188 of 545 --

160 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
the death. Some individuals, depending on their social support system,
may request assistance from team members for funeral arrangements.
If a crisis counselor is asked by the survivor to help with these plans,
it is imperative to assist the survivor based on the customs, traditions,
religious beliefs, and personal preferences of the family. Most survivors
are confused at the initial notification, and others may feel abandoned
after the notification. Many survivors will want clarifications or may
need more direction on necessary arrangements.
Following up is an important last step in completing the death
notification process and may be a crucial factor enabling a survivor to
reach out for continued mental health services. Often, counseling ser-
vices are necessary for clients to work through the extended or complicated grieving
process. A death notification event may be the first exposure a survivor has to a mental
health professional, so the interaction could encourage or discourage further connections
with crisis counselors. The members of the notification team should be clear with one
another on any follow-up assignments.
Debriefing with Team Members
Debriefing with team members should occur immediately after the death notification. This
debriefing time should be used to plan for any follow-up with the survivors and to review
how the death notification process was implemented and received. Processing what went
well and what could be improved upon will be helpful for future death notifications.
In addition, death notifications can be stressful and emotionally draining to the indi-
viduals involved in the notification process. Team members should share concerns with one
another. It is important to discuss feelings or thoughts associated with the death notifications
that may have triggered personal unresolved grief issues. Taking care of oneself is essential
when taking care of another person’s initial grief. The stages of grief and loss can certainly
take place among crisis counselors. When debriefing, it is important to take into consider-
ation that crisis counselors experience grief and should be encouraged to process that grief.
As a final activity, choose either Case A or Case B in Activity 5.6 and prepare a
death notification strategy as an individual, in small groups, or as a class. Substantial
modifications are often needed in schools and universities because the losses are more
likely to stem from suicide, accidental death, or death of a teacher or other staff. Also
read Voices from the Field 5.5.
Case A: Death Notification in a Community
Setting
You are part of a crisis team called to give a death
notification to the next of kin for a person killed during
a random shooting. You are not sure how the deceased
person was involved in or became a victim of the
shooting. Work with your team to plan what needs to
be addressed and then role-play a death notification to
the family.
Case B: Death Notification in a School Setting
The principal of your high school contacts you in the
morning and states that there was a phone message
left the night before that a ninth-grade student (John)
was killed in an automobile accident. As a counselor
and a member of the crisis response team for the
school, work with your team and decide what needs
to be addressed in this process and to whom
notifications will be made.
ACTIVITY 5.6
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 5.4
This video shows a death notification of
a military service member and the death
notification steps outlined in the chapter.
What steps in the death notification
process were clearly demonstrated?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=1Mds_nfveoQ
Watch from 06:48 to 09:28

-- 189 of 545 --

Chapter 5 • Loss, Grief, and Bereavement 	161
Maegan Vick
It was after school during a faculty meeting when the
police showed up. Most of the staff was already in the
meeting. I just happened to be in my office, about to
head that way, when I got called to the front office.
When I walked in, I noticed Eric, a first-grade student
who had suffered a traumatic brain injury (TBI) when
he was a toddler. Eric was still waiting with his teacher
for his father to pick him up in the front office. I said
hello to Eric and then noticed a police officer in the
corner speaking with the secretary. The police officer
introduced himself and walked with me to my office
without saying a word. I knew something was terribly
amiss. The police officer sat down with me and said
Eric’s father had been killed in a car accident on the
way to pick him up from school that day. This was espe-
cially tragic because Eric’s mother had been killed in a
car accident when Eric was a toddler. Eric was in the car
with his mother during that fatal accident and that was
how Eric got the TBI. Now, with both parents deceased,
Eric was all alone.
Eric’s teacher, Ms. Smith, waited anxiously in the
front office after she saw the police officer walk with me
to my office. As we returned, I watched her glistening
eyes search my face for any indication of what was
happening. When my eyes met hers, it was as if she
already knew her fear had come true. While Eric waited
in the office with the secretary, I pulled his teacher to
the hallway where we could be alone. “I’m sorry to
have to tell you this,” I said to her, “but Eric’s father
was killed in a car accident on the way to pick him up
today.” Ms. Smith sank to the floor with a muffled
scream, “No, no, no! It’s just not fair . . . his mother
was killed this way . . . I just . . . ” There were not
any words that could comfort her at that moment. All
I could do was tell her we would take care of Eric.
During the next couple of hours, we tried to contact
Eric’s closest relative, his uncle.
The following day Eric’s uncle, Matt, came to
meet with me. He was not sure how to tell Eric about
his father. It is hard enough for any first-grader to
understand that his mother and father are both dead,
much less a child with a TBI. I encouraged Eric’s uncle
to be as honest and as concrete as possible. He asked
me if we could tell Eric together, and we did.
“Daddy will not be coming home. He died. His
heart stopped beating. His eyes will not open. Daddy
loved you, but he will not be back.”
“Eric bad?” Eric asked. “Daddy mad?”
“No, you were not bad,” I said, “You are a good
boy. Daddy died. He cannot come back. He loved you
very much. You’ll go home with Uncle Matt, Jayne,
and Ally.”
Only the slightest sign of revelation appeared on
Eric’s face. “I go home with Jayne and Ally?”
We then read a short children’s story about
“Elmo remembering his daddy.” I gave this book to
Eric’s uncle so that Eric could read it at their house.
Matt called a few days later asking if Eric should attend
the funeral. I encouraged him to decide according to
which choice he and Eric felt most comfortable. Some
believe that allowing a young child to attend a funeral
can help provide closure. Matt took Eric to the funeral.
In the end, Eric adjusted well to his new home
and new school. His uncle grew more confident with
his ability to help Eric grieve and understand. Our
school learned to cope with a tragedy. I will always
remember Eric.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 5.5
A Death Notification in Elementary School
SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed several psychological
theories of grief, including Kübler-Ross’s
groundbreaking work on death and dying and the
task model put forth by Worden. The importance
of attachment across the lifespan was discussed
in relation to the work of Bowlby. More recently,
Walsh proposed a family systems perspective to
understand how a family member’s death affects
the entire family. Fowler’s faith development
theory and the FICA spiritual assessment tool
were introduced as means to explore the role of
spirituality, religion, and faith in the client’s life.
We are all born the same way, but each of
us dies differently. Death can come peacefully at
the end of a life well lived, or it can be untimely,
traumatic, or life-changing for the bereaved. As

-- 190 of 545 --

162 	Part I • Elements of Crisis Intervention
in the case of infertility, Alzheimer’s disease, or
missing persons, loss can also be ambiguous.
It is not possible in this space to create specific
interventions for every possible grief experience.
Rather, the goal is to help professionals learn
about grief and bereavement, be able to identify
the nuances differentiating normal from
complicated grief, and understand and address
any continuing issues of their own concerning
death and dying.
Type of relationship, attachment, cause of
death, and timing are unique to each situation
and require individually tailored counseling
responses. Professionals who work with crisis
intervention, and particularly death and dying,
should use basic communication skills to be
fully present and responsive to the needs
of the bereaved, to be open to familial and
cultural adaptations to loss, to encourage and
foster strength and resilience, and to consider
any spiritual or religious values that the client
has. The ultimate goal should be to provide
appropriate and timely interventions during
times of crisis so that people can experience and
process their grief in a healthy manner and not
become stuck in patterns that lead to depression,
complicated bereavement, or result in more
serious pathology. If successful, we will have
helped our clients forge a path through their
grief and once again find meaning in their lives.
Each person responds differently to a loss.
This chapter does not define major and minor
losses, as it is truly the perception of the loss for
the individual that will determine whether it
becomes a crisis. More importantly, counselors
should attempt to understand how a loss can
affect and cause other losses and how these
multiple losses are perceived when developing
a crisis plan or offering a referral. The DSM-5
task force cautions against attaching a premature
diagnosis to individuals who are experiencing
bereavement. The new diagnosis of other-
specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder
(specified by “persistent complex bereavement
disorder”) is discussed as an alternative for
complicated grief and bereavement and previous
diagnoses.
Death notifications are often viewed as
the least-favored duty for any professional.
Notifying someone of a loved one’s death can
be difficult, not only for the person receiving
the news but also for the person providing the
death notification. It is always important to be
sure that the person providing the notification
is not experiencing personal unresolved grief
issues and can provide a sense of calmness
and compassion. Death notifications can be
unpredictable, since no one knows how another
person may react in receiving such news.
Individuals may respond with a continuum
of 	responses—from 	numbness, 	excessive
sadness, and melancholy to anger. Unknown
circumstances may lead a person to project
their feelings on to the person providing the
notification. It is always important to understand
that reactions will differ and to keep your
personal safety in mind when providing a death
notification.
Although the likelihood of a counselor
being involved in providing a death notification
has increased over the years due to expanded
job responsibilities, research suggests that
counselors have little preparedness in this area.
Indeed, counselors have been involved in death
notification more often in their personal lives,
but this does not mean the process they used
was effective. Counseling programs offer little
to no formal training in this area. Knowing that
death is a natural part of the life process, it is an
appropriate part of clinical training to include
information on providing a death notification.
The level of preparedness of the professional
counselor in the notification process may affect
the reaction and the traumatic impact of the
delivery experienced by the survivor, reduce
professional burnout, affect the bereavement
process, and influence whether a person seeks
professional counseling (if needed) in the future.

-- 191 of 545 --

163
PREVIEW
Suicide and homicide are viewed as preventable global public health problems. Suicides
and homicides have a mental health impact on family members, friends, coworkers,
neighbors, and members of extended social networks, and even the professional
community struggles with the implications of these preventable deaths. Nonsuicidal
self-injury (NSSI) has always been a concern, but only recently has it received a similar
clinical focus and formal assessment to suicide and homicide. Even after inclusion in
the DSM-5-TR, assessment of NSSI occurs less frequently or is more targeted in certain
populations, like adolescents or persons diagnosed with borderline personality disorder.
However, an NSSI assessment should also be part of all suicide risk assessments and is
now required as a standard of care. Whether intervening before suicide, NSSI, or homicide
(prevention), while occurring (intervention), or after it has occurred (postvention),
professional counselors play a vital role in society’s response to helping those in need of
violence-free coping strategies, intervention based on sound practices, or, if necessary,
the best and most productive short-term and long-term response to survivors of suicide
or homicide. This chapter is explicitly for crisis counselors to learn how to be effective in
responding to members of their communities touched by suicide, NSSI, and homicide.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
6.1 Describe the prevalence and rates of suicide, homicide, and NSSI.
6.2 Describe risk factors, protective factors, and warning signs of suicide.
6.3 Distinguish between acute and chronic suicidal risk.
6.4 Describe how counselors assess a client’s suicidal risk as no, low, moderate, or high.
6.5 Describe effective questions and assessment strategies for suicide intervention.
6.6 Describe appropriate treatment planning and care management with a suicidal
client, including a safety plan, outpatient and inpatient treatment, and postvention.
6.7 Describe assessments and treatment for NSSI, including the use of a Q-tree.
6.8 Describe threat assessment and treatment options for intervention with people
who are homicidal or are threats to others.
6 Risk Assessment and Intervention:
Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury,
and Homicide
Judith Harrington, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford*
C H A P T E R
*We thank Charlotte Daughhetee for her contributions to previous editions of this chapter.

-- 192 of 545 --

164 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
PREVALENCE AND RATES OF SUICIDE, HOMICIDE, AND
NONSUICIDAL SELF-INJURY
Learning Objective 6.1 Describe the prevalence and rates of suicide, homicide,
and NSSI.
Clinicians and epidemiologists alike watch closely the rates and prevalence of suicide
and homicide to monitor the presence of conditions that may increase risk factors for
certain populations. (Nonsuicidal self-injury historically was not included in these
prevalence reports and more research needs to be conducted.) Counselors should know
what the terms prevalence and rate mean to interpret how members of certain at-risk
groups might require more attentive care:
• Prevalence is a nominal figure that states how many lives were lost to suicide (or
any other type of malady). For example, the prevalence of suicide in County RST
was 75 persons, contrasted with County XYZ, which lost 33 persons.
• Rate or crude rate is a value explaining data that has been interpreted by leveling
the playing field, so to speak; in other words, if all members of a population (or
an age group, gender, or ethnic group) were divided into groups of 100,000, the
rate would indicate how many people died per 100,000 people (sometimes called
per capita). For example, County RST, a very populated county, lost 75 persons to
suicide or homicide, but its rate was 10.9 per 100,000, or 10.9. County XYZ, a small,
sparsely populated county, lost 16 persons to suicide or homicide, but its rate was
19.7 per 100,000, or 19.7. Due to the common denominator of 100,000, the higher
rate for County XYZ is considered more alarming, even though the prevalence of
suicide was smaller in the rural county.
Epidemiologists also study the causes of death and the rankings of these causes, and
they track the rates of suicide and homicide, as rates provide a more uniform view for
analysis to which prevention efforts may be targeted. For example, the suicide rate for
Americans age 65 years and older is approximately 18 in 100,000, but the prevalence
is lower than in other groups because the population number (or size of this group)
of older persons is smaller. A rate of 18 in 100,000 is considered alarming because it is
higher than the national overall rate. For suicide, the national rate is 14.5 per 100,000.
Professionals want to learn why persons in each group are more prone to die by suicide
or homicide. Youth have a lower rate of death than older Americans; however, suicide is
ranked as the second leading cause of death ranking among youth, and homicide is the
sixth and third leading cause of death among 0 to 14-year-olds and 15 to 24-year-olds,
respectively (Drapeau & McIntosh, 2020; World Life Expectancy, 2020). Cause of death
ranking is often illustrated in chart form listing the 10 highest prevalence of deaths per
cause (e.g., heart disease, malignancies, respiratory disease, liver disease, unintentional
injury).
Drapeau and McIntosh (2020) reported an estimated 1,124,125 annual suicide
attempts in the United States or 25 suicide attempts for every suicide. Cerel et al. (2014)
estimated that for every suicide, 147 individuals (survivors) are connected to the person
who died by suicide (6.6 million annually). When examining the vast effects of those
affected by suicides, mental health professionals must be prepared to serve the high
numbers of survivors.

-- 193 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	165
Suicide is a public health problem that all crisis counselors, regardless of setting,
must learn to assess and treat because of its prevalence in society. In the United States
in 2020, suicide claimed 45,979 lives, with about one person dying from suicide every
11.1 minutes (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2022a). Consider these
data:
• In 2020 in the United States, 12.2 million adults experienced thoughts of suicide
(CDC, 2022a).
• In 2020 in the United States, 3.2 million people planned to attempt suicide (CDC,
2022a).
• In 2020 in the United States, 1.2 million persons attempted and survived a suicide
(CDC, 2022a).
• Though suicide happens in all age groups and is the 10th leading cause of death
across all age brackets, it is the ninth leading cause of death in the United States
among persons age 10–64, and the second leading cause of death for youth age
10–14 and adults age 25–34 (CDC, 2022a).
• Men die from suicide at a ratio of 3.6 for every 1 loss of life to suicide among women
(American Association of Suicidology [AAS], 2021).
• Women attempt suicide more often than men, at a ratio of 3:1; men die more often
than women, mainly because of more lethal means (AAS, 2021).
• The impact of suicide loss has staggering personal and economic impact on
individuals and communities. The CDC (2022a) estimated an annual cost of
$70 billion in the United States from lifetime medical and work-related expenses
due to suicide attempts and suicide deaths.
• AAS (2021) estimated that 135 individuals are exposed to or affected by each suicide
death, which is 6.9 million persons annually in the United States.
• The rates of suicide per 100,000 persons across the United States ranged from
6.2 per 100,000 (Washington, DC) to 29.4 per 100,000 (Wyoming) (Drapeau &
McIntosh, 2020).
• Suicide rates have been increasing. From 2014 to 2019, the rates per 100,000 persons
climbed respectively from 13.4, 13.8, 13.9, 14.5, to 14.8, with a slight decrease in
2019, to 14.5.
Furthermore, more than 1.2 million nonfatal suicide attempts occurred in the United
States in 2020, sometimes resulting in permanent injury or disabling conditions and
sometimes imperiling a concerned person who tried to prevent the suicide from hap-
pening (CDC, 2022a).
For a worldwide analysis of suicide deaths and homicide deaths, consult the World
Health Organization (WHO, 2021c) and the World Population Review (2022). The num-
ber of suicides worldwide in 2019 was 703,000 (WHO, 2021c) and the number of homi-
cides globally in 2017 was 464,000 (World Population Review, 2022).
Nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI) behaviors are less often reported in the literature and
often not the focus of a risk assessment unless it is the presenting problem. This does
not mean the prevalence of NSSI is not occurring at alarming rates. NSSI is reported to
occur among 13–17% of American adolescents and young adults (Swannell et al., 2014).
Furthermore, NSSI relates to other mental health issues including depression, anxiety,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and suicidal risk. The recent inclusion of NSSI

-- 194 of 545 --

166 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
behaviors in the fifth edition, text revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2022) reveals the need
for a thorough risk assessment that includes NSSI behaviors.
Effective risk prevention requires input from multiple systems and increased
involvement from governments; the professions of mental health, public health, and
medical health; law enforcement; schools, universities, and other institutions of learning;
the media; and community leaders. Effective risk assessment also begins with the ability
of the crisis counselor to initiate and ask direct questions about risk assessment. If the
crisis worker does not bring up any of these issues or feels uncomfortable bringing these
issues up, the client may not feel comfortable bringing up risk issues. The first step to
providing a competent risk assessment is to be aware of comfortability in asking about
risk assessment. Activity 6.1 provides structured practice in asking clients about suicide.
You can also use the same activity to practice assessing NSSI and homicidal risk.
Form a group in which participants stand in two lines
facing each other. At the direction of a leader, the
participants in line 1 ask their partners in line 2, “Are
you having thoughts of suicide?” The members of line
1 should then move to the right (or circle to the other
end of the line if they are at the far-right end of the line)
and ask the next partner the same question. Continue
doing this until all line 1 members have asked everyone
in line 2 the same question. Then repeat the activity, but
this time, every member of line 2 now asks members
in line 1, “Are you having thoughts of suicide?” After
the exercise, discuss together as a group the following
questions:
• Which role did you prefer: being the person
asked or being the person doing the asking?
Explain.
• Why do you think it is important to practice
asking the question, “Are you having thoughts
of suicide?”
• How do you feel about using the word suicide
or about looking someone in the eye and asking
directly about suicide?
• What are some other equally direct and
nonjudgmental ways that you could ask about
someone’s intention to self-injure?
• What has been your experience with suicide, both
personally and professionally? Consider what you
do and do not know about working with a client
in a suicidal crisis or emergency. What more do
you need to know before you work with a client
who is suicidal? What personal attitudes, values,
opinions, or views do you have about suicide?
ACTIVITY 6.1
Suicide Terminology
The use of terminology is important when discussing suicide since the language chosen
could reflect personal attitudes and affect those impacted by suicide. For example, the
phrase “committed suicide,” although once common, is less acceptable as it implies a
negative perspective of the person. Compare the phrase to “committed adultery” or
“committed murder,” as they often carry a negative view of the person who participated
in or “committed” the act. If we define a person solely by the label of a mental illness,
we diminish the whole person.
In comparison to other types of medical deaths, we often refer to the cause of
death rather than placing responsibility on the person, such as “cancer-related death”
or “died of cancer.” Following these guidelines, language such as “died by suicide,”
“suicide death,” or “took their own life” are more acceptable phrases as they offer a
more humanistic approach to those grieving the death of a suicide and those who may

-- 195 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	167
have attempted or taken their own life. Terminology now considered unacceptable has
been used for decades by professionals, so be patient and use this as a time to provide
educational guidance to those in the field who may still use what now is viewed as
unacceptable terminology. Professional literature will still include what is now viewed
as unacceptable language. Try using the examples in Table 6.1 of “acceptable language”
in place of what is now viewed as “unacceptable language” around suicide.
Many individuals are impacted by the loss of a loved one from suicide, so it is
essential to understand correct terminology when referring to those impacted by suicide
and with other professionals. Primary victims are the individuals who took their own life
or died by suicide. Attempt survivors are those persons who have attempted to take their
own life but did not die. Survivors are loved ones affected by the loss of a person who
died by suicide.
RISK FACTORS, PROTECTIVE FACTORS, AND WARNING SIGNS
Learning Objective 6.2 Describe risk factors, protective factors, and warning signs
of suicide.
Most often, counselors attempting to provide a thorough risk assessment for suicide
will assess and report only on the risk factors of a client experiencing thoughts of
suicide or who has attempted suicide. Although this is an essential part of the suicide
assessment, protective factors are just as clinically essential to explore because they
offer insights into what is actually protecting or preventing the individual from taking
their life. So specifically ask, “What has kept you from following through on taking
your life?”
Counselors should discern these protective factors from the overall assessment and
build them into the care management aspect of treatment. If a counselor only focuses
on the risk factors and does not integrate the protective factors, the level of risk and
lethality may not be accurate. Risk and protective factors are individualized and depend
on unique client circumstances. Therefore, no single risk or protective factor can be used
across clients to indicate certain lethality and risk. Rather, the entire assessment profile
helps a counselor determine the most effective client care management action.
Risk Factors
Risk factors increase the likelihood of a person experiencing suicidal thoughts or
behaviors. Risk factors are often seen as the absence of something (e.g., supports,
medication compliance, medical wellness, loss of loved ones) but may include underlying
Acceptable Language 	Language to Avoid
Died by/of suicide 	Committed/Completed suicide
Suicide death 	Successful attempt
Suicide attempt (attempt suicide) 	Unsuccessful attempt
Person experiencing suicidal thoughts or behaviors 	Suicide attempter
TABLE 6.1 Acceptable Language to Describe Suicide and Language to Avoid

-- 196 of 545 --

168 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
meaning-related factors (e.g., feelings of guilt/shame, abandonment, being a burden)
that often increase risk lethality.
Many special groups have a heightened risk for suicide. These include Native
Americans; members of the military or veterans; first responders; older persons; persons
with life-threatening depression and/or bipolar disorder; victims of bullying; and youth
who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning, and other (LGBTQ+). For these
groups, suicide death rates are higher than average for the population. It is important to
note that a certain group does not have traits that make them more suicidal; rather, other
external determinants elevate the risk that members of some groups may become self-
violent. These factors may include marginalization, trauma events or complex trauma,
poverty, and exposure to self-violence or violence, among other factors.
Although agencies and clinicians may have different ways to inquire about risk
factors, for the following discussion, risk factors are placed into three main categories:
health factors, environmental factors, and historical factors. These categories may have
some factors in common.
HEALTH FACTORS 	Health factors include medical or mental health concerns. Often,
physical illnesses such as a terminal disease may also affect a person emotionally and
existentially. Thus, such illnesses may become complex risk factors. For example, an
individual with cancer may not be able to work, may become dependent on others, and
this may affect their family (e.g., financially or via role changes). In addition, the
individual may perceive they have become a burden to family members for their care,
which may be a significant change from their previous role of taking care of others.
Therefore, it is important that counselors understand not only the surface risk factor
(medical diagnosis) but also other factors that may complicate the risk (e.g., financial,
job status, perception of being a burden on others, independence).
Some mental health concerns may also impact the risk for an individual. Often
when the client is not able to think through rational situations or is impulsive, a higher
risk of acting on suicidal thoughts exists. Mood disorders, schizophrenia, anxiety
disorders, substance use, and certain personality disorders may also present a higher
risk for suicidal behaviors.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 	Environmental factors can include cultural, behavioral,
and personality issues. Cultural issues include, but are not limited to, those relating to
race/ethnicity, gender identity, socioeconomic status, political affiliation, religious/
spiritual affiliation, sexual orientation/identity, age, and sex. Other environmental
factors may include, but are not limited to:
• Hopelessness
• Impulsive or aggressive tendencies
• Family history of suicide
• Recent job or financial loss
• Recent loss of relationship
• Perceived rejection associated with personal meaning
• Access to lethal means
• Lack of social support and sense of isolation
• Stigma associated with asking for help
• Lack of health care, especially mental health and substance use disorder treatment

-- 197 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	169
• Cultural and religious beliefs, such as the belief that suicide is a noble resolution
of a personal dilemma
• Exposure to others who have died by suicide (in real life or via the media)
• Ability to be a part of one’s personal rescue plan from past suicide thoughts/
behaviors
HISTORICAL FACTORS 	Historical factors are unique to the client’s life and include, but
are not limited to, history of trauma or abuse, abandonment of social supports, family-
of-origin risk factors, previous suicide attempts, family history of suicide, or humiliating
past events that are still causing pain for the client.
Protective Factors
Protective factors make a client less likely to engage in suicidal behavior. Protective
factors can also promote resilience and ensure connectedness with others during diffi-
cult times, thereby making suicidal behaviors less likely. Often, the factors listed as risk
factors for some clients may also be protective factors. For example, a client’s religious
beliefs may be the reason the client is not following through on the plan to die by suicide.
Consider this statement made by a client, “I have not followed through because I do
not believe I would be joined with my other family members in heaven.” A counselor
would not say, “Yes, according to your beliefs, you may not go to heaven.” Rather, a
counselor may respond, “It sounds like being with your family after death is important
to you. Tell me more about your religious/spiritual beliefs and the importance of being
reunited with loved ones.”
Another protective factor may be a single mother who says, “I have
not acted on my suicidal thoughts because I would hate for the father of our
children, who has been abusive to me, to be given custody and abuse the
kids. I cannot do that to my children.” Her desire to make sure her children
are cared for is a protective factor. A counselor would not reply with, “Yes,
that would be quite selfish to have your children experience the abuse you
did because you decided to kill yourself.” Rather, a response to support
the protective factor may be, “It sounds like you do not want your children
to experience the same abuse from their father that you did, and you are
concerned that if you took your own life, they would not be cared for the
way you want to take care of them. Tell me more about your children and
what you want for them.”
Other protective factors include, but are not limited to:
• Hopefulness
• Restricted access to highly lethal means of suicide
• Strong connections to family, friends, social, and community supports
• Skills in problem solving, conflict resolution, handling problems in a nonviolent
way, and lack of impulsivity in past situations
• Ability to see alternatives, limited cognitive distortions, and less impulsivity
• Cultural or religious beliefs that discourage suicide and support self-preservation
• Medication compliance
• History of ability to solve problems and create solutions
• History of demonstrating skills for handling emotional crises
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6. 1
In this video, a counselor works
with Hannah (age 15), who has
a history with suicide ideation.
The segment focuses on
protective factors and family
supports. What other protective
factors can assist clients in
not following through on their
thoughts of taking their life?

-- 198 of 545 --

170 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Expression of concrete and detailed future plans
• Family commitments, such as raising children or caring for siblings
• Willingness to sign a no-harm contract
• Being resilient in past situations
• Having a sense of purpose or meaning
Warning Signs
Warning signs may be present prior to death by suicide but not recalled until after the
fact. Survivors may experience guilt in not intervening in the suicide, which may cause
more complicated grief issues. Other clients may not present with warning signs at all.
Often, individuals who do not present with warning signs are those who truly want to
die and do not want any intervention. In addition, some warning signs may be normal
behavior for the person who died and therefore may not be seen as a warning sign by
family, friends, and counselors.
Some warning signs may fall into risk factors. Aside from assessment of risk,
counselors should be aware of various warning signs that a client may present
and provide psychoeducation and information to family members and friends (as
appropriate), such as including possible things to look for when they know their loved
one has indicated they are experiencing thoughts of suicide. The following are common
warning signs of suicide that may lead to acute suicidal thoughts or behaviors requiring
immediate intervention (Rudd et al., 2006).
• Talking about wanting to die
• Researching methods of dying, preparations, or rehearsal of taking one’s own life
• Talking about feeling hopeless or having no purpose; self-hate statements
• Talking about feeling trapped or being in unbearable pain
• Talking about being a burden to others; recent hospital discharge
• Increasing use of alcohol or drugs
• Acting anxious, agitated, impulsive, or reckless, especially if this is not the norm
• Sleeping too little or too much
• Withdrawing or feeling isolated
• Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge
• Displaying extreme mood swings
• Cognitive, behavioral, or mood changes
ACUTE VERSUS CHRONIC SUICIDE RISK
Learning Objective 6.3 Distinguish between acute and chronic suicidal risk.
Acute suicidal risk is defined as an individual who reports or presents with a desire
to die in a foreseeable time frame—usually 24 hours or less—with statements about a
specific plan, intent, means, and method (Kleespies, 2000). Some counselors may allow
for a longer time period, but there is still a specific time frame. For example, a client
who has been experiencing chronic and complex grief may state, “I just cannot get over
my mother’s death. On Mother’s Day this year, I plan to end it all so I can be with my
mother.” It would still be appropriate to consider this as an acute risk situation and to
take appropriate measures to start the preventative suicidal assessment and intervention.

-- 199 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	171
Acute crisis refers to situations that require immediate professional intervention.
For example, Jobes (2016) concluded there is a strong relationship between acute risk
and acute crisis events, such as personal failures that may impact core meaning or
situations that are perceived as humiliating to the client. Any recent events need to be
assessed to determine whether the client perceives the events as humiliating. These
acute crises alone may increase the suicidal risk and lethality to a high level, resulting
in immediate and imminent risk. Examples include demotions at work, a relationship
breakup, legal situations, discovering a betrayal, foreclosure or encountering adverse
financial situations, educational failure, and medical issues that may be perceived to
cause a financial burden on family members. Often, a humiliating event can cause an
individual to not think clearly and, combined with impulsive personalities, can trigger
suicidal behaviors.
Chronic suicidal risk is often connected with long-term patterns of relationship
difficulties, interpersonal conflicts, poor decision making in various aspects of life,
and repetitive destructive patterns causing life situation difficulties. These chronic
risk situations may be associated with chronic suicidal thoughts and possibly chronic
behaviors, but individuals may have less specific plans and less lethal intent or means.
Thoughts of suicide may last over long periods of time and may not appear as imminent
or immediate. Chronic risk must be assessed for the possible emergence of active or
acute risk.
Individuals with chronic risk can be described as having “markers” of a potential
suicide risk that is not currently imminent. In other words, individuals may present with
some identifiers of persons who could become acutely suicidal but are not currently in
imminent danger. Just as with other medical diagnoses, the client in your office with a
family history of cancer (a risk factor) may not ever be stricken with cancer. A person
who is chronically in suicide risk may thus have markers or risk factors for potential
suicide, but there is a chance the person will never attempt suicide. Chronic risk should
be observed closely for the possible emergence of active or acute risk. A few of these
chronic markers might include the following:
• Being from a high-risk suicidal group
• Diagnoses including but not limited to mood disorders (depression or bipolar
disorder), anxiety, eating disorder, thought disorder, substance use disorder or
some personality disorders
• History of trauma, abuse, violence, self-injury, previous hospitalizations, low self-
esteem, high self-hate, tolerance and acceptance toward suicide, oppression related
to sexual orientation, perfectionism, divorced parents, family history of suicide
attempts or fatalities, and other factors
In summary, chronic risk suggests the presence of longer-term potential of
suicidality, but with less specificity of intent or plans (e.g., means or methods) to carry out
an imminent attempt. The counselor has more time to help the client mitigate, manage,
or resolve psychological pain (and the need to end the pain), can be less directive,
and may not resort to immediate protection such as hospitalization as a treatment
strategy. The counselor will instead reassess suicidality regularly, manage safety, and
attempt to stabilize long-term risk with effective counseling. Table 6.2 provides further
differentiation between the acute and chronic risk categories.

-- 200 of 545 --

172 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
LEVEL OF SUICIDAL RISK
Learning Objective 6.4 Describe how counselors assess a client’s suicidal risk as no,
low, moderate, or high.
The gathering of information regarding risk factors, protective factors, warning signs,
and acute versus chronic risk will likely render a decision connected with lethality. Most
counselors assess a client’s suicidal risk on a continuum of low, moderate, or high:
• Low suicidal risk includes the presence of suicidal ideation/behaviors or infrequent
thoughts without a plan and means to carry out the plan.
• Moderate suicidal risk includes serious thoughts and desire to die with ideas of a
plan and means, often no access, some existence of social support, but also some
risk factors.
• High suicidal risk includes details of a plan and means to carry out the plan,
presence of risk factors, and absence of protective factors including support.
Although many scales indicate low, moderate, and high, there should also be a note if
there is no (or none) suicidal risk detected. Indicating “no or none” is a best practice
and allows you and other referring counselors to have a better comparison of suicidal
thoughts and behaviors over time.
Table 6.3 presents a sample rubric from an AAS-accredited crisis center utilized
for crisis calls and distance counseling to assess the level of suicidal risk of callers
Acute Risk 	Chronic Risk
Descriptors 	Emergent, urgent, imminent
behavioral indicators and
warning signs; could lessen
and possibly become chronic
More long-running risk, grounded in risk
factors; could be precrisis state, in crisis, or
transcrisis; may or may not become acute
Time frame for
potential attempt
Hours, 24 hours to perhaps
a few days
Days, weeks, months, years
Ambivalence 	Little to none; believes death
is the answer to ending the
pain
Some to considerable ambivalence
(e.g., 50-50); wants to live as much as
seeking death to end pain
Clinical response 	Clinician advised to get
help for client immediately,
arrange heightened
vigilance, not let the client
remain alone, provide
emergency intervention, and
use directive style
Clinician advised to monitor risk frequently
and regularly, be aware that hospitalization
may not be required unless risk becomes
acute, develop and maintain therapeutic
alliance, perhaps meet more frequently,
prepare a safety plan, provide support,
and help the client develop coping skills,
problem-solving skills, and life skills
Likely trigger or
precipitant*
A sudden or recent event,
loss, humiliation, defeat,
embarrassment, trapped
feeling
Likely to be relationship based; risk can rise
to acute with a sudden or recent event,
loss, humiliation, or defeat
* See Jobes (2016) for additional information.
TABLE 6.2 Acute Risk versus Chronic Risk

-- 201 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	173
Indicators/
Risk Levels 	None
Very low
risk
Mild/
low risk
Moderate
risk
Severe/
high risk
Extremely
high risk
Method(s)
Considered
None 	Vague, no
plan
Pills, slash
wrist
Drugs,
alcohol, car
wreck, some
specifics
Gun, hanging,
jumping; some
specifics
In progress;
gun, hanging,
jumping; very
specific—knows
how, when,
where
Suicidal Plans 	None 	None 	None 	Some but no
clear intent
Developed
plan with
considerable
detail
Well-thought-
out, lethal plans
Availability
of Means
None 	No plan; no
availability of
means
Not
available—will
have to get
Available but
not close by
Available—has
close by
Has in hand or in
progress
Suicidal
Behavior
None 	No current
ideation;
may report
past ideation
Ideation 	Threat 	Attempt low
lethal
Attempt high
lethal
When
Attempt is
Planned
None 	No attempt
planned
48 hours or
more
24 to 48
hours
24 to 18 hours 	Presently (in
progress) or
within 24 hours
Previous
Suicide
Attempt(s)
None 	None 	None 	Yes (1–5
years ago)
Yes (3 months
to 1 year ago)
Yes (3 months
ago or less)
Feelings of
Loneliness
None 	Hardly ever 	Sometimes,
support sys-
tem present
Usually, some
support
system
Always, lim-
ited support
system
Always, no sup-
port system
Hope/
Level of
Ambivalence
Hope-
ful
Hopeful;
readily
acknowledges
desire to live
Some hope,
aware of
some desire
to live
Hope and
some desire
to live pres-
ent, but
inconsistent
or limited
Little or no
hope for
future; does
acknowl-
edge some
ambivalence
No hope; does
not consciously
acknowledge any
ambivalence
Intoxication
(Use of
Alcohol or
Drugs)
None 	Has not
been drink-
ing or using
drugs
Limited use of
alcohol
Limited use
of alcohol or
drugs; his-
tory of sub-
stance abuse
treatment
Intoxicated,
mixing drugs
and alcohol
Mixing drugs
and alcohol
and evidence of
intoxication
Chance of
Intervention
Has
clear
sup-
ports
Others
present
Others
expected
Others
expected or
available
Others
available
No one nearby;
isolated
Source: Based on the Crisis Center, Birmingham, Alabama.
TABLE 6.3 Suicide Assessment Form – Checklist for Assessing Emergency Risk for Suicide

-- 202 of 545 --

174 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
experiencing suicidal thoughts. Law enforcement “hostage negotiators” also use
variations of this guide for crisis response teams.
In addition, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (NSPL; 2007) recommends
following a rubric of assessing suicide risk based on the individual’s desire, capability
to attempt, and intent to die or attempt suicide.
Suicidal desire is indicated by:
• Desire to harm self or others
• Psychological pain such as hopelessness, helplessness, or feeling trapped
• Perceiving oneself to be a burden on others
Suicidal capability is evidenced by:
• History of suicide attempts
• Exposure to someone else’s death by suicide
• History of or even current violent behaviors toward oneself or others
• Having the means to hurt oneself or others
• Current intoxication or excessive substance use
• Recent dramatic mood changes or loss of orientation to reality
• Extreme agitation, rage, increased anxiety, decreased sleep, and recent acts or
threats of aggression
Suicidal intent is reflected by
• Attempt in progress
• Plan with a known method to hurt oneself or others
• Preparatory behaviors (e.g., giving away possessions, finalizing one’s business
affairs, saying goodbye [perhaps cryptically], counting pills, reading up on how to
use the method, loading and reloading the gun, rehearsing the method) and stated
intent to die
Now see the various scenarios in Case Study 6.1, which asks readers to assess potentially
suicidal cases.
CASE STUDY 6.1
Potentially Suicidal Cases
After reading the following brief potentially suicidal cases, indicate the risk factors
(health, environmental, historical), protective factors, warning signs, and other relevant
information and indicate whether you believe the suicidal risk is acute or chronic or no,
low, moderate, or high risk.
Case A
Kelson is a 22-year-old who has recently spent 27 months in a conflict zone. Kelson
is headed home for an extended furlough and fidgets and is agitated on the 18-hour
plane ride home. Kelson arrives home to discover their former partner is now involved
with a high school friend. In addition, Kelson’s dad has remarried a woman whom
Kelson has never met. The marriage occurred when Kelson had been deployed for just 4
months. Kelson’s new stepmother has moved into the house where Kelson lived before

-- 203 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	175
deployment. Kelson’s younger brother, in the meantime, graduated from high school
and is now in college two states away. Kelson goes on a drinking binge the first night
home and gets into a scuffle at the bar. As a soldier, Kelson knows how to use firearms.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case B
Devon is a Black college student who has learned to cope by “doing more.” If having
one part-time job is good, then two part-time jobs are better. Devon is prone to getting
overinvolved in extracurricular activities, thinking that overachievement will lead
to being selected for preferred groups and clubs in college. Devon has been seeing a
counselor due to lack of focus on class. In addition, Devon’s grades are not quite good
enough to meet the requirements of Devon’s desired activities. Devon’s counselor asked
about depression. Devon was bullied as a teenager by others who mocked Devon’s
physical features, and admitted to lifelong gruff treatment by a step-father. Devon is
bright and likeable but does not possess that self-view. Devon cannot explain all the
crying and self-pity because of all the hard work to “keep it together.” Devon feels like
a burden to everyone and has daydreamed about taking a bunch of pills.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case C
Charles is a White, 77-year-old retiree. During retirement, he plays a lot of tennis and
spends time at his hunting cabin with friends. One of his long-time tennis buddies of over
30 years died suddenly from a heart attack on the tennis court only minutes after Charles
had left the club. In addition, Charles’s wife has been diagnosed with lymphoma and
is undergoing treatment. While she is doing well despite the fatigue of the treatments,
he is very worried about the possibility of her death before his own, and since his adult
children have busy lives and reside in another region, he is primarily the sole caregiver
for his wife. Together, they have decided to not get out and socialize as much as they
had formerly, and they seem to be more socially isolated, except for Charles’s occasional
tennis matches. On a recent visit to his physician, the doctor became worried and asked
him if he was thinking of suicide.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:

-- 204 of 545 --

176 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case D
Jessie is a 34-year-old Native American who has struggled with substance use for many
years. Because Jessie feels that drinking is a gesture of loyalty to friends, abstaining
or understanding the risks of chemical dependence is difficult. Jessie’s father died by
suicide when Jessie was 16 years old; as the oldest child, Jessie became the head of the
family. Last night, Jessie got a second drunk-driving charge so is in a panic about the
shame and embarrassment that this will bring on the family. Jessie told a friend about
going to the cliffs to “fly with the eagles.”
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:
Case E
Sandy is a 47-year-old White man who has just finalized a divorce from his third partner.
For most of his life, he has placed a high premium on having a relationship with a
partner, yet his commitments and marriages have seemed rushed and not very thought
out, according to some friends and relatives. Sandy is devastated when things do not go
well, and his pattern of relationships has been somewhat chaotic and often conflicted.
Similarly, he has seen several counselors over the years. Sandy’s current counselor, in
talking to his most recent prior counselor, learned that he has never attempted suicide
actively but has often talked about wanting to die “if it happened.” Sandy is not sure
how he would do it because he is afraid. He is an adult survivor of childhood sexual
abuse. He is an active member of his church and does not think it would be “okay” to
attempt suicide.
Risk factors:
Protective factors:
Warning signs:
Other relevant information:
Acute risk or chronic risk:
No, low, moderate, or high risk:

-- 205 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	177
The field has produced a variety of acronyms to assist counselors in recalling risk
and protective factors and warning signs during suicide assessments. These should not
serve to replace a formal model and Q-tree (which we discuss next) but may be helpful in
gathering information on risk and protective factors. The following is not an exhaustive
list but provides examples:
• IS PATH WARM (Juhnke et al., 2003): Ideation, Substances, Purpose, Anxiety,
Trapped, Hopelessness, Withdrawal, Anger, Reckless, and Mood
• SIMPLE STEPS (McGlothlin, 2008): S—Are you Suicidal?, I—Ideation, M—
Means, P— Perturbation, L—Loss, E—Earlier attempts, S—Substance abuse,
T—Troubleshooting the client’s problem-solving ability, E—Emotion (hopeless,
hapless, worthless, loneliness, depression), P—Parents or family history/exposure,
S—Stress and life events
• MAN THIS ISN’T FAIR (Sankaranarayanan, 2007): M—Mental issues (depression,
anxiety, agitation, guilt, shame, delusions), A—Attempts at self-destruction, N—
No positive support from family/peers, T—Triggering stressors, H—Hopelessness,
I—Ideas and intent, S—Substance abuse, I—Illness/chronic pain, S—Suicide in
family history, N’T—(suicide) Note, F—Final arrangements/saying goodbye/
giving away possessions, A—Access to means, I— Isolation, R—Recent psychiatric
hospitalization
The above is only a guide to the factors that may affect risk and lethality.
There is no set number of indicators someone may have to determine lethality,
and a single indicator may not constitute higher risk. In other situations, an
individual may have many indicators but may not be high in lethality. In
still others, a few indicators together may be essential enough to qualify for
high risk. For example, if a client says they have a plan and means, have no
hope, and will follow through on their plan without seeking intervention,
then the individual may certainly have a high suicidal risk. There are many
assessments in the field that can be used to quantify the variables connected
with suicide.
EFFECTIVE QUESTIONS AND ASSESSMENT STRATEGIES
FOR SUICIDE INTERVENTION
Learning Objective 6.5 Describe effective questions and assessment strategies for
suicide intervention.
A suicide risk assessment should always begin at the first session in counseling, and it
should be the main assessment goal in any crisis. The counseling field has a plethora
of assessments and models for assessing suicide risk. A standard of care in our
profession is to not only provide a risk assessment of every person, regardless of the
client’s presenting problem, but also have a framework (model) upon which to base
the assessment. Although the profession does not dictate a specific suicide assessment
to use, it is a standard of care to use effective risk assessment to practice ethically and
reduce negligence.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6.2
In this video, a counselor
works with a person who has
thoughts of wanting to take
his life. What are the risks and
warning signs and how would
you assess his level of lethality?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=A-m_aIQfXZA
Watch from 00:00 to 12:05

-- 206 of 545 --

178 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
An effective suicide risk assessment relies heavily on clinical judgment and
interpretation of available facts, indicators, evidence of past behaviors, rating of current
mood and symptoms, and consideration of all these data against the backdrop of the
field’s knowledge of risk factors, protective factors, epidemiology, and causative factors
that are known to increase the risk of suicidal death. Regardless of the model used, there
are a set of questions that should be integrated to weigh the risk and protective factors
and make a sound clinical impression of lethality to provide a treatment plan.
Question-Tree Approach for Suicide Assessment: Essential Questions
Regardless of the assessment used, certain questions should be part of the suicide
assessment. Depending on the answers, follow-up questions should be asked for a
comprehensive assessment. If a counselor only stays with a surface question and does not
follow up with additional questions, the assessment is not complete and the treatment
plan may be ineffective or inaccurate, leading the counselor to an incorrect lethality
level. Using a question-tree (Q-tree) approach allows the counselor to weigh the risk
and protective factors and formulate the most appropriate plan for a client experiencing
suicidal thoughts or behaviors (see Figure 6.1).
Notice that the risk and protective factors are included in the Q-tree. In addition,
some indicators may be difficult to assess by a question. Desire to die may not, by itself,
indicate an individual’s risk level. Rather, the counselor must assess how capable the
client is to follow through on the desire. Capability is defined by a sense of fearlessness
and impulsivity to follow through on a specific plan and the means available to follow
through on the plan to die or attempt suicide. Neither desire nor capability
predict active behaviors toward seeking death as strongly as intent (Kalafat
et al., 2005). Strong intent to die may lead to reduced motivation or reasons
for living and can result in a more lethal method selection.
The recommendations issued by the NSPL (2007) include exploring
buffers, which are like protective factors to lessen suicidal risk. These may
include (1) immediate supports, (2) social supports, (3) hopefulness and
future plans, (4) engaging in the therapeutic process, (5) desire to live, (6)
core values and beliefs that conflict with suicide, and (7) a sense of meaning/
purpose.
TRIAGE APPROACH 	While using any suicide assessment or Q-tree,
counselors must also be observant and use the TRIAGE approach.
Counselors should observe a client’s affective factors (e.g., nonverbals such as
being withdrawn, uncooperative, distant, disinterested in taking part in a
plan), behavioral factors (e.g., how likely a client is to act on their thoughts or
follow through on a plan to stay alive), and cognitive factors (e.g., Does a
client seem rigid in their thought process or open to exploring the situation
and options for life? Are thoughts distorted?). In addition, developmental
factors (e.g., the perception of death as related to a client’s understanding of
death by age, cognitive level, or developmental abilities and limitations) and
environmental factors (e.g., various cultural values important to the individual)
should be gathered and documented. See Chapter 1 for more details.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6.3
In this video, a group of
university friends meet to talk
with a peer who has shown
some warning signs of suicide.
The questions asked by the
one friend are an excellent
demonstration of many of the
question tree assessments that
can be utilized in assessing
risk level of suicide thoughts
and behaviors. The group also
puts together a safety plan and
generates resources for the
friend. What specific question
tree questions were used? What
risk level would you report for
this client? What other safety
planning elements may be
helpful for the friend?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=QHQzpDU55oE
Watch from 02:40 to 13:40

-- 207 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	179
FIGURE 6.1 	Sample Q-tree for Suicidal Assessment.
Do you have a plan for how
you would attempt suicide?
Do you have a way (means)
to carry out the plan?
What is the plan? 	Have you acted on the plan
(rehearsed it, or made plans to
follow through)?
Have you used this
plan in the past?
Yes
Have you acted on the plan? 	If that plan does not result in
your death, is there another
plan and means?
Have you used this
plan and means in the
past?
Yes
Have you had any past
suicidal attempts?
Yes
Yes
	Do you have a mental health
diagnosis (whether you agree or
disagree)?
Do you have a family member with a
history of a substance use disorder
or mood disorder (e.g., major
depressive disorder, bipolar disorder,
or other mood disorder)?
Do you have a family history of
suicide? (Family means any perception
of family and does not have to be
related by blood.) For children and
teens, has a friend attempted suicide
or died by suicide?
Can you commit to working on a
plan to keep you alive?
Suicidal Assessment Questions
Do you want to die?
Do you have hope that
things will get better?
Do you have a social support
system?
Has an issue occurred that
has not been resolved?

-- 208 of 545 --

180 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Suicide Lethality Assessments
Many assessments are available in the field and used as frameworks by crisis counselors
in lethality assessment. It is a standard of care to integrate at least one model into your
practice to provide documentation for each client. Regardless of the model selected, the
Q-tree discussed above should be integrated into any of these models. Some models will
indicate a section within the model for gathering risk and protective factors, although the
Q-tree or essential questions are not written into the model. The following assessments
provide a sampling from the field.
BECK SCALE FOR SUICIDE IDEATION 	The Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (BSI) is a self-
report instrument requiring 10 minutes to administer that evaluates a client’s thoughts,
plans, and intentions to die by suicide. The 21 items are administered by the counselor
using a rating scale that includes items such as “I have made plans to die by suicide”
and “I have access to lethal means.” The instrument requires specific, detailed recall of
suicidal experiences, such as “I was XX% sure I would die by suicide” and “I have only
felt suicidal (number of) times.”
CHRONOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF SUICIDE EVENTS 	The Chronological Assessment of
Suicide Events (CASE) model was developed by a former emergency department (ED)
doctor who observed firsthand the high prevalence of suicide risk and suggested there
was a window of opportunity where professionals could intervene when a client was
discharged from psychiatric admission to the ED or psychiatric hospitalization. His
concern was with the high demands on ED medical professionals and being able to bet-
ter assess suicidal risk. The CASE method focused on the immediate factors of the cli-
ent’s suicidal risk—the conditions immediately prior to the psychiatric emergency (6–8
weeks buildup or a pileup of distress), the influences prior to 6–8 weeks of buildup
(e.g., long-ago exposure to suicide, family history of suicide, traumatic events)—and
concludes with questions about the “now” of suicidal feelings and pending days ahead.
The approach emphasizes five sets of question-asking:
1. Shame attenuation (i.e., normalizing feelings of psychological suffering and the
immediate issues the client has experienced)
2. Behavioral incident specificity (e.g., “Where is the weapon?”, “And then what did
you do?”, “And after that, what did you do?”, “Who knows about your plans?”)
3. Gentle assumption (e.g., “How have you thought of killing yourself?” rather than
“Have you ever thought about killing yourself?”)
4. Symptom amplification (e.g., “How much time do you spend thinking about
suicide in a 24-hour period?”)
5. Denial of the specific (e.g., asking clients if they have considered other methods—
this will not give clients the idea of having more options)
COLLABORATIVE ASSESSMENT FOR MANAGING SUICIDE 	Jobes (2016) developed an
assessment that combines the interview with the written instrument tool. Collaborative
Assessment for Managing Suicide (CAMS) is evidence and theory based and requires
close collaboration with the client to understand the details of the suicidal risk. CAMS
integrates safety and treatment planning and has been integrated into a 4-hour online
training. It can be found at http://www.empathosresources.com (Empathos, 2015).

-- 209 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	181
COLUMBIA-SUICIDE SEVERITY RATING SCALE (C-SSRS) 	The Columbia-Suicide Severity
Rating Scale (C-SSRS; Posner et al., 2011) includes detailed categories of suicide ideation,
intensity of ideation, and suicidal behavior to assess lethality of suicide. The scale has
been adapted and developed for various populations (e.g., general population, schools,
and first responders) and has suggested actions coded as red, yellow, and green based
on the responses of the individual.
MINI-MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION (MMSE) 	The Mini-Mental Status Examination
(MMSE) is a brief (10- to 15-minute), quantitative measure to assess cognitive
impairment for those age 18–85 years, is available in over 70 languages, and is
recommended as a screening tool for depressed individuals (Folstein et al., 2016). The
MMSE demonstrated score validity and reliability in psychiatric, neurologic, geriatric,
and other medical populations. It is used to evaluate five areas of mental status:
orientation, registration, attention and calculation, recall, and language. The maximum
score is 30, and a score of 23 or lower demonstrates a level of cognitive impairment
indicating a referral for a more intensive cognitive evaluation. Orientation, place, and
recall are not impacted by level of education and are important to assess prior to
administering the examination. If only assessing for orientation, place, and recall, a
total maximum score is 17. The MMSE is attributed to the following descriptors that are
frequently referred to in many client charts:
• Oriented *3 (person, place, time)
• Oriented *4 (person, place, time, situation/event)
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE SUICIDE IDEATION INVENTORY 	Positive and Negative Suicide
Ideation Inventory (PANSI) is a 20-item self-report measure of positive and negative
thoughts related to suicide. It contains statements such as “I am in control of my life”
and “I think about killing myself,” to which clients respond on a 1- to 5-point Likert-
type response scale. This instrument is intended to be used as a screening tool for adults
and high school students.
SUICIDE ASSESSMENT FIVE-STEP EVALUATION AND TRIAGE 	The Suicide Assessment
Five-Step Evaluation and Triage (SAFE-T) can be used by mental health professionals
during the initial contact with a person experiencing thoughts of suicide. The five-
step assessment includes identification of risk and protective factors; conducting an
inquiry about suicidality (implementing a Q-tree); determining level of risk and
selecting an appropriate intervention; and documenting the process, including a
follow-up plan.
TASK MODEL OF CRISIS ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION 	The task model of crisis
assessment and intervention (see Table 6.4 and Chapter 1; see also Jackson-Cherry,
2018) can be integrated for a suicide assessment and focuses on four important areas of
crisis assessment leading to a more effective and appropriate four-task intervention plan
for individuals in virtually every type of crisis, regardless of setting. Assessment of
safety/stabilization; biopsychosocial/spiritual elements; clarification of the problem(s);
and coping skills, resources, and supports are essential first steps toward more accu-
rately defining the actual crisis situation.

-- 210 of 545 --

182 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
TREATMENT PLANNING AND CARE MANAGEMENT WITH A
SUICIDAL CLIENT
Learning Objective 6.6 Describe appropriate treatment planning and care
management with a suicidal client, including a safety plan, outpatient and inpatient
treatment, and postvention.
After assessing a client’s acute or chronic risk and determining the level of risk, many mental
health professionals might again ask, “Now what do I do?” Assessment is only part of the
intervention process. Rudd et al. (2004) and Jobes (2016), among others, provide qualified
step-by-step recommendations for appropriate treatment planning and responding. Just as
all treatment plans for clients seeking counseling for any condition are customized to meet
their needs, the same is true for clients at risk for suicide. The assessment process yields
valuable information to assist with the design of appropriate treatment interventions. This
section reviews several ideas for counselors to consider, beginning perhaps with the most
important intervention of all: the development of a customized safety plan.
Safety Plan
Developing a safety plan with the client is an industry standard and expectation, but
many mental health professionals were trained prior to the emergence of research
and data to write a “no-harm contract.” Based on research, best-practice thinking,
examination of the potential for false security regarding liability, and more evolved
legal, ethical, and clinical reasoning about how much a suicidal client might be able to
“agree” to such a “contract,” the no-harm contract has been replaced with professional
and empirical preference for the safety plan.
Even seasoned practitioners who are reluctant to do away with the no-harm
contract should be advised that not only is it ill-advised but it is also in contradiction
to many more modern insights about safety planning, and they could run the risk of
increasing liability if using no-harm contracts even in conjunction with safety plans.
Liability for knowing what to do in the case of a suicidal crisis is clearly the burden
of responsibility on the professional and not the client, who would be potentially
Level I: Four Essential Crisis Assessment Tasks
Assessment Task 1: Safety, Stabilization, and Risk
Assessment Task 2: A Holistic Biopsychosocial/Spiritual Assessment Approach (Integrate Q-Tree)
Assessment Task 3: Clarification of the Problem(s)
Assessment Task 4: Coping Skills, Resources, and Supports
Level II: Four Essential Crisis Intervention Tasks
Intervention Task 1: Normalize and Educate
Intervention Task 2: Exploration of Options
Intervention Task 3: Develop a Plan and Obtain a Commitment
Intervention Task 4: Documentation, Follow-up, and Referral
Source: Jackson-Cherry (2018)
TABLE 6.4 The Task Model of Crisis Assessment and Intervention

-- 211 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	183
considered not “competent” to direct treatment decisions if incapacitated with life-
threatening depression or multiple symptoms of any diagnosis. Many acutely at-risk
suicidal clients are not in a psychiatrically oriented or lucid condition to shoulder the
burden of knowing enough about suicide or safety planning. Therefore, the attempt of
the clinician to contract with the temporarily disabled client increases the counselor’s
liability through the use of a no-harm contract.
While some authors have referred to safety plans by varying nomenclature (such
as crisis response plan and self-care plan), the NSPL’s Standards, Training, and Practices
Committee recommends the term safety plan.
We would always use the term “safety plan” . . . other terms [crisis response
plan or self-care plan] are too vague and do not explicitly reference the fact
that keeping the individual safe is the primary goal in developing a plan—
vagueness is not good. In addition, we would never reference a “safety plan”
without explicitly stating the avoidance of anything that resembles a “no
harm contract”—so would attempt to eliminate any confusion at the outset.
(G. Murphy, personal communication, September 22, 2010)
Stanley and Brown (2009) have written extensively about the components of a
safety plan and recommend that clients ask the following questions:
1. When should I use the plan?
2. What can I do to calm/comfort myself if I am feeling suicidal?
3. What are my reasons for living?
4. Who can I talk to?
5. Who can I talk to if I need professional assistance?
6. How can I make my environment safe?
7. What should I do if I am still not feeling safe?
Stanley and Brown addressed not only what should be included in safety planning but
also how to talk through its use with clients. They are widely considered the field’s
experts on safety planning, and practitioners should explore their resources and seek
training in their Safety Planning Intervention.
A comprehensive safety plan addresses specific behavioral actions, determined
in concert with the client, and includes several key focal points including means
restriction, self-soothing options, self-care options, family involvement options, resource
development, and crisis response options (M. Gould & D. Jobes, personal communication,
November 10, 2010), in addition to the recommendations that Stanley and Brown (2009)
suggested.
One essential component of safety planning is addressing means restriction
(Coombs et al., 2010; Mann et al., 2005). Since firearms are the most frequently used
method with which to attempt suicide in the United States—and the most lethal with
the least amount of time for active rescue or intervention—counselors developing safety
plans should include a focus on means removal. It is best to engage a safety partner to
assist with means removal to guarantee the means restriction more fully, rather than
counting on the client to do so.
An example of a safety plan is presented in Table 6.5, written with samples of
specific behavioral actions.

-- 212 of 545 --

184 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
A well-facilitated assessment will encourage a client to trust the counselor and
provide detailed information, which will allow the counselor to understand when,
how, and under what conditions the client becomes vulnerable to suicide. For example,
if a client reveals they want to end their life, particularly when experiencing conflict
with a partner, the treatment plan might recommend couples counseling and conflict-
resolution skills building. If an isolated 80-year-old widower reports being desperately
vulnerable between the hours of 5:00 and 8:00 p.m. each day when imagining all the
neighbors having dinner with their loved ones, a treatment plan should increase social
support during that period of vulnerability.
I will . . . (List specific behaviors such as the examples listed below). Customize the plan with
your client.
1. Remove gun and ammunition from house, car, truck, cabin, barn.
(Note to counselor: Means restriction)
2. Fill doctor’s prescriptions weekly (not a month at a time).
(Note to counselor: Means restriction)
3. Take my dog to play in the park.
(Note to counselor: Soothing feelings of distress)
4. Call a friend.
(Note to counselor: Soothing feelings of distress)
5. Eat three meals a day.
(Note to counselor: Self-care)
6. Drink nonalcoholic and noncaffeinated beverages.
(Note to counselor: Self-care)
7. Avoid lonely times by going to my sister’s.
(Note to counselor: Family support)
8. Spend the night at my cousin’s house.
(Note to counselor: Family support)
9. Go to a community support group for persons who have bipolar disorder.
(Note to counselor: Using resources)
10. Call my sponsor or go to a meeting.
(Note to counselor: Using resources)
11. Call 988 or contact https://988lifeline.org
(Note to counselor: Crisis or emergency support)
12. Go to my primary care physician, psychiatrist, or the ED.
(Note to counselor: Crisis or emergency support)
List the names and reliable phone numbers of several people that the counselor can call or who
can call the counselor in the event of an escalating situation:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Name: 	Phone:
Note: Specific behavioral ideas should be written in the affirmative. For example, in Item #6, instead of
“Don’t drink alcoholic or caffeinated beverages,” restate it in the affirmative “Drink nonalcoholic and
noncaffeinated beverages.”
TABLE 6.5 An Example of a Multimodal Safety Plan with Specific Behaviors

-- 213 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	185
Safety plans should always involve resources, actions, and coping
mechanisms that the client is able and willing to put into place, that are
specific to the situation, and that are written with clear behaviorally specific
verbiage. In the examples provided in Table 6.5, note that there are behavioral
recommendations for means restriction, self-soothing, self-care, family
support, use of community resources, and crisis response options.
Outpatient and Inpatient Treatment Decisions
and Management
Changes in the health care insurance industry and managed care have
severely reduced the amount of hospitalized care that at-risk persons may
obtain, even when suicidal risk remains high. However, when a client is in
immediate risk to self, the decision for hospitalization may be required to keep the per-
son safe. States and counties within states differ as to the process for involuntary and
voluntary hospitalizations, and it is essential that clinicians understand the laws and
policies in the state and county where their clients live. It is better to know what to do
prior to a crisis for both the clinician and the client.
Voluntary hospitalization is preferred over involuntary hospitalization as it allows
the client (and supports) to be part of the decision-making process. In many states, when
a person voluntarily seeks hospitalization, they may have more control in their discharge.
Although this may be preferred, voluntary hospitalization may leave the crisis worker
with an uneasiness of not knowing whether the client followed through with this plan.
When clients and families agree to voluntary hospitalization, the crisis counselor should
obtain a release of information and gain as much information as possible as to where
the client will be seeking admission so they can follow up. A well-being check can be
requested if there is any thought the client (or guardians) did not follow through. The well-
being check is a request of law enforcement to check on the “well-being” of the individual.
Since well-being checks do not fall in the priority of most law enforcement priority calls,
these checks may be at the discretion of the law enforcement officer. An involuntary
hospitalization may follow a voluntary decision that is not followed through by the client.
Involuntary hospitalization differs from state to state, whereas some states require
courts to mandate the commitment of an individual; others allow licensed professionals
to initiate an emergency petition for involuntary hospitalization; some states integrate
mobile crisis teams or crisis intervention teams, while others rely on a community service
board that would make the final assessment and determination based on the clinicians’
observations. The crisis counselors should also establish professional relationships with
community service officers in their jurisdiction and become familiar with protocols. In
these situations, once a client is involuntarily hospitalized, the client will likely not have
further contact with the crisis counselor, and clients will be discharged to outpatient
mental health counselors.
Partial hospitalizations are often referred to as a step down from a hospitalization
when a person may need additional or more intense support than outpatient mental
health. For some this may be residential support in the evening when risk is higher. For
others, like children, partial hospitalization may be scheduled during the day where they
are able to continue their schoolwork and access mental health services and be discharged
to parents in the evening. Medical stabilization and pharmacological intervention are
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 6.4
In this video, toward the end
of a risk assessment session,
a counselor develops a
collaborative safety plan with
a 15-year-old client. What
important components were
listed in the safety plan?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jd7PM9HFDO4
Watch from 00:00 to 07:26

-- 214 of 545 --

186 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
the goals of hospital mental health administrators, and discharge planning begins at
admission. No matter how difficult, uncomfortable, or disruptive a hospitalization is
for clients, it does save lives. Discharge planning and collaboration is essential between
hospital personnel and outpatient counselors to eradicate the high window of risk for
suicide after discharge.
CRISIS FOLLOW-UP CONTACT 	The follow-up with a client who is at risk for suicide is
critical practice (Murphy, 2010). Follow-up as a clinical standard is a form of active
postvention that is postventive, preventive, and interventive. Follow-ups may include
regularly scheduled phone calls, letters, or notes, and even texting or e-mailing, or they
may include memoranda of agreements with provider organizations (e.g., between
agencies or practices and hospital EDs).
Data about follow-up assessments with crisis center callers is very encouraging
in that callers who sought out suicide intervention assistance from centers are very
positive and motivated to reduce ambivalence about wanting to die. Clinicians may
direct family care team members to obtain helpful booklets from agencies such as the
Feeling Blue Suicide Prevention Council (https://www.givepulse.com/group/2786-Feeling-
Blue-Suicide-Prevention-Council?) to assist family members following a suicide attempt.
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration also has several
“after an attempt” resource booklets for medical providers, attempters, and family
members of attempters that can be obtained at https://store.samhsa.gov/product/A-Guide-
for-Taking-Care-of-Your-Family-Member-After-Treatment-in-the-Emergency-Department/
sma18-4357eng.
DOCUMENTATION OF LETHALITY 	It is important that the counselor notes what a client
reports and how they present. Not asking does not mean a client is not suicidal. It
means the standard of care was not met sufficiently. How a client presents is also
important documentation. Is the client agreeable to a plan? Are they more distant today
than other sessions? Do statements made by the client and how the client is behaving
conflict? Do they appear disoriented? Does the client have distorted thoughts?
A common risk statement should show that a verbal assessment was made as well as an
observation of nonverbal behaviors: “The client does not report or present with current
suicidal or homicidal thoughts and behaviors. The client denies a history of suicidal
behaviors or hospitalizations for psychiatric concerns.” This statement implies that the
counselor has asked the appropriate questions and the client has been evaluated based
on their behavioral presentation. This documentation should also be extended to NSSI
and homicide risk assessments. Now read Voices from the Field 6.1.
Amanda Evans
A common theme that I noticed when working at an
inpatient psychiatric unit as a graduate student was
helping professionals struggling to assist patients in
crisis who performed at lower cognitive functioning.
I can specifically remember several clients who were
misunderstood by the hospital staff due to their level of
cognitive functioning and were subsequently provided
more restrictive care. It is very important as a counselor
to be mindful that just because a client is an adult does
not mean that the client can manage the responsibilities
or cognitive complexity of adulthood. A patient who
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.1
Crisis Intervention with Clients Who Have Low Cognitive Functioning

-- 215 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	187
Postvention
In recent years, postvention has grown to include the care practices that practitioners
provide to persons who have survived a suicide attempt. Postvention with attempt
survivors can include ongoing stabilization, long-term therapy, and improvement of
help-seeking skills and overall self-care, with a goal of long-term improvements in
quality of life and functioning.
Historically, postvention has been the type of care provided to survivors of suicide
loss. Survivors of suicide or homicide loss can develop protracted symptoms of grief,
depression, anxiety, PTSD, longer and more complicated grief and bereavement; more
demands on medical and mental health services; and greater potential for lost time
at work and at school. Survivors of suicide loss also have an elevated risk for suicide
attempts. The remainder of this section focuses on survivors of suicide loss.
BEREAVEMENT AND OTHER ISSUES 	Bereavement from both suicide and homicide can
remain complicated for many years. The DSM-5-TR (American Psychiatric Association,
2022) added a diagnosis of prolonged grief disorder; arguably, many survivors of suicide
or homicide loss might be at risk for this diagnosis due to the vexing circumstances
compared to other types of loss.
Given the prevailing prevalence of suicide in the United States, a conservative
estimate of persons who become newly bereaved due to the loss of a loved one by suicide
numbers over 275,000 per year (Suicide Awareness Voices of Education, 2022). The job of
bereavement counselors is an important one, due both to the large number of survivors
of suicide loss in the population and the misperceptions and myths about suicide both
before and after death. Survivors of suicide loss often report feeling misunderstood,
stigmatized, and marginalized. They are prone to bereavement and sorrow, complicated
grief, and posttraumatic symptoms (Harrington, 2011). Their bereavement may be
punctuated by the complexities of believing that their loved one “rationally chose”
death, as contrasted with viewing suicide as a multifactorial process of debilitation and
vulnerability (Survivors of Loved Ones’ Suicides, 2006). They may have lost a child, a
appears to be 50 years old may in fact function cognitively
as an adolescent or as a child. This can be challenging in
a hospital setting when clients in crisis require immediate,
effective, and appropriate medical attention.
Oftentimes, patients who were lower functioning
were expected to cope and manage in the same
way as their higher-functioning peers. This included
maintaining personal hygiene, medication compliance,
following the unit’s rules, and establishing appropriate
boundaries with their peers. In addition, I noted
counselors who provided treatment to these clients
struggled with gathering intake information and
establishing aftercare goals. This difficulty in serving
lower-functioning patients was most evident in the
staff’s attempt to deescalate crises. In my opinion,
clients who are lower functioning are commonly
misinterpreted by helping professionals, leading to
unnecessary rapid escalation in crisis situations, physical
restraints, and possibly medical restraints.
Based on my personal experiences, I want to
encourage counselors-in-training to consider alternative
methods to communicate with clients in crisis. When
patients who have low cognitive functioning are in
crisis, expecting mature, rational decision making may
be unrealistic; however, helping clients to express
themselves, calm down, or self-soothe is ideal. In
addition to talking through a crisis, working with
individuals using pictures, schedules, sign language,
silence, or techniques specific to the client’s needs
can be very helpful in deescalating a crisis. At times,
competent care requires stepping outside of the box
and using alternative interventions to best assist clients.

-- 216 of 545 --

188 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
sibling, or a partner within a cloud of unknown circumstances, such as losses or defeats
that resulted in acute suicide risk, such as a bad business deal, a negative performance
evaluation at work, or an act of infidelity that they could not work through, to name a few.
The circumstances surrounding the immediate scene of a suicide may include the
involvement of law enforcement, investigators treating the scene as a murder, potential
arrest warrants being issued, and limited or potentially gruff communication with
personnel such as coroners or first responders, possibly punctuated with yellow crime
scene tape. Of course, many survivors report exemplary conduct on the part of these
professionals, and so it is not a universal problem, but for some survivors of suicide loss,
the circumstances surrounding the immediate scene complicate the grieving process.
Adults and children alike are often witnesses to the actual suicide, they may
discover the body, or they might be involved in clean-up. Many family-related and
religious complications can ensue, with conflicts possible among stepfamily, family-of-
origin, or in-law family members who may disagree about stating the cause of death
openly to their communities. Sometimes the suicide may be like one domino in a row
of dominoes that continue to fall. For example, consider the scenario in which a middle-
aged person dies from suicide, leaving financial problems that result in foreclosure
or bankruptcy for the surviving family members, leaving college-age children unable
to continue their schooling, and a partner/parent who must reenter the workforce or
sell the house. The suicide can become one crisis of many in a sequence of events, not
unlike the ABC-X model of crises (Hill, 1949, 1958) or the Double ABC-X model of crises
(McCubbin & Patterson, 1982).
Counselors providing postvention grief services to survivors of loss should
become familiar with complicated bereavement and mourning, learn about counseling
techniques and countenance directly related to working with suicide loss, and especially
be aware of the feelings of helplessness, sense of responsibility, and internalized guilt
that the bereft feel after a suicide. Many family members have knowledge of their loved
one’s struggles and may have assisted in ways that in fact prolonged the life of their
loved one. Yet the traumatic circumstances, the stigma or belief that it was a rational
choice, or the complicated mourning leave survivors clinging to a sense of guilt-framed
attribution of responsibility.
FRAMEWORK TO INTERVENE WITH SURVIVORS 	Whether working with an individual or
with a group, there are common factors to take into consideration that may be unique to
those grieving the loss due to suicide: (1) prevention of further suicides, (2) reconstructing
the “why,” (3) commemorating the positive, (4) saying goodbye, and (5) an assessment
of guilt/shame and absolution of guilt. The main priority throughout the time with
survivors is to assess and prevent further additional suicidal behaviors. Often, suicide
survivors have no closure and may not know why their loved one decided to take their
own life. It is unlike the grief process during which a person is grieving the loss of a
loved one with a known cause (e.g., terminal illness, accident).
In suicide cases, survivors often are stuck in the “why.” Questions such as “Why
did he not come to me for help?” and “Why did she take her own life?” are things
that keep a survivor progressing through healthy grief work. Counselors may need
to normalize the repetition of these questions and reconstruct the why to understand
what the underlying meaning of these “why” questions is for the survivors. Meaning
may relate to the perception of being a “bad” parent, grieving the loss of a role of being

-- 217 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	189
a family member, or could uncover some hidden guilt in not being present when they
now believe they could have assisted in suicide prevention.
Connected with being stuck in the “why,” survivors are unable to have closure and
move on with their own lives through letting go or saying goodbye. Counselors, when
reconstructing the “why,” will often help clients work toward moving on in their own
life while still remembering the loved one lost. Similar to staying stuck in the cognitive
“why,” survivors may experience a range of emotions, including anger, sadness,
confusion, numbness, and guilt (to name a few) toward their loved one. Being stuck in
one emotion can also prevent survivors from moving on and healing in grief work and
may lead to negative feelings toward their loved one. Being able to commemorate a
positive trait or attribute can allow a survivor to start working through the loss.
Finally, in suicide cases, there may be a degree of guilt by the survivor, thinking
they could have done something to prevent the suicide. In many cases, survivors can
recall the warning signs of the loved one. However, these warning signs are often
only evident after the fact and could not have predicted a suicide. Therefore, it may be
important for survivors to know that whatever the situation or relationship leading up to
the suicide, it was ultimately the decision of the loved one to take their own life—offering
absolution of guilt. Having these aspects built into the grief process can help survivors
move into healthy grieving.
When working with family and friends, it is imperative to determine who may
have found the body. Often, a family member may not be forthcoming if they found the
body. The human senses (visual, hearing, touch, or smell) connected with the suicide
may trigger flashbacks for this individual; therefore, the individual who found the body
should be a priority in counseling.
Counselors should become familiar with how to find suicide bereavement
groups that exist in many localities around the country by visiting either the American
Foundation for Suicide Prevention or the American Association of Suicidology websites
for comprehensive listings. While survivors of suicide loss often report that they speak
the same language, a language that other bereft persons do not fully understand, not
all survivors will think that a group is the best option for them. Other suggestions
for therapeutic responses that counselors can recommend include bibliotherapy and
Internet resources, psychoeducation, family guidance, survivor outreach, cyber groups
or chatrooms, survivor conferences, and activism, with activism marking a full circle
from postvention to prevention.
Suicide bereavement counselors might provide psychoeducational insights to
survivors of suicide loss. For example, the counselor may provide insight that experts do
not believe that suicide is a “rational choice,” that intent looks very much like a “choice”
when clinically they are very different, that suicide was not done to punish the survivors
but rather to end the pain or to alleviate the burden that the decedent perceives they were
(often a mistaken perspective). Counselors should be prepared to support survivors of
loss when survivors encounter misinformation, myths, stigma, and judgments about the
type of death that occurred. Some people, even well-meaning friends, say hurtful and
untrue things, such as “I can’t believe he would do such a selfish and hostile thing to
you” or “How tragic that she committed this sin; she’ll surely go to hell.”
Finally, some counselors become crisis advisors to employers, agencies, schools,
faith-based groups, and communities. These professionals should be familiar with the
national resources available for responsible communication with the media following

-- 218 of 545 --

190 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
a suicidal death. All the prominent national suicidological organizations have such
resources available on their websites for distribution to decision makers, spokespersons,
and even media representatives to use the public news forum responsibly, prevent
suicide contagion, and avoid glorifying suicide or misrepresenting knowledge about it.
Now complete Activity 6.2.
ACTIVITY 6.2
Think about how society sometimes normalizes
language that is violent or self-harming. Have
you ever heard friends in casual conversation use
phrases to describe their exasperation like “That’s
enough to make me wanna kill myself” or “I’m just
going to shoot myself if he doesn’t quit teasing
me”? Perhaps you have seen seemingly humorous
references to suicide in unexpected places.
For example, a restaurant may have a dessert called
“Suicide by Chocolate” or a corporate trainer may
talk about “career suicide.”
Public messaging is a powerful tool in promoting
initiatives that are clinically responsible and in the
interests of public health. It is unacceptable to refer to
a fatal suicide attempt as “successful.” Only prevention
can be considered successful.
How we unwittingly toss around the words and
concepts of suicide says something to the public. We
may unconsciously promote stigma and even set up
barriers for the public to learn and to trust that help
is available. They will not have to worry about being
crazy, a quitter, a loser, or a sinner if they understand
that health care professionals know that self-directed
violence is the result of involuntary and debilitating
attempts to end psychological pain. To be more
empowered and enlightened is to use language that
is nonjudgmental and inviting to persons who may be
struggling to be help-seeking.
What will you do the next time you hear a
so-called humorous reference to suicide? How would
you entertain the idea that generally people do not often
joke about other life-threatening illnesses, such as cancer,
cardiac arrest, or diabetes? We do not see “Cancer by
Chocolate” on menus. People do not say “she cancered”
herself. What small individual act of suicide prevention
advocacy will you do when you have the opportunity?
NONSUICIDAL SELF-INJURY
Learning Objective 6.7 Describe assessments and treatment for NSSI, including the
use of a Q-tree.
The DSM-5-TR added suicidal behavior and nonsuicidal self-injury into the “other
conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention” section. The inclusion of NSSI
should improve documentation of these behaviors to determine risk factors for suicidal
ideation and actions and provide more effective treatment planning options. NSSI is
the intentional, self-inflicted, immediate destruction of body tissue, without suicidal
intent, that is not viewed as culturally acceptable behavior. Self-injurious behaviors can
be performed on any part of the body but often injuries are done to the hands, wrists,
stomach, and thighs. The severity of NSSI can range from superficial wounds to long-
term disfigurement. In one study, 33% of people who reported engaging in self-injurious
behaviors reported they should have sought medical attention; however, only 6.5% in the
same study reported receiving medical attention for their wounds. Although the most
common NSSI behavior continues to be reported as cutting, other common behaviors or
methods of NSSI include, but are not limited to:
• Burning
• Skin picking
• Hair pulling

-- 219 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	191
• Banging or hitting the head or other body parts
• Rubbing objects into the skin
• Skin erasing or carving
• Interfering with wound healing
• Bone breaking
Most of the literature suggests that NSSI increases substantially in early adolescence
and decreases during late adolescence and early adulthood (Plener et al., 2015) with
more incidents of NSSI behaviors by females (Fox, 2015). Considering the prevalence of
self-injury among adolescents, the likelihood that counselors and medical professionals
will encounter NSSI is quite high. Historically, NSSI has been viewed as not linked
with suicidal intent, but most clinicians and researchers suggest that NSSI is a strong
predictor of future suicidal behavior. Scott et al. (2015) estimated that suicide attempts
increased fourfold for those who previously engaged in NSSI and suggested that both
suicide ideation and NSSI are known risk factors for suicidal behavior with increased
predictive risk for suicide attempts.
Assessments and Q-Tree
The high correlation of NSSI and future suicide attempts prompted the DSM-5-TR
(American Psychiatric Association, 2022) to add suicidal behavior and NSSI into section
2, “other conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention.” Furthermore, it is a
standard of care to integrate an NSSI assessment as part of all suicide risk assessments.
It is essential to understand the intentions of those who participate in NSSI to properly
assess intent, implement the most effective treatment strategy, or appropriately refer to
additional care. Every intake should have an NSSI assessment in addition to the suicide
and homicide risk assessment, even if NSSI is not a presenting issue. It would be better
to include a standard NSSI question than not ask and live with the consequences after
the fact. This could entail simply including the following:
• “Have you ever engaged in any nonsuicidal self-injurious behaviors?”
✓ If no, proceed to a suicidal risk assessment
✓ If yes, complete the NSSI assessment
Kruzan and Whitlock (2019) adapted the transtheoretical model (TTM) of behavior
change proposed by Prochaska and DiClemente to assess motivation for change. TTM
integrates the following while assessing motivation of change: (1) precontemplation
(with no intent to stop NSSI); (2) contemplation (intent to stop NSSI within 6 months);
(3) preparation (intention of taking steps to stop NSSI within next month); (4) action
(currently taking steps to stop NSSI); (5) maintenance (steps have been taken for more
than 6 months); and (6) termination (cessation of NSSI for over 3 years).
We have integrated a Q-tree into the TTM as an example for crisis counselors to
assess and identify a timeline of NSSI, risk factors, and motivation for change (protective
factors) to provide referral for treatment.
Have you self-injured in the last 6 months?
If YES (to the 6-month question), is self-injury something you would like to stop?
• If yes, have you taken steps to stop NSSI?
✓ If yes, explore ACTION STAGE and ACTION PLANNING

-- 220 of 545 --

192 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• If no, do you plan to take steps to stop NSSI?
✓ If no, client is in the PRECONTEMPLATION STAGE (consider psychoedu-
cation)
✓ If yes, client is in the PREPARATION STAGE (explore ideas and establish
plan)
If NO (to the 6-month question), have you self-injured in the past YEAR?
• If yes, is self-injury something you would like to stop?
• If no, have you self-injured in the past 3 YEARS?
✓ If yes, explore MAINTENANCE STAGE
✓ If no, no action is recommended
A more comprehensive assessment should follow this Q-tree screening approach.
The TTM approach assesses the timeline and motivations for change based on the
motivation for change theory. It is limited to these assessment categories unless you
implement additional elements needed for a more thorough NSSI assessment. We
suggest that more elements should be included for a comprehensive NSSI assessment
and have included the following adapted NSSI assessment, based on the research and
clinical work of Wester and Trepal (2017), who also found a high correlation between
NSSI and suicidal attempts. Thus, it is best practice to conduct independent suicidal risk
and NSSI assessments.
According to Wester and Trepal (2017), the NSSI assessment should gather:
(1) basic information, (2) contextual information, and (3) functional/reasoning
information. Table 6.6 can serve as a Q-tree for NSSI, and we have included some Q-tree
questions that connect to Wester and Trepal’s indicators. Upon gathering this information
and assessing NSSI risk, a crisis counselor can provide effective referral for a client.
Basic Information 	Contextual Information 	Functional/Reasoning
1. What was the age at onset?
2. How did the NSSI begin? (Was
there a triggering situation or
event?)
3. When was the last time the client
engaged in NSSI? (Start with most
recent, in past week, month, 3
months, year, over their lifetime)
4. What methods are used to
engage? Have methods changed?
5. Where on the body is NSSI
targeted?
6. Is NSSI known by others or is it
secretive?
7. Are there any wounds that have
needed medical attention?
8. Has client ever been able to
cease NSSI?
1. When engaging, are
substances (drugs,
prescription medications,
alcohol) used?
2. Has client ever found
a wound they had no
recollection of inflicting?
3. Is client able to delay
engagement?
4. If not, has there ever
been a desire to delay
engagement?
5. Is there a geographical
location or setting
where the NSSI occurs?
6. Does client have
thoughts or ideations of
suicide as well?
What reason is NSSI
used to:
1. regulate emotions?
2. feel better?
3. connect to
oneself (decrease
numbness)?
4. socially withdraw or
isolate?
5. engage or belong?
6. control or influence
others?
7. fill a craving or
addiction?
8. communicate?
TABLE 6.6 Q-Tree Questions for NSSI

-- 221 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	193
Just as with suicidal risk assessment, the counselor should weigh the risk factors
and protective factors to gather all the information required for treatment planning and
referral. As a note, often NSSI behaviors can serve as protective factors so the counselor
is cautioned to not eliminate NSSI behaviors without evaluating the impact of stopping
the NSSI behavior, or exploring the elimination, as this could increase suicidal thoughts
or behaviors. This model is more comprehensive in gathering and reviewing several key
pieces of information that facilitate referral for continued care.
NSSI assessment, like suicide and homicide risk assessment, often requires long-
term care, which may exceed the time a true crisis counselor can offer, unless the NSSI
treatment takes place in long-term counseling. Often, crisis counselors will gather the
information and then refer the person to appropriate long-term counseling. Using
the template above allows a counselor to gather the basic, contextual, and functional
information needed to provide a solid referral for treatment.
Treatment Approaches
Understanding the most effective treatment approaches for NSSI is also essential. The most
common therapeutic approaches for NSSI include dialectical behavior therapy, cognitive-
behavioral therapy, problem-solving therapy (rational problem-solving therapy),
and treatment for self-injurious behaviors (T-SIB). T-SIB was developed as a brief
nine-session intervention to treat NSSI behaviors in young adults without borderline
personality disorder (see Table 6.7). T-SIB can be used as a standalone treatment or an
adjunctive intervention and includes the components in Table 6.7 with psychoeducation
Session and Overview 	Description of the Session Content
1. 	Psychoeducation
and Addressing
Motivation
Psychoeducation of NSSI, orientation to treatment, motivational
interviewing, and other strategies to decrease ambivalence may be
used by counselor
2. 	Functional
Assessment (FA)
Assess NSSI behaviors, provide alternative coping strategies for NSSI
if appropriate, and provide homework to address the functional
assessment of NSSI (is the person getting what they intend from
NSSI behaviors?)
3. 	FA 	Explore times when NSSI is not engaged
4. 	FA and Differential
Reinforcement of
Alternative Behaviors
Explore behaviors that may be adopted as alternatives to NSSI
and provide homework to only list alternative strategies with clear
instructions not to try them yet
5–6. Differential
Reinforcement of
Alternative Behaviors
Evaluate impact of each alternative listed, revise list, homework
assigned to implement alternative behaviors
7–8. Individual Modules 	Individual sessions for each client depending on their function
of events to NSSI. May integrate distress tolerance, interpersonal
communication, cognitive distortions, and restructuring
9. Termination 	Review progress and address obstacles moving forward
TABLE 6.7 T-SIB Sessions and Program Overview

-- 222 of 545 --

194 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
and therapeutic interventions. Counselors know how stressful this work can be and are
reminded to receive training, practice self-care, and seek consultation and supervision
as needed. Next, read Voices from the Field 6.2.
Amanda C. La Guardia
After completing my bachelor’s degree, I started
working in the mental health field as a case manager
assigned to a small number of children and adolescents
who had been identified as “at risk” for being removed
from their homes and placed into foster care or long-
term inpatient facilities. My job was to help ensure
these youngsters stayed with their families. I was with
each family for up to 12 hours per week, which was far
more than their licensed counselors were. I frequently
felt that I did not have the training necessary to help
in the way that was needed (which is why I decided to
pursue my master’s in counseling).
One of the biggest challenges I faced with
many of my clients was treating non-suicidal self-
injurious behavior. I worked with several adolescent
females who used self-injury as a way of coping with
either the psychological impact of the trauma they
had experienced or their emotional turmoil. I also
encountered elementary school–age boys who engaged
in self-injurious behaviors for similar reasons. Rather than
perceiving these behaviors as a coping strategy, many of
the counselors I worked with judged these behaviors to
be the result of mental illness. For example, borderline
behavior was a consistent assessment for the females
and impulsivity because of hyperactivity was a common
assessment for the boys. Thus, I noticed clinicians often
did not focus on nonsuicidal self-injury as an important
treatment concern. I knew better, but I needed training.
In many cases, the clients who engaged in the
most frequent self-injurious behaviors were also con-
templating suicide. They would injure themselves to
deal with their overwhelming emotions (or lack of
emotional connection) and to prevent acting out on
their suicidal thoughts. This combination was tricky.
I knew they needed a better way of coping, but I did
not want to take away the method that they felt kept
them from walking down a more dangerous path.
Formal and informal ways of assessing their suicidal
ideations as well as their need for self-injury became
equally necessary. Self-injury and suicidal ideation are
separate issues, but they are often interconnected.
Together with my clients, we discussed what
situations (external and internal) tended to lead to
self-injurious behaviors and worked on developing
new ways of coping. I did not ask them to stop, but
I did ask them to take care of themselves and
encouraged them to find new ways of dealing with
their pain because they deserved happiness, however
they defined it; they were worth it. I let them know
I would be with them as they struggled, and then I
made sure that I was.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.2
Treating Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
HOMICIDE
Learning Objective 6.8 Describe threat assessment and treatment options for
intervention with people who are homicidal or are threats to others.
Most counselors are aware that they are likely to encounter suicidal clients in their coun-
seling practice (Laux, 2002) and be exposed to persons experiencing thoughts of suicide.
Still, many counselors underestimate the need for expertise in assessment and inter-
vention skills with homicidal clients. There is a general assumption that clients with
homicidal ideation are found primarily within the domain of forensic mental health and
therefore are not a concern for most counselors in a variety of settings. Obviously, clients
with a history of certain mental disorders and violent offenses do present an elevated
risk to the public, and mental health professionals working with violent offenders should
strive to balance public safety and client rights (Carroll et al., 2004; Large et al., 2011).

-- 223 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	195
Ongoing reports from the media reveal that the potential for violence and
homicide exists in families, schools, colleges, the workplace, and across all communities.
Accordingly, it is essential that counselors in all practice settings be equipped to assess
the lethality of clients with homicidal ideation and be capable of making decisions
regarding the referral and treatment of dangerous clients. Van Brunt (2015) stated
that while mental illness is often a contributing element, “the core of assessment must
be based on threat assessment principles, not clinical pathology” (p. viii). Moreover,
counselors in all settings may be called on to provide services to survivors of loss due to
homicide. A homicidal crisis is intense and has long-lasting repercussions for individuals
and communities who are left struggling to make sense of their traumatic loss and
complicated grief (Currier et al., 2006). In this section, we explore the issue of homicidal
ideation and systems of threat level assessment as well as treatment options.
Homicide can be defined as the willful killing of one person by another person.
According to the CDC (2022b), in 2018 there were 24,576 homicides in the United States
(7.5 per 100,000). The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI; 2019) reported 16,425 homi-
cides for 2019, which reflected a rate of 5.0 per 100,000 in that year. Preliminary analy-
sis forecasts that the downward trend will continue, though the trends will be studied
closely given any pandemic-related influences on the increase or decrease in violence.
It is also important to note that while overall homicide rates have been decreasing, the
rate of mass shootings has been on the rise, with 40 mass shootings in 2020, up from 30
in 2019 (FBI, 2021).
Sixty-eight percent of homicides are committed with guns (Doucette et al., 2019).
Mental health professionals as prevention advocates are faced with myriad complex
variables related to public opinions, political and values-informed discourse, the
availability of guns through legal and illegal means, conflicting social values between
personal freedoms and personal safety, and other factors. At the very least, within the
clinical relationship, clinicians can and should strive to prevent homicide by attending to
clients’ safety with means-removal, means-restriction, and safety planning. They should
work with highly attuned standards for duty to warn and duty to protect.
“I could just kill him!” That is not an uncommon declaration from a client venting
anger at a difficult partner, peer, or coworker, and counselors must be able to ascertain
frustration from true risk of violence (Welfel, 2016). Such threats of harm toward another
usually transpire when a client is experiencing extreme psychological anguish and is
attempting to resolve feelings of distress; they are expressions of emotion without any
real intent to carry out a threat (Warren et al., 2011). The counselor is then tasked with
determining whether such pronouncements are simply common idiomatic expressions
of anger or are legitimate lethal threats. Fortunately, in most instances, clients are merely
indulging in hyperbole to give voice to intense anger or frustration; however, counselors
must be prepared to recognize and assess potential lethality in cases where resentment
and infuriation have escalated into homicidal ideation and possible violent actions.
Legal Issues
Working with potentially violent and homicidal clients presents a challenge to crisis
counselors as they attempt to assess possible homicidal behavior, provide treatment, and
protect potential intended victims and themselves (Meloy et al., 2011). When counseling
potentially homicidal clients, the protection of the public (or individual) is the priority.

-- 224 of 545 --

196 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
The noteworthy 1976 case of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California (refer to
Chapter 3) clarified that the duty under California law to warn individuals who are in
peril is of greater importance than the preservation of client confidentiality (Rothstein,
2014; Welfel, 2016). The Tarasoff case established the legal construct of duty to warn
through case law that inspired a higher ethical standard, even though in many states it
was not codified by law and still may not be used as a precedent in some states.
It is a good idea for crisis counselors to become familiar with the regulations of
their own state laws regarding the duty to warn, as these issues are constantly being
addressed by legislators at the state level. Welfel (2016) noted that while codes of ethics
allow breach of confidentiality regarding dangerous clients and the burden of responsi-
bility to warn targeted victims, there are state laws that require client protection to take
place through hospitalization of the threatening individual (e.g., in Ohio) or contacting
police rather than directly contacting the intended victim (i.e., in Texas) and breaching
confidentiality.
Counselors must be aware of the terminology in their licensing states in relation to
homicidal behaviors. For example, Welfel reports that some states clarify that the harm
must be imminent before confidentiality can be breached and may require consultation
with other mental health professionals. Legal consultation is strongly urged before
confidentiality is breached.
Assessment of Homicide: Risk Factors
Certain basic indicators and risk factors tend to be associated with homicidal behavior
and violence. However, a word of caution about risk factors: While they may assist
crisis counselors in assessment, it is important to remember that the existence of risk
factors does not mean the client will become violent, and, conversely, the absence of
risk factors does not indicate a lack of homicidal intention. Remember, each case must be
evaluated on its own terms. With or without the presence of certain risk factors, someone
can become homicidal at any time for any reason. Just as the existence of a risk factor
cannot predict suicidality, risk factors for homicide in clients cannot predict whether the
client will act in a violent manner (Van Brunt, 2015).
The FBI Unified Crime Report (2019) reports the following:
• 78.3% of the 13,927 murder victims were male.
• When race was provided for the 13,927 murder victims, 54.7% were Black, 42.3% were
White, and 3.1% were of other races. Data on race was not included for 234 victims.
• More than 73% of the homicides involved the use of firearms.
• 28.3% of homicide victims were killed by someone they knew other than a family
member (acquaintance, neighbor, friend, boyfriend, etc.), 13.0% died at the hands
of a family member and 9.9% were murdered by a stranger.
Berghuis and Klott (2015) noted that, among other behaviors, males who become
homicidal tend to exhibit impulsivity and have prevalence of mental illness, family
violence, job instability, and overall insecurity in their social contexts. They usually
express a need to control intimate relationships and may exhibit possessiveness and
rage. The need to control others is most clearly demonstrated in domestic violence cases
where batterers control their partners through threats, physical violence, isolation from
friends and family, and limiting access to money. Emotional reactivity and acting out

-- 225 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	197
of jealousy and revenge were found to be common themes among domestic violence
perpetrators (Juodis et al., 2014a).
Research provides information about the characteristics and risk factors associated
with youth who commit acts of violence and homicide. According to the CDC (2023a),
homicide is the third leading cause of death for youth between the ages of 10 and 24 and
the leading cause of death for non-Hispanic Black youth. Sexual minority teens are more
likely to experience multiple forms of violence compared to their heterosexual peers.
Furthermore, the report outlines various risk and protective factors, although it cautions
that risk factors are not direct causes of youth violence. A combination of individual,
relationship, community, and societal factors contribute to the risk and prevention of
youth violence.
• Individual risk factors: History of violence victimization; attention deficit or
learning disorders; history of early aggressive behavior; use of drugs, alcohol, or
tobacco; low IQ; poor behavior control; deficits in social cognitive or information-
processing abilities; intense emotional distress; history of treatment for emotional
problems; antisocial traits and beliefs; exposure to violence
• Family risk factors: Authoritarian parents; inconsistent disciplinary practices;
low parental involvement; low emotional attachment to parents or caregivers; low
education and income of parents; substance use or criminal incidents by parents;
poor family functioning; lack of supervision of children
• Peer and social risk factors: Delinquent peers; involvement in gangs; social rejection
by peers; lack of involvement in acceptable activities; poor academic performance;
low commitment to school and school failure
• Community risk factors: Diminished economic opportunities; high level of tran-
siency; high level of family disruption; low levels of community participation;
socially disorganized neighborhoods
Protective factors would be the opposite of the risk factors listed above.
School Homicide and Violence
The Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD; 2019) reminds
readers and members of K–12 school personnel that there is not a simple or obvious
profile of a student who might enact a school shooting. Though school shootings result
in extensive media coverage and collective trauma within communities and beyond,
the prevalence of gun violence off the school campus is still substantially higher
than on campuses. ASCD reported that the average number of deaths from gunshot
wounds between 2002 and 2014 was 1,300 per year, compared with 117 total fatalities
in school locations between 2000 and 2014. Despite the tragic and vexing aftermath
of school shootings, educational settings may be considered safer than other settings
that children frequent. Everyone who cares about safer communities and schools wants
to know who that child may be that could become a school shooter, yet the ability to
predict or “spot the profile” of such a youth is elusive. ASCD reported that, while most
school shooters are White male teens, their academic and behavioral histories were
unremarkable. They experienced some successes in school, had friends or a social group,
and were relatively typical, leading the FBI and the U.S. Secret Service to advise against
using profile analysis as a prevention approach.

-- 226 of 545 --

198 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
That said, in recent years, it has become tragically evident that K–12 schools and
higher-education settings are vulnerable to heinous acts of violence. The FBI (2019)
tracked active shooter events from 2000 to 2013 and found a steady increase over that
time span. Of those incidents, 24.4% occurred in educational settings. Moreover, the
incidents that occurred on campuses accounted for some of the highest casualty rates.
As with violent incidents in other settings, school shootings are precipitated
by a complex interplay of personal issues and environmental circumstances. Again,
it is important to note that the presence of certain risk factors cannot predict actual
violent acts, but since most violent students communicate their intentions, ongoing
threat assessment can help school officials prevent violence and provide intervention
to troubled students. By using systematic threat assessment and being attuned to
warning signs, educational settings can more clearly identify individuals with violent
intent. According to Meloy et al. (2011), “warning behaviors are acts which constitute
evidence of increasing or accelerating risk . . . acute, dynamic, and particularly
toxic changes in patterns of behavior which may aid in structuring a professional’s
judgment that an individual of concern now poses a threat” (p. 256). School personnel
and crisis staff are certainly encouraged to maximize any efforts within the social
and emotional development initiatives schoolwide to equip students with increasing
emotional self-awareness, strong coping skills, help-seeking skills, conflict resolution
skills, and more.
Meloy et al. (2011) developed a typology of eight warning behaviors that can indi-
cate amplified risk of targeted violence and should be utilized when assessing a threat.
They state that “threat assessment is concerned almost wholly with the risk of targeted
violence by a subject of concern and has a behavioral and observational policing focus”
(p. 257). The eight warning behaviors are as follows:
1. Pathway warning behavior—the individual plans an attack
2. Fixation warning behavior—the individual becomes obsessed with a person or cause
3. Identification warning behavior—the individual identifies with attackers or warriors
4. Novel aggression warning behavior—the individual tries out violent behavior as a test
5. Energy burst behavior—the individual increases activities related to the intended
victim(s)
6. Leakage warning behavior—the individual tells another person about the plans
7. Directly communicated threat warning behavior—the individual makes an explicit
threat to the target or police
8. Last resort warning behavior—the individual displays an increase in distress and
comes to believe that there is no other way forward but violence toward the target
(Meloy & O’Toole, 2011)
It is hoped that this typology of warning behaviors can make threat assessment more
systematized and usable.
According to Meloy and O’Toole (2011), individuals leak their plans for a variety of
reasons, such as excitement, attention, anxiety, or fear. Leakage may be unintentional or
intentional. If leakage occurs during counseling, the counselor should discern the need
to follow duty to warn responsibilities. O’Toole (2014) noted that individuals who are
withdrawn, detached from others, and think they have been attacked by another person
(whether the attack is real or imagined) may begin to plot a revenge attack. Erford et al.
(2019) also state that revenge for bullying or social rejection is a specific motivation for

-- 227 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	199
many school shootings. Bullying prevention must be considered an important facet of
any school violence prevention program (Duplechain & Morris, 2014). The U.S. Secret
Service (2010) offered this insight into the prevalence of leakage:
School-based attacks are rarely impulsive acts. Rather, they are typically
thought out and planned in advance. Almost every attacker had engaged in
behavior before the shooting that seriously concerned at least one adult—
and for many had concerned three or more adults. In addition, prior to most
of the incidents, other students knew the attack was to occur but did not
alert an adult.
This information points to the need to educate students, school staff and faculty, and the
public about leakage. Violence in school is usually planned, and school staff and faculty
need to be particularly attentive to signs and symptoms of violence as well as to school
environmental factors that give rise to bullying, rejection, and the promotion of violence
(Miller et al., 2000).
Kanan (2010) highlighted the following 10 findings on violent incidents in schools:
1. Incidents of violence are rarely impulsive acts.
2. Prior to most incidents, other people knew about the attacker’s ideas or plans.
3. Most attackers did not threaten their targets directly prior to advancing the attack.
4. There is no active or useful profile of students who engage in targeted school
violence.
5. Prior to the attack, most attackers engaged in some behavior that caused concern
or indicated a need for help.
6. Most attackers were known to have difficulty coping with significant losses or
personal failures.
7. Many attackers felt bullied, persecuted, or injured by others prior to the attack.
8. Most attackers had access to and had used weapons prior to the attack.
9. In many cases, other students were involved in some capacity.
10. Despite prompt law enforcement responses, most shooting incidents were stopped
by means other than law enforcement interventions. (p. 32)
A key point to consider in school shootings is the fact that attackers usually indicate
their intentions to someone. Most of the time, other students had some hints that a fellow
student was ready to lash out. Part of the difficulty that schools face is the fact that
students are reluctant to tell adults their suspicions. Payne and Delbert (2011) noted that
the use of an anonymous hotline for students to report threats, mistreatment, or bullying
can be an effective deterrent to incidents of school violence. Prevention messaging, such
as “if you see something, say something,” or training youth to get help from an adult
are important school context norms to advance.
In general, college campuses are safe environments, and there is a lower rate
of crime on college campuses compared to off-campus settings (Carr & Wood, 2006).
Horrific shootings on college campuses are more reflective of problems with mental
health access and compliance than of problems with campus safety. Colleges and
universities can combat violent incidents through training for faculty, staff, and even
students. The implementation of threat assessment and prevention programs on
campus and campus-wide warning systems could provide the means to thwart future
acts of violence and protect student lives. Campus leadership can continue to improve

-- 228 of 545 --

200 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
access to mental health care, foster social and emotional support in residential facilities,
and improve morale across groups (Van Brunt, 2015). Case Study 6.2 addresses the
importance of risk assessment in schools.
CASE STUDY 6.2
Risk Assessment in Schools
Peyton is a grade 10 student who is very withdrawn and has few friends. Dalton, the
school counselor, is concerned about Peyton. Last year there was a case where some
students were bullying Peyton, who then shared thoughts of suicidal ideation with
Dalton. Peyton has been seeing a counselor for the past year and the bullies were
punished; however, Dalton has a gut feeling that the bullying continues “under the
radar” of school officials. Peyton’s English teacher recently stopped by to show Dalton
one of Peyton’s tests. Peyton did not answer a single question, but instead drew pictures
of guns all over the test.
Discussion Questions
1. What should Dalton do?
2. What questions should Dalton ask?
3. What process should Dalton follow?
4. Are there any special considerations since they are in a school setting?
5. Are there any gender considerations?
Workplace Violence and Homicide
In 2017, there were 458 workplace homicides (Doucette et al., 2019) and, according
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021), 20,870 workers in the private industry expe-
rienced trauma from nonfatal workplace violence in 2019. Of those victims who
experienced trauma from workplace violence:
• 68% were female
• 65% were age 25–54 years
• 70% worked in the health care and social assistance industry
• 21% required 31 or more days away from work to recover, and 20% needed
3–5 days away from work
However, the number of workplace homicides has decreased overall since 1993, a year
in which 1,068 workplace homicides occurred. Even with this decrease over the years,
homicide in the workplace is the fourth leading cause of fatality at work and remains a
disturbing reality. Most workplace homicides involve robberies, and individuals who
work in retail and hospitality establishments are at greater risk, as are customers and
bystanders in these settings. Approximately 80% of workplace fatalities result from
shootings.
Just as a school can be held liable for not addressing bullying and threats, the
workplace can also be liable for failing to address danger and threats (Lies & Simonsen,
2015). Lies and Simonsen recommend that workplaces have clearly stated policies

-- 229 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	201
regarding violence and threats, a way for employees to communicate concerns, a system
to promptly investigate concerns, a discipline policy, training for all employees on the
signs and symptoms of violent intent, and an Employee Assistance Program that can
counsel employees in distress to help prevent acts of violence.
According to the CDC (2021a), the most dangerous workplace risk factors involve
the following:
• Contact with the public
• Exchange of money
• Delivery of passengers, goods, or services
• Having a mobile workplace such as a taxicab or a police cruiser
• Working with unstable or volatile persons in health care, social service, or criminal
justice settings
• Working alone or in small numbers
• Working late at night or during early-morning hours
• Working in high-crime areas
• Guarding valuable property or possessions
• Working in community-based settings
The risk of workplace violence and homicide increases during times of extreme job
stress. Understaffed job sites, overworked employees, and times of downsizing or labor
disputes will create a tense and potentially dangerous context for the development of
violent behavior. Additionally, poor management, a high number of grievances, and the
lack of employee access to counseling can contribute to violence and homicidal threat
in the workplace (O’Toole, 2000). It is essential that workplace employers, particularly
in high-pressure workplaces or those undergoing turmoil, be mindful of the need for
ongoing threat assessment and be proactive by providing support to employees.
Threat Level Assessment
Various models of threat assessment have emerged over the past years, and it is beyond
the scope of this chapter to outline all of them. Counselors are encouraged to familiarize
themselves with a variety of models of threat assessment.
When a client has overtly indicated intent to harm others or has indirectly exhibited
predictors or behaviors of violence and harm to others, this constitutes a direct threat, and
the counselor must assess the level of threat (Warren et al., 2011). Threat level assessment
is critically important to ensure the safety of others and to appropriately guide treatment
decisions. While most people who make threats are unlikely to carry out a violent action,
all threats must be taken seriously and evaluated (O’Toole, 2000). Threat assessment is
the evaluation of the lethality of a threat through an examination of motive, risk factors,
intent, and the means and ability to enact the threat.
O’Toole (2000) explained that threat assessment should involve exploration of the
following questions: What are the details of the threat? Are the victims identified? Are
the details logical, plausible, and spelled out in a specific manner (time of day, method)?
Does the client have the means to carry out the threat? What is the emotional state of the
client? While emotionality does not specifically indicate lethality, knowing the affective
condition of the client provides important assessment and diagnostic information related
to lability of mood, dysregulation of feelings, ability to think clearly or not, rational

-- 230 of 545 --

202 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
functioning or not. Are there stressors or triggers that might predispose a client to
violence? Is the level of threat low, medium, or high? O’Toole, working with the FBI
National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime, delineated threat levels as follows:
Low Level of Threat: A threat that poses a minimal risk to victim and public safety.
The threat is vague and indirect.
Information contained within the threat is inconsistent.
The threat lacks realism.
The content of the threat suggests the person is unlikely to carry it out.
Medium Level of Threat: A threat that could be carried out, although it may not
appear to be entirely realistic.
The threat is more direct and more concrete than a low-level threat.
The wording in the threat suggests that the person issuing the threat has given
some thought to how the act will be carried out.
There may be a general indication of a possible place and time (though these
signs still fall well short of a detailed plan).
There is no strong indication that the person who issued the threat has taken
preparatory steps, although there may be a veiled reference or ambiguous
or inconclusive evidence pointing to that possibility—an allusion to a book
or movie that shows planning of a violent act or a vague general statement
seeking to convey that the threat is not empty: “I’m serious!” or “I really
mean this!”
High Level of Threat: A threat that appears to pose an imminent and serious dan-
ger to the safety of others.
The threat is direct, specific, and plausible.
The threat suggests that concrete steps have been taken toward carrying it
out—for example, statements indicating that the person who issued the
threat has acquired or practiced with a weapon or has had the victim under
surveillance. (pp. 8–9)
The process of threat assessment must be conducted in an environment that will
calm the client, facilitate the de-escalation of intense emotions, and assist in the attain-
ment of precise information regarding the level of threat intent. The assessment of vio-
lence is like the assessment of other symptoms, in that the client’s history of violence,
family and medical history, mental status, and drug use must all be investigated. Van
Brunt (2015) underscored the need for a calm demeanor and the use of basic rapport-
building and active listening skills. Using counseling skills, a relationship can be formed,
and the clients will be more willing and able to open up about their thoughts and poten-
tial plans. Law enforcement representatives assert that the active listening skills that
counselors learn in their interpersonal listening classes are very similar to the rapport-
building strategies that crisis response or SWAT team members use in police or FBI work
(R. Jackson, personal communication, April 15, 2015; C. Spears, personal communication,
February 10, 2022).
Once rapport is established, the counselor can delve into precise questions to
obtain detailed information about the intent of the client to harm another, the extent

-- 231 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	203
and intrusiveness of the homicidal thoughts, and the ability of the client to acquire the
means to implement homicide plans. When dealing with a client expressing homicidal
intent, crisis counselors must always keep the ethical obligation of public safety and the
duty to warn at the forefront of their minds, even with low-threat clients. Furthermore,
while assessing homicidal ideation, the counselor should also assess for suicidal ideation
because homicide and suicide may co-occur. Now see Case Study 6.3, which presents a
situation where a counselor must assess a client’s level of threat. Then read Voices from
the Field 6.3 and complete Activity 6.3 on threat assessment.
CASE STUDY 6.3
Assessing for Level of Threat
Riley: 	I hate my supervisor at work. My life would be better if he was
dead.
Counselor: 	You’re so angry at your supervisor that you wish he was dead.
Have you had thoughts about harming him?
Riley: 	Sure, I think about killing him.
Counselor: 	Have you come up with a plan to kill him?
Riley: 	A plan? I mean I’ve got a 45 at home but no, not a plan exactly.
Counselor: 	Are there times when you feel you might act on these thoughts?
Riley: 	Ha, whenever I’m drunk.
Discussion Questions
1. What level of threat is indicated so far?
2. What other information does the counselor need to assess the threat level?
3. If the counselor determines the supervisor is in danger, what steps should the
counselor take?
Cheryl Lewellen
When assessing for homicidal ideation of potential
clients to our nonprofit women’s residential substance
use treatment facility, we begin by using a state
assessment issued by the Department of Mental Health.
I am sure most states have a similar standardized
assessment. It takes more than an hour to perform and
assesses for multiple factors, with both suicidal and
homicidal ideation included.
Given the nature of clients struggling with
addictions, it is important to continue to verbally assess
for both suicide and homicide during individual sessions
throughout the 90 days they are here. One of the main
factors for this is that many of the women come into
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.3
Leaving No Stone Unturned
(continued)

-- 232 of 545 --

204 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Referral
Because of the danger to others and the possible existence of mental disorders in homi-
cidal clients, counselors usually refer clients to or work collaboratively with other mental
health providers, particularly psychiatrists, when treating clients who pose a threat to
others. Violent clients often need the help of specialists in forensic mental health, and it is
a good idea for crisis counselors to be familiar with forensic specialists in their local area.
Clinical assessment of low-threat-level clients may reveal the need for psychiatric
evaluation and treatment with psychotropic medication; however, it is imperative that
clients with homicidal ideation who are assessed at the high and medium threat levels be
referred for psychiatric evaluation and possible treatment with medications. Because of
imminent danger to others, high-threat-level clients require immediate law enforcement
involvement and probable voluntary or involuntary commitment (O’Toole, 2000;
Warren et al., 2011). Medium-threat-level clients need to be monitored closely and may
need to be hospitalized.
In instances with out-of-control and impulsive clients, homicidal and suicidal
ideation may coexist and, therefore, such a client poses a threat to both self and others. As
with suicidal crises, practitioners should be familiar with their state and county protocols
for voluntary and involuntary commitment hearings with potentially homicidal persons.
The procedures for voluntary and involuntary commitment discussed previously in this
chapter in relation to suicide should be followed for homicide cases, with the inclusion
of law enforcement in high-threat-level situations. Personal safety of the crisis counselor
should always be a priority. A counselor should never attempt to physically stop a
resistant client from leaving. If the client is intent on leaving, it is best to get as much
information as possible about the client and request law enforcement to intervene.
What is the relationship between mental illness and homicide? Individuals with
diagnosed mental disorders are at a higher risk than the general population for violent
or homicidal behavior (Laajasalo & Hakkanen, 2004), and individuals with untreated
mental illness are more likely to threaten to kill (Warren et al., 2011). It should be noted,
however, that this risk is not present across the board and that an elevated threat to
the program insufficiently detoxed, and it takes a while
for them to gain a clear perspective on their lives. As
they begin treatment and open up to aspects of their
lives that caused them to use drugs and alcohol in the
first place, the clients become aware of the multitude
of emotions they had attempted to numb. Many of
the clients have suffered abuse on multiple levels either
before or during their drug use. Therefore, it is always
important to monitor their potential ideation of both
suicide and homicide.
As with assessment of suicidal ideation,
assessment of homicidal ideation involves asking the
client questions to establish whether an individual has
thoughts about harming or killing another person,
whether they have a plan, and to what extent the plan
could be enacted.
Think about counseling a client who requires a threat
assessment. The literature emphasizes the need for
counselors to maintain calm and use facilitative skills
to build rapport while conducting an assessment for
homicidal ideation. How difficult would you find that
to be? Put yourself in the situation: What concerns
you? What do you feel you need to master threat
assessment?
ACTIVITY 6.3

-- 233 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	205
CASE STUDY 6.4
Assessing for Level of Threat: Judy
Judy is a 43-year-old single woman who has been placed on 2 weeks’ administrative
leave from her job as a research and development technician at a chemical company.
Over the years, she has had many personality conflicts with other workers, but her
expertise is valuable and these conflicts have always been smoothed over and worked
out. Recently, Judy “lost it” with her boss and flew into a rage when she was denied time
off in compensation for working late the previous week; this incident was the basis for
her administrative leave. Her family doctor has prescribed antidepressants for her and
has referred her to you for counseling.
others is mainly associated with certain diagnoses (Eronen et al., 1998). An increased risk
of violent behavior has been found with diagnoses of schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders, but the highest risk of violent and homicidal behavior has been found in
individuals with a dual diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder and substance use
disorder. Substance use repeatedly emerges as a major risk factor for violent behavior
and homicide; the comorbidity of substance use and any mental disorder increases the
likelihood of violence and should be considered when assessing and treating violent
clients.
Treatment Options
As stated earlier, a therapeutic alliance is particularly imperative with potential homicide
offenders, since client investment in treatment compliance is necessary for public safety
(Kolski et al., 2015). Tishler et al. (2000) noted that mental health providers may struggle
with extending empathy and may experience fear when working with homicidal clients.
While such reactions are understandable, it is important to remember that homicidal
behaviors are symptoms of a client’s illness and that open displays of fear and distaste
undermine rapport building and impair treatment outcomes.
Once the immediate homicidal crisis has been dealt with, the safety of others
has been assured, and appropriate medical treatment has begun, long-term treatment
planning can proceed. Ongoing assessment of the client is crucial to both treatment
outcomes and public safety; therefore, assessment must remain foremost in the crisis
counselor’s mind. One concern in assessment is the tendency for violent offenders to be
less than forthright about the facts surrounding violent acts (Carroll et al., 2004). Crisis
counselors should thoroughly examine client history and obtain external substantiation
of client facts. Suicidal ideation and homicidal ideation often co-occur, and it is important
to assess the risk of both suicide and homicide in clients who have thoughts of harm to
self or others.
By understanding how aggression may have been reinforced in the client’s past
and by exploring any inhibiting factors and situational contexts, crisis counselors and
clients can identify thoughts and behaviors that may lessen violent behavior in the
future. The client can begin to learn other ways to cope with anger and aggression. See
Case Study 6.4, which presents a situation in which a counselor must assess a client’s
level of threat.

-- 234 of 545 --

206 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Compliance with treatment—in particular, compliance with medication—must
be stressed with clients who have indicated homicidal ideation or intent. Nordstrom
et al. (2006) studied convicted homicide offenders who had been diagnosed with
schizophrenia. Most offenders were found to have been noncompliant with medication
and treatment at the time of their crimes, resulting in active hallucinations and delusions
during the homicidal crisis. Therefore, it is essential that crisis counselors conduct
ongoing evaluations of medication compliance throughout treatment.
Family involvement in the treatment of homicidal clients is critical as a support
for ongoing treatment compliance. Families can communicate to counselors if clients
stop taking medication and can also report observed behaviors of concern that might
indicate elevated risk (Kolski & Jongsma, 2015). Additionally, families provide a social
network foundation that can facilitate client coping. In some instances, family mem-
bers need to be given information to ensure their own safety. Family members and
friends, rather than strangers, were the most frequent victims of homicide offenders
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia (Laajasalo & Hakkanen, 2004). This fact highlights
the need for families to be an active part of collaborative treatment and ongoing evalu-
ation of homicidal clients. Counselors should establish and adhere to the terms of
confidentiality with the primary client and update any informed consent about how
information is shared and for what reason and when those boundaries would result
in exceptions.
Early environmental factors influence the development of mental disorders and
violent behavior; thus, early intervention with children at risk and their families may
deter the development of future antisocial behavior, including homicidal behavior
(Laajasalo & Hakkanen, 2004). Schools provide the first opportunity for intervention
with children who are exhibiting behavioral problems and struggling with academics,
both of which are associated with violence. Farmer et al. (2007) recommend a service
delivery structure that supports intervention and prevention to promote academic
achievement and social skills, intervention with at-risk youth, and developmental
systemic prevention strategies. It should be noted that such a delivery structure can
be achieved by the full implementation of the ASCA National Model: A Framework for
School Counseling Programs (American School Counselor Association, 2019). Also,
recent research on adverse childhood experiences has provided more clarity about
the debilitating impact of chronic, toxic stress on young children. Early intervention
Judy expresses anger and a sense of hopelessness about her situation. She is dis-
traught and drinks wine every night just to go to sleep. She is convinced that she will be
fired and that the boss is using these 2 weeks to build a case against her. Judy expresses
to you how valuable she is to the company and how much knowledge she has, includ-
ing her knowledge of tasteless but deadly poisons. She states, “Just one minute in the
break room is all someone would need; just slip it in the coffee and they wouldn’t know
what hit them.”
Discussion Questions
1. What level of threat is indicated in this case?
2. Are there factors that increase the homicide risk in this client?
3. What actions should you take?

-- 235 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	207
in concert with pediatricians, early education teachers, and other community partners
when possible is recommended.
Needs of Survivors of Homicide Loss
Homicide survivors may experience symptoms consistent with complicated grief due
to the nature of the loss. According to the Mayo Clinic (2016), several symptoms may
accompany complicated bereavement:
• Extreme focus on the loss and reminders of the loved one
• Intense longing or pining for the deceased
• Problems accepting the death
• Preoccupation with one’s sorrow
• Bitterness about the loss
• Inability to enjoy life
• Depression or deep sadness
• Difficulty moving on with life
• Trouble carrying out a normal routine
• Withdrawing from social activities
• Feeling that life holds no meaning or purpose
• Irritability or agitation
• Lack of trust in others
To heal from violent loss, survivors need to feel able to openly express what has
happened to them and to fight for change in a system where they have felt injustice. It is
also important that survivors find meaning in the death of their loved one by working
to benefit others experiencing similar circumstances; this gives meaning to the loss as
well as purpose to the survivor (Rynearson, 2012). Saindon et al. (2014) examined the
use of restorative retelling, a technique where clients deal with internalized trauma and
commemorate the life of the lost loved one from a strengths-based and resilient stance.
They found that restorative retelling showed promise as an intervention, particularly
regarding easing depression, lessening avoidance, and decreasing prolonged grief.
Support groups tend to provide much healing in feeling connected to others who share
a similar experience of death connected with violence.
Crisis counselors responding to the crisis of homicide should be prepared for
complex and varied reactions and symptoms from individual survivors. Individuals and
entire communities can be altered by homicide. At college campuses where a homicide
has taken place, students may no longer feel safe and the stress and anxiety may affect
their academic achievement. Communities touched by homicide are altered by the brutal
reality of murder within their midst; a coordinated community counseling response and
activation of resources can serve to facilitate healing. Additionally, crisis counselors
should be sensitive to cultural differences in grief expression. Clients from expressive
cultures will show more outward signs of grieving. A lack of outward grief expression
may be indicative of a more emotionally restrictive culture, and crisis counselors should
not underestimate the inner grief state of less expressive clients (Cavaiola & Colford,
2018). See Case Study 6.5, which focuses on grief counseling for parents who have lost a
daughter to homicide. Then read Voices from the Field 6.4. Finally, Tables 6.8–11 provide
resources for helping people through suicide, NSSI, and homicide.

-- 236 of 545 --

208 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
CASE STUDY 6.5
Treatment for Families of Homicide
Debbie, a 19-year-old college student, did not show up for classes or for her job one
day. When she did not answer her cell phone or come home that night, her roommate
was worried and contacted Debbie’s family, who decided to report her as a missing
person. After 3 weeks of searching and televised pleas for her return, Debbie’s body was
found in a wooded area 30 miles from her apartment. She had been sexually assaulted
and strangled. DNA found on her body was a match with DNA from a man out on
parole from a previous rape conviction. He was accused in Debbie’s murder. The killer
claimed that he had consensual sex with Debbie in his car and that she was fine when
he dropped her off at campus. Debbie’s parents were appalled when the killer’s defense
team attempted to portray Debbie as a wild, out-of-control college student who partied
too much, had multiple sex partners, and put herself at risk. The trial ended with a hung
jury, and there is uncertainty about when there will be a new trial. Debbie’s parents have
come to you for grief counseling.
Discussion Questions
1. What factors have contributed to the parents’ complicated bereavement?
2. What emotions and reactions might you expect from the parents in this case?
3. What treatment goals and interventions are called for in this case?
Gregory Pollock
The calm of the day was interrupted by the loudspeaker
calling a code for violent behavior being exhibited
by a client. I quickly dropped what I was doing and
responded to the code. As I approached the area, the
commotion of the situation became louder and louder,
as my adrenaline levels increased quickly with each step
closer to the area. I felt my breath become shallower,
my stomach drop, and my body become tense. I had
to consciously step back and take a breath and attempt
to relax prior to entering the room where the client in
question was out of control and becoming violent. How
many of us as counselors have been faced with similar
situations?
I have learned the hard way that approaching
situations such as these while hyped up and excited
only adds to the tension and worsens the situation.
I think back to my early days in this field where
I witnessed staff enter crisis situations in a frustrated
state and saw how this exacerbated the situation in very
negative ways, at times leading to the staff or client
becoming injured.
It is imperative to remain calm when reacting in
crisis situations so that we do not add to the situation
at hand. I frequently hear from counselors-in-training
that they do not feel that they could remain calm in
a crisis and that when faced with a crisis, they seem
to “forget” all their skills. On the contrary, their skills
are not forgotten but often masked with anxiety, fear,
adrenaline, and stress reactions. So how is it possible
to remain calm and keep our wits about us when faced
with a crisis? Our training programs do a great job of
preparing us for a variety of situations using counseling
skills and techniques. Not all counselors have equal
opportunities to practice in crisis situations, and those
working in situations where crises are more common
will have a greater comfort level in dealing with crisis
incidents.
It is helpful to remain mindful of ourselves and
recognize what is going on internally when entering a
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 6.4
Reacting in Crisis Situations

-- 237 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	209
Organization 	Website
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
Site for Loss Survivors
http://afsp.org/find-support/ive-lost-someone/
Alliance of Hope 	http://www.allianceofhope.org
American Association of Suicidology (AAS) 	www.suicidology.org. Click on the Resources
tab. Scroll down to find Attempt Survivor and
Loss Survivor resources.
AAS: Suicide Loss Survivors 	https://suicidology.org/resources/
suicide-loss-survivors/
Center for Deployment Psychology, Clinicians
as Survivors of Loss
http://deploymentpsych.org/blog/
staff-perspective-suicide-postvention-
don%E2%80%99t-forget-clinician-survivors
Department of the Air Force Resilience 	https://www.resilience.af.mil/Postvention-Tools/
Friends for Survival 	www.friendsforsurvival.org
Harvard Medical School, Harvard Health Publi-
cations, Harvard Women’s Health Watch
http://www.health.harvard.edu/
newsletter_article/Left-behind-after-suicide
HEARTBEAT: Grief Support Following Suicide 	http://heartbeatsurvivorsaftersuicide.org
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention 	www.actionallianceforsuicideprevention.org.
Use the search option to find resources. Try
using key words such as suicide loss, suicide
grief, after a suicide, suicide bereavement,
postvention, and lived experience.
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 	https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
help-yourself/loss-survivors/
Parents, Friends and Families of Suicide 	http://pos-ffos.com
TABLE 6.8 Resources for Suicide, NSSI, and Homicide
regular counseling session or a crisis. How aware are we
of our feelings and thoughts when walking into crisis
situations? It is important to control our emotions as
we enter crisis situations with the best interest of the
client at heart, much like a regular counseling session.
There are great consequences to not remaining mindful
lest we lose sight of what is needed to best remedy the
situation we face.
I refer to a yogic phrase, Ahimsa, meaning to do
no harm. This is a great term to keep in mind as we
prepare for and enter crises. The best way to ensure
that we do no harm to ourselves in yoga is by being
aware of ourselves and staying in touch with our bodies
to make sure that we do not strain ourselves. It may be
difficult to understand the amount of influence that we
have on situations and controlling our emotions goes
a long way in enabling us to enter stressful situations
in a calm manner.
Maintaining awareness daily becomes very
difficult, especially considering our listening to and taking
on the issues and circumstances of our clients, leaving us
vulnerable to compassion fatigue, which in turn can lead
to a loss of control in crises. Self-care is vitally important
to help us deal with underlying frustrations so that we
can maintain our emotional stability.
The most important thing to focus on in crises
is maintaining safety of self, the client, and other staff.
We also need to focus on what the client needs in crisis
situations, and we need to be open to empathizing,
understanding, and meeting the needs of the client in a
respectful, nonharming manner while approaching these
situations with compassion and a calm, even temperament.
(continued)

-- 238 of 545 --

210 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Organization 	Website
Alabama Suicide Prevention and Resources
Coalition (ASPARC) contains resource directory
and materials for professionals and families
www.asparc.org
American Association of Suicidology (AAS) 	www.suicidology.org
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
(AFSP)
https://afsp.org
TABLE 6.9 Resources for Suicidology, Suicide Prevention, Best Practices,
and Intervention
Organization 	Website
Pennsylvania Adult/Older Adult Suicide Preven-
tion Coalition
https://www.preventsuicidepa.org/?s=loss. Use
the search option to find resources. Try using
key words such as suicide loss, suicide grief,
after a suicide, suicide bereavement, postven-
tion, and lived experience.
Sibling Survivors of Suicide Loss 	http://www.siblingsurvivors.com
SPRC website 	www.sprc.org. Use the search option to
find resources. Try using key words such
as suicide loss, suicide grief, after a sui-
cide, suicide bereavement, postvention,
and lived experience. For clinician survivors:
https://www.sprc.org/resources-programs/
clinicians-survivors-after-suicide-loss
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education (SAVE) 	https://www.save.org/what-we-do/
grief-support
Suicide Resource & Response Network 	https://srrn.net/aftercare/
Survivors of Suicide 	http://www.survivorsofsuicide.com
Survivors of Suicide Loss – San Diego 	https://www.soslsd.org
The Dougy Center for Grieving Children and
Families
www.dougy.org; https://www.dougy.org/reso
urces?how=suicide&who=&type=&audience=.
Scroll down this page to find resources for sui-
cide and grief.
The Guide (for schools) 	http://theguide.fmhi.usf.edu. Note that this
is primarily designed for schools and school
systems, but their materials are easily transfer-
able to other types of organizations. Use the
search option to find resources. Try using key
words such as suicide loss, suicide grief, after a
suicide, suicide bereavement, postvention, and
lived experience.
TABLE 6.8 Resources for Suicide, NSSI, and Homicide (continued)

-- 239 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	211
Organization 	Website
Be the 1 To (an initiative of the NSPL) 	www.bethe1to.com
Centre for Suicide Prevention (Canada) 	https://www.suicideinfo.ca/
Didi Hirsch MHS (premiere crisis center in Cali-
fornia, closely related to the work of Dr. Edwin
Shneidman, “grandparent” of suicidology)
https://didihirsch.org
International Association for Suicide Prevention
(IASP)
https://www.iasp.info
Jason Foundation 	http://jasonfoundation.com
JED foundation 	https://www.jedfoundation.org
Kevin Hines (mental health advocate and
survivor, lived experience)
https://www.kevinhinesstory.com/
Living Works A.S.I.S.T. Training and SafeTalk
Training (a Canadian company that provides
extensive training in the U.S.)
https://www.livingworks.net/asist
Man Therapy (addresses many mental health
needs of men, suicide-related content among
them)
www.mantherapy.org
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention
(often referred to as the Action Alliance)
https://theactionalliance.org
National Organization for People of Color
Against Suicide (NOPCAS)
http://nopcas.org/
Olweus Bullying Prevention Program 	www.olweus.org
QPR Institute 	https://qprinstitute.com/
Speaking of Suicide Elevating the Conversation;
based on Freedenthal (2017).
https://www.speakingofsuicide.com/
Stamp out Stigma 	http://stampoutstigma.com
StopBullying.gov 	www.stopbullying.gov
Suicide Prevention Resource Center (SPRC) 	https://www.sprc.org
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education (SAVE) 	https://save.org/about-suicide/
preventing-suicide/
Suicide.org, Suicide Prevention in the Military 	www.suicide.org/suicide-prevention-in-the-
military.html
The GUIDE (designated best–practice model for
school-based suicide prevention, intervention,
and postvention care by the University of South
Florida)
http://theguide.fmhi.usf.edu
The Trevor Project 	https://www.thetrevorproject.org
(continued)
TABLE 6.9 Resources for Suicidology, Suicide Prevention, Best Practices,
and Intervention (continued)

-- 240 of 545 --

212 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUMMARY
Suicide, NSSI, and homicide are crises that
counselors will encounter during their careers.
Suicide rates are increasing among all segments
of our population, and this trend is expected to
continue despite the extensive prevention efforts
ongoing at school, local, state, and national
levels. Counselors and other response-oriented
personnel may find that their own anxiety
surrounding these risk assessments may affect
their approaches to helping clients. In addition
to ongoing training, periodic self-examination
is therefore necessary to maintain an adequate
degree of differentiation from the client’s crisis,
to prevent countertransference of the crisis
counselor’s anxieties onto the client, and to avoid
damaging the potential for a positive counselor–
client relationship.
No one universally recognized rubric for
predictability of suicide, NSSI, or homicidal
behaviors exists; however, it is a standard of care
to approach these risk assessments with models
for assessment to provide effective intervention.
Three primary goals to help crisis counselors
dealing with a person threatening suicide or
Organization 	Website
Terry Wise (the lived experience, award-
winning author, speaker, advocate)
https://terrywise.com
United Survivors 	https://unitesurvivors.org
Zero Suicide Alliance (Britain/UK) 	https://www.zerosuicidealliance.com
Zero Suicide Institute 	http://zerosuicideinstitute.com
https://zerosuicide.edc.org
TABLE 6.9 Resources for Suicidology, Suicide Prevention, Best Practices,
and Intervention (continued)
Help Guide 	https://www.helpguide.org/articles/anxiety/cutting-and-self-harm.htm
S.A.F.E. Alternatives 	https://selfinjury.com/referrals/programs/
SELF 	https://www.self.com/story/self-harm-friend-help
Self-Injury Recovery
Anonymous
https://www.thesira.org/
The Recovery
Village
https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/mental-health/self-harm/related/
self-harm-statistics/#gref
TABLE 6.11 Resources for NSSI
Counselors may find numerous resources, journal articles, research, YouTube videos, and more to
learn more about NSSI. A few helpful websites to explore are:
Center for Homicide Research 	www.Homicidecenter.org
Justice for Homicide Victims 	https://justiceforhomicidevictims.org/resources/
National Organization for Victim Assistance 	www.trynova.org
TABLE 6.10 Resources on Homicide

-- 241 of 545 --

Chapter 6 • Risk Assessment and Intervention: Suicide, Nonsuicidal Self-Injury, and Homicide 	213
homicide are (1) ensure client safety, (2) assist
the client in achieving immediate short-term
mastery of self and situation, and (3) connect
the client with formal and informal supports.
A variety of models were presented to help the
crisis responder achieve these goals.
Knowledge of suicide risk factors, warning
signs, and protective factors is essential for the
crisis counselor to make a qualified assessment
of suicide risk in clients who are struggling
with thoughts of death to end pain. Once the
client is assessed, the counselor formulates the
level of risk and actively monitors the client
to make progress toward symptom and risk
reduction and when subsequent events affect
the client’s disposition. Documentation of the
entire process is an increasingly important
part of the assessment and treatment cycle;
documentation is the single most important
factor in justifying and defending a particular
course of treatment action. Implementing NSSI
risk assessment should now be part of any
suicide risk assessment. Counselors should be
aware of basic, contextual, and functional aspects
to include in a Q-tree for an NSSI assessment in
order to gather the information necessary to refer
clients to the most effective treatment.
Responding to incidents of homicide
presents many of the same kinds of challenges
as responding to a suicide incident, although
many crisis counselors underestimate the need
for readiness to respond to homicidal risk. In
fact, since homicide risk is becoming more
frequent, crisis counselors should be prepared to
integrate a homicide assessment and determine
risk level. Crisis counselors may find themselves
in a position if they need to exercise the duty to
warn, duty to protect, and duty to consult. Crisis
counselors should be aware of their legal duties
in these situations.
Survivors of homicide loss often experience
complicated bereavement. They may feel
stigmatized, isolated, and traumatized by the
legal system. Treatment of survivors should
address their complicated bereavement issues
and help them find resolution and meaning.
Support groups for homicide survivors have
been found to be helpful in the healing process.
Finally, mental health counselors are
reminded to practice effective self-care when
working with the stressful situations of their
at-risk clients and family members. Crisis
counselors are often first responders who pivot
a potential tragedy into an alternative narrative
of improved well-being of their clients and who
also can experience professional gratification
for making a difference in the lives of their
clients.

-- 242 of 545 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 243 of 545 --

215
PREVIEW
This chapter provides an overview of substance use disorders (SUDs) and symptoms and
the counselor’s role in working with clients facing crisis situations. The etiological factors
of SUDs and various models of addiction are reviewed. Sections in the chapter dealing
with treatment are arranged to help counselors understand the sequential treatment
process in a crisis setting. Special issues such as relapse, support groups, co-occurring
disorders and crises, and cultural considerations are discussed. Case studies and activities
are provided throughout the chapter to help the reader integrate and apply the material.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon competing this chapter, readers will be able to:
7.1 Understand the nature of and importance of substance use in society, including
classification of drugs and current research.
7.2 Describe the etiology and risk factors of substance use and dependence.
7.3 Articulate procedures for the screening, assessment, and diagnosis of substance
use disorders and symptoms, including screening procedures, commonly used
assessment instruments, assessment, diagnosis, assessing a client’s readiness to
change, and treatment admission and placement processes.
7.4 Explain substance use crisis treatment, including relapse and crisis, harm
reduction, support groups, couples and family treatment, and co-occurring
disorders.
7.5 Explain multicultural perspectives on substance use in crisis situations.
7.6 Identify elements of crisis intervention related to substance use, including safety
and self-care, diagnostic considerations during a crisis, and essential substance
use–specific crisis intervention skills.
7 Understanding and Treating
Substance Use Disorders with
Clients in Crisis
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry*
C H A P T E R
*We thank William R. Sterner for contributions to past editions of this chapter.

-- 244 of 545 --

216 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUBSTANCE USE AND SOCIETY
Learning Objective 7.1 Understand the nature of and importance of substance use
in society, including classification of drugs and current research.
Throughout history, substances, many of which are now considered illegal in a num-
ber of countries, have been used as an integral component of social activities, religious
ceremonies, spiritual rituals, and cultural practices. Along with intended sociocultural
purposes, substances have also been sought out to alter mood and enhance sensory
experience and pleasure. People have continually experimented with mood-altering sub-
stances, as well as heuristic routes of administration that both maximize the delivery to,
and enhance the effects on, the brain. The list of mood-altering substances is as varied
as it is long and includes well-known substances such as marijuana, cocaine, heroin,
tobacco, and ethyl alcohol (one of the most widely used and easily accessible mood-
altering substances).
Data from the 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2019) revealed that over 50%
of Americans age 12 years and older (about 132 million people) are current consumers
of alcohol, and over 21% of Americans age 12 years and older (nearly 58 million people)
are current users of tobacco products. Survey results revealed that nearly 57 million
Americans reported using an illicit drug in 2019, a proportion of 20.8% of all people
12 years and older. A majority (53%) of those reporting use of nonmedical prescription-
type drugs indicated the illicit substances were acquired from family and friends. Of the
20.4 million who reported needing treatment for an illicit drug or alcohol problem, only
2.3 million (11%) received treatment (SAMHSA, 2019).
Based on these data, one may conclude that substance use has evolved beyond
sociocultural practices to more self-serving and unhealthy usage. However, what is
not clear is the primary intent for use. Reasons for using substances can be varied
and complex, as evidenced by the numerous theories developed to explain use and
addiction. Prevailing attitudes, however, may not fully acknowledge factors beyond
pleasure-seeking motives—factors such as stress, psychopathology, crisis response,
pain relief, and grief and loss responses to traumatic events such as natural and
human-generated disasters, emergencies, and tragedies. Unfortunately, aggregate
data do not delineate the extent to which substance use may in fact be as much about
pleasure-seeking as it is about compensating for psychosocial, psychopathological, and
sociocultural problems.
Classification of Drugs
The number of different drugs that exist worldwide is unknown. Anecdotal reports estimate
that the number of different drugs worldwide may be as high as 100,000. To gain some
perspective, Kinch et al. (2014), in their meta-analytic study, reported that by the end of 2013,
a total of 1,453 drugs had received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval. Rather
than attempting to quantify drugs, a more effective methodology is to classify substances
based on the specific physiological and psychological effects. Current drug classifications
include cannabinoids (e.g., marijuana, hashish, dronabinol), depressants (e.g., alcohol,
tranquilizers, barbiturates, sleeping pills, inhalants), stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines,

-- 245 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	217
methamphetamine, caffeine), hallucinogens (e.g., LSD, phencyclidine, ketamine, mescaline,
psilocybin), opiates (e.g., heroin, morphine, OxyContin, codeine, methadone), nicotine, and
psychotherapeutics (e.g., Prozac, Zoloft, Ativan, Xanax, BuSpar, Cymbalta, Abilify, lithium,
Geodon, Zyprexa, Risperdal). Other drugs can have multiple effects and may fall under
several classifications. For example, Ecstasy (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine or
MDMA), a designer drug popular in the club and bar scene during the mid-1990s, has
both stimulant and hallucinogenic effects. Dextromethorphan (also known as DX or DXM),
a drug found in many over-the-counter cough syrups, can have both depressant and mild
hallucinogenic effects if taken in large doses.
The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 classified
controlled drugs into five schedules based on a continuum of potential for abuse,
accepted medical use, and potential for dependence. Drugs listed under Schedule I have
the highest potential for abuse and dependence and have no current medical application
in the United States (e.g., heroin, LSD), whereas drugs listed under Schedule V have the
lowest potential for abuse and dependence and have an established medical application
(e.g., cough syrups with codeine).
Research on Substance Use, Crisis, and Society
Several studies documented the relationship between natural and human-generated
disasters and subsequent patterns of substance use. A meta-analysis of over 30 studies
investigating substance use following terrorist attacks in the United States found an
increased use of substances in the 2 years following terrorist events, and the rates of
use were likely higher than estimated (DiMaggio et al., 2009). One month following
the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, increased use of marijuana,
alcohol, and cigarettes was reported in Manhattan (Vlahov et al., 2004). A random phone
study of 1,507 New York City residents 6 months after the September 11 attacks showed
that the incidence of alcohol problems for those who did not have drinking problems
before the attacks was 2% (Vlahov et al., 2006). In addition, a workplace cohort study
that took place before and after the September 11 attacks showed that women used more
alcohol after the attacks compared with before the event (Richman et al., 2004).
Understanding how crisis situations affect those with preexisting conditions has
important implications for addictions counselors. Examining the effects of substance
use following the April 19, 1995, Oklahoma City bombing, a majority of survivors did
not develop new SUDs; however, a majority of those survivors who did use substances
excessively had a preexisting SUD (North, 2010). Compared with a control community,
alcohol consumption among Oklahoma City bombing survivors in the year following the
Oklahoma City bombing was 2.5 times greater than for the control community (Smith
et al., 1999). For evacuees of Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, treatment for preexisting
psychiatric illnesses, not increased substance use issues, was the main concern (North,
2010). Counselors should assess the types and quantity of substances used as well as the
source(s) or provider(s) of the substances.
NDCHealth Corporation compiled data on the use of antianxiety medication
following the September 11 attacks in the New York City and Washington, D.C.,
metropolitan areas, revealing that in the 2 weeks post–September 11, prescriptions
for Xanax, Ativan, and Valium increased significantly (Okie, 2001). Regarding
adolescent patterns of substance use, changes in usage status for adolescents exposed to

-- 246 of 545 --

218 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Hurricane Katrina were noted: 15% shifted from cigarette nonuse pre-Katrina to use
post-Katrina, 9% shifted from nonuse to use of marijuana, and 25% shifted from nonuse
to use of alcohol (Rowe et al., 2010). Adolescents not near the events of September 11
also experienced increased marijuana use (Costello et al., 2004).
Substance use can not only result from crisis situations, it can also affect crisis
situations. Schneider (2009) found a strong correlation between SUDs and suicide. In
a review of psychological autopsy studies, Schneider reported that substance-related
disorders contributed to a high proportion of suicides. Individuals who use substances
are nearly six times more likely to attempt suicide than those who report no substance use
problems (Dragisic et al., 2015). Furthermore, Dragisic et al. (2015) found that those with
SUDs who attempted suicide also had family members who had psychiatric disorders.
Darke (2009) estimated that 5% of the deaths of those who are substance dependent
are due to homicide. He noted that homicide is a major risk factor for substance-
dependent populations since substance use plays a key role in perpetuating this form of
violence, with alcohol contributing the most to substance-related homicides. Substance
use also contributes to other forms of violence, including intimate partner violence (IPV)
and sexual assault, as many perpetrators of IPV against women resulting in homicide or
attempted homicide were using alcohol, drugs, or a combination of alcohol and drugs.
Juodis et al. (2014b) reported that 76% and 65% of perpetrators of domestic homicide had
alcohol use and drug use problems, respectively. Regarding victim substance use, varying
data exist as to the relationship between victim substance use and IPV. The National
Institute of Justice (2009) highlighted findings from several studies that also indicate an
association between victim substance use and domestic violence victimization.
The relationship between substances and sexual violence may in fact be “reciprocal
in that sexual violence may be a precursor to or consequence of substance use, abuse, or
addiction” (Dawgert, 2009, p. 21). A history of sexual victimization may in fact lead to
substance use to cope with the pain and trauma, while substance use may increase the
risk for victimization. To be clear, the victim of sexual assault is never responsible for
their assault, regardless of whether they were under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
However, alcohol is a behavioral disinhibitor and makes individuals less aware or in
control of their reactions in social or interpersonal contexts. Gidycz et al. (2007) found
that for women who reported a history of sexual victimization, alcohol use contributed
significantly to revictimization during the 2-month follow-up period. Furthermore, as
alcohol use increased, so too did the risk for sexual revictimization during this period;
women with the highest risk had a history of rape or attempted rape and were also
heavy drinkers. Gidycz et al. also found that decreasing alcohol use can reduce the risk
for sexual assault. According to the National Institute of Justice (2008), sexual assault
on campuses is more frequently associated with alcohol than drugs, with less than 1%
of women reporting being incapacitated by date-rape drugs. In addition, the National
Institute of Justice reported that while more women experience forced sexual assault
before college, once in college the risk of becoming a victim of incapacitated sexual
assault increases. Based on the National Crime Victimization Survey, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics revealed that 47% of female students believed the offender was under
the influence of alcohol or drugs when the sexual assault occurred, compared with
25% who did not believe substance use by the offender factored into the sexual assault
(Sinozich & Langton, 2014). Complete Think About It 7.1.

-- 247 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	219
THE ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS OF SUBSTANCE USE
AND DEPENDENCE
Learning Objective 7.2 Describe the etiology and risk factors of substance use and
dependence.
The most widely accepted belief is that addiction is biologically (neurobiologically,
specifically) based; however, alternative hypotheses continue to be debated. One
reason for the diversity of theoretical perspectives likely stems from the fact that
while research continues to make inroads linking addiction to neurobiological
mechanisms, no conclusive evidence of a specific biological relationship exists
(Capuzzi & Stauffer, 2020; Hammersly, 2014), even though evidence of strong
statistical associations exists between biological factors and alcoholism (Capuzzi &
Stauffer, 2020).
Factors That Increase Risk for Substance Use Disorders
Numerous risk factors have been identified as contributing to initial substance use.
Since initial use often occurs during adolescence, most of the commonly identified
risk factors reflect events and issues relevant to that developmental stage. Some of the
more common factors include poor academic performance, alcohol and other drug
(AOD) availability, peer pressure, living in a dysfunctional family environment, and
undiagnosed problems, such as learning disabilities. Even though initial use typically
occurs in adolescence, AOD use can occur at any age and can be triggered by various
issues such as trauma, disasters, or other emergencies.
Differentiating between risk factors for initial use and SUD is an important
consideration given that a majority of those who report experimenting or engaging in
recreational substance use do not develop problematic usage behaviors. If that were the
case, AOD data would yield a much bleaker picture. For individuals who develop SUDs
and symptoms, counselors need to be aware of other potential risk factors such as self-
esteem and self-worth issues, isolation, intimacy issues and fear of rejection, poor coping
mechanisms, and impulsivity and compulsivity patterns.
Counselors must also be knowledgeable of the co-occurring patterns of
psychopathology and SUDs and symptoms. Key psychiatric disorders that co-occur
with SUDs include major depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, and certain personality disorders (e.g., borderline personality
disorder, antisocial personality disorders). Other risk factors that can lead to abuse
and dependency problems include low socioeconomic status, cultural and subcultural
factors/expectations, criminality, history of abuse, and a family history of substance
abuse and psychopathology.
Think about a person with a SUD or significant symp-
toms. What are some of the problems that person may
be facing? What images or biases come to mind when
you think of a person who is addicted to a substance?
THINK ABOUT IT 7.1

-- 248 of 545 --

220 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SCREENING, ASSESSMENT, AND DIAGNOSIS OF SUBSTANCE USE
DISORDERS
Learning Objective 7. 3 Articulate procedures for the screening, assessment, and
diagnosis of substance use disorders and symptoms, including screening procedures,
commonly used assessment instruments, assessment, diagnosis, assessing a client’s
readiness to change, and treatment admission and placement processes.
A critical step in the treatment process is properly evaluating the degree to which
substance use is problematic and the extent to which it has influenced the individual,
especially those clients who are dealing with crisis or trauma situations. Careful
screening, assessment, and diagnosis not only provide an accurate clinical picture but also
help the counselor conceptualize applicable theoretical models, formulate preliminary
treatment goals, and implement techniques and approaches that will align with the
client’s presenting issue(s) and motivation for change. In crisis settings where there is
a time limit on the number of sessions, this comprehensive information is essential in
order to determine the best treatment options for clients.
Success at this stage of the treatment process is greatly influenced by the therapeutic
relationship that has been established. A strong therapeutic working alliance between
counselor and client can help create a trusting and safe environment, enabling the client
to feel more at ease when discussing substance history, especially sensitive, shameful, or
embarrassing information. Creating a collaborative counselor–client relationship can reduce
client resistance and ambivalence while increasing motivation to change.
Counselors who instill a sense of optimism or hope and focus on the client’s
strengths and successes are more inclined to find clients open to exploring
options. Seeing clients as more than their addiction is critical to this process.
Screening
The first step in the evaluation process is to rule out AOD problems. Screening
clarifies whether there is sufficient evidence of problematic substance use
and, if yes, whether this use warrants further investigation (assessment).
Screening is brief in nature and often entails simple screening questions
or brief measures related to substance usage. Questions are designed to
determine patterns of use and often focus on frequency, quantity, and
problem areas. Examples of frequency and quantity questions that might be
asked during the screening process include “During the past 30 days, how
many days per week did you drink alcohol or use drugs?” or “On a day when
you did drink alcohol or use drugs, how many drinks did you have (or what
quantity of drugs did you use)?”
Regarding the quantity question, the counselor must also determine the client’s
interpretation of a drink. The following example underscores the importance of clarifica-
tion of the quantity question:
C ounselor : 	Daryl, during the past 30 days, how many days per week did
you drink alcohol or use drugs?
Daryl: 	I’ve never used any drugs in my life but I do enjoy drinking
alcohol. During the past 30 days, I would say I drank an average
of 2 or 3 days each week, and that was mainly on weekends.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 7. 1
In this video, a client identi-
fies a couple of main goals to
frame her counseling sessions.
With the counselor’s guidance,
the client targets better coping
skills as one of her main goals.
The counselor helps the client
identify positive activities and
pastimes. What other screening
questions would be important
to utilize in the session?

-- 249 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	221
Counselor: 	On those days when you do drink, how many drinks do you
consume?
Daryl: 	I only have a couple beers.
Counselor: 	By a couple do you mean two?
Daryl: 	Actually, three or four.
Note that if the counselor concluded the questioning at this point, the only informa-
tion garnered is the number of drinks per episode and how many episodes occurred in
the past 30 days. The counselor may surmise that there is no need for further evaluation.
But what if the counselor probed further?
Counselor: 	So on those days when you drink, it is often three or four
beers.
Daryl: 	Yes.
Counselor: 	Tell me about the number of ounces in a typical beer. (The
counselor notices a defensive shift in client’s posture and his non-
verbal facial expression is one of frustration. Client responds in an
angry tone.)
Daryl: 	Why do you need to know this? I like a few beers, and that’s
no one’s business! (A period of silence follows) Okay, so I drink
three or four 40s. It’s not a big deal.
Making assumptions about the size of the drinks may lead to inaccurate
information and miss a potential problem. In this example, the assumption may be that
the client consumes three or four 12-ounce beers per occurrence, when in reality Daryl is
consuming over three times that amount. Using the consumption question may be more
telling than using more extensive questioning (Fleming, 2003). From a sample of men
and women, Williams and Vinson (2001) found that asking the question “When was the
last time you had more than four drinks (women) or five drinks (men)?” led to detection
of problem drinking or criteria for abuse or dependence in nearly 9 out of 10 people
sampled. Self-administered screening instruments can also provide valuable information
about substance use patterns. Given the information presented in the example above,
continued evaluation appears warranted.
Commonly Used Assessment Instruments
Counselors should carefully weigh the advantages and disadvantages of using
assessment instruments based on the information gathered during the screening phase.
If an assessment instrument is deemed necessary to gain additional information from
the client on substance use, the counselor must decide which type will be most efficient
in maximizing clinical information while minimizing client time and frustration.
The following considerations apply when using an assessment instrument:
• The client must sign an informed consent form (e.g., a form that addresses the
purpose of the assessment, risks, benefits, how the information will be used,
the client’s right to refuse consent).

-- 250 of 545 --

222 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• The counselor should see the client as more than the results (the assessment is only
one of many pieces of the clinical picture).
• The counselor should ensure that the assessment instrument is applicable and
appropriate for the population it will be used to measure.
• The counselor should have training and competency in administering the
assessment.
• The counselor must be able to interpret the results (Stauffer et al., 2020).
Four commonly used assessment instruments are the Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT; Babor et al., 2001), Michigan Alcoholism Screening
Test (MAST; Selzer, 1971), Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory–4 (SASSI-4;
Lazowski et al., 2016), and the CAGE (Ewing, 1984).
The AUDIT was developed as a collaborative project by the World Health
Organization from a six-nation study to identify early detection of problematic drinking
patterns and behaviors (Saunders et al., 1993). The AUDIT comprises 10 items divided
into three domains: questions 1–3 address alcohol consumption patterns, questions
4–6 focus on dependency issues, and questions 7–10 address problems associated with
alcohol use. The AUDIT questions use a five-point Likert-type scale (0–4) and total scores
can range from 0 to 40. A total score greater than 8 points indicates a pattern of harmful
or hazardous drinking. Of those diagnosed with harmful or hazardous drinking, 92%
had scores greater than 8 points. Of those who were not diagnosed with problematic
drinking, 94% had scores less than 8 points. Based on total scores, counselors may
incorporate certain interventions. The use of education and reduction approaches is
suggested for those who score from 8 to 15. Individuals who score from 16 to 19 likely
would benefit from brief interventions or counseling and follow-up. Individuals who
score over 20 are at high risk and should be assessed for alcohol dependence and more
intensive treatment (Babor et al., 2001).
The CAGE (Ewing, 1984) is a simple four-question screening tool that can be
incorporated into a clinical interview. It is used only with adult and adolescent clients,
and it is intended to identify behaviors related to alcohol use only. Each letter in the
acronym CAGE represents one of the four questions: Have you ever felt the need to
Cut down on your drinking? Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
Have you ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking? Have you ever had a drink first
thing in the morning to steady your nerves or to get rid of a hangover (Eye opener)?
Each yes response to these questions receives a score of 1 point. Scores 0–1 do not reflect
any apparent problems, and scores greater than or equal to 2 are a possible indication
of alcohol dependence. One concern with the CAGE is the wide variability in accurately
diagnosing alcohol use disorders.
Assessment
An assessment is conducted for the following purposes: (1) to ascertain the degree and
severity of a problem; (2) to determine the presence of co-occurring disorders; (3) to make
accurate diagnoses; (4) to assess the scope of the problem (i.e., whether it is specific to
the individual or systemic, such as within the family or support system); (5) to guide the
treatment planning process; and (6) to provide a mechanism for communication across
treatment personnel (Erford, 2021).

-- 251 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	223
The primary focus of substance use assessment is to gather detailed information
on substance use patterns, including drug(s) used; progression of use (amount and
frequency of use over time); route of administration; reason for periods of increased
usage or abstinence; treatment history; and evidence of tolerance, dependence,
and withdrawal. During the clinical interview, obtaining clients’ history of substances
used helps to establish a pattern and context of substance usage. The assessment
should compile information and usage patterns on commonly used drugs such
as alcohol, marijuana, opiates, hallucinogens, cocaine, amphetamines and related
stimulants, inhalants, nicotine, and caffeine. With the growth of synthetic or designer
illicit drugs, the assessment should include questions about use of drug variations
such as flakka (a synthetic version of the stimulant cathinone), K2 (synthetic
cannabinoids), bath salts (synthetic cathinones), wax (marijuana and butane), purple
drank (cough syrup with codeine and promethazine mixed in soft drinks or made
into candy), and krokodil (desomorphine, a derivative of codeine that is mixed with
oil, gasoline, alcohol, or paint thinner and injected), to name a few (see Table 7.1 at
the end of this chapter for resources on commonly used designer drugs).
Inquiring about use of any psychotherapeutic medications, prescriptions, and
over-the-counter drugs, including herbal supplements, rounds out the comprehensive
picture of usage. Including questions about these types of drugs is beneficial since most
clients do not consider them to be problematic, especially if they have been prescribed.
Gathering information on these substances provides valuable information on potential
synergistic effects resulting from drug interactions. Furthermore, having knowledge of
different drug interactions can help determine any potential contraindications that may
exist. For example, clients with bipolar disorder who use lithium are advised to avoid
certain drugs that are contraindicated, including alcohol, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medications such as ibuprofen, and illicit drugs such as Ecstasy that can result in changes
in lithium levels.
Assessment also provides a comprehensive picture of the client across different
psychosocial domains (e.g., medical, legal, education, employment history, family
history, psychiatric history). Often information gathered on other psychosocial issues is
directly connected to substance use. For example, clients with substance use issues may
have an unstable employment history or a pattern of legal problems. It is not uncommon
for those with a history of substance-related problems to also have conflicts in their
relationships with family and friends. Medical concerns may be directly related to
substance use, yet clients may not make the connection or resist addressing the problem.
When conducting a substance use assessment, counselors should also evaluate the
client’s current level of mental functioning, which is often done using the Mini-Mental
State Examination (MMSE-2; Folstein et al., 2016) in crisis situations. The purpose of the
MMSE-2 is to investigate signs and symptoms of impaired affect, behavior, cognition, and
intellectual functioning related to one’s mental state. The MMSE-2 can also be valuable
in differentiating between substance and nonsubstance impaired mental symptoms and
for ruling out co-occurring disorders (Rudd, 2006). Given that most clients who have
co-occurring substance use and mental health issues are likely attending counseling due
to acute symptom presentation or concerns associated with these disorders, counselors
should evaluate whether a crisis assessment is warranted. For example, clients who
have a previous history of psychiatric diagnoses (e.g., bipolar disorder, major depressive

-- 252 of 545 --

224 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
disorder, schizophrenia) and substance use are at greater risk for suicidal behavior.
Depending on the score related to any cognitive impairment not due to the substance
use, a referral for a full mental status exam may be included in the treatment plan.
One of the more commonly used methods for conducting substance use assessment
is the clinical interview, a process that includes extensive and detailed questions regarding
various content domains. When counselors are conducting the clinical assessment, it is
inevitable that clients indicate how they define their substance use. Some clients may
be inclined to overestimate or underestimate use or information. Clients may indicate
that they fit into certain categories (e.g., social drinkers, recreational users) despite
information to the contrary. Therefore, counselors may need to ask additional questions
or clarify client responses.
Semistructured clinical interviews are often preferred over structured ones because
they allow the counselor to ask specific, structured questions in various domains and pro-
vide the counselor with the flexibility to expand on or deviate from questions based on
client response. Domains that are commonly covered in a clinical interview are as follows:
1. Demographic information (e.g., name, age, race, height, weight)
2. Presenting complaint or reason for attending
3. Medical history (e.g., diagnoses, medications, hospitalizations, surgeries)
4. Substance use history
5. Legal history (e.g., specific charges, incarcerations, any charges that are pending,
parole/probation status, any protection from abuse orders)
6. Employment history (e.g., job history, reason for leaving jobs, conflicts with
coworkers or supervisors, work performance and evaluations)
7. Education history (e.g., degrees achieved, problems in school and reasons for them,
difficulty with reading or writing)
8. Social and family history (e.g., childhood issues, trauma, or abuse; family discord/
dysfunction; marital status; current living arrangements; history of relationship
problems; family history of mental illness or SUD; history of child abuse or neglect
for those with children)
9. Recreational history (e.g., activities of interest, activities impacted by substance use,
hobbies, memberships in clubs or groups)
10. Religious/spiritual/cultural history (e.g., current and past religious/spiritual
beliefs, practices, attendance; spiritual injuries that cause people to question their
faith; cultural/heritage values, beliefs, considerations)
11. Psychiatric/psychological history (e.g., any psychiatric or personality diagnoses,
hospitalizations, inpatient/outpatient treatment, suicide attempts and history)
12. Sexual history (e.g., sexual identity, sexual disorders, sexually transmitted
infections)
13. Mental status exam
Scenarios 1 and 2 provide some guidance on clarifying client presenting information.
Scenario 1: Challenging a Client’s Definition of Social Drinking
Counselor: 	Finch, you mentioned earlier in our session that you drink
daily and often drive when you know you shouldn’t. Help me
understand how you see your drinking.

-- 253 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	225
Finch: 	Well, I don’t see it as a problem. I never had a DUI [driving
under the influence] and had only minor issues with my
partner when I’ve gotten home late or with my boss when
I’ve missed time at work because I’m hung over. I guess I see
myself as a social drinker because I only drink when I go out
after work with my friends.
Counselor: 	So you classify your drinking as social because of the location,
and you have not had any significant consequences.
Finch: 	That’s how I see it.
Counselor: 	Tell me how you might view this definition if you got arrested
for a DUI, the relationship with your partner got much worse,
or you got fired from your job because of your drinking. (This
probe helps the client examine personal usage, knowing that any one
of these scenarios is a real possibility even as a “social drinker.”)
Scenario 2: Differentiating Between Recreational Use and Substance Use
Hayes: 	I only smoke pot recreationally as a way to relax and have
some fun.
Counselor: 	How would you classify your pot use?
Hayes: 	I share a joint or two with some friends once a month. It’s not a
big deal.
Counselor: 	You mentioned that you only use marijuana occasionally, yet
when you were discussing your medical and legal history, you
alluded to using it more regularly.
Hayes: 	Just ‘cause I have breathing problems and had a few run-ins
with the law doesn’t mean I have a problem!
Counselor: 	I sense you’re upset right now because we’re talking about
whether your use is really recreational. My intent is not to
judge or be critical of your choices around marijuana. Rather,
I’m concerned that your use may be causing problems in other
areas of your life.
Hayes: 	Sometimes I use it more as a way to have fun.
Diagnosis
A well-conducted, thorough assessment should yield sufficient data and documentation to
make accurate decisions and establish the degree of impairment. With most other mental
health diagnoses, providing a full diagnosis during a crisis phase would be premature
and inappropriate due to the symptoms and period of time needed to accurately offer
a valid diagnosis. However, documenting prior diagnoses, onset, relapse, current client
reports, and presentations are essential to provide for the next phase of the treatment so
the next clinician can formulate a diagnosis. Pure SUDs, not including induced disorder

-- 254 of 545 --

226 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
categories (e.g., substance-induced mood disorders, substance-induced bipolar disorder)
rely on self-reports and can aid the treatment planning and referral process.
The purpose of diagnosis is to identify the specific condition(s) or disorder(s) that
are causing the impairment in order to provide a basis with which treatment interventions
can be applied or to make an appropriate referral for long-term substance treatment.
The main diagnostic tool used for SUDs is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, the most current being the fifth edition, text revision (DSM-5-TR; American
Psychiatric Association, 2022). In DSM-5, substance use and addictive disorders are
organized into a number of categories. The two categories of primary interest are alcohol
use disorder and SUD, the latter covering a variety of addictive substances, such as
amphetamines, cocaine, and inhalants.
Prior to the latest edition, DSM classified substance use disorders as either
substance abuse or substance dependence. As a result of the ambiguity and confusion
surrounding dependence and addiction, DSM-5-TR does not use the terms substance
abuse and substance dependence. Instead, it uses the umbrella term substance use disorders
in relation to recurrent alcohol and drug use (American Psychiatric Association, 2022).
Dependence and addiction were often used interchangeably, and tolerance and withdrawal
were criteria central to a dependence diagnosis. However, tolerance and withdrawal
are common and expected responses to prescription medications that act on the central
nervous system and as such do not imply one is addicted, especially if these are the only
symptoms evident. The reclassification to SUDs and the use of severity specifiers (mild,
moderate, severe) provide counselors with a reference point for the progression of the
substance use pattern, as well as a perspective on how best to approach treatment and
which interventions may be most applicable.
According to DSM-5-TR, at least two of the following criteria must be met for an
individual to be diagnosed with a SUD: (1) significant problems exist at home, school,
or work due to use; (2) physical hazards occur due to repeated episodes of impaired
driving or operating machinery while under the influence; (3) substance use results in
recurring legal problems (e.g., public intoxication); (4) tolerance increases; (5) withdrawal
occurs; (6) increasing amounts of the substance are taken over time; (7) usage levels
are not being reduced; (8) a lot of time is spent acquiring the substance; (9) social or
work activities are sacrificed due to use or recovery from use; (10) use continues despite
interpersonal and physical effects; and (11) there is craving, a strong urge, or desire for
the substance. Severity is determined by the number of presenting criteria (i.e., mild: two
to three criteria; moderate: four to five criteria; severe: six or more criteria). Complete
Activity 7.1, which focuses on SUD diagnosis.
When assessing a client for a SUD, which issues and factors do you believe should be considered
to make an accurate diagnosis?
ACTIVITY 7.1
Assessing a Client’s Readiness to Change
A client’s readiness to change is an essential function to consider during the assessment
phase. Evaluating resistance to change allows the counselor to match treatment techniques
and motivational approaches to the level of client ambivalence. Several change models have

-- 255 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	227
appeared since the 1970s (Connors et al., 2015), but Norcross et al.’s (2011) five-stage change
model focuses mainly on change patterns associated with health behavior change and reflects
identifiable stages individuals go through as they are attempting to change substance use
behaviors. Norcross et al. identified the following five stages of change:
1. Precontemplation—characterized by resistance to change or denying that a prob-
lem exists.
2. Contemplation—evidence of ambivalence exists and the client is contemplating
the effects of substance use as well as weighing the advantages and disadvantages
of continued use.
3. Preparation—resistance has waned and the client has made a decision to change
but is uncertain how to go about this process.
4. Action—the client is committed to making a change and has demonstrated specific
goals and behaviors toward this end.
5. Maintenance—the client has maintained a period of abstinence and is working on
maintaining recovery and addressing relapse issues and triggers.
Transitioning across stages is rarely a smooth, straightforward process. Clients may
move from one stage to the next or move across several stages only to experience a setback.
Moving back to an earlier stage is not unexpected given that change is difficult, and
clients will likely experience much frustration and discouragement during the process.
Motivational support becomes an integral component to assist in the change process.
Understanding the importance of instilling motivation as an antidote for
ambivalence and resistance, Miller and Rollnick (2013) integrated their motivational
interviewing (MI) approach into the stages-of-change model based on the belief that
motivation is not intrinsically driven as part of one’s personality or personal traits but
rather is developed through interpersonal interactions. They identified MI as a client-
centered, directive, transtheoretical approach emphasizing empathic communication to
bring about a client’s intrinsic motivation to change that aligns with values and beliefs.
MI was developed as an alternative to the directive and confrontational approaches that
were widely used and accepted in treating addiction for decades.
Miller and Rollnick (2013) developed four central processes that serve as the basis
for MI: (1) engaging—establishing a connection between counselor and client that helps
to build the working alliance; (2) focusing—involves the counselor developing and
maintaining a focused direction in the discussion about change; (3) evoking—assisting the
client to take ownership for their motivation for change; and (4) planning—establishing
a commitment to change with a specific course of action where talk shifts from whether
and why it happens to when and how to change. Read Voices from the Field 7.1.
Rachel M. Hoffman
“Addiction is an issue with which I never want to work!
I don’t want to work with clients who don’t want to
change!” That quote, or something very close to it, was
uttered by me at some point (or maybe more) during
my graduate counselor training experience. Before
being exposed to the field of addiction counseling,
I mistakenly believed that addiction was a disorder
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 7.1
Working with Substance Use
(continued)

-- 256 of 545 --

228 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Treatment Admission and Placement
Information gathered during the assessment and diagnosis phases assists the counselor
in determining not only treatment planning but also the appropriate level of care for cli-
ents in crisis. Clients who present with significant substance use issues will likely require
an intensive treatment protocol compared with clients who are misusing a substance.
The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM; 2013) provides comprehensive
treatment criteria for patient placement, continued stay, and discharge. The latest ASAM
criteria put greater emphasis on co-occurring mental health disorders and SUDs. ASAM
continues to divide the continuum of treatment into increasing levels of care. The five
broad levels of care, now designated by numbers instead of Roman numerals, are as
follows:
• Level 0.5 (Early Intervention) involves screening, brief intervention, referral, and
treatment; early intervention services were expanded as a way to reach out to the
nearly 20 million individuals who are pursuing addiction treatment
• Level 1 (Outpatient Services) is considered a gateway for substance use treatment
as well as a level of care that can focus on ongoing chronic addiction and abstinence
• Level 2 (Intensive Outpatient/Partial Hospitalization Services)
• Level 3 (Residential/Inpatient services)
• Level 4 (Medically Managed Intensive Inpatient Services)
Each level also has a withdrawal management designation that aligns with what the
counselor believes is needed to manage the physiological and psychological symptoms
of withdrawal.
ASAM has developed six dimensions that practitioners can use to assess clients
at each level and provide a rationale/justification for a particular level of care. The
dimensions also serve as standardized assessment language for general health care and
mental health practitioners. The six dimensions are as follows:
1. Acute intoxication and/or withdrawal potential—assessing withdrawal
management across different levels of care and making preparations for continued
addiction services
from which people really had to “hit rock bottom”
before they could recover. Now, many years and a lot
of education later, I have a completely different view of
addictions, and I honestly could not imagine working
with any other population.
Addiction is a complex phenomenon. Many
researchers now believe that addiction is a brain disease
that results in neurological adaptations with prolonged
substance use. After spending the past several years
working in an agency that specialized in addiction,
I have learned that it is important to use interventions
appropriate for a client’s stage of change. Assessing
a client’s stage of change (i.e., precontemplation,
contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance)
allows the counselor to develop interventions based on
the client’s readiness to change a particular behavior
or situation.
In my work with clients, I have appreciated the
ability to use motivational interviewing techniques to
help the client move through the stages of change.
I respect my clients’ abilities to make changes that align
with their stated goals and desired outcomes. Adopting
this strengths-based approach to working with clients
has helped me avoid frustration, burnout, and anger in
my work. Although I did not initially intend to work with
this population, I find my daily work with addictions
immensely satisfying and rewarding, and I am thankful
that my career path has led me in this direction.

-- 257 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	229
2. Biomedical conditions and complications
3. Emotional, behavioral, or cognitive conditions and complications
4. Readiness to change
5. Relapse, continued use, or continued problem potential—greater focus on
addressing early stages of change
6. Recovery/living environment
The ASAM assessment dimensions should be incorporated into the continuous
evaluation of the client’s progress. Based on the outcome of an assessment, the counselor
should identify the most appropriate care and adjust the treatment plan accordingly
(Mee-Lee, 2013). When assessing all six dimensions, counselors want to select the
treatment level that is least intensive but the safest level of care based on the client’s
presenting issue and assessed dimensions. Case Study 7.1 highlights the ASAM
assessment process.
CASE STUDY 7.1
A Client Assessment Using the Six ASAM Dimensions
Jules is a 42-year-old brought to the city hospital following a DUI accident that resulted
in breaking both a collarbone and arm. Jules’s blood alcohol level (BAL) was 0.42 at the
time of arrest, and this was Jules’s second DUI in the past 12 months. Jules’s BAL for the
first DUI was 0.12, and Jules was approved for Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition,
a pretrial intervention program for nonviolent offenders with no prior record. During
the trial for the second DUI, the judge requested a substance use evaluation and is
considering remanding Jules to treatment in lieu of incarceration. The counselor
completed an assessment of Jules using the six ASAM dimensions and made a treatment
recommendation.
Dimension 1: Acute Intoxication and/or Withdrawal Potential Jules demon-
strated increased tolerance. Based on reported usage, Jules is at elevated risk for
physiological withdrawal. Concerns exist given the pattern of continued use, high
BAL, and inability to stop drinking. Jules meets criteria for Level 3.2-WM (Clini-
cally Managed Residential Withdrawal Management).
Dimension 2: Biomedical Conditions and Complications With the exception of
current medical complications, Jules did not present any specific health problems
or complications due to alcohol. Jules is not on any medications. Jules meets
criteria for Level 1 (Outpatient Services).
Dimension 3: Emotional, Behavioral, or Cognitive Conditions and Complications
Jules has problems managing anger and often fights with partners and coworkers,
especially when drinking. Jules lacks coping skills and can be quite reactive when
confronted about alcohol use. Interpersonal skills, specifically communication
skills, are poor. Jules does not take responsibility for personal actions and tends to
blame others for problems. Jules lacks self-efficacy, motivation, and cognitive
awareness to make the necessary changes at this point. Jules meets criteria for
Level 3.3 (Clinically Managed Population-Specific High-Intensity Residential
Services [adult level only]).

-- 258 of 545 --

230 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUBSTANCE USE TREATMENT AND CRISIS
Learning Objective 7.4 Explain substance use crisis treatment, including relapse and
crisis, harm reduction, support groups, couples and family treatment, and co-occurring
disorders.
Treating SUDs and symptoms becomes more complex when the client is also experiencing
a crisis. Clients can be in crisis at any point along the substance use continuum and may
require different interventions depending on their level of motivation, stage of change,
the significance of the crisis event, intensity of the crisis response, coping capacity,
resilience, and existence of co-occurring disorders. Before continuing, complete Think
About It 7.2 and read Voices from the Field 7.2.
Dimension 4: Readiness to Change Jules is at the precontemplative stage of change.
Jules does not see personal use as a problem and believes no assistance is needed
with the drinking. Jules feels misunderstood and is in denial about usage and
amount. Jules is defensive and angry when discussing alcohol use and meets cri-
teria for Level 3.3.
Dimension 5: Relapse, Continued Use, or Continued Problem Potential Jules’s
potential for relapse is very high without intensive treatment. Jules lacks skills
and resources to maintain sobriety and denies having any friends who do not
drink or who provide positive support systems. Without intensive treatment and
an established support network, the prognosis for maintaining sobriety is very
poor. Jules meets criteria for Level 3.3.
Dimension 6: Recovery/Living Environment Jules has alienated partners and fam-
ily and does not care. Jules has refused to attend 12-Step meetings and thinks they
are a waste of time. The current support system cannot assist Jules in helping to
maintain recovery. All social activities revolve around drinking. Jules meets crite-
ria for Level 3.3.
Recommendation to the Judge Jules meets criteria for Level 3 for five of the six
dimensions. Treatment recommendations are as follows: complete inpatient/
residential treatment detoxification protocol followed by Level 3.3 residential
treatment (adult level only). Length of stay will depend on progress on all six
dimensions and should be reevaluated after 4 weeks. Step down to Level 2.1
intensive outpatient treatment following successful discharge from Level 3 care.
Discussion Questions
1. What treatment approaches might you consider using with Jules?
2. As the counselor, what issues would come up for you as you work with Jules?
Think about your personal characteristics and skill lev-
els. What counselor characteristics and counseling skills/
techniques do you believe are important when working
with clients who use substances as a means to manage
a crisis response?
THINK ABOUT IT 7.2

-- 259 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	231
Steve Zappalla
One of the most common traits of substance use clients
is their denial system and strong habit to protect their
substance of choice, often at any cost. For the counselor,
it is important to relate to and understand their desire
to use a substance. Using language, descriptions, and
techniques they understand is helpful to gain their
trust, respect, and confidence quickly. Meeting clients
where they are is extremely important.
Listen carefully to the client’s resistance and use
calm, reflective statements. Determine the main theme
that is bothering the client and avoid attacking the
drinking or using problem. It helps to hear what they
are saying. Try to see things from the client’s point of
view, no matter how unreasonable or how irrational
it seems. Your goal is to create a space to help clients
see that what they are doing is not working and try
to get them to want to do something about it, not to
win a confrontation. It could prove more beneficial to
acknowledge different viewpoints.
Try to be encouraging and understanding. Clients
often become resistant, even hostile, when they feel
frustrated or confused. Clients with SUDs and symptoms
tend not to have a very mature emotional coping system
and will react quickly with what they know best. The most
important thing to keep in mind is that there is a good
chance the client does not know any other way. While
small steps may seem a success early on, it is critically
important to help clients feel and see the long-term
benefit of this new behavior. It is most important to help
clients see that what they are doing is not working and
begin to help them take steps to do something about it.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 7.2
Engaging the Client Who Uses Substances
Counselors should be aware of a multitude of treatment options when working
with clients identified with SUDs and symptoms. Over the years, numerous treatment
modalities have been implemented to address SUDs. Sorting out which treatments
are effective has been no simple task. Decisions for treatment approaches have often
been based on personal interest or counselor familiarity rather than on empirically
supported evidence. Efforts to understand which treatments are effective have
increased significantly over the past several decades. Traditional approaches such
as confrontational approaches, aversion therapies, insight-based psychotherapy,
and educational approaches have generally been ineffective (Miller et al., 2003).
A comprehensive review of various treatment modalities revealed that approaches such
as brief interventions, motivational enhancement, gamma-aminobutyric acid agonists
and opiate antagonists, various behavioral treatments, community reinforcement, and
social skills training were ranked the highest in terms of treatment efficacy.
Given that brief interventions and motivational enhancement approaches were
two of the highest-ranked, most effective approaches to address SUDs and symptoms,
integrating a crisis model that aligns with these approaches allows the counselor
to effectively address both the crisis response and SUD (see the task model of crisis
assessment and intervention presented in Table 1.1). Case Studies 7.2 and 7.3 provide
practice in applying the model of crisis assessment and intervention.
CASE STUDY 7.2
A Single Crisis Session
Lenora is a 23-year-old woman who was transported to the hospital during the early-
morning hours by her sister, Mary. Lenora presented as visibly upset, very angry,
shaking, disheveled, and crying uncontrollably. Mary told the attending nurse that

-- 260 of 545 --

232 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
CASE STUDY 7.3
Multisession Crisis Intervention with a Substance Use Client
Francis is a 39-year-old married man who recently learned that his wife of 10 years is
filing for divorce because of his marijuana and cocaine addiction. He also learned she
is having an affair with his best friend. Francis has been distraught for several days
upon hearing this news and is contemplating suicide. At his mother’s insistence, Francis
begrudgingly attends the initial appointment she made for him with a counselor who
specializes in substance use and crisis issues at the local mental health agency. Francis
is aware that his drug use was causing problems at home and has tried several times
to stop, but he has been unable to maintain abstinence for more than a day. He reports
that he was in counseling 2 years ago when his wife threatened to leave him but was not
motivated to change and dropped out after a couple of sessions. He also did not feel the
counselor listened to him and instead told him what to do. Francis acknowledges his
drug use has caused problems and is upset over his wife’s affair with his best friend. He
is coming to the realization that it is too late to save his marriage. He states that he has
no reason to live. Let’s examine how the counselor may structure the first six sessions.
Session 1
The counselor must undertake several tasks simultaneously. Understanding what was
helpful and not helpful from the client’s previous counseling experience can provide
valuable information as to how the client views counseling, approaches that should
be avoided or enhanced, a sense of motivation, and ways to conceptualize how best
to establish a working alliance. Establishing a working alliance is essential given the
client’s fragile emotional state. While the counselor is working to establish rapport
and create an environment where the client can feel supported, effort must be directed
toward the client’s message of desperation and suicide ideation. The counselor must
assess the severity of the client’s statement around self-harm. During this process,
the counselor must assess the level of intent and determine both the subjective (client
statements) and objective (specific concrete behaviors) messages. Using direct language
Lenora had been out drinking earlier that night and met a man. Mary explained that he
was buying Lenora drinks and at one point must have slipped her a “roofie.” Lenora
did not recall what took place but when the drug wore off, she found herself alone and
unclothed in a hotel room several blocks from the bar. Lenora reported that she had been
raped. Mary also shared that Lenora “has been drinking a lot for the past 6 months”
following the termination of a long-term relationship. You are an addictions counselor
working for a local mental health agency that contracts with the hospital for evening and
weekend crisis response calls.
Discussion Questions
1. Explore how you could integrate the task model of crisis assessment and interven-
tion (see Table 1.1).
2. What would be the first thing you would do to address this crisis situation?

-- 261 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	233
(direct questions vs. reflective responses) is necessary to evaluate intent, means to
carry out the intent, and a clearly developed plan. Conveying this information in an
empathic manner creates a sense of care and concern that increases the likelihood the
client will come back next session. Let’s look at the counselor–client dialogue related
to examining intent.
Counselor: 	Francis, I appreciate your willingness to seek help and for
being open with me. I want to ask you a few questions to help
me better understand your emotional state.
Francis: 	OK.
Counselor: 	Tell me about what you mean by not wanting to live anymore.
Francis: 	My world has fallen apart. My wife has been upset about my
drug use for some time, and I think it drove her to have an
affair. I don’t see any reason for living. I really screwed up.
Counselor: 	A couple times today you mentioned or alluded to the fact that
you don’t want to live. Before we talk about what’s going on
right now for you, let’s discuss any previous suicidal thoughts
or attempts. Have you made any suicide attempts previously?
Francis: 	No, never, but I’ve thought about it from time to time, espe-
cially after my wife and I got into fights about my drug use.
Counselor: 	At that time, did you have a plan to hurt yourself and, if you
did, did you have the means to carry it out? (Give examples of
methods)
Francis: 	No, I didn’t have a plan. It was just thoughts running around
my head that I couldn’t let go of. I got really scared of my
thoughts because I didn’t feel I had any reason to live. I felt
that I was no good to her or anyone. I felt overwhelmed and
the pain was unbearable.
Counselor: 	You felt so distraught and worthless because nothing seemed
to matter anymore. The only solution in your mind was to
hurt yourself. Describe your intention to hurt yourself at that
point.
Francis: 	I thought a lot in those moments about killing myself, but
I didn’t because I would have hurt more knowing my children
and my mom would have to live with this.
Counselor: 	Francis, you were aware of the painful outcomes killing your-
self would have on loved ones. Help me understand more
about your state of mind during that time. Did you think of or
have a plan in place and, if so, did you have a means to carry
out that plan?
Francis: 	No plan. I just wanted the pain to go away. I started to use
more drugs to numb out.

-- 262 of 545 --

234 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Counselor: 	Did you plan to use more drugs with the hope of killing your-
self? (Exploring drug use as a possible means to carry out suicide is
important to assess as it can be easily overlooked with the focus on
more acute means of lethality.)
Francis: 	No. I never planned or intended to overdose or use drugs to
kill myself. Only to take away the pain.
Counselor: 	So, you had no specific plan or means?
Francis: 	That’s right. I guess I chickened out.
Counselor: 	Choosing to live when you were facing incredible pain takes a
lot of courage and strength. (The counselor continues to use empa-
thy to build support, rapport, and trust.)
Francis: 	I guess, but I’m not feeling a lot of courage right now.
Counselor: 	Describe your current thoughts about wanting to kill yourself.
(The counselor may use a 1 to 10 scale to help assess, with 1 being no
intent, plan, or means to kill myself and 10 being a definite plan and
means to kill myself.)
Francis: 	Kind of like what we talked about before. Feeling really over-
whelmed. Maybe a 3 or 4.
Counselor: 	So a 3 or 4 would indicate feeling overwhelmed like what you
felt before, or is it more than before?
Francis: 	Pretty much the same.
Counselor: 	Thank you for helping me understand. Francis, given these
recent painful experiences, do you have a plan or means to kill
yourself right now?
Francis: 	No. I just feel really awful. I just wish the pain would go away.
Counselor: 	The pain feels really unbearable, so much so that you think that
the only way to reconcile it is by not existing anymore. (If the cli-
ent mentioned a plan and intent, the counselor would explore in detail
the plan and means. The counselor would ask about specific sources to
carry out suicide and continue to examine multiple methods until the
client states that no other methods have been considered.)
Francis: 	Yes. (Francis cries for several minutes.) And I don’t know what to
do next because nothing has worked out and my wife is leav-
ing and screwing around with my best friend because of my
drug use.
Counselor: 	It sounds like you don’t want to die, you just want your life to
make sense. Right now, you’re uncertain what direction to go
to alleviate the pain. You know that drugs have not helped the
situation, but they have been the only thing that has helped to
numb the pain.

-- 263 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	235
Francis: 	Exactly! I know this is no way to live my life. I’m tired of feel-
ing this way, but it’s the only thing I know that works and I’m
not sure I want to let go of using drugs at this point. (The cli-
ent’s affect brightens a little and seems a little hopeful that he is being
listened to, something he complained his wife never did.)
Counselor: 	It sounds like the relationship with drugs is causing a lot of
pain and problems, but you’re not ready to let it go. Maybe we
can work together to examine this relationship and the costs
and benefits of using versus not using.
Francis: 	It’s something I’ve been thinking about. I’ve been trying to
figure out why I keep doing this when it causes so many other
problems, but I need it and I’m not sure I can give it up right
now because it hurts too much when I don’t use drugs.
Counselor: 	Let’s not focus on all-or-nothing options related to use. Would
you instead be open to examining your use and understanding
what purpose it’s serving for you?
Francis: 	I’d be open to talking about that.
Counselor: 	To help start that conversation, I have some materials that
others have found helpful as they attempted to understand
similar issues you’ve been facing. Would you be interested in
looking these over between now and our next session?
Francis: 	Yes, I’d be interested.
The counselor established that there was no chronic suicidality or previous attempts.
Client responses indicate mild risk, and the counselor should evaluate and monitor risk
on an ongoing basis. The client has difficulty when facing challenging situations, feels
overwhelmed, often uses substances impulsively to manage emotional instability, and
has a history of fleeting thoughts of suicide but no established intent, plan, or means.
During the remainder of the session, the counselor will assess the client’s drug use
and motivation to change. The counselor is still concerned about the client’s strained
emotional state and will work to establish a plan in the event that the client’s condition
worsens before the next session. The counselor may consider using the commitment
to treatment statement (CTS), an agreement to commit to the treatment process and to
living, and a crisis response plan that outlines specific behaviors the client will engage
in if the crisis escalates (see Rudd, 2006).
The counselor and client also work together to examine a realistic plan for substance
use. It is evident the client is in the contemplative stage, and the counselor wants to
continue to enhance client understanding and awareness. The counselor also commits
time in session to discussing the marital issues and explores the dynamics that have
triggered this recent crisis situation. The client is feeling better at the end of the session,
and they agree to meet again in 4 days. At the end of this session, the counselor must
thoroughly document the session and provide specific content related to the suicidal
ideation, established patterns, and current condition. The use of direct client quotes
strengthens the record.

-- 264 of 545 --

236 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Session 2
The counselor continues to build rapport and establish the therapeutic working alliance
using basic reflective skills and advanced skills such as clarification and immediacy as
needed while helping the client color in the details related to the presenting problem,
including the implications of the affair. In this session, the counselor assesses the client’s
emotional state and explores behaviors and activity during the past several days and
evaluates whether different interventions are necessary. Motivational enhancement
approaches continue to serve as a building block for exploration of the client’s substance
use and assist in shifting the client’s ambivalence toward change.
The exploration and implementation of treatment options will align with the
client’s stage of change. Assessing cultural factors and their role in understanding a
client’s motivation level is important during the second session. Also, the counselor
discusses the bibliotherapy assignment and specific reactions, thoughts, and insights and
how the client has integrated this information and any newly acquired knowledge into
his situation. The counselor and client discuss additional options, including continued
bibliotherapy options and the possibility of listing advantages and disadvantages of
current substance use for the next session. At the end of the session, the counselor
and client both summarize salient issues and the counselor reminds the client of the
behavioral plan in the event the crisis reemerges.
Sessions 3–6
Evidence of a stronger therapeutic alliance is emerging with ease of rapport and signs
that the client is trusting the counselor. The exploration of presenting problems continues.
The counselor notices that the client has chosen options to help explore ambivalence,
including a handwritten list of the advantages and disadvantages of drug use. The
client reports that he knew his substance use was a problem but did not understand the
magnitude until he made this list. He reports that he wants to make changes and wants
to end this relationship with drugs. He also realized how much he alienated his wife and,
while still very hurt and upset over her affair, understands how his drug use contributed
to this process. He reports that he wants to change but does not know where to begin.
He also reports that he has not used drugs for the past 12 hours and has been feeling a
little rough but indicates he would like to be drug-free in the next month.
The client’s attitude has shifted from the first session, and his behaviors indicate
that he is preparing to move toward making a change. The counselor recognizes this shift
and works with the client to develop a plan to change and specific treatment options that
align with the preparation. During this stage, the client’s motivation aligns with specific
behavioral approaches and the opportunity for the counselor to use other advanced skills
such as challenging, advanced empathy, and immediacy. During these sessions, working
with the client to establish a support system is critical.
At this point, the counselor would discuss various types of supports and assess the
client’s willingness to explore each. It is important that the counselor be knowledgeable
of different support options and help the client navigate this process. For example,
integrating 12-Step support groups is quite common, yet many counselors may not take
the time to process the client’s apprehensions or fears. Explaining what 12-Step groups
are about, the types of meetings available, expectations, and what a typical meeting
entails can do much to allay client fears. The counselor may suggest to Francis that to

-- 265 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	237
Relapse and Crisis
One of the more critical aspects of substance use treatment is addressing relapse. Relapse
is sometimes inevitable, especially for clients who have a chronic, long-term history of
substance dependence. Despite efforts to address relapse as part of treatment goals, it
continues to be problematic for many clients. Various studies report 40–75% of clients
with SUDs relapse in the 6 months following treatment (Hasin et al., 2013; Kabisa et
al., 2021; Maehira et al., 2013; Moradinazar et al., 2020; Sapkota, 2019). Even those who
maintain abstinence beyond a year struggle. Dennis et al. (2007) found that 36% of
respondents with less than 1 year of abstinence (any substance) were able to maintain
it at year 8. For those with 1–3 years of abstinence, rates improved to 66%, and they
increased to 86% for those with 3 or more years of abstinence. Dennis et al. concluded
that the first 3 years of abstinence yield the highest risk for relapse. Numerous factors
may contribute to this wide variance in relapse rates, such as treatment not addressing
relapse issues, clients not following through with treatment goals, and clients dropping
out of treatment. Those with SUDs and significant symptoms may be at a higher risk for
relapsing when facing crisis situations.
During treatment, counselors need to prepare for relapse by helping clients explore
triggers and learn new cognitive-behavioral strategies. Even in short-term crisis centers,
these triggers can be identified, explored, and documented when clients are referred
for treatment. Examining the client’s high-risk behaviors, self-monitoring activities,
and coping skills (Moss & Cook, 2020) as well as supporting the client in progressive
relaxation techniques can help counselors address relapse concerns (Lewis et al., 2019).
Counselors need to help clients differentiate when use is viewed as a “lapse” or a
“relapse.” A lapse is a single episode of using a substance following a period of abstinence.
The individual often takes responsibility for this lapse and examines the specific experience
or trigger(s) that resulted to build on recovery. A relapse is a return to sustained use of
the same substance or another mood-altering substance following a defined period of
abstinence. Counselors need to be extra vigilant to potential warning signs, including client
rationalization or denial (or using other defense mechanisms); the client not showing up for
treatment; the client not attending 12-Step meetings or working with a sponsor; the client
demonstrating changes in attitudes, behaviors, or thoughts around substance use; and
the client reconnecting with unhealthy people or environments. An established support
system is an essential piece in addressing relapse during a period of crisis. Clients should
be encouraged to seek support from 12-Step groups, be aware of the need to commit more
time to meetings, and work closely with sponsors. Complete Think About It 7.3.
help ease into this process, it may be beneficial to see whether a friend would be willing
to accompany him the first time. Support is an essential step in enhancing motivation
and creating an alternative to relying on drugs as a means of coping.
Discussion Questions
1. What other issues warrant consideration in this case?
2. What other considerations would you integrate into the session 1 dialogue?
3. What counselor responses would you change or revise and why in the session 1
dialogue?

-- 266 of 545 --

238 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Think about relapse. What are your thoughts, attitudes, and beliefs about relapse? What approach would you
take if a client reported a lapse or relapse?
THINK ABOUT IT 7. 3
Harm Reduction
For those with SUDs and symptoms, the main goal of
treatment is to establish and maintain abstinence, while
incorporating strategies for harm reduction. Getting to a
place of abstinence is often a complex and difficult process.
Counselors using various approaches may also find using
harm reduction approaches is a valuable tool within the
treatment protocol. Harm reduction approaches are tools to
help the client reduce the negative consequences associated
with use, regardless of one’s usage pattern. Clients in the
early stages of change are not going to be open to hearing
about severing their relationship with their drug. Harm
reduction can be helpful to find a common ground and
meet clients where they are. Harm reduction is often used
during the early stages of change when clients are expressing
resistance. Harm reduction is often misunderstood, and
some believe it may encourage continued use. In reality, the
ultimate goal of harm reduction is to achieve abstinence and
prevent future crisis situations.
Marlatt et al. (2011) identified five underlying principles of harm reduction:
1. Strive for abstinence while considering alternative options to help minimize harm.
2. View prevention as a way to reduce the negative consequences or harmful outcomes
associated with use but not focusing specifically on usage.
3. Focus approaches on where the client is at that point in their use or addiction and
develop approaches accordingly.
4. View harm reduction as a community-oriented process where action is taken at the
grassroots level to advocate for change specific to the needs within that community.
5. Focus on minimizing harmful consequences and not about judging or criticizing
client behavior.
Using harm reduction approaches helps establish rapport because the counselor
is working with client resistance and not targeting complete abstinence but, rather,
focusing on ways to reduce the harm associated with use. Clients are also more likely
to buy into alternatives to reducing harm that can lead to lowered resistance. Harm
reduction approaches may lead to an increased motivation for change while examining
usage patterns. The dialogue that follows illustrates how a counselor can use harm
reduction with a resistant client.
C ounselor : 	Sam, you mentioned that you like to drink and have no
intention of stopping. Spending time out with your friends at a
bar is an important part of your social life.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 7. 2
In this video, a client shares the
scope of his substance abuse.
The counselor helps the client
begin to identify his goals
and talk about safe recovery,
including the assistance of a
trained physician, as well as
the risks of overconsumption.
Why is it important to offer
psychoeducation with
substance use?

-- 267 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	239
Sam: 	Yes, so it’s not really a good use of your time or mine if these
sessions are going to be about you preaching to me about the
ills of drinking. I don’t have a problem and see nothing wrong
with how I spend my time.
Counselor: 	I appreciate your honesty. My intention is not to preach to you
about your alcohol use. Rather, I was wondering if we might
examine transportation options so that when you are out
drinking you can avoid getting another DUI.
Sam: 	Well, now that I got my license back, I really don’t want to
risk losing it again. I need my license so I can get to work. I’m
willing to discuss this, but I don’t have an alcohol problem.
Counselor: 	Fair enough. Let’s brainstorm some possible transportation
options together for the next time you go out with your
friends. (The counselor is not focusing on alcohol reduction at
this point. The emphasis is on reducing the negative consequences
associated with drinking and driving. By working together, the
counselor is not only establishing the therapeutic alliance and
working to reduce harm but also helping the client feel comfortable
and laying a foundation for later trust and change.)
Support Groups
Support groups serve a valuable function within the treatment process. Clients with
SUDs or significant symptoms often find that as the condition progresses, they become
alienated and isolated from family, friends, and coworkers as they spend more time in
relationships with their substances and those who enable the behavior. When clients
enter treatment, some are often faced with the hard and painful reality that life is empty
and too much damage has been done to repair some relationships.
Another obvious issue is that clients often have poor social and coping skills,
so engaging in social contact can be difficult. A common treatment goal is to learn
to establish social and coping skills, which are critical components in developing
and maintaining abstinence. Support groups play an instrumental role in facilitating
and practicing these skills. The most common and best-known support groups are
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and Narcotics Anonymous (NA), which are both based
on a philosophy that addiction is a disease and individuals are powerless over its effects.
In order to recover, they come to understand that they are powerless over the effects
of the substance and cannot recover under their own volition and must turn their will
over to a higher power.
The underlying mechanism of AA and NA are the 12 Steps, a series of sequential
action steps that help individuals acknowledge their powerlessness over alcohol or other
drugs and move toward accepting responsibility for their recovery. Several common
misconceptions exist with respect to 12-Step meetings, including the belief that AA
and NA are religious based and that these meetings serve as treatment for a person’s
addiction. Counselors encouraging clients to attend 12-Step meetings should educate
clients on the purpose and mission of these meetings, as well as the variety of group
options, meeting formats, and meeting structures.

-- 268 of 545 --

240 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Encouraging support group attendance should align with the client’s stage of
change. Clients may also report feeling discouraged or frustrated after attending a
meeting and should be encouraged to try out different meetings to find out which best
match their needs. Clients may find other groups like SMART (a four-point program that
emphasizes self-reliance and empowerment), Double Trouble (for those dealing with
mental health and SUDs), Al-ANON (for families of those with substance addiction),
Overeaters Anonymous, Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous, and Gamblers Anonymous
as options. Complete Activity 7.2, which focuses on enhancing your knowledge of
12-Step meetings.
Clients unfamiliar with 12-Step meetings are often
reluctant or resistant to attend because they have
misconceptions and fears about what to expect.
Counselors can help allay client concerns by educating
them about these meetings. For this activity, attend an
open meeting of the 12-Step group of your choice.
Note the sequence of events, format, and structure
of the meeting and other pertinent information. How
would you explain these meetings to a client?
ACTIVITY 7.2
Marital and Family Treatment
Marital and family treatment (MFT) has been an integral part of substance use treatment
for decades. During this period, research findings have demonstrated a reciprocal
relationship between problem drinking and family and marital discord (Merkouris
et al., 2022). Stress and problems within the marriage and family can contribute to the
development and continuation of problematic alcohol use. In cases where abstinence has
been achieved, those individuals who continue to deal with unresolved marital and family
conflicts may be at a higher risk for relapse. Merkouris et al. (2022) highlighted client
characteristics that contribute to successful completion of MFT, including being older,
entering counseling following a crisis, being employed, having a history of serious alcohol
problems, having graduated from high school, and living together with one’s family.
Counselor attributes that tend to lead to successful outcomes include addressing
client and family members simultaneously; focusing on alcohol problems first; using
empathetic listening and dealing effectively with intense anger during the initial stages of
counseling; developing a structured, directive approach that includes establishing rules,
boundaries, and consequences; and viewing the change process as long term. Treatment
goals for MFT include eliminating substance use and addressing marital and family
dysfunctional patterns. Initial sessions address negative interactions and feelings, and
later sessions focus on increasing positive interactions and communications, developing
healthy coping skills, implementing behavior change contracts, and integrating problem-
solving skills.
Co-occurring Disorders and Crisis
Substance use disorder is the most common co-occurring disorder with severe mental
illness. SAMHSA (2022) defines a co-occurring disorder as the concomitant occurrence of a
substance use and mental health disorder. Co-occurring disorders were first identified in
the early 1980s, and treatment outcomes often had poor results, as traditional approaches

-- 269 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	241
for treating substance use were integrated into existing mental health services (Drake
et al., 2004). Clients who are diagnosed with a co-occurring disorder may find that crisis
situations not only present challenges to maintain abstinence from substances but also
trigger symptoms associated with a mental health diagnosis. Counselors working with
clients with co-occurring disorders must be competent in understanding each disorder
as well as how to integrate treatment so as to ensure that the disorders are addressed
simultaneously. Unfortunately, integrated treatment options within many communities
may not be widely available (National Alliance of Mental Illness, 2017).
Counselors need to understand how substance use can present symptoms that
mimic mental illness and other medical conditions. As discussed, effective treatment
requires counselors to make an accurate diagnosis, but doing so is often unrealistic in
crisis settings with short-term exposure to the client. Careful consideration should be
given to conducting differential diagnosis, especially if there is evidence that mental
health disorders or medical conditions may be present. Focusing on the evident symptoms
is critical. For example, clients who use alcohol may also present with symptoms of
depression. If alcohol is the reason for the depression yet the counselor fails to connect
this information to a SUD diagnosis, the counselor may incorrectly diagnose the primary
cause as a depressive disorder.
Similar scenarios involve clients who use stimulants such as amphetamines or
cocaine, with symptom presentation manifesting as manic episodes or, depending on
the amount of usage, psychotic episodes. If there is no co-occurring psychotic disorder,
stimulant-induced psychosis will be temporary and subside as the individual comes off
the high. When assessing individuals who present with psychosis, counselors should
be aware that while symptom presentation for certain substances may mimic certain
psychotic disorders, some differences exist. For example, clients with amphetamine-
induced psychosis may present symptoms similar to those of clients with paranoid
schizophrenia. However, clients with amphetamine-induced psychosis tend to present
with visual hallucinations, whereas clients with paranoid schizophrenia tend to report
auditory hallucinations.
More time is needed to make most other mental health diagnoses that are not SUDs.
A client who presents with possible co-occurring mental health disorders while in a crisis
center or with a crisis counselor can be documented as follows: “Client [demonstrates,
presents, or reports] with symptoms consistent with an anxiety-related disorder.” This
documentation allows the next treatment provider to be aware of possible differential
or co-occurring disorders.
Withdrawing from a substance can also create a crisis situation. For clients who
establish tolerance and dependence on alcohol and benzodiazepines, withdrawal can
have potentially life-threatening consequences. Complications from withdrawal of
alcohol can result in serious medical conditions, such as seizures, stroke, tachycardia,
and death. Counselors also need to be aware that overdose or sudden death due to
substance use (e.g., alcohol poisoning, inhalant use, heroin overdose) can also result in
acute crisis situations and trauma for family and friends. Educating clients and their
families about drug actions, interactions, and synergistic effects, as well as symptoms of
withdrawal, is an important treatment consideration.
As we now transition to multicultural perspectives related to substance use,
complete Activity 7.3, which asks you to consider the clients with whom you possibly
feel uncomfortable or fearful.

-- 270 of 545 --

242 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
MULTICULTURAL PERSPECTIVES, SUBSTANCE USE, AND CRISIS
Learning Objective 7.5 Explain multicultural perspectives on substance use in crisis
situations.
One of the many issues a counselor must consider is the significance of culture in shaping
a client’s identity. Culture refers to the values and beliefs that shape a person’s worldview.
Pedersen (1991) emphasized the importance of cultural diversity within the counseling
relationship and the recognition that all counseling is multicultural counseling. Counselors
working with clients with SUDs or significant symptoms and in crisis need to understand
how the culture of substance use influences each client’s worldview. Historically,
treatment has focused on reduction or abstinence goals, often with little consideration
for understanding the role that culture plays in etiology or maintenance of use. Relapse
considerations often emphasize exploring both intrapersonal and interpersonal factors
yet may not fully explore the implications of culture on substance use behavior.
Counselors must be knowledgeable about and implement multicultural counseling
competencies in their practice. Ratts et al. (2015) outlined four multicultural counseling
competencies—counselor self-awareness, client worldview, counseling relationship, and
counseling and advocacy interventions—that each comprise four dimensions—attitudes
and beliefs, knowledge, skills, and actions. Addictions counselors should develop
self-awareness of attitudes and beliefs that may interfere with their work with clients,
including any attitudes or beliefs associated with specific substances and substance
usage patterns or behaviors. For example, if a counselor has specific attitudes or beliefs
regarding clients exchanging sex for drugs, which may be a common practice within
some drug-using subcultures, judgment and biases may spill over into counseling.
Addictions counselors should also be aware of the client’s cultural worldview and
the role substances play as part of that identity. For example, the counselor working with
adolescent boys should understand whether certain substance use coincides with cultural
expectations or rites of passage. Integrating cultural awareness into substance use treatment
better aligns the treatment with the client’s particular cultural worldview and context.
Counselors should also consider the significance of the client’s cultural worldview
during the assessment phase, when evaluating motivation and ambivalence. Motivation for
continued substance use involves a complex and varied set of factors and circumstances that
often manifest as client ambivalence and resistance. In some instances, ambivalence may
be less about mood altering and getting high and more about maintaining a client’s beliefs,
customs, or rituals associated with substance use as it relates to cultural identity or tradition.
Assessing cultural meaning as it relates to substance use provides a broader
understanding of the cultural dynamics that may help explain ambivalence. Counselors
should maintain a cultural focus when working with clients through the five stages of
change. Moreover, triggers for relapse behavior should be examined from a cultural
perspective. Case Study 7.4 explores multicultural considerations when working with a
client who uses substances.
With what types of clients, characteristics of clients,
or specific cultural differences would you feel most
uncomfortable or even fearful? Discuss the reason(s)
for your concern.
ACTIVITY 7.3

-- 271 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	243
CASE STUDY 7.4
Multicultural Considerations with a Substance-Using Client
Van is a 26-year-old multiracial man. Over the past 6 months, his use of alcohol and
marijuana has increased significantly. His usage has coincided with his disclosure to his
parents that he is gay, which conflicts with their beliefs and values. Van thinks he has let
his parents down and feels depressed and isolated. He has been attending counseling for
the past month and has experienced suicidal ideation. The ideation issue was dealt with
in session 1 and determined to be low risk: no plan, specific means, and low motivation
to self-harm. In this session, the discussion focused on understanding substance use and
cultural expectations.
Counselor: 	Van, we’ve been talking the last several sessions about your
coming-out process and your parents’ reaction. You knew tell-
ing your parents that you are gay was going to be hard, but
you didn’t think it was going to be this painful. They are very
angry and disappointed.
Van: 	I didn’t want to disappoint them, but I couldn’t keep living
this lie. They were pressuring me to settle down, get married,
and have a family. They believe I’m making a choice to be gay
as an act of defying them. The weight of their anger and disap-
pointment sits heavy in my heart.
Counselor: 	I’m sensing your pain as we talk and the heavy toll it’s tak-
ing on you. Tell me more about your parents’ cultural beliefs
about being gay.
Van: 	In my culture, being gay has always been viewed as some
sort of defect and has been looked down on. My parents don’t
support this lifestyle and believe it’s sinful. They made it clear
that they would never accept this lifestyle in any of their chil-
dren. I was always fearful because I knew I was gay for a long
time.
Counselor: 	You knew deep down that identifying as gay meant you’d
never be accepted by your parents, so you turned to alcohol
and drugs as a way to numb the pain.
Van: 	Well, it’s a lot easier to drink and get high to take away the
pain than to feel it. Yet I still feel it and sometimes it only mag-
nifies the feelings. Maybe I should just give them what they
want because I see how much it is hurting them and me. It’s so
confusing and I don’t know what to do.
Counselor: 	You’re questioning yourself and thinking giving them what
they want will make everything better. (Van looks dejected, like
he is feeling lost and confused. It is clear he is struggling with his
truth versus family and cultural expectations.)

-- 272 of 545 --

244 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
OVERVIEW OF THE ELEMENTS OF CRISIS INTERVENTION RELATED TO
SUBSTANCE USE
Learning Objective 7.6 Identify elements of crisis intervention related to substance
use, including safety and self-care, diagnostic considerations during a crisis, and
essential substance use–specific crisis intervention skills.
The purpose of this final section is to review several specific elements of crisis intervention
related to substance use, including safety and self-care, diagnostic considerations during
a crisis, and essential substance use–specific crisis intervention skills.
Van: 	Yeah.
Counselor: 	(Using an advanced empathic statement to make the implicit mes-
sage explicit) Van, as we’ve been talking today and over the last
several sessions, might it be that you can’t accept yourself as a
gay man unless your parents can also accept you in that way?
That you have struggled for a long time with the realization
that being true to who you are means alienating your family?
Knowing that you’re disappointing them has led to alcohol
and drugs as a way to numb the pain. Yet the pain never
goes away.
Van: 	(Van sits for several minutes in silence reflecting on the
counselor’s response) I just wanted the pain to stop, but how
can it as long as I keep denying who I am? I can’t control
how they see me, but I can control how I see myself and
how I want to live my life. I’m really tired of feeling like
I have to be something I’m not. I need to find other ways of
dealing with this problem, and I realize using alcohol and
drugs is not solving it.
Counselor: 	You want to be true to yourself and find healthier ways
of dealing with the pain. We can use our time together to
explore what cultural expectations and messages you want
to embrace while finding healthier ways to deal with painful
emotions.
A multiculturally competent counselor examines any value conflicts and biases that
arise as clients tell their stories and addresses those conflicts and biases. The counselor
also attempts to see the presenting problem from the client’s worldview. Strategies for
change will likely require exploration and resolution of conflicting cultural messages and
healthier ways of coping as clients move toward embracing their identity.
Discussion Questions
1. What other strategies for change should be integrated into the work with Van?
2. How should the counselor go about dealing with the substance use concerns?
3. What other cultural issues do you believe should be considered and why?

-- 273 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	245
Meghan Brown
Recently, while sitting at my desk, one of the counselors
on my team came to my office and noted that a
15-year-old girl in her group was “acting out” and
refusing to leave the women’s restroom. I could hear
the young girl yelling at her counselor and to all in
the group: “Leave me alone . . . my life is crap!” The
counselor returned to her group while I stood outside
the restroom, nonchalantly pouring myself a cup of
coffee. After a few moments, the young woman came
out of the restroom, joined me at the kitchenette, and
clearly stated, “No one can understand me . . . no one
is me. I’d like to be a butterfly because butterflies are
free.” I immediately recognized that she was under the
influence.
I asked the young woman to go into an open
group room with me. I told her that she did not have
to talk to me, but she was more than welcome to talk
about anything as I was interested in what had made
her so upset. During the time she spoke, I was able
to conduct an informal mental status exam, explore
her judgment, assess her potential for suicide, and
observe her behaviors to further assess what substance
she had taken. The conversation was very interesting
but frightening due to hearing the girl repeatedly note
that she has no reason to live, she wants to die, she
will overdose to die, she has a history of psychiatric
hospitalizations, she does not like her parents, and
she enjoys her relationship with drugs. She remained
disorganized in her thoughts, glared at me, was
agitated, and demonstrated trouble regulating her
breathing. Every few moments, it appeared as though
she was gasping for air. I observed that her trouble
breathing was not related to her crying but potentially
more a result of her using a system depressant. I quickly
asked her counselor to give the rest of the group a
break and to come and sit with her in the open group
room while I contacted her parents.
The young woman’s parents arrived at the
facility within minutes of our phone call. They were
concerned and immediately defensive about their
daughter’s condition. The mother repeatedly noted
that she does not think her daughter uses alcohol or
other drugs, despite her being involved in chemical
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 7.3
Substance Use and Crisis Issues
Safety and Self-Care
Clients with SUDs or even symptoms can be particularly vulnerable to the effects of
crises. Crises can result in greater risk for increased use of substances or lapse/relapse
behaviors. Those who engage in substance use tend to be at a higher risk for crisis or
trauma while under the influence (Zinzow et al., 2010). When individuals with SUDs or
symptoms experience crisis or trauma, the recovery process and the work of the coun-
selor can be challenging (SAMHSA, 2014). Driessen et al. (2008) reported that individu-
als with SUDs and symptoms who experience trauma tend to have poorer treatment
outcomes than those who lack a history of trauma. Clients who increase substance use
because of crisis or trauma create potentially dangerous outcomes for themselves (e.g.,
overdose, suicide) and the community (e.g., homicide, DUI-related accidents).
During a crisis, the counselor simultaneously addresses a client’s crisis or trauma
response and the potential risk for or actual substance use. Ensuring that the client is
safe is a critical first step in crisis intervention. To effectively address safety concerns
in relation to the client, the counselor establishes rapport, trust, and genuineness and
creates a safe environment. Creating an environment where the client is protected and
out of harm’s way can help deescalate the crisis situation. The counselor assesses the risk
of suicidality or instrumental suicide-related behavior and takes a directive role when
the client in crisis presents danger to self or others. Voices from the Field 7.3 describes
one counselor’s experience with substance use and crisis issues.
(continued)

-- 274 of 545 --

246 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Assessing and placing the client in the appropriate level of care can help reinforce
the importance of safety by aligning the client’s needs with applicable treatment and
interventions. Determining where the client is in the stages of change can be valuable so
the counselor can begin to conceptualize appropriate and applicable interventions. Use
of personal support and empathy can be instrumental throughout the crisis. Employing
harm reduction measures may be valuable for clients who are in the precontemplative
or contemplative stages of change.
Once the crisis situation has deescalated, the counselor can enhance safety in a
variety of ways, including employing grounding exercises to help clients establish some
control when they feel overwhelmed; creating a structured counseling setting with
specific routines or rituals; creating opportunities for safe discussion; identifying triggers
or behaviors that create feelings of not being safe both in the moment and in general; and
developing a safety plan (SAMHSA, 2014).
Counselors also take steps to ensure their own safety when dealing with clients who
are in crisis (see Chapter 2). Counselors need to be aware of the dangers of working with
clients who pose a threat to public safety or who have a history of violence, especially
those who may also be under the influence of a substance (e.g., phencyclidine or other
forms of hallucinogens resulting in distortions in one’s perception of reality). Counselors
should gauge the risk in working with clients who pose safety concerns and can take
steps to minimize the risk by screening high-risk clients, avoiding seeing clients when
there is a lack of physical security available, recognizing warning signs of violence,
avoiding working alone during in-home counseling, and establishing rules prohibiting
weapons in session.
Working with clients who have SUDs and significant symptoms creates unique
challenges for counselors. Counselors who constantly face client resistance, ambivalence,
dependency treatment and testing positive in her most
recent drug screen. I informed the parents that an
ambulance had been called for their daughter due to
her difficulty breathing and her high risk for suicide.
The primary counselor and I worked with the client and
the parents to try to keep everyone calm and provide
the emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and police
officer with the appropriate information.
The young woman repeatedly refused to
cooperate with the EMTs and the police officer. As a
result of her refusal, the police officer told the young
woman’s parents that he could not take her to the
hospital. Her parents, although initially resistant to the
idea that their daughter was under the influence, noted
that they were afraid to take her home. They informed
me that the police officer refused to “pink slip” their
daughter and was going to send her home with them.
It was at that point that I reminded the police officer
what I had already told the EMTs, that this young
woman was clearly under the influence, stated she had
no reason to live, and had the means to overdose if she
wanted to die. It was only then that the officer agreed
to mandate the young woman be taken to the hospital
for a 72-hour hold.
The entire length of this event was a total of
45 minutes, but looking back on it all, it seemed more
like 3 hours. The situation required legal knowledge,
sound ethics, and clinical judgment. I needed to be
able to recognize the symptoms of a client under the
influence of alcohol and/or other drugs, the risk factors
and signs of suicide, and how to keep a client calm
in a crisis situation to get the information needed to
obtain appropriate care for the client. Had I not spent
some time with the client to hear the words “I want to
die” and understand the means she had to kill herself,
I would not have been able to gain the support of law
enforcement to have the young woman mandated to
receive care in the emergency department.

-- 275 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	247
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 7. 3
In this video, a counselor
offers psychoeducation about
drinking to the client. How can
psychoeducation be essential
in a crisis session? When can
it be harmful?
motivational concerns, and relapse issues may question their effectiveness in facilitating
change. Working with this population requires counselors to integrate self-care
techniques into their daily routine to minimize the potential for burnout. Self-care
techniques that can be effective when working with clients with SUDs or significant
symptoms include engaging in interests and hobbies; having a strong support network;
establishing work boundaries; attending to one’s physical, mental, and spiritual
needs; learning effective time management; engaging in continued professional
development and training; attending counseling to address any maladaptive patterns
or interpersonal issues that hinder emotional or psychological well-being; and seeking
out supervision.
Diagnostic Considerations During a Crisis
A crisis situation can exacerbate and confound the diagnostic process, especially if the
client has co-occurring issues. The first consideration is to differentiate among symptoms
that are due to the acute crisis situation and symptoms that present as part of the
pathology. Differentiating crisis symptom presentations from pathological symptoms
helps counselors explain to clients that their experiences are normal by associating those
symptoms with the crisis, which can help minimize the client’s stress. Explaining to
clients how crisis situations can manifest physically and psychologically helps clients
better understand the symptom presentation. Furthermore, explaining to clients how
crisis situations can magnify affective states and trigger increased substance use may
help normalize their experience.
As mentioned, the purpose of diagnosis is to determine an appropriate course
of treatment. Differentiating between crisis symptoms and other presenting mental
health and substance abuse symptoms enables the counselor to properly assess and
triage the situation while also identifying appropriate interventions and normalizing
the client’s experience. Caution is warranted when providing a mental health diagnosis
that may require more information than can be obtained in an assessment during crisis
intervention.
Essential Substance Use–Specific Crisis Intervention Skills
The intervention skills used for clients with SUDs and symptoms tend to
also apply when these clients experience crises. Use of attending behaviors
and active listening skills is important in crisis situations. Creating warmth,
expressing genuineness, and creating an atmosphere of trust, safety, and
acceptance not only target the motivational factors inherent with treating
SUDs and symptoms but also help clients in crisis deescalate from the acute
stressor and feel more at ease and comfortable with the counselor. Using a
directive approach, conducted in a compassionate and empathic manner,
allows for clarification and understanding of the crisis threat so that appro-
priate courses of action can be taken.
Table 7.1 provides a number of online and print resources that will
expand your knowledge of the interplay between crises and substance
abuse.

-- 276 of 545 --

248 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUMMARY
Substance use has been an integral part of
the human experience and cultural identity
throughout time. The reasons that people
use drugs vary; however, specific biological,
psychological, and sociological circumstances
are key factors. Unfortunately, as the data reveal,
only a fraction of those needing substance use
treatment actually receive care. Failing to address
SUD issues or significant symptoms can be
particularly problematic for clients who are also
dealing with crisis issues. Numerous models
have been developed in an attempt to explain the
complex phenomenon of addiction. Still, there
is no consensus on the causality of addiction.
Counselors having knowledge of different models
and theories of addiction are better equipped to
address the array of etiological considerations.
To understand and treat clients with
SUDs or significant symptoms, especially those
who are dealing with a crisis, counselors must
be competent in all aspects of assessment and
diagnosis. Proper assessment and diagnosis
are instrumental in establishing an effective
treatment protocol and resources for the
client. Numerous screening and assessment
instruments exist, with the clinical interview
being one of the most commonly used assessment
tools. Treatment must consider both the level
of motivation and the nature and severity of
the crisis situation. Treatment considerations,
especially for clients facing crisis situations, need
to factor in admission and placement decisions
as outlined by ASAM’s level of care criteria.
Understanding the stages of change within
the crisis context can assist the counselor in
developing both an effective crisis response and
a quality therapeutic alliance once the crisis is
managed. The implementation of crisis models
helps the client return to a precrisis level of
functioning and is the first step in the treatment
process, especially when a client’s crisis response
involves an increased use of substances or a relapse.
Furthermore, counselors should think
about how to structure subsequent sessions
based on response to the initial crisis session.
Establishing a strong therapeutic working
alliance between counselor and client is
critical throughout the crisis period. Other
Online Resources
Harm Reduction Coalition: https://harmreduction.org
National Alliance on Mental Illness: https://www.nami.org/Home
ProjectKnow: https://projectknow.com
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: https://www.samhsa.gov
Print Resources
American Society of Addiction Medicine. (2013). The ASAM criteria: Treatment criteria for
addictive, substance-related, and co-occurring conditions (3rd ed.). Author.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: Helping people change (3rd ed.).
Guilford Press.
Publishers Group. (2022). Street drugs: A drug identification guide 2022. Author.
Rudd, M. D. (2006). The assessment and management of suicidality. Professional Resource Press.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2022). 2021 National Survey on
Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) Methodological Resource Book, Section 2: Sample Design
Report. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2021-nsduh-sample-design-report
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014). Trauma-informed care
in behavioral health services (Treatment Improvement Protocol [TIP] Series 57, HHS
Publication No. [SMA] 13-4801). Author.
TABLE 7.1 Resources on Substance Use and Crisis

-- 277 of 545 --

Chapter 7 • Understanding and Treating Substance Use Disorders with Clients in Crisis 	249
considerations include assessing client and
counselor safety, client support, risk (on a
continued basis), how substance use factors
into risk behavior, specific plans once the crisis
subsides, and motivation to change.
Also, counselors must understand that the
risk of relapse is high when dealing with SUDs
or symptoms and can become magnified when
clients are in crisis. Helping clients identify and
address triggers is a key part of treatment, as is
helping clients understand the difficulty and
inherent challenges and obstacles in maintaining
abstinence in both the short and long term.
Other matters that must be considered
during counseling include marriage and
family concerns, co-occurring disorders, the
integration of a harm reduction philosophy
and approach into the overall treatment model,
and the involvement of support systems such
as 12-Step groups. Throughout the treatment
process, counselors must apply multicultural
counseling competencies to ensure that the
counselor’s cultural attitudes, values, and biases
do not interfere with care; the client’s worldview
is recognized; and culturally appropriate
intervention strategies are implemented.
This chapter highlights a number of
considerations when working with clients
with co-occurring crisis and substance use
issues. Substance use can not only lead to crisis
situations but also exacerbate them, so counselors
need to navigate crisis situations and substance
use issues simultaneously. Effectively assessing
client motivation to change means counselors
understand 	applicable 	and 	appropriate
strategies, skills, and approaches that align with
the client’s current state of change. Furthermore,
assessing the stage of change and motivation
can have important implications once the crisis
has been addressed, especially if substance use
precipitated the crisis event. Finally, counselors
who can create a therapeutic environment based
on genuineness, trust, acceptance, and warmth
go a long way toward establishing therapeutic
rapport while building a foundation that
enhances short- and long-term client change.

-- 278 of 545 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 279 of 545 --

251
PREVIEW
Intimate partner violence (IPV) and domestic violence (DV) are major public health
concerns, and it is imperative that counselors recognize and respond to IPV/DV victims
competently. This chapter provides an overview of the facts and figures associated with
IPV/DV, discusses the cycle of violence commonly experienced in abusive relationships,
and explores various perspectives on reasons why individuals stay in relationships
with abusive partners. Common crisis issues experienced by IPV/DV victims, such as
dealing with physical injury, establishing immediate safety, and reporting IPV/DV to
the police, are also highlighted. In addition, this chapter explores special considerations
regarding IPV/DV in LGBTQ+ relationships; relationships characterized by female-to-
male violence; abusive relationships in racial-ethnic groups and older adult populations;
and abusive dating relationships among adolescents and young adults. Guidelines for
counselors on conducting IPV/DV assessments, responding to IPV/DV disclosure,
planning for safety or harm reduction, and addressing the emotional impact of IPV/
DV are provided. Finally, the goals, theories, and challenges associated with batterer
intervention programs are discussed.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
8.1 Define and apply the terms intimate partner violence and domestic violence.
8.2 Integrate the cycle of violence into assessment and intervention of individuals in
violent relationships.
8.3 Describe how several helpful models can be applied to crisis work in IPV/DV.
8.4 Understand the common crisis issues of individuals in violent relationships.
8.5 Consider and explore special populations in IPV/DV relationships and their
needs.
8.6 Describe how to intervene with IPV/DV victims.
8.7 Describe how COVID-19 has impacted persons in IPV/DV relationships.
8.8 Explain effective IPV/DV perpetrator identification and treatment.
8 Intimate Partner Violence and
Domestic Violence
Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry and Bradley Erford*
C H A P T E R
*We thank Amy L. McLeod and John Muldoon for their outstanding contributions to previous editions of this
chapter.

-- 280 of 545 --

252 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
OVERVIEW OF INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE AND DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE
Learning Objective 8.1 Define and apply the terms intimate partner violence and
domestic violence.
The terms intimate partner violence (IPV) and domestic violence (DV) have often been used
interchangeably, albeit with some error. IPV involves physical, sexual, and emotional
aggression, violence, or stalking by a current or former intimate partner (Patra et al.,
2018). IPV is an inclusive term that is used to describe violence among opposite- or
same-sex couples currently or formerly in a relationship. IPV is only one aspect of DV
and used by itself is not inclusive of other individuals who are in violent relationships.
Additionally, although increasingly viewed as a subset of DV, intimate
partner violence is not the legal term used in federal or state statutes or
regulations that outline mandated reporting laws for health care providers
or laws that govern law enforcement practices when intervening in DV
situations. For this reason, the legal term domestic violence is also referred
to throughout the chapter. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2019) defines
domestic violence as “violence between spouses, or spousal abuse but can
also include cohabitants and non-married intimate partners.” States may
further narrow this definition, and counselors should be aware of the
laws that govern their practice with DV victims and perpetrators in their
state. Law enforcement intervention and charges will vary depending on
the state’s definition of DV and assault or whether the person in the DV
relationship aligns with the definition of DV or assault.
It can be difficult for the counselor-in-training to use the legal terms for DV
victims, rather than survivors, but during crisis intervention it is necessary to view
clients as inhabiting the legal “victim” identity to help move them forward to inhabit
the “survivor” identity. Case Study 8.1 focuses on an IPV/DV incident.
CASE STUDY 8.1
Physical and Emotional Abuse
For days, Casey had taken extra precautions to make sure that nothing upset Jamie. Casey
kept the house extra clean, had Jamie’s favorite meals prepared for dinner every night,
and tried to seem cheerful and upbeat. Still, Casey could not shake the uneasy feeling
that trouble was brewing with Jamie. It was 8:00, and Jamie still was not home from
work. Casey was concerned. When Jamie walked in the door, Casey smelled whiskey.
“Where have you been? I was so worried!” Casey exclaimed.
Jamie’s eyes narrowed. In a low, angry voice, Jamie growled, “I’ll go where I damn
well please,” and knocked Casey into the wall. Casey immediately apologized to Jamie,
but it was too late.
“You constantly nag me,” Jamie yelled and hit Casey hard across the face. Casey
fell to the ground and sobbed.
Jamie walked into the kitchen and said, “I’m hungry.”
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 8.1
This PSA video offers a short
overview of IPV, types of
abuse, populations at risk,
and resources available to IPV
victims. What unique issues are
experienced by special popula-
tions? What are types of vio-
lence in IPV relationships?
https://www.youtube.com/watch
?app=desktop&v=l7uVpiTEI_o
Watch from 00:00 to 02:51

-- 281 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	253
Statistics regarding DV vary due to the range of definitions and data collection
methods used by researchers. Importantly, most instances of DV are never reported,
so the available facts and figures are considerable underestimates of its occurrence.
Regardless of which statistical estimates are consulted, DV is a major public health
concern. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2021) reported that DV accounted for about 20%
of all violent victimizations. As by their definition in this report, DV incidents included
rape, sexual assault, robbery, and degrees of assaults committed by immediate family
members, intimate partners, or other relatives. Within this data, IPV accounted for about
12% of all violent victimizations. Interestingly, the Bureau of Justice Statistics reported
a decline in DV and IPV reports in 2019–2020 of approximately 3.7 to 2.0 per capita
(1000 persons), respectively, during the pandemic, while the unreported rate was stable
at 2.9 and 2.8 per capita, respectively.
CYCLE OF VIOLENCE THEORY
Learning Objective 8.2 Integrate the cycle of violence into assessment and
intervention of individuals in violent relationships.
It can be helpful to understand the cycle of violence most often experienced by a person
in a violent relationship to understand the reasons many will remain in the relationship
as well as for psychoeducational purposes. Having a framework like this can be helpful
in crisis intervention. The cycle of violence theory was originally developed by Walker
(1980), a psychologist who based her theory on interviews with hundreds of women who
Not wanting to make matters worse, Casey got up, walked into the kitchen, and
started to warm up dinner. Casey’s mind was racing, I can’t believe this is happening again.
Jamie promised never again after the last time. Jamie promised!
Discussion Questions
Take out a piece of paper and answer the following questions as quickly as possible:
1. With what gender do you think Casey identifies?
2. With what gender do you think Jamie identifies?
3. What do Casey and Jamie look like?
4. What is Casey’s racial-ethnic background?
5. What is Jamie’s racial-ethnic background?
6. Did you assume Casey and Jamie self-identify as heterosexual, gay, lesbian,
bisexual? Men, women, or gender fluid?
7. Are they married?
8. Does either Casey or Jamie have a disability?
9. Are Casey and Jamie religious?
10. What does Jamie do for a living?
11. What does Casey do for a living?
12. Are Casey and Jamie upper, middle, or lower socioeconomic status?
13. Whom do you blame for the violence in this relationship?
14. How do your answers to these questions reflect your biases about IPV/DV?
15. How may this influence your work with clients?

-- 282 of 545 --

254 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
experienced DV. Walker noted that the violence described by women in her research
typically followed a three-phase pattern: (1) tension-building, (2) the explosion or
acute battering incident, and (3) the honeymoon phase of kindness and contrite, loving
behavior (see Figure 8.1). Each phase varied in time and intensity during each cycle of
violence for the same couple and between different couples.
Phase 1: Tension-Building
Phase 1, the tension-building phase of the cycle of violence, is characterized by mounting
pressure and strain in the relationship. The abused partner “walks on eggshells” around
the abusive partner, becoming compliant, nurturing, or whatever it takes to keep the
abusive partner’s anger from escalating. This phase also involves minor battering
incidents (Walker, 1980)—from insults and threats to actions such as throwing a dinner
on the floor and blaming the abused partner for overcooking the food. During the
tension-building phase, the abused partner may cope with the minor battering incidents
by denying anger about the incident, rationalizing the abuse to self (e.g., thinking they
did something to deserve this), or making excuses for the abuser. Following each minor
battering incident, the tension and stress in the relationship build again.
Phase 2: The Acute Battering Incident
Phase 2 of the cycle of violence occurs when tensions build to the point of explosion
in an acute battering incident that is characterized by unpredictability, uncontrollable
rage, brutality, and seriously damaging consequences (Walker, 1980). The acute battering
incident is typically triggered by an external event (e.g., stress at work) or the abusive
partner’s internal state and can last for hours or even days. During an acute battering
incident, victims have reported dissociative experiences, such as feeling as though they
are outside their own bodies and watching themselves being thrown into a wall, choked,
or raped. Following an acute battering incident, many victims enter a state of shock and
disbelief. Both partners may make attempts to rationalize the violence.
Phase 3: The Honeymoon Phase
Phase 3 in the cycle of violence is characterized by loving and repentant behavior from
the abusive partner. The abuser may shower the IPV/DV victim with gifts, beg for
FIGURE 8.1 The cycle of violence.
Phase One:
Tension-Building
Phase Three:
Honeymoon Phase
Phase Two: Acute
Battering Incident

-- 283 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	255
forgiveness, and promise never to be violent again. During the honeymoon phase, the
abusive partner may also use guilt to attempt to persuade the victim into staying in the
relationship, using statements such as “I would be lost without you” and “Don’t make
our kids grow up without me in their lives.” The honeymoon phase results in the IPV/DV
victim feeling needed and loved, leading to a renewed commitment to the relationship.
The length of the contrite, loving phase varies, although it is typically shorter than
the tension-building phase and longer than the acute battering incident (Walker, 1980).
After repeated cycles of violence, the honeymoon phase may shorten or eventually be
eliminated. The IPV/DV victim who has experienced numerous cycles of violence may
experience increased shame and humiliation during the honeymoon phase due to the
realization that the abuse will almost certainly reoccur, despite the batterer’s promises,
which the IPV/DV client now recognizes as empty.
Educating IPV/DV clients about the cycle of violence can help in naming experiences
as abusive. For example, some clients may not define their relationships as abusive
because violence does not occur frequently. Other clients may see the batterer’s apologies
and gifts as a unique indication of how special their relationship is until learning that the
honeymoon phase is typical during a cycle of violence (McLeod et al., 2010).
HELPFUL MODELS FOR UNDERSTANDING IPV/DV
Learning Objective 8.3 Describe how several helpful models can be applied to crisis
work in IPV/DV.
The Duluth model was developed in 1984 by a group of IPV/DV activists and is based on
the actual experiences of female IPV/DV survivors. The central component of the Duluth
model is the Power and Control Wheel (see https://www.theduluthmodel.org/wheels/), a
visual representation of the most experienced abusive tactics, including economic abuse;
using male privilege; using children; minimizing, denying, and blaming; isolation;
emotional abuse; intimidation; coercion and threats; and physical and sexual violence
(Domestic Abuse Intervention Programs, 2013). The Power and Control Wheel can be
used to help female IPV/DV victims normalize and understand their experiences. It
can also assist abusive partners in identifying violent behaviors as part of a batterer
intervention program.
Another component of the Duluth model is the Equality Wheel (see https://
www.theduluthmodel.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Equality.pdf), which is a visual
representation of the changes needed to move from an abusive relationship to a
nonviolent relationship.
Although changes in the relationship are the focus of long-term counseling,
counselors seeing clients in crisis should be aware of various resources in the community
for referral purposes for clients experiencing IPV/DV, which may help normalize a
victim’s experiences while in and after the crisis.
The concept of learned helplessness originates from the classic research of Seligman
(1992), in which dogs were locked in a cage and administered random electric shocks.
The dogs quickly learned that none of their responses and attempts to escape were
successful in eliminating the unwanted stimulus, and they therefore submitted passively
to the shocks. Later the cages were opened, providing the dogs with an opportunity to
escape, yet the dogs did not attempt to do so. In other words, the dogs had learned to

-- 284 of 545 --

256 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
believe they were not in control of their situation, so even when they had the opportunity
to control the outcome (i.e., avoid shocks by leaving the cage), the dogs responded with
learned helplessness.
Learned helplessness theory has been used to explain why IPV/DV victims remain
in abusive relationships. During the tension-building phase of the cycle of violence, the
abused partner behaves in an accommodating manner to avoid escalating the abusive
partner’s anger. Eventually, the tension builds to an explosive battering incident, and the
victim learns that attempts to control the situation were unsuccessful. An IPV/DV client
may reach out for help from family, friends, or the police, yet the battering continues.
Again, the victim receives the message that efforts to control the situation are ineffective.
Repeated incidents of uncontrollable violence diminish the victim’s motivation to
respond, leading to passivity and learned helplessness (Walker, 1980).
Opponents of the application of learned helplessness theory to IPV/DV victims
argue that the theory pathologizes the victim, places the responsibility for ending abuse
on the victim while ignoring the larger sociocultural context, and implies that leaving
the relationship ensures the victim’s safety (Finn, 2020).
Ecological theory offers an alternative explanation for why the IPV/DV victim stays
in a relationship with an abusive partner. According to ecological theory, the sociocultural
system (the ideological and institutional patterns of a culture), the institutional–
organizational system (the agencies, policies, programs, and professional groups), the
interpersonal system (the victim’s direct interactions with the abusive partner, children,
family, and friends), and the individual system (the victim’s perceptions, meanings, and
actions) all play roles in the victim’s decision (Di Napoli et al., 2019).
The contextual model of family stress proposed by Rolling and Brosi (2010)
provides a more comprehensive view of IPV/DV than learned helplessness theory. This
model considers the interaction of the stressor event, available resources, an individual’s
perception of IPV/DV, the external family context (culture, history, economy,
development, and heredity), and the internal family context (family boundaries and
rules, understanding of a stressor event, and family values, beliefs, and assumptions).
This model allows for in-depth understanding of the victim’s experiences as well as for
intervention in multiple domains.
Constructivist theorists argue that the decision to stay with an abusive partner
could result from a rational decision-making process based on weighing the costs and
benefits of ending the relationship. The victim who decides to stay in the relationship,
instead of being viewed as powerless and helpless, is viewed as choosing to confront
violence from within the relationship. In addition, researchers have rejected the notion
that the victim who stays in the relationship is helpless and have focused on the inner
resources (e.g., resilience, sense of humor, hope, spirituality) and survival strategies of
the IPV/DV victim who chooses to stay with an abusive partner (McLeod et al., 2010;
Watlington & Murphy, 2006).
Counselors are advised to consider how their interventions with victims and per-
petrators of IPV/DV may be influenced by their beliefs about IPV/DV and why victims
stay in abusive relationships. Since IPV/DV impacts so many individuals and families,
counselors must be aware of their beliefs and judgments about perpetrators and victims,
since this is a population most likely to be served in a crisis setting. How a counselor
views victims and perpetrators in crisis may affect intervention. Before moving on to
the next section, complete Activity 8.1, which looks at how the media depicts IPV/DV.

-- 285 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	257
COMMON CRISIS ISSUES
Learning Objective 8.4 Understand the common crisis issues of individuals in violent
relationships.
The intense emotional and physical stress caused by IPV/DV can often exceed the
perceived coping resources of the abused partner. As a counselor responding to an IPV/
DV crisis, the overarching goal is the safety of the victims, regardless of whether they
decide to stay in or leave the violent relationships. Simultaneously, and because in most
instances the decision to stay in or leave a violent relationship is in the hands of the victim,
counselors should also work to empower clients to solve problems effectively based on
the client’s unique situation and available resources. Counselors should conduct a triage
assessment to determine which aspects of the situation require immediate intervention.
In addition, crisis counselors should work with IPV/DV clients in crisis to increase
perceived options, mobilize resources, and identify sources of continued support after
the crisis is stabilized (Greenstone & Leviton, 2011). Common crisis issues that emerge
when working with IPV/DV clients include attending to physical injury, establishing
immediate safety, and deciding whether to report IPV/DV to the police.
Attending to Physical Injury
Some IPV/DV victims receive treatment in emergency departments and doctors’ offices
for injuries inflicted by an intimate partner; yet health care providers often fail to assess
the cause of the injuries they treat (Ghandour et al., 2015). Just as it is imperative for
health care providers to screen for IPV/DV, it is also essential that counselors ask about
physical injuries and facilitate medical care when necessary. Physical injury resulting
from IPV/DV can range from scrapes and bruises to permanent disfigurement, disability,
and death. Emergency medical treatment may be required before any further counseling
intervention can occur; therefore, counselors should be prepared to refer clients and
arrange transportation to appropriate medical facilities. They should also be aware of
free and low-cost medical resources since victims may not have health insurance. In
addition, since IPV/DV can take the form of sexual assault and rape, counselors should
be aware of medical facilities that specialize in rape. Advising the client of what to expect
during use of a rape kit can help reduce anxiety and allow the client to make an informed
decision about consenting to the procedure.
Watch and critique a movie that depicts IPV/DV. You
may choose a movie from the following list or select a
movie of your choice, as long as IPV/DV is a central issue
in the film. Movies depicting IPV/DV include A Streetcar
Named Desire (1951), Petulia (1968), The Burning Bed
(1984), Crimes of the Heart (1986), Sleeping with the
Enemy (1991), What’s Love Got to Do with It (1993),
Enough (2002), Provoked (2006), The Living (2014),
Private Violence (2014), and Die Ungehorsame (2015).
How does the movie you chose portray the abusive
partner and the IPV/DV victim? Is the cycle of violence
evident in the film? What stereotypes or myths are
perpetuated by the film? What messages does it
send about staying in an abusive relationship? What
positive or awareness-raising messages about IPV/DV,
if any, are present in the film? What was your reaction
to watching the movie from a personal perspective?
What was your reaction to watching the movie from
a counseling perspective? Would you be able to work
with either the perpetrator or victim in crisis?
ACTIVITY 8.1

-- 286 of 545 --

258 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
When a referral to a medical facility is necessary, crisis counselors should ensure
continuity of care by communicating that they are not abandoning the client, checking
to make sure that the client arrives at the medical facility safely, and advising the client
that counseling is available for continued support once medical needs are addressed.
Establishing Immediate Safety
During an IPV/DV crisis, assessing and planning for physical safety or preventing
further harm to the client is paramount. Time is of the essence, and crisis counselors must
gain thorough and accurate information quickly by conducting a detailed assessment of
the situation, including violence severity, available resources, and barriers to accessing
resources and treatment (Ghandour et al., 2015). The counselor must also directly assess
the client for suicide and homicide risk and be prepared to take protective measures,
if needed (e.g., to act on the duty to warn, to arrange for involuntary psychiatric
hospitalization of the victim or perpetrator in severe cases).
In some situations, the client may not be able to return home safely, so the counselor
must arrange for emergency shelter. In the event a client decides to return home, a harm
reduction plan should be developed. In both scenarios determining others who may be
affected (e.g., children, other household members, supporters, and pets) is important in
crisis work. A detailed description of how to construct a safety plan or harm reduction
plan is provided later in the chapter.
Reporting Intimate Partner Violence to the Police
The process for reporting an IPV/DV incident to the police is complex and differs
from state to state. States outline who is a mandated reporter, what injuries require
reporting, and what exceptions are outlined in the law. A counselor should be aware
of the mandated state reporting law for DV. Some states have mandatory reporting
laws but require specified injuries and wounds (e.g., gunshot, stabbing) to mandate
the reporting of DV (Futures without Violence, 2022). Other states require consent of the
victim to report if specified injuries are not present.
Mandated reporting laws for IPV/DV are different from the mandated reporting
laws for suspected child, elder, or other vulnerable persons abuse. However, if a victim of
DV discloses there is also abuse to a child, elder, or vulnerable adult, then the mandated
reporting under these separate suspected abuse situations must be made in compliance
with state mandates—no exceptions. When a counselor must act as a mandated reporter
of child, elder, or vulnerable person, the IPV/DV victim may perceive this reporting
as more victimization. To minimize the victim’s loss of power, counselors should pay
special attention to the informed-consent process regarding limits of confidentiality and
encourage the IPV/DV client to report the abuse.
The majority of IPV/DV incidents are not reported to the police. A victim may
choose not to contact the police due to the belief that the abuse was not serious enough
to require police intervention, that the police will not be helpful, or that if the police
are called, the relationship with the abusive partner will need to end. In addition, a
victim may fear the consequences of contacting the police, such as the loss of housing or
the involvement of child protective services. At the same time, many victims want the
violence to stop but do not want to leave the relationship in the hopes that the situation
will get better.

-- 287 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	259
For members of racial-ethnic or other marginalized groups (e.g., LGBTQ+,
immigrants), the decision to call the police may be further complicated by other factors
discussed in more detail later in this chapter. Individuals in DV relationships may fear
that calling the police will increase the risk for further harm from their abusers or may
impact immigration status. Unless suicidality, homicidality, specific injuries sustained
(see previous discussion), or suspicion of child, elder, or vulnerable persons abuse is
disclosed, counselors are not required to report IPV/DV incidents and should support
the choice the client makes regarding police notification (Augustyn & Willyard, 2022;
Becker & Bachman, 2020). The counselor should discuss the pros and cons of police
intervention with the client and then respect the client’s decision. Counselors must
understand the laws regarding DV to help clients determine what is realistic based on
the laws that govern law enforcement officers’ actions. State laws differ regarding police
intervention, arrest policies, and charges. Complete Activity 8.2 to assess your beliefs
about IPV/DV. Then complete Think About It 8.1.
Identifying Domestic Violence Acts
Review this list of intentional acts. Circle the acts you would consider abusive. Add more acts as appropriate.
Scratching 	Pulling hair 	Disrupting sleep
Using physical restraint 	Biting 	Slapping
Throwing objects 	Burning with cigarette 	Humiliating in front of others
Pushing 	Grabbing 	Forcing sex
Calling names 	Withholding sex 	Committing adultery
Threatening to leave 	Threatening to kill self 	Threatening to kill others
Poisoning 	Kicking 	Choking
Destroying property 	Using jealousy 	Isolating from others
Killing partner 	Controlling a schedule 	Punishing for no sex
Deciding how a partner dresses 	Disrupting meals 	Wounding with a knife
Review the list. Would your choices be different if you were considering IPV/DV among racial-ethnic
minorities? Toward a male? Toward someone from a more religious background? Toward someone with a
disability? Toward someone identifying as LGBTQ+? Discuss how the behaviors you consider abusive may depend
on the cultural makeup of the client.
Note: The purpose of this activity is not to justify any acts of DV in relation to sex, racial-ethnic, or other marginalized
populations or situations, but rather to evaluate your own biases that may influence your work with persons in DV
relationships.
ACTIVITY 8.2
Think about the role of law enforcement in IPV/
DV incidents. Some states have laws that require or
strongly recommend arrest when police respond to
an IPV/DV incident. What are the pros and cons of
mandatory arrest? Do you think mandatory arrest laws
are beneficial to IPV/DV victims? Explain.
THINK ABOUT IT 8.1

-- 288 of 545 --

260 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Learning Objective 8.5 Consider and explore special populations in IPV/DV
relationships and their needs.
Culture is important to consider when understanding and treating clients experiencing
IPV/DV. Culture guides how clients define, view, experience, and respond to IPV/DV.
Counselors responding to IPV/DV should attend to cultural dimensions such as sex,
race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (SES), level of acculturation, language, religiosity,
sexual orientation, ability status, and age. With the increased acknowledgment that
IPV/DV is a global problem, the social and cultural contexts of IPV/DV are gaining
much-needed attention. Unfortunately, the impact of culture on the IPV/DV experience,
including the reporting of IPV/DV and help-seeking behaviors, has been largely ignored
in the counseling literature. The sections that follow highlight some of the social and
cultural considerations relevant to the conceptualization, prevalence, and presentation
of IPV/DV, including racial-ethnic and marginalized concerns and the intersection of
sex, social class, immigration status, and religiosity.
Race and Ethnicity
Race and ethnicity are important considerations in understanding and intervening
in IPV/DV. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2021c) reported
that 54% of Black women and 44% of multiracial, non-Hispanic women experienced
sexual assault, IPV, or stalking in their lifetime, which is a higher proportion than
White, non-Hispanic women (35%). Asian or Pacific Islander women were less likely to
experience IPV/DV over their lifetime compared to White (non-Hispanic) women. This
report also estimates Alaskan Native men and Black, non-Hispanic men experienced
rape, physical violence, or stalking by an intimate partner more frequently than White,
non-Hispanic men.
Some studies show lifetime rates for physical and/or sexual abuse as high as
41–60%, depending on the amount of time subgroups have resided in the United States
(Yoshihama et al., 2015). Obviously, the prevalence of IPV/DV can differ depending on
the study; hence, reported data may not accurately indicate actual prevalence. Differences
may occur for several reasons:
1. Some rates may be underreported due to cultural values or social factors.
2. There are flaws in reporting as individuals get “lumped” into larger racial-ethnic
groups, ignoring great variation within each racial-ethnic group.
3. Information is self-report data obtained from samples of convenience, which vary
significantly depending on the setting in which they are obtained.
4. Many studies gather IPV/DV data from health departments and clinics that serve
lower-SES victims of IPV/DV; whereas higher-SES groups may be financially
able to obtain counseling services through private practices and therefore may be
underreported in many studies.
IPV/DV reporting trends may be associated with community services sought by
different racial-ethnic groups. For example, Black and Hispanic female IPV/DV victims
were two to three times more likely than White female victims to report IPV/DV to the

-- 289 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	261
police in one study (Lipsky et al., 2009). Unfortunately, IPV/DV-related resources may
be unavailable in certain lower-SES communities of color, affecting reporting and help-
seeking trends (Hien & Ruglass, 2009).
Various forms of oppression such as racism, heterosexism, classism, and ableism
may intersect to further prohibit a sense of safety to report. Alternatively, the degree of
cultural solidarity may perpetuate IPV/DV. Strong cultural ties, particularly in smaller
communities, may isolate women from outside resources, promote greater acceptance
of gender inequities, and result in a stronger tradition of family secrecy.
Regardless of the differences in IPV/DV prevalence rates by race and ethnicity,
there seem to be similar reasons for remaining in violent relationships. However, there
are cultural subtleties in how IPV/DV is recognized and addressed that affect reporting
trends across racial-ethnic groups. The interrelated factors include patriarchal family
structure, SES, immigrant status, and religious and spiritual beliefs.
Socioeconomic Status
The role of lower SES may be connected to higher rates of IPV/DV incidents (National
Center for Victims of Crime, 2017). Poverty is inextricably linked to limited resources,
substance use, social isolation, pregnancy, and unemployment. These variables
collectively create unhealthy environments that both initiate and perpetuate IPV/
DV. Some argue that it may be income or social inequality rather than poverty that is
associated with IPV/DV. That is, the wider the gap between the “haves” and “have-nots,”
the greater the violence victimization of those with lower SES. Social disorganization
theorists argue that concentrated poverty weakens informal community resources
and leads to a lowered sense of self-efficacy in the community for responding to IPV/
DV. Others argue IPV/DV transcend SES and occur at similar rates across SES groups.
However, middle- or upper-SES groups often have the resources to seek more formal
counseling, services, or supports that are not often used by reporting agencies. Much of
the statistics of IPV/DV originate from police reports and health care clinics, which may
be used less often by middle- to upper-SES groups.
Immigrant Status
IPV/DV is more common among immigrants and refugees than longer-term U.S. citizens
overall, as migration from one country to another often creates isolation that facilitates
IPV/DV situations. On a global level, 38% of all murders against women are at the hands
of intimate partners and approximately 30% of the world’s women have been physically
assaulted by a partner (World Health Organization [WHO], 2021b). In the United States,
for immigrant women there is an overall decrease in the use of social and health care
services. Language barriers often prevent women in abusive relationships from seeking
assistance. Lack of knowledge of available resources, distrust of government agencies,
and lack of knowledge of the U.S. legal system may also be barriers to help-seeking
for immigrant women who experience IPV/DV. Undocumented immigrant victims of
IPV/DV may be more hesitant to report IPV/DV due to concerns with deportation.
With many immigrant and refugee women entering the United States each year, it is
imperative that counselors acknowledge the prevalence, and assess for the consequences,
of IPV/DV in this population.

-- 290 of 545 --

262 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Religious and Spiritual Beliefs
Religiosity, spirituality, and partner violence are linked in both positive and negative
ways (Houston-Kolnik et al., 2019; Orpinas et al., 2022). Some individuals who perpetrate
partner violence may use (and misuse) religious texts and beliefs to justify or rationalize
IPV/DV. Some IPV/DV victims may stay in abusive relationships due to religious or
spiritual beliefs that condemn divorce and promote male domination, superior male
morality, the value of suffering, and submission and obedience to husbands. Some IPV/
DV victims may be hesitant to seek help outside of the religious or spiritual community
or may be reluctant to disclose IPV/DV to preserve the family image. Some religious
leaders may be unprepared to respond to issues of IPV/DV.
Religious or spiritual practices may also serve as protective factors against IPV/DV
and as a coping mechanism in recovering from its consequences. Faith in a higher power can
serve as an inner coping resource for religious IPV/DV victims. In the Black community,
prayer is sometimes used for coping with IPV/DV consequences, and religious leaders
who are well trained in responding to IPV/DV may help bridge the gap between religious
and community resources for victims (Houston-Kolnik et al., 2019; Orpinas et al., 2022).
Female-to-Male Violence
Most of the literature, as well as provision of shelters and other resources, have
historically focused on women as victims of DV. Although research does support the
higher prevalence of women in DV relationships, data also show that men are victims of
DV. The National Center for Victims of Crime (2017) approximates one in four men in
the United States (25.7% or 29 million) have reported being slapped or pushed/shoved
by an intimate partner in his lifetime and one in seven men in the United States (13.8%
or 15.6 million) experienced more severe physical abuse resulting in injury.
Why might female-to-male violence be underreported? Gender norms may prevent
men who suffer emotional, physical, or sexual abuse from reporting because disclosure
might “emasculate” them. Men may also fail to define their experiences as abusive or
may fear being laughed at or ridiculed if they reach out for help. Male victims of IPV/
DV may also be reluctant to report abuse from a female partner for fear that they will
also be accused of being abusive (Douglas et al., 2012).
Additionally, there are fewer IPV/DV resources available for men. Most shelters
are designated for women and serve only women and children. Funding and grants
are often awarded to clinics and centers that assist women who are victims of IPV/DV.
Prevailing myths, discriminative training and education, and biased clinical practices
based only on feminist theory or accepted myths that men cannot be the victims of IPV/
DV may prevent many in the helping field from intervening or even asking males at
intake about being victims of IPV/DV.
To effectively meet the needs of male victims, counselors should validate their
experiences, provide accurate educational information about IPV/DV, and provide
gender-appropriate IPV/DV resources.
LGBTQ+ Violence
The lifetime prevalence of IPV/DV for LGBTQ+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
questioning, and others) individuals is greater than that in heterosexual couples. The

-- 291 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	263
National Center for Victims of Crime (2017) reports 4 in 10 lesbian women, 6 in 10 bisex-
ual women, 1 in 4 gay men, and 1 in 3 bisexual men have experienced rape, physical
violence, or stalking by an intimate partner. Prevalence in the transgender community
is harder to estimate, yet the problem seems to be more pervasive. Approximately 35%
of all transgender individuals reported experiencing physical abuse from a partner
(James et al., 2016).
Estimating the prevalence of LGBTQ+ violence presents difficulties like those
encountered in other populations. Among the systems affecting LGBTQ+ disclosure of
IPV/DV are family and friends, mutual friends of the abused and abuser in the LGBTQ+
community, LGBTQ+-affirmative shelters and crisis counselors, the legal system (e.g.,
attorneys, jurors, judges, laws), public policy, and societal myths based on gender norms,
homophobia, transphobia, and heterosexism (Walker, 2015).
Is IPV/DV a gendered problem, as many feminists assert? Can men be victims
and women be batterers? The feminist notion that IPV/DV is caused by traditional
gender-role socialization in a patriarchal family structure often does not fit LGBTQ+
relationships. If IPV/DV is because of patriarchy, gay and bisexual men cannot be
abused, and lesbian and bisexual women cannot be abusive. Feminist theory also fails
to account for the experiences of transgender individuals. Thus, feminist theory may
leave counselors working with LGBTQ+ couples with little information about the causes
of IPV/DV (Walker, 2015).
Homophobia and transphobia, or prejudice and discrimination against LGBTQ+
individuals and their culture, contribute to the minimization of IPV/DV in the LGBTQ+
community and preclude many from seeking help from traditional IPV/DV resources
(e.g., shelters, community agencies, the legal system). These attitudes and behaviors are
often based on heterosexism, the idea that heterosexuality is normative and thus superior
to other forms of sexuality. Stereotypical gender-role misconceptions also negatively
impact the transgender community. LGBTQ+ couples may internalize heterosexist and
transphobic ideas and thus feel responsible for protecting one another due to societal
oppression and the resulting social isolation.
An LGBTQ+ partner who is being abused may find it difficult to report the abuse
for several reasons: (1) the abuser may threaten to “out” the abused if the IPV/DV is
disclosed to anyone; (2) the abused may be fearful of disclosing sexual orientation or
transgender identity in the process of disclosing the abuse; (3) the abusive partner may
be the only source of support; (4) the abusive partner may share the same friends as
the abused partner, and embarrassing the abuser may result in potentially
losing the community in which the abused partner’s sexual orientation and/
or gender identity is accepted; (5) the process of disclosure may reinforce or
strengthen internalized homophobia or transphobia in the abused partner;
and (6) the desire to maintain the LGBTQ+ community’s reputation for
offering safety and advocating for equal rights (e.g., marriage, adoption)
may outweigh the desire to assert that there is “something wrong” in the
community, such as IPV/DV (James et al., 2016; Walker, 2015).
Taken together, these factors have contributed to a lack of resources
for LGBTQ+ individuals who experience IPV/DV. Gay and bisexual
men may have fewer resources than do lesbian and bisexual women.
Few shelters accept gay and bisexual men due to the propensity toward
aggression and homophobia of other male batterers who may be living
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 8.2
This video offers a glimpse into
intimate partner violence with
a lesbian couple and the stages
of the cycle of violence. Can
you identify the stages of the
cycle of violence outlined in
this chapter?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=1J_uEfdBWU8
Watch from 00:00 to 01:21

-- 292 of 545 --

264 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
in the shelter. Transgender IPV/DV victims are rarely welcomed at shelters or other
community agencies who define IPV/DV as a problem that affects women in heterosexual
relationships (Walker, 2015). Furthermore, IPV/DV victims seeking services may be
revictimized if their relationship is viewed as not being “real” or if they are subjected to
other forms of homophobia, transphobia, and heterosexism.
Those providing community resources are often placed in a difficult position. Since
LGBTQ+ violence goes against the typical view of the causes and course of IPV/DV,
they are left to decide “who to believe” and thus who should receive assistance and who
should be reprimanded. This creates many situations where victims are ignored, abusers
are unintentionally allowed into similar shelters as those they abuse, and abusers are
not prosecuted.
Disability Status
Another special population includes individuals with physical, cognitive, or emotional
disabilities. Controlling for race/ethnicity, age, and SES, women with disabilities are
physically or sexually assaulted at a rate double that of those without a disability
(Breiding & Armour, 2015). A victim or perpetrator with a disability is at risk for IPV/
DV, or the disability may be a result of IPV/DV toward the individual. Vulnerability and
powerlessness are prevalent in this population, as they often depend on their intimate
partners to assist them with activities of daily living, such as providing medication,
bathing, dressing, and running errands.
A vulnerable person is a person who is under the care of another person for some
or even all their daily living activities. Because of being “under the care of” another,
laws are in place that mandate counselors to report these incidents to authorities. More
on vulnerable person abuse is found in other chapters of this text. Crisis counselors are
strongly encouraged to ensure that the agencies in which they work are adequately
prepared for individuals with disabilities; this may include having physical items such as
wheelchairs readily available and making referrals for physical health needs. Counselors
should be aware of the laws for mandated reporters of abuse of vulnerable persons.
Elder Abuse
With the U.S. population living longer, IPV/DV will increasingly affect those within the
aging population. Abuse of an older adult may occur within intimate relationships as well
as extended families. Available data suggest that approximately 3.5 million Americans
age 65 years and older experience abuse from someone they are dependent on for care and
protection (National Center on Elder Abuse, 2022). Older adult women are more likely than
older adult men to experience abuse, and as age increases, so does the likelihood of abuse.
In addition to physical, sexual, and emotional abuse, types of older adult abuse include
neglect (e.g., malnutrition, poor personal hygiene, unsafe or unclean living conditions),
abandonment (e.g., desertion of an elder at a facility or public location), financial or
material exploitation (e.g., sudden changes in bank account practices, unpaid bills despite
availability of resources, forgery), and self-neglect. Vulnerability and powerlessness can
be common risk factors for elder abuse and individuals with disabilities.
Signs of IVP (e.g., bruising, unexplained injuries, confusion) may be overlooked
or considered medical issues associated with aging. Mental health service providers
may hold ageist beliefs that could negatively impact older adults in IPV/DV situations.

-- 293 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	265
Similar to mandated reporting laws for vulnerable persons, all states have mandated
reporting laws for elder abuse. More on elder person abuse is found within this text.
Counselors should be aware of the laws for mandated reporters of older adult abuse.
Culturally competent counselors recognize that IPV/DV is a real and salient issue in the
older population and respond with appropriate screening, interventions, and resources.
Counselors should be aware of the laws for mandated reporters of abuse of elder persons.
Dating Violence among Adolescents and Young Adults
IPV/DV begins early for many—sometimes with their first dating experiences. An
estimated 23% of females and 14% of males report some form of IPV/DV prior to the age
of 18 years; and 71% of females and 58% of males report some form of IPV/DV before age
25 years (National Center for Victims of Crime, 2017). Dating violence, just like other forms
of IPV/DV, includes physical, emotional, and sexual abuse and stalking. Adolescents
who do not have clear ideas about appropriate boundaries and healthy relationships
may characterize abusive behaviors as acceptable or even positive characteristics of a
relationship. For example, an adolescent may view possessive, stalking behaviors as a sign
that their dating partner cares about them. Many adolescents spend large amounts of time
using social media and other forms of technology. Social media can increase the prevalence
of abuse when used to control behavior or intimidate, humiliate, or coerce a partner.
The CDC (2021b) has linked adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) to higher rates
of teen dating violence. ACEs are potentially traumatic events that include experiences
of or witnessing violence, abuse, or neglect within the family; having a member of the
family attempt or die by suicide; substance use; mental health concerns or instability
to a parental separation or alienation; and other circumstances that can impact safety,
stability, and bonding. In their research, an estimated 61% of adults surveyed reported
they experienced at least one type of ACE; one in six reported they had experienced four
or more ACEs. Unfortunately, dating violence in adolescence significantly predicts IPV/
DV in young adulthood. Exposure to violence in childhood increases the potential for
perpetrating and experiencing IPV/DV.
Dating violence on college and university campuses is of particular concern.
College women who experience IPV/DV possess characteristics that distinguish their
IPV/DV experiences from the experiences of victims in other age groups. For example,
most college-age women do not live with their partners, do not have children, and are
not financially dependent on their partners (Edwards et al., 2012). Thus, when college-
age IPV/DV victims decide whether to remain in a relationship with an abusive partner,
they may consider these and other variables.
Due to the prevalence of and serious consequences associated with dating violence,
multiple prevention programs have been developed for adolescents and young adults.
The CDC (2021c) reports that experiences of IPV/DV in teen dating relationships can
have short- and long-term negative effects, including (1) symptoms of depression and
anxiety; (2) higher engagement in using tobacco, drug, and alcohol use; (3) presenting
with antisocial behaviors (e.g., lying, theft, bullying); and (4) thoughts of suicide. Due to
the high rate of IPV/DV among teens, the CDC developed two programs: (1) Preventing
Intimate Partner Violence Across the Lifespan and (2) Dating Matters ®: Strategies to Promote
Healthy Teen Relationships targeted for 11- to 14-year-olds. Complete Activity 8.3, which
focuses on raising awareness about adolescent dating violence.

-- 294 of 545 --

266 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
THE COUNSELOR’S RESPONSE TO INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE
CLIENTS IN CRISIS
Learning Objective 8.6 Describe how to intervene with IPV/DV victims.
Crisis counselors have numerous opportunities to make a difference in the lives of
victims and survivors of IPV. These opportunities include accurate screening, use of
Q-tree assessments, effective responses to IPV disclosure, implementing effective harm
reduction and safety planning, intentional referrals to IPV shelters, and helping clients
navigate the emotional ramifications of IPV.
Screening for Intimate Partner Violence
Due to the prevalence of IPV/DV, it is generally agreed that IPV/DV screening should
be universal. Just as crisis counselors assess for suicidal and homicidal ideation with
every client, they should ask all clients directly about IPV/DV. Most research on IPV/
DV screening focuses on assessment in doctors’ offices and emergency departments,
since many victims require medical treatment for physical injury inflicted by an intimate
partner but may not necessarily seek counseling to address the effects of IPV/DV.
Nevertheless, the research that follows provides important information for counselors.
While acknowledging the need for intervention with IPV/DV victims, most health
care providers, crisis counselors, health care professionals, and clinicians fail to routinely
screen for IPV/DV (Clark et al., 2020). A primary barrier to universal IPV/DV screening
is the lack of knowledge of and training on how to ask about IPV/DV, how to recognize
symptoms that may indicate an individual is experiencing abuse, and how to respond
if IPV/DV is disclosed.
Personal variables may also prevent health care professionals and crisis counselors
from asking about IPV/DV. For example, clinicians may have negative attitudes toward
IPV/DV victims stemming from personal experiences with IPV/DV or have prejudicial
attitudes including racism, classism, ageism, and homophobia. Health care workers may also
avoid screening for IPV/DV due to fear for their own safety, fear of offending their patients,
or perhaps because they do not view intervention in domestic affairs to be part of their health
care responsibilities (Alotaby et al., 2013; Qasem et al., 2013; Todahl & Walters, 2011).
Institutional and professional barriers to IPV/DV screening are the perception of
powerlessness to help victims due to insufficient community resources and the fear of
marginalization by colleagues (Alotaby et al., 2013; Qasem et al., 2013; Todahl & Walters,
2011). However, the many reasons for not asking about IPV/DV do not outweigh the
Unfortunately, dating violence is a problem that affects
many individuals at an early age. When adolescents
are first beginning to explore dating relationships,
many are unaware of what healthy or unhealthy
dating relationships look like. Work individually or
in groups to develop an awareness-raising product
that is developmentally appropriate for adolescents.
Include information such as facts and figures on dating
violence, how to recognize warning signs that a dating
relationship may be unhealthy, and how to ask for
help if experiencing dating violence. Consider how you
could use the brochure or poster you developed in your
future counseling practice.
ACTIVITY 8.3

-- 295 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	267
argument for its screening. Screening can help prevent injury and literally help save the
lives of individuals who experience partner abuse.
The first step in screening for IPV/DV requires a cultural shift in the regular intake
assessment. The prevalence of IPV/DV incidents should make it a standard of care to
assess for IPV/DV. Screening should occur during wellness visits and during visits
for chronic disease management and emergency encounters. Following a chronic care
management model, assessments should occur during follow-up visits to assess for
important changes in risk and safety.
Creating a safe environment is an imperative part of the screening process.
Disclosing IPV/DV can be a very difficult and painful process for victims due to shame,
embarrassment, and fear of being judged. The crisis counselor’s interpersonal style can
also help create a safe atmosphere. Creating an environment of unconditional positive
regard and acceptance of the client’s choices will decrease feelings of being judged.
All persons should receive comprehensive assessment and/or appropriate referral
(Dutton et al., 2015).
There are two absolutes that crisis counselors should follow with victims of IPV/
DV. First, counselors should never ask about abuse in the presence of the client’s partner;
doing so may greatly increase the risk for harm to the client. Second, counselors should
be careful not to recommend ending the relationship as the only way to establish safety.
In fact, the risk for harm to an IPV/DV victim may increase following separation from an
abusive partner. Post-separation violence involves the batterer’s attempts to regain control
over the abused partner and may include physical assault, rape, stalking, harassment, and
even homicide (Bates, 2019; Spearman et al., 2022). Research on nonlethal post-separation
violence among heterosexual married couples indicates that the prevalence of IPV/DV
is many times greater among women who are separated or divorced from their abusive
husbands than among women who are still living with their husbands.
Once a safe environment and rapport are established, counselors should ask directly
about IPV/DV, gathering as many concrete and specific details as possible (see Question
Tree below). Counselors must be comfortable assessing for not only physical abuse but
also sexual abuse. Vocal tone and phrasing are especially important during IPV/DV
assessment, since counselors do not want to imply judgment or raise the client’s level
of defensiveness. It may be helpful to begin with more general questions, such as asking
clients whether they feel safe in the current relationship or whether anyone is hurting them.
As the assessment progresses, more specific information must be gathered. For example, a
counselor may ask who is hurting the client, how arguments usually begin, details of the
most recent incident of violence, how long the most recent incident lasted, what specific
forms of injuries occurred, and what happened when the incident was over. The client’s
IPV/DV history is important as well, including childhood exposure to IPV/DV, violence in
previous relationships, the first and worst incidents of violence in the current relationship,
past attempts at intervention by others (e.g., family, friends, neighbors, police, the legal
system), and the role of mental health and substance use issues in the IPV/DV.
Counselors should consider conducting a variety of assessments for lethality:
suicidal, homicidal (see Chapter 6), and level of threat as perceived by the victim. Often
victims have thoughts of suicide or homicide to avoid further abuse. In addition, a threat
assessment based on the client’s perception of injury should be completed to determine the
appropriate crisis response, which may range from developing a safety or harm reduction
plan with the victim to seeking immediate police intervention and hospitalization.

-- 296 of 545 --

268 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
A lethality assessment includes questions about the severity of violence, other
criminal behaviors of the abuser (e.g., assaults or harassment of others, previous
criminal charges), failed past interventions (e.g., multiple calls made to 911; abuser
ignoring court orders; family, friends, and neighbors have tried to intervene, yet violence
continues), obsessive or stalking behaviors, psychological risk factors (e.g., previous
homicidal or suicidal threats or attempts, substance use issues, external life stressors,
severe depression), perceived threats to the relationship (e.g., victim planning to leave,
separation or divorce, infidelity), access to weapons, and behaviors that prevent the
victim from accessing emergency resources.
Remember that victims may initially deny that they are experiencing abuse. If
this occurs, make sure to revisit questions about IPV/DV again in the session or in a
subsequent session. The following intake provides an example of how to conduct an
initial IPV/DV screening.
Counselor: 	Hayden, we have talked a lot about your relationship with
your partner. I know the two of you have been through a lot
and your relationship is really strained right now. I need to ask
you if your partner has ever hurt you in any way.
Hayden: 	(30 seconds of silence while looking down) Not really.
Counselor: 	I know it can be really hard to talk about. Take your time and
know that I am not judging you in any way.
Hayden: 	Are you going to call the cops if I talk about this?
Counselor: 	As we have discussed before, there are a few situations that
would require me to break confidentiality to protect you or
someone else. I would need to act if I believed you were going
to kill yourself or someone else or in cases where I suspected
child abuse. Otherwise, what we talk about is between us. It
would be your decision to report to the police.
Hayden: 	(30 seconds of silence, crying) I feel so embarrassed to say it out
loud. (Crying for 30 seconds) Last weekend, we both had too
much to drink. We started arguing about the same things we
always fight about—the bills, past lovers, chores around the
house. A beer bottle was thrown at me and it hit me on the
head. I fell over and started crying. Aster, my partner, started
yelling, “Get up, bitch!” then came over and kicked me in the
stomach a few times and spat on me. Then Aster stormed out
and didn’t come back home for two nights. When Aster came
back, it was all flowers and crying and telling me it would
never happen again. I still can’t believe it happened. I never
thought Aster would hurt me.
Counselor: 	Hayden, it took a lot of courage to share that experience with
me. I can see how painful it is for you to talk about that night.
I need to ask you a few more questions, but let’s take it at a
pace you feel comfortable with. How are you feeling now?

-- 297 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	269
Hayden: 	I actually feel a little better just sharing it with someone else.
Counselor: 	I can see that you’re relaxing a little. Hayden, no one deserves
to be hurt. You didn’t do anything to bring this violence on
yourself.
Hayden: 	I don’t know what to do. I love Aster and I know Aster really
does love me, too. I just never imagined this could happen to
me.
Counselor: 	Let’s talk about that. How comfortable do you feel going home
today?
Hayden: 	I’m not sure.
Counselor: 	You know sometimes when someone experiences something
as shocking and devastating as what you have gone through,
they have thoughts about hurting themselves or hurting the
person who hurt them. Have you had those thoughts?
Hayden: 	No. I would not ever hurt myself . . . or Aster. We’re in love
and I would never want to make Aster feel this awful. The not
wanting to go home is more about worrying it could happen
again. And just feeling so embarrassed.
Counselor: 	Okay, we can talk about lots of different options. You are in
control of how to handle this situation. I also want to give you
some crisis resources in case Aster does get violent again. First,
take me back to that night. Walk me through everything that
happened. I know it will be really hard, but really dissecting
the details of that night can help us come up with an effective
safety plan for you.
Question Tree Screening Approach
As with other topics in this book, the Question Tree (Q-tree) screening
approach has been developed to offer a framework of questions that should
be addressed while also prioritizing other individual questions unique to
the person’s situation or ecological determinants (see Chapter 1). IPV/DV
is one of the areas that a Q-tree can assist, as many questions must be asked
during the assessments to develop a plan. As with all Q-trees, how a person
replies to a surface question will determine needed follow-up questions.
The following are some questions connected with IPV/DV:
• What type of violence have you experienced (physical, sexual,
emotional, stalking, other aggression or violence)? If yes, the following
may be asked:
✓ What is the type of violence, its severity, its frequency, and the date
of the last incident? What was your response? Have you ever
attempted to leave? What was the response of the abuser? (This
allows counselors to include safety mechanisms into a safety plan
if that is the direction needed by the client.)
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 8.3
This role-play video illustrates
an initial domestic violence
risk screening session using
essential question tree ques-
tions, psychoeducation, and
resources. The client says she
plans to go home and the
counselor asks if she feels
safe. What safety plan or harm
reduction plan could you dis-
cuss with her before leaving?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=g4qPmBbfyW0
Watch from 00:00 to 05:40

-- 298 of 545 --

270 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Did the abuse cause injuries? If yes:
✓ What injuries were sustained? Did the injuries receive medical attention? Were
the injuries reported to a medical professional? Did the medical professional
report the abuse to authorities? Were there any arrests? Did you seek a restraining
order? (If yes) Is it valid?
• Did you or someone else contact law enforcement? If yes:
✓ What was the result of law enforcement intervention? Were there any arrests?
Did you seek a restraining order? (If yes) Is it valid? What was the response of
the abuser to law enforcement involvement?
• Have family, friends, coworkers, or other supporters (e.g., faith based) been
involved in your support? If yes:
✓ What has been their response? Have there been some supports who are more
reliable than others? Have threats been made to any supporters?
• Has the abuser demonstrated any stalking behaviors or other behaviors that have
limited your ability or freedom to be around supporters or your workplace? If yes:
✓ Have the stalking behaviors increased? Have they included threats to your life?
• Does the abuser have legal issues? A mental health diagnosis? Use substances?
Have they threatened suicide or homicide?
• What are the perceived or actual threats if you were to leave?
• Have weapons even been used or threatened during or outside the abuse? If yes:
✓ Are there weapons in the home? Were any injuries because of the use of the
weapon? (This allows counselors to know whether they are mandated to report
based on their state laws.)
• Have you noticed recent abnormal behaviors by the abuser?
• Who else lives in the home? If any others:
✓ Has there been any abuse of others in the home? Are there children or others
who are in your care? (This assists counselors in any mandated reporting.) Are
there any pets?
This is only a sample Q-tree and is not limited to these questions. The Q-tree approach
allows counselors to determine whether a safety plan or harm reduction plan should be
developed. It also allows counselors to determine whether a mandated report of abuse
must be made.
Response to Intimate Partner Violence Disclosure
Because nearly all counselors will work with an IPV/DV victim at some
point, they must be prepared to respond when a client reports being abused
by a partner. Immediately following an IPV/DV disclosure, it is critical for
the crisis counselor to validate the victim’s experience and communicate
that the victim is not to blame for the abuse (Martín-Fernández et al., 2018).
Documentation that the client is experiencing IPV/DV is also
important. Victims indicate that it is helpful for crisis counselors or health
care workers to make notes about the disclosure of IPV/DV and to take
pictures of physical injuries, which could later be used in court if the victim
chooses to take legal action. If some injuries are not visible, using a diagram
of a person to indicate where you visually see physical injuries and where
the victim reports injuries can also be part of documentation.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 8.4
In this video, the counselor
explores client supports,
resources available to the
client, and group options.
What other resources could be
made available to the client?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=H1Wi_Fxngpw
Watch from 19:38 to 22:16

-- 299 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	271
Providing the victim with resources and protection is another essential component
of responding to an IPV/DV crisis (Martín-Fernández et al., 2018). Counselors should
have an extensive list of IPV/DV resources available, including options for emergency
shelter, transportation, food, child care, medical needs, mental health care, and legal
aid. The National Domestic Violence Hotline can be accessed 24 hours a day, 365 days
per year at 1-800-799-SAFE or at www.thehotline.org. Crisis counselors may also consider
providing a list of IPV/DV resources to all clients. Some agencies place small cards
printed with IPV/DV crisis resources in the restroom so that victims may anonymously
take the information and hide it if necessary.
While crisis intervention is typically more directive than traditional counseling,
counselors should strive to empower IPV/DV victims by giving them as much control
over their situations as possible (Todahl & Walters, 2011). Finally, victims indicate that it
is helpful to be informed that even if they initially choose not to access IPV/DV resources,
they can return to the agency and receive assistance in the future.
Safety Planning and Harm Reduction Planning
It is crucial for a counselor to know whether a client is deciding to stay in the abusive
relationship (i.e., will return home) or leave the abusive relationship prior to the client
leaving the crisis center or counselor. The counselor will want to implement a plan based
on the client’s decision, taking into consideration the unique issues of and resources
available to the client.
SAFETY PLANNING 	The National Center for Victims of Crime (2017) reports that 9% of
homicides are completed by intimate partners. Many relate to the decision to leave an
abusive relationship. Therefore, a comprehensive assessment and safety plan that meets
the needs of the individual client is imperative. If a client decided to leave the abuser, the
counselor should develop a safety plan with the main goal of keeping the client physically
safe, as well as any other vulnerable person living in the home (e.g., children, older adults).
The safety plan is tailored to the unique situation of each IPV/DV victim; therefore,
gathering concrete and specific information about the victim’s experiences is essential. The
counselor and client should determine appropriate supports for the client, locations that
provide physical safety (e.g., shelters), and whether law enforcement should be contacted.
It is also important to emphasize that a safety plan in no way guarantees the safety
of the IPV/DV victim. For example, civil protective orders are designed to prevent an
abusive partner from having future contact with an IPV/DV victim and can be tailored to
meet the victim’s specific needs. A protective order may contribute to an increased sense
of safety for many IPV/DV victims. However, approximately half of protective orders
are violated by IPV/DV perpetrators, particularly if there is a history of severe violence
or stalking in the relationship (Bates, 2019; Spearman et al., 2022). Additionally, some
IPV/DV victims may choose not to seek a protective order due to fear of retaliation, nega-
tive feelings toward the legal system, or limited financial resources (Lynch et al., 2022).
HARM REDUCTION PLANNING 	Harm reduction plans are developed for clients who do
not intend to leave the abusive relationship. The goal of the plan is to reduce the amount
of harm a victim may encounter by an abuser. Counselors should assess where incidents
of violence mainly occur to attempt to avoid those rooms, how to read signs of

-- 300 of 545 --

272 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
heightened anger, using code words for children to protect them from danger, using
code words to alert neighbors or family members of potential abuse, and arranging an
escape bag with necessary items (medications, keys, legal documents) in case the victim
must leave immediately. Since storing a bag in the home could increase violence,
collaborating with supporters or local religious centers can help keep the items safe
without the abuser’s knowledge. All of these things are accounted for in the harm
reduction plan. It is also important for clients to not demonstrate too many behavioral
changes lest an abuser become suspicious of their leaving.
Some harm reduction plans may also integrate strategies to assist in alleviating pain
from abuse. Meditation, mindfulness, praying, refocusing, and other self-care techniques
may need to be explored with the client as part of the harm reduction plan. Developing
a safety plan or a harm reduction plan may allow a client to gain a little control in
uncontrollable situations. Voices from the Field 8.1 provides some real-life insights into
harm reduction planning.
Victoria E. Kress
“My boyfriend hits me. . . . I’ve lost part of my
hearing. . . . I have two missing teeth, and I’ve had two
concussions. . . . I know I need to leave, but I’m not
sure I am ready. . . . He says he’ll take the baby from
me if I leave. . . . He’s threatened to kill me if I leave.”
When I was in graduate school, I never learned what
to say or do when counseling a person making these
remarks. The first time I worked with a woman in a
violent relationship, my first reaction was to tell her
to leave, to run to the nearest shelter and to be safe.
My client’s safety was a priority, of course, but I felt
a personal need to protect her as well. As counselors
we do have an obligation to encourage client safety,
but we also must balance this with clients’ right to
autonomy; their right to make their own decisions on
their own terms and schedule. So how do we respect a
client’s autonomy while also facilitating their welfare?
While it may be difficult, I recommend that
counselors working with clients in violent relationships
should not suggest that clients leave the relationship
but should instead encourage their clients to be as
safe as possible. People in abusive relationships have
typically been told by multiple people to leave, and
they themselves have often thought about leaving.
Counselors suggesting that clients leave a relationship
may indicate an inability to understand the complexity
of each client’s situation. Maybe more importantly,
suggesting that someone leave a relationship indicates
that the counselor does not believe that the client
can make autonomous choices. Finally, at the time a
woman leaves a violent relationship, her risk of being
murdered escalates dramatically. So, telling a woman
to leave a relationship before she is prepared to do so
can be dangerous.
Instead of focusing on the client leaving the
relationship, I suggest counselors develop a thorough
harm reduction plan as a first step. When I develop
harm reduction plans, I encourage my clients to do
specific things:
• Identify at least two places where you can go
the next time you need to leave the house or go
somewhere safe.
• Tell friends or neighbors about the violence and
request that they call the police if they get
suspicious.
• Identify the safest rooms in your house where
you can go if there is fear that an argument will
occur.
• Develop and store somewhere safe and
accessible an escape kit that includes a copy of a
protection order, extra keys, money, checks,
important phone numbers, medications, Social
Security card, bank documents, birth certificates,
change of clothes, etc.
• Process the safety plan with children when
appropriate.
• Practice escape routes and identify rooms that
are safe and not close to weapons.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 8.1
Safety and Harm Reduction Planning with Intimate Partner Violence Victims

-- 301 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	273
Intimate Partner Violence Shelters: Opportunities and Challenges
IPV/DV shelters provide a safe haven for many abused women and their children. IPV/
DV shelters not only protect victims from additional physical harm but also provide a
safe place where emotional healing can begin. Shelter residents often deeply connect with
one another around their shared experiences. Shelter staff may provide much-needed
support and encouragement to victims. Many IPV/DV shelters also offer counseling
services and provide victims with comprehensive resources, including legal aid and
assistance finding long-term housing and employment.
While IPV/DV shelters are invaluable resources for many victims, life in a shelter is
certainly not stress-free and it requires adherence to programmatic rules and regulations
that may infringe on a victim’s sense of autonomy. In addition, victims may not feel
ready to address the emotional impact of their abuse yet may be required to do so as
part of the shelter program. Adjusting to a shared living environment may also present
difficulties, particularly for victims from cultural minority groups (Walker, 2015).
Finally, because of their traumatic experiences, some IPV/DV victims struggle with self-
regulation and engage in behaviors such as verbal or physical altercations with shelter
staff and residents or with substance use.
Working as a counselor in an IPV/DV shelter can also be stressful. For example,
counselors may experience secondary traumatization from exposure to victims’
experiences. Counselors must be sure to practice self-care to avoid burning out or taking a
blaming attitude toward victims. Counselors may also experience the stress of dual roles.
For example, a counselor may deeply empathize with a victim during an individual or
group session and then later be required to enforce shelter rules (e.g., imposing a penalty
for not completing a required chore, dismissing the victim from the shelter for substance
use). Solidify your knowledge of IPV/DV by completing Activity 8.4.
Compile a list of IPV/DV resources available in your
community. Consider the multitude of needs of
someone leaving an abusive partner (e.g., shelter,
food, transportation, clothing, child care, employment
assistance, legal aid, medical care) and barriers to
accessing resources (e.g., having no Internet access,
having to sneak out of the house to go to counseling,
having limited financial resources). Gather specific
information about how to access these community
resources (e.g., hours of operation, cost of services,
criteria for assistance). If possible, obtain written
materials or brochures from community organizations
that could be provided to IPV/DV victims. What was
your experience like when trying to gather information?
Were resources hard to identify? Were the agencies that
you contacted helpful? How might your experiences
identifying resources be like or different from those of
an IPV/DV victim in crisis?
ACTIVITY 8.4
Addressing the Emotional Impact of Intimate Partner Violence
The emotional consequences of IPV/DV can be as devastating as the physical
consequences. High rates of depression and low self-esteem are common among victims,
and IPV/DV is a major predictor of drug and alcohol use in women (Langdon et al.,
2014). Many IPV/DV victims experience symptoms of PTSD, including a reexperiencing
of the trauma (e.g., intrusive recollections, nightmares, flashbacks), avoidance/numbing
(e.g., restricted range of affect, anhedonia, social withdrawal, inability to recall aspects

-- 302 of 545 --

274 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
of the trauma), and increased arousal (e.g., hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response,
difficulty falling or staying asleep). In addition to the symptoms traditionally associated
with PTSD, Walker (2015) argues that IPV/DV victims often experience a cluster of
symptoms referred to as battered woman syndrome, which includes disrupted interpersonal
relationships, difficulties with body image/somatic concerns, and sexual or intimacy
problems.
When working with IPV/DV victims, it is essential to consider their trauma history
in constructing a treatment plan or making a diagnosis. Unfortunately, many victims are
misdiagnosed and prescribed inappropriate medications by mental health care providers
who fail to account for the effects of IPV/DV. Medicating a client inappropriately does
not address the issue of IPV/DV and can only create another potential problem for the
client. Victims may present with depression and anxiety without knowledge of the root
of the symptoms. Most victims will not disclose information without prompting, which is
why counselors should assess for IPV/DV with every client, regardless of the presenting
issue. Victims may be empowered by learning that the symptoms they are experiencing
are a normal response to a traumatic event (McLeod et al., 2010). Case Study 8.2 describes
Melinda’s experiences as an IPV/DV victim. Then complete Activity 8.5 to address
counselor self-care issues in work with IPV/DV.
CASE STUDY 8.2
Counseling a Victim of Intimate Partner Violence: Melinda’s Journey
Melinda, a 25-year-old, middle-class, Black female, first came to counseling for depression.
During the initial intake interview, she reported having trouble sleeping, frequent crying
spells, low self-esteem, and feelings of hopelessness. Melinda’s counselor, Candace,
screened for suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, and IPV/DV as a routine part of the
initial interview. Melinda denied suicidal and homicidal ideation and said that she had
never been abused by her current boyfriend. At the end of the initial session, Candace
provided Melinda with a packet of materials that she distributes to all new clients, which
included a pamphlet on IPV/DV.
Over the next two sessions, Melinda and Candace developed a strong rapport.
During her third session, Melinda tearfully disclosed that her live-in boyfriend sometimes
pushes or hits her when he has been drinking. Candace listened empathically to Melinda
and let her know that the abuse was not her fault and that she believed her. After
Melinda’s disclosure, Candace asked for more information about the abuse, including
how arguments usually begin, details of the most recent incident of violence, and her
history of experience with IPV/DV. Melinda reported that the last time her boyfriend hit
her was a week ago, when he came home drunk from a party. She sustained a split lip
but did not require stitches.
Candace also completed a lethality assessment and determined that Melinda’s
boyfriend had never threatened to kill her, did not have a criminal record, and did not
have a gun in the house. Melinda stated that she had never feared for her life when
her boyfriend became abusive. She indicated that she did not want to break up with
her boyfriend and that she did not think the abuse was serious enough to report to
the police.

-- 303 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	275
Candace respected Melinda’s autonomy and provided her with additional edu-
cational materials about IPV/DV and information on 24-hour IPV/DV crisis resources
that she could use in case of an emergency. Since Melinda reported that her boyfriend
typically drank every weekend, Candace scheduled another appointment with her
before the upcoming weekend to develop a safety plan. Melinda and Candace col-
laboratively developed the following safety plan to minimize the risk and impact of
IPV/DV:
1. Plan to be away from the house when Melinda suspects her boyfriend may come
home drunk.
2. If her boyfriend comes home drunk unexpectedly, stay away from the bathroom
and kitchen.
3. Pack and hide an emergency bag with clothes, cash, and an extra set of keys in case
of the need to flee the house quickly.
4. Program IPV/DV crisis hotline number into cell phone.
Melinda and Candace also discussed ideas for building coping resources, includ-
ing engaging in self-care activities like reading empowerment books and joining
a women’s support group at church. Over the next several months, Candace and
Melinda met once a week for counseling. They continued to discuss and evaluate her
safety. Despite her efforts to avoid physical violence from her boyfriend, the incidents
of abuse became more frequent over time. Melinda had now sustained several inju-
ries, including a broken arm and a broken rib. A turning point occurred when she
learned that she was 8 weeks pregnant with her first child. Melinda decided that she
did not want to raise a child in an abusive home. She was ready to leave. Candace and
Melinda discussed the risks associated with leaving an abusive partner and tips for
ensuring a safe escape. Together, they decided that an IPV/DV shelter was the best
option, since Melinda had no trusted family or friends in the area. Candace arranged
for transportation to the shelter straight from her office and waited with Melinda until
help arrived.
Discussion Questions
1. Are there other considerations that will need to be implemented into Melinda’s
treatment?
2. What are some short-term and long-term therapeutic considerations?
3. What are some case management issues that must be addressed?
4. What referrals need to be made for Melinda?
Working with victims of IPV/DV can vicariously
traumatize counselors; therefore, self-care is essential.
Self-care is a preventive process of proactively
enhancing health by building resilience against illness
and disease. It involves identifying and practicing
ways to promote personal well-being. Start practicing
self-care now. Make a list of activities that you find
personally renewing. Develop a plan to incorporate at
least one activity into each day of the upcoming week.
Keep a brief journal about your self-care experiences.
ACTIVITY 8.5

-- 304 of 545 --

276 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
COVID-19 PANDEMIC IMPACTS ON IPV/DV
Learning Objective 8.7 Describe how COVID-19 has impacted persons in IPV/DV
relationships.
The increased isolation due to COVID-19 has impacted individuals in IPV/DV situations
worldwide to the extent that the WHO (2021a) issued statements regarding the need for
a global awareness of social isolation on IPV/DV victims. Even though their focus is on
women and children, it is imperative to extend this awareness to all who are isolated
without supports in abusive environments. The decreased ability to seek leave from envi-
ronments of abuse has been assumed to increase situations of DV. Pre-pandemic supports
such as visiting with family and friends and workplace and educational environments
that often provided some form of distancing from an abuser were cut off during most
of the pandemic, meaning diminished reprieves from the abuser. Add in the stressors
from the pandemic, such as economic changes, and abuse is believed to have increased.
Those seeking supportive services struggled to maintain them during the pan-
demic. Even using telehealth for counseling services may have decreased safety when
abusers learned of the counseling. Code words and scans of the room may have allowed
for assurance of privacy, but the conversation may still have been overheard within
the household. At the same time, those persons involved in IPV but not living with the
abuser may have seen a decrease in violent relationships due to social isolation.
The services that were available to individuals in IPV/DV relationships were
impacted by the pandemic. Services may have been scaled back, personnel cut or limited,
and shelters may have closed or limited access for safety. In other situations, lack of
economic means may have limited or not allowed individuals access to the Internet to
participate in telehealth.
The WHO (2021a) distributed psychoeducation about the pandemic and increased
IPV/DV incidents, suggesting:
• Reducing exposure to news outlets to 1–2 hours per day
• Staying in contact with family and friends by e-mail and text
• Maintaining daily routines including physical activities and sleep
• Integrating meditation and grounding exercises to relieve stressful thoughts
• Engaging in activities that help reduce stress
• Developing a safety plan with family in case violence increases
• Keeping important documents, money, and personal items accessible in case you
need to leave immediately and planning ahead on how you might leave
• Having numbers on hand for hotlines, shelters, social workers, child protective
services, and the nearest police station
• Being discreet and not keeping any of this information where the abuser may find it
Next, complete Activity 8.6 before moving on to batterer intervention.
Pair up with another student. Review the suggestions
made by the WHO (2021a) and role-play how you
would have this discussion with a client. What other
issues would you want to include depending on the
unique cultural or situational issues for clients?
ACTIVITY 8.6

-- 305 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	277
BATTERER INTERVENTION
Learning Objective 8.8 Explain effective IPV/DV perpetrator identification and
treatment.
IPV/DV response has two aspects: victim intervention and batterer intervention. Both
are valid attempts to end IPV/DV. One model of attending to the needs of both IPV/DV
victims and batterers is a coordinated community response (CCR), which involves the
collaboration of local councils of service providers in developing a more comprehensive
response to IPV/DV incidents. CCR helps victims identify and access multiple available
services, of which victims are often not aware. These services focus on advocacy, criminal
justice, child services, health care, education, and vocation.
Without a network of support, IPV/DV victims face the frustration and fatigue
of searching for and navigating through multiple systems and services, thus reducing
the likelihood that victims will seek help at all (Shorey et al., 2014). In addition to
the efforts of community organizations, over half of the states have laws that make
specific reference to batterer intervention programs, and many designate specific
entities to certify, license, or establish standards for batterer intervention programs
(CDC, 2021c).
Batterer intervention programs have three primary goals: (1) ensuring the safety
of IPV/DV victims, (2) stopping future acts of partner violence, and (3) increasing
offenders’ accountability for their behavior. Batterer intervention programs teach
abusive partners to develop empathy for their victims, identify and self-monitor negative
thoughts, and identify and interrupt the negative self-talk that often precedes incidents
of violence to prevent further abuse. Additionally, batterer intervention programs teach
gender equality in relationships and typically teach participants to identify various
forms of abuse, recognize and detail the type of abuse they have engaged in, take
responsibility for the abuse, and find alternatives to violence, often helping participants
learn to develop a nonabusive response to behavior that they might ordinarily respond
to in an abusive manner. Although most batterer intervention programs are designed
for long-term intervention, counselors should understand the components of these
programs and know whether they are available in their community. Understanding the
minimizing behaviors perpetrators use can also be a helpful psychoeducation activity
for victims.
Safety
The primary goal of batterer intervention programs is to ensure the safety of the abused
partner and any children who may be involved. Steps to ensuring safety include
assessment of the resources that are available to IPV/DV victims, assessment of the
severity and repetition of violent incidents, and assessment of the effects on children
exposed to IPV/DV. Depending on the aforementioned factors, offenders may need to
reside separately from the victims. If law enforcement is at the scene and an arrest occurs,
incarceration of the offender may provide temporary safety.
Cessation of Violence
The second goal of batterer intervention programs is stopping all forms of violence,
including verbal, emotional, physical, and sexual abuses. One of the first steps toward

-- 306 of 545 --

278 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
this goal is acknowledgment of one’s violent behavior. Such an acknowledgment means
discarding denial (e.g., “I didn’t do it”), minimizing (e.g., “I only hit her”), and blaming
(e.g., “She should have been home on time”). It also means accepting that threats,
coercion, and emotional abuses—the types of violence where there is no physical
contact—qualify as IPV/DV.
Accountability
The third goal of batterer intervention is increasing individual accountability for acts
of IPV/DV in the form of accepting responsibility for one’s behavior. Simply saying
“I’m sorry,” especially if those words have been said on multiple occasions, is not
enough. Developing alternatives to battering is an essential component of increasing
accountability. One alternative strategy involves understanding and subsequently
changing negative self-talk to positive self-talk. Negative self-talk involves destructive
comments made when challenged with an uncomfortable or threatening situation. For
example, a batterer might say, “I’m so mad that my partner doesn’t have dinner ready.”
The idea is to change this statement to something more constructive, such as “Since
dinner isn’t ready yet, maybe I can help.”
A second task in becoming accountable is to learn to recognize triggers or cues
leading to violent behavior. Triggers can be words, phrases, or statements that either
the individual or partner uses (e.g., profanity, degrading comments); situations that
typically create arguments (e.g., payday, drinking/drug use); and physiological changes
(e.g., muscle tension, headaches, increased blood pressure/pulse). The identification of
triggers enables IPV/DV offenders to be responsible for initiating behaviors that will
decrease their level of anxiety, frustration, and anger and thereby prevent any further
acts of IPV/DV.
Counselors who work with IPV/DV perpetrators encounter numerous challenges,
including the underreporting of IPV/DV incidents, the need to distinguish batterer
intervention programs from anger management programs, limited financial resources,
and low completion rates. Other issues include IPV/DV and substance use, the duty to
protect and the duty to warn, personal safety, and the counselor’s comfort working with
batterers. Working with victims of IPV/DV is only part of decreasing it. The counseling
profession needs counselors who are willing to work with batterers to assist in ending
generations of abuse.
Challenges to Referrals to Batterer Intervention Programs
One of the biggest challenges regarding batterer intervention is that most program
participants are court mandated. For a judge or probation officer to refer an IPV/
DV offender to treatment, someone must first report an IPV/DV incident. The
reasons so many cases go unreported are complex and varied: fear of the unknown
and of the batterer, existence of children, promises of reform, guilt, lack of self-
esteem, love, gender-role beliefs, economic dependence, religious beliefs, stigma of
a broken home, or denial of a problem. Although many of these reasons are valid, if
IPV/DV incidents go unreported, batterer intervention is nearly impossible. Read
Voices from the Field 8.2 to hear from a former director of a batterer intervention
program.

-- 307 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	279
Financial Resources
The financial aspect of batterer intervention is also a challenge. A significant number
of batterer programs charge fees for services to sustain the program’s existence. Most
federal and state monies for IPV/DV go to battered women’s programs—and rightly so.
However, if we do not intervene with batterers and re-educate them, IPV/DV will likely
never end. Therefore, batterer program staff members must solicit referrals from judges
and probation officers. Unfortunately, potential referral sources often refuse to make
appropriate referrals to batterer intervention programs due to their cost.
Completion Rates
Treatment refusal, overt or passive resistance, and premature termination (i.e., dropout)
are common issues confronted by counselors in the typical batterer intervention
program. Numerous authors have reported treatment noncompliance and client
attrition rates ranging between 40 and 70% (Ferrer-Perez & Bosch-Fiol, 2018; Hamel
et al., 2015). Recidivism rates for batterers were substantially lower for those who
completed intervention programs when compared with those who stopped attendance
prematurely. In addition, re-arrest rates were substantially lower for batterers who
completed treatment than are generally found in the literature on batterer recidivism.
These findings offer optimism for counselors willing to address the batterer’s resistance
as a major component of treatment planning.
Assessing Perpetrators of Intimate Partner Violence
Assessment of batterers is important when considering the holistic impact upon victims,
victim safety, and changing abusive behaviors. A plethora of surveys exist to assess the
severity of batterer behavior. Most assessment tools ask questions of victims rather than
perpetrators, although both parties can be asked the same set of questions. The more
comprehensive assessment tools ask questions that seek to know more about the abusive
John Muldoon
I was the director of a batterer intervention program
for almost 7 years. While my body sometimes cringed
at statements men would make, I also saw the trauma
that some male offenders experienced because of
growing up with inappropriate or absent male role
models and the interconnection of substance use and
IPV/DV. My experiences raised my awareness about the
lack of equality inherent in batterer intervention. Many
of the batterers who chose to attend our program to
avoid incarceration were either unemployed or working
in blue-collar jobs. IPV/DV offenders with higher income
levels were often able to hire an attorney to dispute
the criminal charges at the time of the incident. I also
saw the lack of consistency from one jurisdiction to
another and even from one judge or probation officer
to another in terms of willingness to understand the
general mission of batterer programs and to collaborate
with our program. To this end, I know there are pockets
of places that are committed to take action to end IPV/
DV. Overall, there is work that still needs to happen
to educate people about IPV/DV. It continues to be a
social crisis that is greatly unknown and misunderstood,
except to those who experience it.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 8.2
Working in Batterer Intervention

-- 308 of 545 --

280 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
relationship and invite discussion of how victimization patterns and relationships
changed over time.
Typically, an assessment of IPV/DV severity includes a review of the following risk
factors: (1) access to/ownership of guns, (2) use of weapon in prior abusive incidents,
(3) threats with weapons, (4) serious injury in prior abusive incidents, (5) threats of
suicide, (6) drug or alcohol abuse, (7) forced sex of female partner, (8) obsessiveness/
extreme jealousy/extreme dominance, and (9) previous victimization or attempts of any
violence (National Resource Center on Domestic Violence, 2011).
Based on a review of data on domestic homicide, researchers found that the
following factors existed before the killing of an intimate partner: (1) a prior history of DV
on the part of the perpetrator; (2) an estrangement, separation, or an attempt at separation
by the victim; (3) prior involvement with police by the perpetrator, accompanied by
a failure to be deterred by police intervention or other criminal justice initiatives;
(4) threats by the perpetrator to kill the victim, with details communicated to the victim,
family members, friends, colleagues at work, or others; and (5) a restraining order or an
order of protection by the victim against the perpetrator (National Resource Center on
Domestic Violence, 2011).
Another significant but often overlooked factor that should be considered when
assessing the severity of IPV/DV is stalking. Morgan and Truman (2022) define stalking
as a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person
to feel fear. They reported that 3.4 million people in the United States (1.3% of all people
16 years and older) were victims of stalking in 2019, 67% of stalking victims knew the
stalker, 16% of stalking victims sought victim services, and 74% of those received services.
When considering co-occurring mental health and substance abuse issues, Thomas
et al. (2012) found that batterers who abused substances were more violent and were
more likely to perpetrate violence that is severe in nature, reported higher levels of
anger and trauma, and had a greater proclivity toward a borderline personality disorder.
Screening batterers for alcohol and other drug (AOD) problems and substance use is
highly recommended. Dual screening serves multiple purposes, including being more
vigilant about victim safety and focusing on anger and trauma issues when working
with AOD batterers.
Personal Safety
The presumption is that batterers will exert violence only toward their intimate partner.
However, counselors should be aware of how they interact with perpetrators and be
cognizant of personal safety. Accusations and criticism should be kept at a minimum
while balancing skills of challenging and confrontation to assist in empathy building,
awareness of violence, and behavioral change. Perpetrators should be held accountable,
but they should also be allowed to work in an environment where they can safely explore
their behaviors and not feel continuously criticized.
Counselors should also be able to identify when clients’ emotions become heightened
to assist in calming the situation or, if that is not possible, to seek additional means of
intervention. Assess the best way to maintain personal safety, get out of the violent path,
and then follow up for help, which may involve contacting law enforcement. Chapter 2
presents an expanded discussion of safety precautions and Chapter 14 presents an
expanded discussion of counselor self-care strategies during a crisis. Now complete Think
About It 8.2 and read Case Study 8.3. For additional resources on IPV/DV, see Table 8.1.

-- 309 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	281
Think about the current state of counselor training in
IPV/DV. What level of training and experience is needed
to counsel IPV/DV victims and perpetrators? What
training should be required in counseling programs?
What experience in IPV/DV intervention should be
required for licensure? What basic training about IPV/
DV programs should all counselors have?
THINK ABOUT IT 8.2
CASE STUDY 8.3
Intervening with an Intimate Partner Violence Solution
It is between 5:45 and 6:00 p.m. on a Tuesday. You are the counselor for this evening’s
batterer intervention program group. The group starts at 6:00 p.m. and participants have
begun checking in and paying their fees. One of the participants has already taken a seat
in the group room. You are aware that he received a phone call and left the building.
A few moments later, you hear yelling outside and go out to see what is happening.
Upon walking outside, you notice the member standing in the doorway very calmly. A
woman, whom the participant states is his estranged partner, is yelling, screaming, and
pointing an accusatory finger at him.
Discussion Questions
1. What do you do with/for the batterer intervention program participant?
2. What do you do with/for the woman?
3. What conclusions can you hypothesize from what you observed?
4. What questions will you ask the batterer intervention program participant?
5. What questions will you ask the woman?
Dating Matters: https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence/datingmatters/
index.html
Futures Without Violence: The National Health Resource Center on Domestic Violence, 1-888-792-
2873, https://www.futureswithoutviolence.org
National Center on Domestic Violence, Trauma, & Mental Health: http://www.
nationalcenterdvtraumamh.org
National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (NCADV): https://www.ncadv.org; https://ncadv.org/
resources
National Domestic Violence Hotline, 800.799.SAFE Online Chat, Text “START” to 88788; https://
www.thehotline.org
National Human Trafficking Resource Center/Polaris Project, 1-888-373-7888, Text “HELP” to
233733
National Sexual Assault Telephone Hotline, 1-800-656-4673, www.rainn.org
TABLE 8.1 Resources on Intimate Partner Violence
(continued)

-- 310 of 545 --

282 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Office on Women’s Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: https://www.
womenshealth.gov/violence-against-women/types-of-violence/domestic-intimate-partner-
violence.html
Preventing Intimate Partner Violence across the Lifespan: https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/
pdf/IPV/DV-technicalpackages.pdf
Women in Distress hotline: https://www.womenindistress.org/we-can-help/24-hour-crisis-hotline/
Teen and Young Adult Dating Violence Resources
Break the Cycle: https://www.breakthecycle.org
Futures Without Violence: https://www.futureswithoutviolence.org
Know Your IX: https://www.knowyourix.org
Love Is Respect: https://www.loveisrespect.org
Batterer Intervention Resources
Batterer Intervention Curricula: https://www.theduluthmodel.org/
Batterer Intervention Services in Michigan (they sponsor webinars): https://www.biscmi.org
National Online Resource Center on Violence Against Women: https://vawnet.org
National Resource Center on Domestic Violence (Harrisburg, PA): https://www.nrcdv.org
Research by Edward Gondolf (https://www.iup.edu/marti/publications/edward-gondolf/index.
html), Donald Dutton (https://drdondutton.com/journal-articles/; https://drdondutton.com/
books/), and Amy Holtzworth-Munroe (https://holtzlab.psych.indiana.edu/profiles/
profile%20-%20Amy%20HM.html)
Standards and Protocols for Batterer Intervention Programs: https://www.stopvaw.org/standards_
and_protocols_for_batterers_intervention_programs
TABLE 8.1 Resources on Intimate Partner Violence (continued)
SUMMARY
IPV/DV is an all-too-common crisis. As a result,
counselors must be prepared to respond to the
needs of its victims. Understanding the cycle of
violence is a critical first step for crisis counselors.
The cycle of violence consists of the tension-
building phase, the acute battering incident, and
the honeymoon phase, which is characterized
by contrite, loving behavior. It is also important
for counselors to examine their beliefs about
why IPV/DV victims stay in relationships
with abusive partners. In this chapter, various
explanations for staying with an abusive partner
were offered, including learned helplessness
theory and the ecological theory of IPV/DV.
Common crisis issues for IPV/DV victims
include attending to physical injury, establishing
immediate safety, and deciding whether to report
the IPV/DV to the police. When addressing IPV/
DV crises, counselors should strive to empower
victims to problem-solve effectively and respect
victims’ decisions to stay in or leave an abusive
relationship. When addressing IPV/DV in racial-
ethnic minority and LGBTQ+ communities,
counselors must be aware of the compounded
effects of IPV/DV on these populations due
to oppression stemming from factors such as
racism, classism, transphobia, and homophobia.
In addition, issues specific to female-to-male
violence, dating violence, and violence against a
partner with a disability must also be considered.
This chapter discussed barriers to IPV/DV
screening and endorsed universal screening of
IPV/DV in every crisis, regardless of whether the
presenting issue is IPV/DV. Screening includes
gathering concrete and specific details about
the client’s IPV/DV history and conducting a
lethality assessment to determine the degree
of urgency required in responding to the crisis.

-- 311 of 545 --

Chapter 8 • Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence 	283
When IPV/DV is disclosed, the counselor should
validate the victim’s experience, document
that it is occurring, and provide resources and
continued support to the victim.
A specific component of IPV/DV response
is safety planning or harm reduction planning,
which is based on the victim’s decision to stay
in or leave the abusive relationship. When
responding to IPV/DV, the counselor should
consider the emotional consequences of abuse
and be careful not to pathologize a normal
response to the trauma of IPV/DV. Counselors
who work with IPV/DV victims must be mindful
of self-care to avoid vicarious traumatization
and burnout.
The chapter concluded with a discussion
of the various aspects of batterer intervention.
The goals of batterer intervention programs
include ensuring the safety of IPV/DV victims,
stopping future violence, and increasing the
batterers’ accountability for their behavior.
Batterer intervention programs are based on
power and control theory, moral development
theory, attachment theory, and feminist-
informed 	cognitive-behavioral 	theories.
Common challenges encountered in batterer
intervention include the underreporting of
IPV/DV, confusion surrounding the differences
in anger management problems and battering
behavior, and limited financial resources.

-- 312 of 545 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 313 of 545 --

285
PREVIEW
Sexual violence is a broad term used to describe an unwanted sexual act that is perpetrated
on an individual via force or manipulation without the individual’s consent. Forms of
sexual violence include sexual assault and rape, unwanted sexual contact or touching,
sexual harassment, and sexual exploitation. The most common acts of sexual violence
are sexual assault and rape. Sexual assault is an underreported crime, with victims
facing numerous potential physical, psychological, cognitive, behavioral, and emotional
consequences. Counselors who work with survivors of sexual violence need to be aware
of the multitude of challenges these individuals face, best practices for treatment, and
support services available in the local community. In this chapter, sexual violence is
defined, signs and symptoms are described, crisis intervention is addressed, and long-
term counseling treatment interventions are discussed. The final section of this chapter
addresses sexual offenders, their patterns of behavior, and common treatment options.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
9.1 Define and apply key terms and concepts associated with sexual violence.
9.2 Describe demographic and statistical data related to the prevalence of sexual
assault and rape.
9.3 Describe the effects of other types of sexual violence, such as sexual harassment,
stalking, human trafficking, and with vulnerable school-age children.
9.4 Identify the physical, cognitive-behavioral, and emotional and physiological
effects of sexual violence.
9.5 Describe how medical and law enforcement personnel assist individuals who
experience sexual violence.
9.6 Describe and develop skills to treat individuals who experience sexual violence.
9.7 Describe important spiritual, religious, multicultural, disability, and LGBTQ+
issues related to sexual violence and assault.
9.8 Describe and develop skills needed to treat offenders and perpetrators of sexual
violence.
9 	Sexual Violence
Robin Lee and Jennifer Jordan
C H A P T E R

-- 314 of 545 --

286 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SEXUAL VIOLENCE, SEXUAL ASSAULT, AND RAPE
Learning Objective 9.1 Define and apply key terms and concepts associated with
sexual violence.
Sexual violence is a crime defined by a wide variety of acts, which include but are not
limited to sexual threats, unwanted sexual contact, and rape (Breiding et al., 2014). Sexual
violence continues to be an underreported crime. Many of the statistics available differ
depending on the definitions used, as well as reporting requirements for various law
enforcement groups. Sexual assault is defined as part of the broader term of sexual
violence.
Historically, the women’s movement was responsible for first drawing attention
to sexual violence in the late 1960s and early 1970s (Largen, 1985). Women began to
gather in communities to discuss problems they were facing, including experiences of
sexual assault. In the 1970s, the National Organization for Women drew attention to the
issue by developing rape taskforces, which were designed to investigate and document
the problems rape victims experienced in their communities. These taskforces began
advocating for change in public policies and social institutions, including court systems,
public education, and law enforcement agencies.
In the 1970s, the National Organization for Victim Assistance was formed, which
led to the development of the National Coalition Against Sexual Assault. In 1975,
Brownmiller published the classic Against Our Will, which brought attention to the issue
of rape and sexual assault. Later, in the 1980s, attention was given to acquaintance rape
after an article on campus sexual assault was published in Ms. magazine (Warshaw,
1994). This article, based on research conducted by Koss (1993), challenged the myth that
stranger rape was the most common form of sexual assault. In fact, the Rape, Abuse,
and Incest National Network (RAINN; 2022h) reports that two-thirds of perpetrators are
known to the victim. In 1994, the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) was passed,
which was the first federal legislation that focused on violent crimes (including sexual
assault) specifically committed against women and children (Roe, 2004).
Up for renewal about every 5 years, VAWA was reauthorized in 2000, 2005,
2013, and 2021, typically focusing on existing protections and programs to assist
survivors. The 2000 reauthorization created programs focused on legal assistance for
victims, specifically targeted to dating violence and stalking. The 2005 reauthorization
developed programming based on prevention, housing assistance for survivors, funds
for sexual assault centers, and culturally and linguistically focused services. In 2013, the
VAWA reauthorization focused on increasing access to services for Native American
and LGBTQ+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning, and others) survivors
(National Network to End Domestic Violence [NNEDV], 2022).
In the most recent 2021 reauthorization, VAWA included the following:
• Funding of $40 million for the Culturally Specific Services Program
• Avenues to justice that focus on victim autonomy, agency, and safety, including
restorative justice practices, investments in responses beyond a criminal system
approach, and expanded access to VAWA-funded legal services for survivors
• Housing protections that allow survivors in federally assisted housing to relocate
to new, safe housing with victim relocation vouchers; maintain housing after a
perpetrator leaves; or terminate a lease early

-- 315 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	287
• Restoration of tribal jurisdiction to hold non-native perpetrators of sexual assault,
stalking, child abuse, elder abuse, assault against law enforcement officers, and
trafficking accountable when they commit crimes on native lands
• Investment in prevention via the Rape Prevention and Education Program and
VAWA Department of Justice prevention programs
• Closure of dangerous legal loopholes in existing federal domestic violence–related
firearms laws that will help reduce domestic violence and dating violence homicides
• Economic justice responses that help survivors access unemployment insurance
and clarify what constitutes economic abuse
• VAWA nondiscrimination requirements that guarantee equal access to VAWA
protections for all survivors regardless of gender (NNEDV, 2022)
Unfortunately, the 2021 reauthorization did not include services for immigrant survivors.
VAWA established the Rape Prevention and Education (RPE) program, which
is overseen by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2020c). In 2001,
administration of the RPE moved to the National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control (Injury Center). The organization was designed to help with prevention efforts
by providing funding, training, and technical support to state agencies and sexual
assault coalitions in the United States. This partnership consisted of Injury Center staff,
victim advocate groups, prevention programs, survivors of sexual violence, state health
department representatives, and others working to eliminate sexual violence.
In 2002, the CDC published the first edition of the Sexual Violence Surveillance report.
The initial report was designed to provide definitions and guidelines for the purposes of
collecting data. The most recent report (2014) focuses on updating definitions of sexual
violence. According to the report, sexual violence is “a sexual act that is committed or
attempted by another person without freely given consent of the victim or against
someone who is unable to consent or refuse” (CDC, 2014, p. 11), which includes:
• Completed or attempted forced penetration of a victim
• Completed or attempted alcohol/drug-facilitated penetration of a victim
• Completed or attempted forced acts in which a victim is made to penetrate a
perpetrator or someone else
• Completed or attempted alcohol/drug-facilitated acts in which a victim is made to
penetrate a perpetrator or someone else
• Nonphysically forced penetration
• Unwanted sexual contact
• Noncontact unwanted sexual experiences
Penetration
A distinction in several of the categories is based on penetration. Forced penetration
is defined as physical insertion of body parts and/or objects. Examples of force
include restraining movement of a person by use of body weight, weapon, or threats.
Alcohol/drug-facilitated penetration is the term used to describe when a person is
penetrated by a body part or other object due to the inability to give consent based on
intoxication via use of alcohol or drugs. Nonphysically forced penetration occurs when
the person’s ability to give consent is altered due to verbal pressure, intimidation, or
abuse of authority.

-- 316 of 545 --

288 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Noncontact Unwanted Sexual Experiences
Physical contact is not always a part of sexual violence. In fact, some unwanted sexual
experiences may occur without the victim’s knowledge in various settings such as school
or work or through technology. Examples of noncontact unwanted sexual experiences
include (1) being forced into sexual situations (e.g., viewing pornography); (2) sexual
harassment through verbal comments or behaviors either in person or through technology
(e.g., spreading rumors, sending explicit photographs); (3) threats of sexual violence to
obtain money or sex; and (4) filming, taking, or disseminating sexually explicit material
without someone’s knowledge.
Consent
Another key factor of understanding sexual violence is consent. Consent must be freely
given in any sexual experience or contact. Consent is defined as words or actions freely
given by a person who is competent, both legally (e.g., not a minor, no physical or
intellectual disability) and functionally (e.g., not intoxicated, unconscious, or sleeping).
If a person is not competent based on the previous definitions, they are unable to give
consent. Another factor is the person’s inability to refuse, meaning that a person is unable
to disagree with engaging in a sexual experience due to pressure such as use of a weapon,
physical violence, intimidation, or misuse of authority.
SEXUAL ASSAULT AND RAPE
Learning Objective 9.2 Describe demographic and statistical data related to the
prevalence of sexual assault and rape.
While the definitions and distinctions regarding sexual violence vary, one form of
sexual violence emerges as the most prevalent. According to RAINN (2022h), a sexual
assault occurs every 68 seconds in the United States. The CDC conducted a national
study that provided data regarding rape and sexual assault. According to this report,
1 in 5 women (23 million) and 1 in 71 men (1.9 million) will be raped in the United
States (Breiding et al., 2014). The results also found that 44% of women and 23%
of men had experienced some type of sexual violence at some point in their lives.
Over the years, the rates of sexual violence have either dropped or remained steady.
However, it is important to recognize that two out of three sexual assaults will go
unreported (RAINN, 2022a). Victims of sexual violence may choose not to report due
to several factors, including fear of retaliation, a lack of confidence that law enforce-
ment will be helpful, and a belief that the crime is a personal matter and should be
handled privately.
According to the 2020 National Crime Victimization Survey (Bureau of Justice
Statistics, 2021), 90% of rape victims were female and 10% were male. In addition,
women with a history of rape before the age of 18 years were two times as likely to
be raped when they were adults. The CDC National Intimate Partner and Sexual
Violence Survey (Breiding et al., 2014) results estimate that 21.3% of women have
been raped and 43.6% have experienced some type of sexual violence other than
rape in their lifetimes. Based on race/ethnicity, 32.3% of multiracial, 55% American
Indian or Alaska Native, 47% White non-Hispanic, 38% Black non-Hispanic,

-- 317 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	289
35% Hispanic, and 32% Asian or Pacific Islander women have been raped during
their lifetimes. For men, 1.7% have been raped and 23.4% have experienced some type
of sexual violence other than rape in their lifetimes. Based on race/ethnicity, 39.5%
of multiracial, 26% Hispanic, 24% American Indian or Alaska Native, 24% Black
non-Hispanic, 22% White non-Hispanic, and 15% Asian or Pacific Islander men have
experienced some form of sexual violence in their lifetimes. Complete Activity 9.1 to
learn more about RAINN.
Visit the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network website at https://www.rainn.org. Explore the
website to learn more about how the organization benefits victims of sexual assault.
ACTIVITY 9.1
Sexual Assault
According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (2019), sexual assault includes
a wide range of victimizations, separate from rape or attempted rape. These
crimes include attacks or attempted attacks generally involving unwanted
sexual contact between victim and offender. Sexual assaults may or may not
involve force and include such things as grabbing or fondling. Sexual assault
also includes verbal threats.
State laws vary on how degrees of sexual assault are categorized, so it is important
for crisis counselors to know the law in their state. While sexual assault is often
perceived as being about sex, RAINN (2022a) describes it as a power and control crime.
There are several forms of sexual assault, including (1) rape (penetration of the body),
(2) attempted rape, (3) forced performance of sexual acts (e.g., oral sex, penetration of
the perpetrator’s body), and (4) fondling or unwanted sexual touching.
Rape
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2019) defines rape as
forced sexual intercourse including both psychological coercion as well as
physical force. Forced sexual intercourse means penetration by the
offender(s). This includes attempted rapes, male as well as female victims,
and both heterosexual and homosexual rape. Attempted rape includes
verbal threats of rape.
This definition allows inclusion of same-gender victims.
A few points are important to remember about rape. First, rape is one form of
sexual assault. Second, physical force is not always used during rape; perpetrators
may use other types of force, such as emotional pressure, psychological pressure,
or manipulation (RAINN, 2022d). Examples of force include threatening harm to
family or others close to the victim. Third, there are several types of rape, including
acquaintance rape, drug-facilitated sexual assault, intimate partner sexual violence,
and statutory rape.

-- 318 of 545 --

290 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
ACQUAINTANCE RAPE 	Historically, acquaintance rape or “date rape” was considered a
form of sexual violence. However, RAINN has recently recommended avoiding the use
of these terms due to the fact that use minimizes the seriousness of the assault (RAINN,
2022d). The recommendation is naming the crime followed by naming the perpetrator.
For example, sexual assault by an acquaintance.
The term acquaintance indicates that while the victim may know the assailant, the
victim is not necessarily in an intimate relationship with the perpetrator. According to
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (2021), 80% of rapes are committed by someone known
to the victim. Females in early adulthood are four times more likely to be sexually
assaulted than females in other age groups (RAINN, 2022h). Unfortunately, few of these
rapes are reported.
Although acquaintance rape occurs within the general population, it is most
prevalent on college campuses. According to a report published by the Bureau of
Justice Statistics on rape and sexual assault among college-age females, only 20%
(students enrolled in postsecondary institutions) and 32% (nonstudents) of sexual
assaults that occurred among college-age females (ages 18–24) were reported to
law enforcement (Sinozich & Langton, 2014). The Bureau of Justice Statistics report
also found that from 1995 to 2013, more than half of sexual assaults and/or rapes of
college-age females occurred during the pursuit of leisure activities away from home.
Weapons were present in 1 out of 10 incidents of rape and sexual assault. Of those who
did not report rape and sexual assault incidents to police, 26% of student and 23% of
nonstudent victims felt the assault was a personal matter, and 20% of both student
and nonstudent victims were concerned that the perpetrator would retaliate if they
did report. Four main factors emerged that increased the risk of college-age women
being a victim of a sexual assault and/or rape: (1) frequent intoxication to the point
of incapacitation, (2) single status, (3) previous sexual victimizations, and (4) residing
on campus. RAINN (2023) provides a prevention navigator to help campuses find the
right prevention program.
AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT 	An important issue related to acquaintance rape is consent.
While consent is not obtained in sexual assaults involving perpetrators not known to
the victims, the idea of consent can be unique with acquaintance rape. A new way of
thinking about consent is being addressed on college campuses. The phrase “yes means
yes” is being used to describe affirmative consent. The message for young people is that
consent is mutually agreed upon, is clearly understood, is freely given and not coerced
or forced, and is never assumed or implied.
While affirmative consent may seem to be a new concept, it is not. In the 1990s,
Antioch College, a small college in Ohio, developed a new policy called the sexual offense
prevention policy, which specifically addresses consent. The policy defines consent,
requires that all sexual interactions be consensual, and requires all students and full-time
employees sign a statement acknowledging that they understand and agree to the policy.
At the time, this policy was considered absurd, mocked, and even parodied by Saturday
Night Live. But now, 1,400 postsecondary institutions have some type of affirmative
consent policy. For example, Suffolk University offers information to students regarding
affirmative consent as part of the Title IX/Nondiscrimination Policy (https://www.
suffolk.edu/about/mission-history/policies-procedures/title-ix-at-suffolk/affirmative-consent).

-- 319 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	291
The university offers students information and resources to help them understand
affirmative consent. The following examples are not affirmative consent:
• When it comes to sex, silence is not consent.
• Flirting is not consent.
• Being in a relationship is not consent.
• Consent for one thing is not consent for everything.
• Dressing in sexy clothing is not consent.
• Having had sex before is not consent now.
• Being too drunk or too high to say no is not consent.
• Being passed out is not consent.
• Being afraid to say no is not consent.
• Making out is not consent.
• Going into a bedroom is not consent.
• “Maybe” is not consent.
• “No” is not consent.
In addition to colleges and universities, states have also developed legislation
to address affirmative consent. RAINN (2020) offers a map of state legislative policies
concerning consent (RAINN, 2020). California passed legislation in 2014 to require
that any higher education institutions receiving state funds be required to include
affirmative consent policies on sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and
stalking. In 2015, New York State approved similar legislation. Voices from the Field 9.1,
Think About It 9.1, and Case Study 9.1 address the important societal issue of sexual
violence on university campuses.
Michele E. Caruso
The more things change, the more they stay the same. Or
so the saying goes. For all the awareness and prevention
efforts, research on effective treatment methodologies,
and laws enacted, retracted, and enacted again, in
many ways substantial challenges remain in working
with sexual violence. This is true when working with
the victim directly and with those indirectly affected by
it, as well as the countless individuals hiding behind the
“it only happens to those people” blindfolds or lost in
the “ignorance is bliss” places.
I have been involved with this kind of work in
some capacity with college students for over 25 years.
The fears, anxieties, somatic headaches, depression,
and pain are the same. The faces are different.
I wouldn’t expect, though, the clinical experiences or
victim responses to change. We are all human beings,
after all, who were not born to be violated in such
a manner. What I would have expected to see shift
by now is the cultural setup for sexual violence, the
cultural response to sexual violence, and the cultural
treatment of the victims of sexual violence.
We all know sexual violence does not happen
in a vacuum. Nobody wakes up one day and thinks,
“Hmmm. I’m bored. I think I’ll rape someone today.”
We allow, condone, and even celebrate behaviors,
attitudes, activities, and certainly entertainment that
perpetuate sexist, racist, and heterosexist roles
that devalue, objectify, silence, and oppress. I would
even posit that there has been an escalation in this in
the last 20 years. College students are bombarded and
saturated with it. We could say there aren’t enough
conversations to the contrary, but there are. They just
aren’t getting through the noise. Is it any wonder?
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 9.1
Advocacy and Working Toward Prevention of Sexual Violence on College Campuses
(continued)

-- 320 of 545 --

292 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
For every college student who “gets it” and is
willing to use their voice, there are 100 who haven’t
heard of it, another 100 who don’t want to hear of
it, and another 100 who have heard of it but are too
afraid, confused, or “fill in the blank” to use their voice.
These are individuals with great potential to facilitate
the needed cultural shift and bring the generations
behind them along for the ride. For all the advocacy,
services, and research that take place on college
campuses, college students are still vulnerable to the
cultural perpetuation of sexual violence. Not only are
traditional age college students still the most at risk for
being victims of sexual violence, but they are also very
vulnerable to the cultural perpetuation of all the factors
that contribute to sexual violence.
So, working with college students through
prevention efforts or victim services has changed in
some ways but has remained the same in many other
ways. We might have more dedicated staff on campus
to address violence, but the effort is still significantly
underfunded. We might have more sexual assault
awareness events, but we still have entertainment on
the TV in the student unions that contributes to victims
being doubted. We might use social networking to
spread the word more efficiently than ever about
how to assist friends who are victimized, but social
networking is also used to spread hateful, disparaging,
and damaging sentiments about victims, potential
victims, and student advocates just as efficiently. We
might have more students looking for a place to find
and use their voice to address sexual violence, but we
still have boxes we keep people in where voices are not
allowed.
I do absolutely remain hopeful and certainly
inspired by those on the front lines and behind the
scenes in all the fields that address sexual violence,
from counselors and advocates to lawmakers and law
enforcement, and everyone in between. However, the
challenges in breaking through the cultural noise to
access and help victims and to shift the paradigm of
the upcoming generations in a way that would reduce
sexual violence remain.
Think about university responses to campus rapes. On
average, 19% of women report being sexually assaulted
or threatened with sexual assault on college campuses
(Bedera & Nordmeyer, 2015). In response, universities
and colleges have started campaigns to prevent
sexual assault and rape. Two types of campaigns have
emerged: empowering women and empowering men.
Empowering women campaigns focus on targeting
risky behavior, self-defense, and empowerment.
Empowering men campaigns focus on targeting men
to stop abuse and violent behavior. Despite the intent
of the campaigns, the most common information
provided to women is that women are vulnerable, that
there are no safe places, and that women should not
trust anyone. What is needed to better address this
serious societal problem?
THINK ABOUT IT 9.1
CASE STUDY 9.1
What Is Sexual Assault? Cindy’s Story
You have been working as a counselor at a university counseling center. Cindy—an
18-year-old college student—has come to see you because she is failing most of her
classes. She recently took her midterm exams and did not pass any of them. In addition,
she did not even take two of the exams. Cindy graduated at the top of her high school
class, even receiving an academic scholarship covering most of her tuition. She reports
that she is in jeopardy of losing her scholarship. Cindy is also concerned about her
parents’ reactions to her poor performance. They have always expected her to excel in
school, and she feels they will be very disappointed with her, possibly even insisting she
return home to her small rural town, from which she was trying to escape.
At your first meeting with Cindy, she also reports having trouble going to classes
because she is sleeping through most of them. She reports wanting to sleep all the time,

-- 321 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	293
DRUG-FACILITATED SEXUAL ASSAULT 	As mentioned earlier, intoxication may increase
the risk for sexual assault occurrences. With this knowledge, perpetrators have been
known to use drugs, often referred to as “date rape drugs,” to prepare for the sexual
assault. Drug-facilitated sexual assault typically occurs in one of two ways: (1) the
sexual assault occurs after the victim has voluntarily used alcohol and/or drugs or (2)
the perpetrator purposefully uses a drug to incapacitate the person. The three most
common drugs used to facilitate sexual assault are (1) alcohol, (2) prescription drugs
(e.g., sleep aids, tranquilizers, muscle relaxers), and (3) street drugs (e.g., Rohypnol,
gamma-hydroxybutyric acid [GHB], ketamine) (RAINN, 2022b).
Rohypnol, also known as “roofies,” can cause a myriad of effects, including dizziness,
loss of muscle control, confusion, lack of consciousness, and, in severe cases, death.
Rohypnol’s effects can last for more than a few hours (Drug Enforcement Administration,
2020). GHB is a powerful drug used to treat narcolepsy, yet it is often made on the
streets. GHB can cause blackouts, dreamlike feelings, seizures, coma, and possibly death.
Ketamine is a legal anesthetic mostly used on animals. Like most anesthetics, it can cause
symptoms such as numbness, loss of coordination, memory problems, and depression.
having a depressed mood, and avoiding her friends, who have convinced her to attend
counseling. Cindy’s appearance is disheveled, and she is wearing what seem to be dirty
clothes.
During the first two sessions, Cindy cries frequently and rarely shares
information. Finally, she reveals to you that a couple of weeks ago she went on a
date with Dennis, a guy from her sociology class, whom she has been interested in
dating since the beginning of the semester. Although Cindy reports that she is not a
big drinker, she had a few glasses of wine at dinner. They were having a great time
talking and laughing. She accompanied Dennis back to his dorm room, where they
laid on his bed and began kissing. Dennis offered her another drink, after which she
became dizzy and thinks she passed out. Cindy is uncertain if she agreed to have sex
with Dennis but is convinced her willingness to go to his dorm room indicated to
him that she wanted to have sex. She was shocked when she woke up in the hallway
outside her dorm room, missing her underwear and feeling sore in her private area.
Later that day, Cindy received several text messages from Dennis, who wanted to see
her again. When she responded that she was not interested, his next few texts became
increasingly hostile. When she asked him to stop and not contact her again, he sent
her a video of their sexual encounter. Dennis told Cindy that if she didn’t have sex
with him again, he would upload the video on social media sites. She is considering
meeting him but is terrified he will harm her.
Discussion Questions
1. Does this case meet the legal definition of sexual assault? If yes, what type?
2. What are the issues with consent in this case?
3. In this situation, how would you proceed with Cindy?
4. What are the legal and ethical guidelines that will drive your work with Cindy?
5. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model for crisis assessment and
intervention featured in Chapter 1.

-- 322 of 545 --

294 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
INTIMATE PARTNER SEXUAL VIOLENCE 	In intimate partner sexual violence, the
perpetrator has an existing relationship with the victim, who may be a partner or
spouse. Intimate partner sexual violence was previously referred to as spousal rape. This
type of violence is rarely reported and is most often classified as intimate partner
violence or domestic violence (see Chapter 8). However, when it is reported, police
officials enforce these cases the same way they would any other reported rape. This
type of sexual violence has had an arduous history. In the 1700s, the first legal statement
occurred by a chief justice in England, in which he declared a husband could not be
guilty of marital rape (Bennice & Resick, 2003). At some point, marital rape was in the
context of property, meaning that a man could not “steal” his own property. In the
1970s, advocates worked to modify marital rape exemptions. In the 1990s, marital rape
was included as a crime in sexual offense codes in all 50 states.
STATUTORY RAPE 	State statutory rape offenses are typically defined based on age of
consent, minimum age of the victim, age differential, and the minimum age a defendant
can be prosecuted. Age of consent in state statutes ranges from 16 to 18 years. The
minimum age of the victim ranges from 12 to 18 years. Age differential is often
dependent on the age of the victim, and ranges from 2 to 10 years (e.g., a 20-year-old
perpetrator and a 15-year-old victim).
Within statutory rape laws, many states include an “age gap provision” or “Romeo
and Juliet clause” to protect individuals who are close in age and not causing harm
through manipulation or coercion of another individual. The age gap provision and
Romeo and Juliet clause provide courts with the opportunity to use discretion and
consider each case individually. The punishment for statutory rape can be imprisonment,
a fine, or registering as a sex offender. However, other factors are used to consider the
severity and legal consequences, including (1) the age difference between the two people;
(2) whether the actor and victim are members of the same household; (3) whether the
actor is a teacher or other employee at the victim’s school; and (4) the actor’s past sex
offenses, if any (Findlaw’s Team, 2019).
Historically, laws have been enacted to protect minors who are unable to give
consent due to lack of maturity. Most of the protection was typically for females, to help
them avoid becoming victims of sexual violence by older men (James, 2009). However,
current statutes tend to be gender neutral. To find age of consent laws by state, visit
https://worldpopulationreview.com/state-rankings/age-of-consent-by-state.
Rape Myths
One reason sexual assault is one of the most underreported crimes may be the social
stigma of being a victim of sexual assault. For many years, myths about sexual assault
were commonly accepted, but with continued research and awareness-raising, many
of these myths have been dispelled. Some of the more common myths about rape and
sexual assault include the following:
• Myth 1: Rape is about sex. Rape is typically about the perpetrator’s need to exert
power and control over another individual, with sex as the weapon of choice.
• Myth 2: Victims of rape deserve to be raped due to their appearance or their neglect
of safety issues. Although sexual assault and rape awareness have improved
over the years, many individuals still believe that victims are to blame for their
assault. Some may believe that victims incite a rapist because of provocative dress,

-- 323 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	295
appearance, or behavior. Others may blame the victim if they perceive that the
victim did not take appropriate safety precautions to guard against an attack. As
discussed later in this chapter, sexual predators often rape someone with little or
no cause to do so—regardless of how a person dresses or behaves.
• Myth 3: Victims of sexual assault often make false reports based on revenge. The
percentage of sexual assaults that are falsely reported remains low. Ferguson and
Malouff (2016) conducted a meta-analysis of confirmed false rape reporting rates
and found that 5.2% of cases were confirmed false rape reports.
• Myth 4: Only strangers lurking in dark alleys commit sexual assaults. The Bureau
of Justice Statistics (2017) National Crime Victimization Study found that about
80% of rapes were committed by someone with whom the victim was familiar, and
82% of sexual assaults were committed by a nonstranger. Sexual perpetrators are
no longer thought of as mentally ill sociopaths who victimize strangers. Those who
sexually assault others come from diverse socioeconomic, racial-ethnic, geographic,
and educational backgrounds.
See Case Study 9.2, which asks you to consider the meaning of sexual assault. Then
complete Activity 9.2, which looks at the services provided to sexual assault victims in
your community.
CASE STUDY 9.2
What Is Sexual Assault? Sherry’s Story
You are a counselor in a mental health center. You have a new client named Sherry,
a 25-year-old who made an appointment for depression and anxiety she has been
experiencing. During the initial session, Sherry reports that she received an associate’s
degree at a local technical college in nursing assistance 6 years ago. Since receiving her
degree, she has worked primarily as a nurse’s aide in several rehabilitation centers. She
recently quit her job abruptly due to an incident at the rehabilitation center where she was
employed for 2 years. Sherry reports experiencing sleeplessness and weight loss. She has
difficulty getting out of bed every morning and has not looked for a new job since she left.
Sherry recently ended a 5-year relationship with her boyfriend, although the couple
was scheduled to be married in 6 months. She describes several episodes where she has
been forced to leave public places after being unable to catch her breath and feeling as
if she is being judged by others. After several sessions, she reveals that while working
at the rehab center, she was sexually assaulted by a 32-year-old patient named James,
who became a paraplegic after a car accident that left him paralyzed below the waist.
Sherry had begun to spend extra time with James after learning that he had very little
to no family support and typically had no visitors. On several occasions, he began to
ask questions about Sherry’s dating life, and he eventually asked her to date him. James
then began asking Sherry to help him deal with his frustrating involuntary erections
and ejaculations. When she laughed off this suggestion, he became more suggestive
and aggressive with Sherry. He would talk about his previous sexual activities prior
to being injured. Eventually, James’s behavior turned to sexual advances, such as
groping Sherry and suggesting that they should have sex. After enduring his advances
for several weeks, she finally complained to her supervisor and asked to be moved to
another wing. Her request was denied due to a staff shortage. Sherry was encouraged

-- 324 of 545 --

296 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Victim versus Survivor
It is important to address the terminology used by mental health professionals,
advocates, law enforcement officers, and those in the legal system to describe persons
who have experienced sexual trauma. Clients who experience a rape are often referred to
as victims. Although most counseling professionals would like to refer to all individuals
as “survivors,” in reality these clients are victims of rape crimes. While the term victim
may be the more accurate term to define the person as a victim of a crime, survivor is a
term that is used to define the person who has survived the crime and is moving forward.
The term victim is typically used by law enforcement, whereas survivor is typically used
by mental health professionals and advocates working in the field. Victim indicates the
feelings of powerlessness a person may feel after experiencing sexual violence; survivor
indicates the reclaiming of power and focuses on healing. Therefore, it is best to assess
the perception of the individual and where the person is in the process of healing to
determine the actions and resources each person needs from the crisis counselor. Thus,
use of the legal term victim is transitional and does not mean a person will not move
toward healing and being a survivor.
OTHER TYPES OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE
Learning Objective 9.3 Describe the effects of other types of sexual violence, such as
sexual harassment, stalking, human trafficking, and with vulnerable school-age children.
In addition to sexual assault and rape, several other types of sexual violence are
important to understand for context in legal and social discussions. These include sexual
harassment, stalking, human trafficking, and sexual violence against school-age children.
to remain professional and told that James was harmless. One day while Sherry was
helping him bathe, James overpowered her and sexually assaulted her with a shampoo
bottle. Sherry was so shocked, she left the rehab center that day and never returned. She
did not report the incident to her supervisor or the police.
Discussion Questions
1. Does Sherry’s experience meet the definition of sexual assault? Why?
2. What are some additional problems Sherry might develop resulting from her
sexual assault?
3. Keeping these circumstances in mind, how would you proceed to work with
Sherry?
4. What are the legal and ethical guidelines that will drive your work with Sherry?
5. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model for crisis assessment and
intervention featured in Chapter 1.
Determine if your community has an agency that spe-
cifically deals with victims of sexual assault. Request an
interview with an agency official to obtain answers to
these questions: What services are provided to victims
in the community? Who provides these services? How
can victims access these services?
ACTIVITY 9.2

-- 325 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	297
Sexual Harassment
The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC; 2023) defines sexual
harassment as “unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct of a sexual nature” that “explicitly or implicitly affect an individual’s
employment, unreasonably interfere with an individual’s work performance, or create
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment” (para. 2). Sexual harassment
is gender neutral and not always directed at one specific person but at those who
are offended by the actions or behaviors. The offense can occur in work or learning
environments, various work- or school-related settings (e.g., after-hour meetings,
hallways), or any other public location where behaviors such as exposing sexual parts,
fondling, or “catcalling” can happen. The federal law that addresses sexual harassment
is Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Stalking
According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (Morgan & Truman, 2022), stalking is defined
as “repeated unwanted contacts or behaviors that either cause the victim to experience
fear or substantial emotional distress or that would cause a reasonable person to
experience fear or substantial emotional distress” (p. 1). The Bureau of Justice Statistics
estimates that 3.8 million people, age 18 years and older, have been victims of stalking
over a period of 1 year. Specific examples of stalking include (1) making unwanted phone
calls; (2) sending unsolicited or unwanted letters or e-mails; (3) following or spying on the
victim; (4) showing up at places without a legitimate reason; (5) waiting at places for the
victim; (6) leaving unwanted items, presents, or flowers; and (6) posting information or
spreading rumors about the victim on the Internet, in a public place, or by word of mouth.
Criminal laws on stalking have been enacted by all 50 states, as well as by the
federal government and the District of Columbia. The Bureau of Justice Statistics
(Morgan & Truman, 2022) reports that 69% of stalking victims knew their offender
in some capacity. Technology can be a way for perpetrators to stalk their victims.
Cyberstalking can include spying or tracking through a computer, tracking by GPS,
posting personal information publicly, sending unwanted electronic communication,
and installing video cameras in places that will violate privacy (RAINN, 2022g).
The effects of stalking can be broad, from causing extreme personal distress to loss
of employment to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). RAINN offers several ways
to help victims deal with stalking, which include making it clear the communication
is unwanted and needs to stop, documenting the incidents, not responding to the
stalker, notifying friends and family about the stalking, reporting the stalking to law
enforcement, and learning about computer safety.
Human Trafficking
A growing concern in sexual violence is human trafficking. According to the U.S.
Department of Justice (2022), human trafficking “is a crime that involves exploiting a
person for labor, services, or commercial sex.” More specifically, the Trafficking Victims
Protection Act of 2000 (TVPA) defines two forms of human trafficking as:
Sex trafficking: the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, obtain-
ing, patronizing, or soliciting of a person for the purpose of a commercial sex

-- 326 of 545 --

298 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
act, in which the commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in
which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age;
Labor trafficking: the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or
obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or
coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage,
debt bondage, or slavery. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
[DHHS], 2022b, para. 2)
If the individual originally participated in prostitution but was then coerced,
forced, or manipulated into soliciting, without consent, they are a victim of trafficking
(U.S. Department of Justice, 2022). Evidence of force, fraud, or coercion does not have
to be present for a minor (an individual under the age of 18 years) to be a victim of sex
trafficking when performing any commercial sex act.
The known victims of sex trafficking are overwhelmingly female, racial-ethnic
minorities, and under the age of 18 years (Varma et al., 2015). TVPA defines minors
under the age of 18 years involved in “commercial sex acts” as victims (National Human
Trafficking Hotline, 2022; National Institute of Justice, 2022). A commercial sex act is defined as
“prostitution, pornography, and sexual performance done in exchange for any item of value,
such as money, drugs, shelter, food, or clothes” (Shared Hope International, 2022, para. 2).
According to DHHS (2022b), traffickers “use force, fraud, or coercion to subject
victims to engage in commercial sex or forced labor” (para. 3). Table 9.1 provides detailed
information about human sex trafficking.
Children who fall into the sex-trafficking industry do not possess the ability to
make choices and maintain control, thus classifying them as a true victim, not a criminal.
However, some governments continue to prosecute these minors for criminal offenses
such as prostitution.
Varma et al. (2015) found that victims of sex trafficking often exhibited more risk-
taking behavior (e.g., using illegal drugs) and were more often victims of childhood
sexual abuse. Many victims of sex trafficking also had an extensive history of violent
abuse. Homelessness is another area of concern for victims of sex trafficking. Youth who
are homeless often engage in survival sex, meaning that they will trade sexual favors
for necessities like food, shelter, or money. The behavior increases a young person’s
vulnerability to engaging in sex trafficking.
Varma et al. (2015) also found that 39% of the sex-trafficking victims interviewed
were suffering from untreated mental health disorders, such as bipolar disorder, PTSD,
and schizophrenia. Many victims do not disclose their victim status for many of the
same reasons that survivors of sexual assault do not (e.g., fear, guilt, distrust of law
enforcement). In a report by the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children,
it was estimated that “1 out of 6 runaways were likely child sex trafficking victims. . . .
Of those, 68% were in the care of social services or foster care when they ran” (Polaris
Project, 2022, para. 5). While the negative effects of engaging in sex trafficking are still
widely unknown, a few new findings are coming to light.
Varma et al. (2015) found the following harmful consequences in sex trafficking
victims: 70% sustained injuries while “on the job,” 89% exhibited symptoms of clinical
depression, 55% exhibited symptoms of PTSD, 84% reported substance abuse, and 67%
reported obtaining a sexually transmitted infection (STI) because of their exploitation.
Treatment in this area should focus on support and crisis intervention techniques,
as well as services for both mental and physical health (Gibbs et al., 2015). There is

-- 327 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	299
ACTION 	MEANS** 	PURPOSE
Recruiting includes proactive
targeting of vulnerability and
grooming behaviors
Harboring includes isolation,
confinement, and monitoring
Transporting includes
movement and arranging
travel
Providing includes giving to
another individual
Obtaining includes forcibly
taking, exchanging something
for ability to control
*Soliciting includes offering
something of value
*Patronizing includes
receiving something of value
Force includes physical
restraint, physical harm,
sexual assault, and beatings.
Monitoring and confinement
are often used to control
victims, especially during early
stages of victimization to break
down the victim’s resistance.
Fraud includes false promises
regarding employment,
wages, working conditions,
love, marriage, or a better
life. Over time, there may be
unexpected changes in work
conditions, compensation or
debt agreements, or nature of
relationship.
Coercion includes threats of
serious harm to or physical
restraint against any person,
psychological manipulation,
document confiscation, and
shame- and fear-inducing
threats to share information or
pictures with others or report
to authorities.
Commercial sex act is any sex act on
account of anything of value given to or
received by any person.
Involuntary servitude is any scheme, plan,
or pattern intended to cause a person to
believe that, if the person did not enter into
or continue in such condition, that person or
another person would suffer serious harm or
physical restraint or the abuse or threatened
abuse of the legal process.
Debt bondage includes a pledge of services
by the debtor or someone under debtor’s
control to pay down known or unknown
charges (e.g., fees for transportation,
boarding, food, and other incidentals;
interest, fines for missing quotas; charges for
“bad behavior”). The length and nature of
those services are not respectively limited and
defined, where an individual is trapped in a
cycle of debt that can never be paid down.
Peonage is a status or condition of
involuntary servitude based on real or alleged
indebtedness.
Slavery is the state of being under the
ownership or control of someone where a
person is forced to work for another.
Notes: *Only for sex trafficking; **means are not always present in sex trafficking of minors.
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (n.d.).
TABLE 9.1 Information about Sex Trafficking
still a lack of research in the area of sex trafficking and the best treatments for victims.
There are four key aspects of treating victims of sex trafficking: (1) ensuring safety
and confidentiality, (2) engagement of trauma-informed care, (3) performing a
comprehensive needs assessment, and (4) delivery of comprehensive case management
that coordinates physical and mental health and legal services (Marburger & Pickover,
2020, p. 18).
Sexual Violence and School-Age Children
Working with an adolescent population, a professional school counselor is highly likely
to encounter students who have been exposed to sexual violence. Issues of consent may
exist with teen encounters that are sexual in nature. With the broad definitions of sexual
violence (e.g., sexual assault, rape, sexual harassment, stalking), it is important for school
counselors to be aware of the definitions of sexual violence and the regulations that
determine a course of action.

-- 328 of 545 --

300 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
The Office for Civil Rights (DHHS, 2022d) oversees Title IX, which prohibits
discrimination based on sex in educational settings. Educational institutions receiving
federal funding are responsible for addressing any form of sexual violence or harassment
that creates a hostile environment, which includes taking action to eliminate, prevent,
and address sexual violence and its effects.
According to the U.S. Department of Education (2020b), a hostile environment
occurs when “the conduct is sufficiently serious that it denies or limits a student’s ability
to participate in or benefit from the school’s program” (para. 4). Schools are required to
investigate any possible sexual violence that occurs either on or off campus. However,
the involvement of law enforcement in any criminal investigation does not absolve the
school of responsibility. Title IX requires schools to develop and publish a policy against
sexual discrimination, identify a Title IX coordinator to maintain compliance and oversee
any complaints of sexual discrimination, and develop a comprehensive procedure for
students to be able to file complaints, investigate incidents, and impose sanctions on
perpetrators.
Based on the school’s responsibility to deal with sexual violence, either reported
or rumored, a student’s right to confidentiality may be a challenge. Victims of sexual
violence may request anonymity with reporting or responding to an incident. This
may be particularly difficult for school counselors who are ethically obligated to
maintain confidentiality. School counselors will need to determine whether a
student’s exposure to sexual violence is a limit to confidentiality. School counselors
should consider consulting peers or supervisors to determine the best action. In
addition, school counselors should be aware of local, state, and federal policies
related to sexual violence in schools. See Case Study 9.3 for an example of a dilemma
of school counseling.
CASE STUDY 9.3
A School Counselor’s Dilemma
Imagine that you are a school counselor at a local high school. Sara, a 16-year-old student,
presents in your office, tearful and distraught. She tells you about a party that happened
over the weekend. The party was at her friend Jessi’s house after the football game.
Jessi’s parents were not at home during the party. With no adult supervision, kids were
drinking and smoking marijuana. Sara reports that she drank some alcohol but did not
do any drugs. She accepted a drink from Michael, who attends the school. Although she
had seen Michael at school, she was not friends with him and had no previous contact.
According to Sara, she and Michael chatted as she sipped her drink. She remembers
laughing and enjoying talking to him. However, she does not remember anything after
that encounter. She woke up in a bedroom, half dressed, and feeling sore in her private
area. She found Jessi and learned that Michael had taken Sara upstairs. Jessi reported Sara
was laughing as they went up the stairs and seemed okay, so Jessi did not intervene. Sara
returned home and began to finish some homework. As she worked, she began to receive
text messages from friends about some social media postings about her. Apparently,
Michael was describing their sexual encounter at the party on Snapchat, bragging to
his friends, providing explicit details, and promising to provide pictures he had taken.

-- 329 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	301
EFFECTS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE
Learning Objective 9.4 Identify the physical, cognitive-behavioral, and emotional
and physiological effects of sexual violence.
Burgess and Holmstrom (1974) first coined the term rape trauma syndrome to describe the
cluster of symptoms reported by women who were raped (see Table 9.2; see also Burgess,
1991). Burgess, a psychiatric nurse, and Holmstrom, a sociologist, conducted research
with women who presented in the emergency department after having experienced a
rape. Burgess and Holmstrom described two distinct phases of women’s response to
sexual assault: the acute phase and the reorganization phase. During the acute phase,
the victim experiences a heightened stress level, lasting from several days to multiple
weeks. The reorganization phase is a longer-term process of integration, during which
the victim regains a sense of control over life.
In their classic conceptualization of rape trauma syndrome, Burgess and
Holmstrom (1974) found commonalities consistent with PTSD, including a significant
On Monday after the party, Sara noticed that people were snickering at her. By the end
of the day, she had been called “slut” and “whore” by several classmates who are not
her friends. She is devastated and not sure what she should do. She begs you not to tell
anyone. Sara’s father is a local police officer, and she is concerned about what he would
do if he learned Michael had assaulted her.
Discussion Questions
1. Does Sara’s experience meet the definition of sexual assault? If yes, what type?
2. What are some of the additional problems Sara might develop due to her traumatic
encounter?
3. Keeping these circumstances in mind, how would you proceed?
4. What are the legal and ethical guidelines for you? For the school?
5. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model for crisis assessment and
intervention featured in Chapter 1.
Psychological Symptoms 	Behavioral Symptoms
Continuing anxiety
Severe mood swings
Sense of helplessness
Persistent fear or phobia
Depression
Denial
Flashbacks
Difficulty concentrating
Rage
Difficulty sleeping (nightmares, insomnia, etc.)
Eating difficulties (nausea, vomiting, compulsive eating, etc.)
Withdrawal from friends, family, activities
Hypervigilance
Sexual problems
Reluctance to leave house or go places that remind the
individual of the sexual assault or perpetrator
Source: Summarized from Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network (2015a).
TABLE 9.2 Symptoms of Rape Trauma Syndrome

-- 330 of 545 --

302 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
stressor, intrusive thoughts about the sexual assault, and decreased involvement in
their environment (e.g., feeling emotionally numb), as well as various other symptoms
such as sleep disturbances, hypervigilance, guilt, impaired memory, and fears about
reoccurrence of the sexual assault.
Crisis intervention during the acute phase, and an understanding of the “normal”
reactions that victims experience during this phase, can help to decrease the sense
of powerlessness one has over personal reactions. When a victim understands that
displayed behaviors are “normal to the abnormal event” (although different than
precrisis functioning), it is possible the reorganization phase can be affected positively.
Normalizing and educating victims about common reactions and responses at each stage
is crucial. Although most research has focused on females as victims, male victims can
also experience these similar responses to rape.
Physical Effects of Sexual Violence
Physical reactions to sexual violence can manifest in varying somatic complaints,
including chronic pain, sleep disturbances, hypervigilance, and impaired memory.
Sleep disturbances may range from sleeplessness or frequent waking to excessive
amounts of sleeping. Victims may deal with other physical issues because of the
sexual violence, including headaches, pregnancy, STIs contracted during the assault,
or permanent physical injuries sustained during the attack. Disorders such as
gastrointestinal disorders, cervical cancer, and genital injuries may occur. According
to the CDC (2020c), approximately 3 million women have experienced rape-related
pregnancy in the United States.
Cognitive-Behavioral Effects of Sexual Violence
Victims of sexual violence may experience cognitive-behavioral problems and may have
impaired memory and/or concentration, including memory loss or the inability to recall
certain details in their lives. They may have a marked inability to concentrate on work
tasks and other activities of daily living. Victims of sexual violence may change addresses
or telephone numbers to try to ensure their safety. They may find themselves in a state
of hyper alertness, which can manifest as paranoia (e.g., feeling as if they are being
followed), compulsive behaviors (e.g., constantly checking the house for intruders), or
displaying an imaginary audience (e.g., thinking that others can tell they were sexually
assaulted by looking at them).
Emotional and Psychological Effects of Sexual Violence
Emotional and psychological reactions to sexual violence may be either expressed or
controlled. Victims who demonstrate more expressed reactions openly show emotions
by crying, screaming, yelling, or even laughing. Those who demonstrate more controlled
reactions may show little outward emotion or remain completely silent. Victims may
experience a wide range of emotions: (1) guilt about surviving the attack, (2) self-blame
about not being able to stop the attack, (3) shame if they chose not to report the assault,
(4) humiliation with family and friends, (5) anxiety about another attack, and
(6) depression that manifests as an inability to return to normal functioning in daily life.
Victims may report feeling emotionally numb and being unable to reconnect with the
world around them. The violence suffered by victims may affect their emotional and

-- 331 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	303
psychological health, which can manifest in different ways including PTSD, acute stress
disorder and other anxiety disorders, self-harm, depression, substance use, eating
disorders, and even suicide.
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER 	The fifth edition, text revision of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association,
2022) provides criteria for PTSD: (1) exposure to a traumatic event, either directly or to
a close friend or relative, witnessing the event, or repeated and/or extreme exposure to
details of traumatic events; (2) recurrent distressing memories or dreams related to the
traumatic event, dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks), or severe physiological reac-
tions; (3) avoidance of thoughts and feelings related to the event, including reminders;
(4) negative effects on mood and cognition; and (5) extreme reactions such as angry
outbursts, hypervigilance, sleep disturbances, or difficulty concentrating. DSM-5 was
the first edition of the DSM to include sexual assault as a specific traumatic event, which
is defined specifically as “threatened or actual violence (e.g., forced sexual penetration,
alcohol/drug-facilitated sexual penetration, abusive sexual contact, noncontact sexual
abuse, sexual trafficking)” (p. 274). According to the 2011 National Intimate Partner and
Sexual Violence Survey conducted by Breiding et al. (2014), 20% of female respondents
and 5.2% of male respondents who have experienced “contact sexual violence” also
experienced one or more symptoms of PTSD. These statistics are derived from inter-
views with 6,879 women and 5,848 men age 18 years and over who completed surveys
by phone in the United States.
DEPRESSION AND SELF-HARM 	As discussed above, one of the symptoms of rape trauma
syndrome is depression. After experiencing a violent assault, it is reasonable to expect
that victims would feel sadness, despair, and hopelessness. The depression victims
experience may lead to either a fatal or nonfatal act of self-harm. With symptoms of
depression, as well as other feelings of loss, guilt, and shame, victims may choose sui-
cide. Statistics correlate in that females make up the majority of victims of sexual vio-
lence, 1 in 10 women experience depression in the United States (Zhou et al., 2019), and
depression is one of the leading causes of suicide. Based on these statistics, the suicide
risk of victims increases due to their depression regarding the sexual violence.
While victims of sexual violence may consider suicide, they may also engage in
self-harm. The CDC (2019) defines self-violence as “anything a person does intentionally
that can cause injury to self, including death” (para. 2). Examples of self-violence include
biting, burning, cutting, hitting the body, pulling out hair, and scratching and picking
skin (RAINN, 2022e). Many victims of sexual assault may choose self-harm as a way of
coping with the distress caused by their traumatic event, albeit not a positive or effective
coping mechanism.
EATING DISORDERS 	Sexual violence may also impact a victim, both physically and
emotionally, through an eating disorder. According to RAINN (2022c), perceptions of
body image may affect victim eating habits. Focusing on food may be an attempt to feel
control while dealing with an event for which the victim feels out of control. However,
while this focus may provide some relief in the short term, it can cause long-term
physical and emotional damage. Behar et al. (2016) found that as many as 30% of
patients with an eating disorder have experienced sexual violence.

-- 332 of 545 --

304 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
ACUTE STRESS DISORDER 	Those survivors who do not develop symptoms of PTSD
may show significant signs of acute stress disorder (ASD) surrounding the event.
According to the DSM-5-TR, individuals must meet the following ASD diagnostic
criteria: (1) exposure to an incident that ended in actual or threatened death, injury, or
sexual violation (excluding exposure through media sources; e.g., television, movies);
(2) symptoms from categories such as intrusion symptoms (e.g., flashbacks), negative
mood, dissociative symptoms, avoidance symptoms, or arousal symptoms;
(3) disturbance that occurs between 3 and 30 days following the trauma exposure;
(4) significant impairment of important areas of functioning (e.g., job performance); and
(5) disturbance that cannot be attributed to any medical condition, substance use, or
psychiatric disorder. Estimates of ASD in victims of sexual violence range from 20 to
50%. One of the hallmarks of ASD is an extreme anxiety level that significantly interferes
with sleeping patterns, physical energy, and the ability to complete tasks. Avoidance
results in withdrawal from situations perceived as threatening. What differentiates
ASD from the more severe PTSD is that the symptoms must occur and dissipate within
1 month of the trauma event or exposure. Intensity, severity, and duration of symptoms
must be considered when diagnosing ASD and PTSD in survivors of sexual violence.
ADDICTION 	The relationship between sexual violence and addiction has been
demonstrated and documented both qualitatively and quantitatively. Frequency,
duration, and type of abuse are heavily correlated with misuse of both drugs and
alcohol. Victims of sexual violence may turn to substances instead of seeking treatment
for a variety of reasons, including (1) feelings of shame and guilt or personal
responsibility for the sexual assault incident; (2) lacking access to adequate treatment;
(3) lacking resources (e.g., economic, transportation); or (4) feeling fearful. Victims may
view substances such as alcohol or prescription drugs as a way to relieve emotional
distress, “numbing” themselves to the effects of the sexual assault, or as a way to cope
with symptoms of a mental health disorder resulting from the attack.
According to RAINN (2015b), victims of rape are 13 times more likely to misuse
alcohol and 26 times more likely to misuse drugs, demonstrating the significant connection
between sexual violence and substance use. Furthermore, victims of child sexual assault
are at a higher risk for addiction, which can lead to revictimization in adulthood, risk
for incarceration, suicide risk, and comorbidity with mental health disorders (Asberg &
Renk, 2013). Asberg and Renk (2013) reported that incarcerated female survivors of child
sexual assault used more avoidant coping characterized by substance use to deal with
these negative experiences. Daigre et al. (2015) conducted a study in which patients in
an addiction treatment center were asked about use experiences within their lifetime.
Almost 14% of the participants reported an instance of sexual abuse.
When working with clients who have been victims of sexual violence, the warning
signs for addiction should be recognized when present. Victims dealing with addictions
may present with depression or anxiety, disinterest in activities they once enjoyed,
aggression or irrationality, or simply forgetfulness (SafeHelpline, 2016). According
to the DSM-5-TR, features of a substance use disorder include (1) relapse effects (e.g.,
intense craving for a substance); (2) rapid changes in behavior; (3) problems with impulse
control; (4) engaging in risky behavior; (5) social impairment (e.g., failure to show up for
work or other obligations); (6) increases in tolerance of a substance; or (7) withdrawal
symptoms, which vary across substances. See Table 9.3 for additional resources for

-- 333 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	305
Victim Support
Anti-Violence Project: www.avp.org
Childhelp USA: https://www.childhelp.org/; hotline: 1-800-422-4453, 1-800-222-4453,
(1-800) 4-A-Child
Coalition to Abolish Slavery & Trafficking (CAST): https://www.castla.org
Male Survivor: https://malesurvivor.org
National Sexual Assault Telephone Hotline: 1-800-656-HOPE (4673)
National Sexual Violence Resource Center (NSVRC): https://www.nsvrc.org
Polaris Project: https://polarisproject.org/about-us/
Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network (RAINN): https://www.rainn.org/
Substance Abuse Support
Free Substance Abuse Treatment Referral Helpline: SAMHSA HELPLINE 1-800-662-HELP (4357)
Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network (RAINN): https://www.rainn.org
Safe Helpline Sexual Assault Support: https://www.safehelpline.org
Perpetrator Treatment and Management
Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers: https://www.atsa.com
Men Can Stop Rape: https://mcsr.org
Sex Offender Solutions & Education Network: https://sosen.org
STOP IT NOW!: https://www.stopitnow.org; hotline: 1-888-PREVENT (773-8368)
Counseling Therapies and Training
Cognitive-behavior therapy (Beck Institute): https://beckinstitute.org
Cognitive-behavioral therapy with children and adolescents training: https://albertellis.org/
professional-rebt-cbt/
Cognitive processing therapy training (Medical University of South Carolina): https://cpt2.musc.
edu/?AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1
National Center on Domestic and Sexual Violence: Training events around the country, http://
www.ncdsv.org/ncd_upcomingtrainings.html
Office for Victims of Crime: Training and Technical Assistance Center—Sexual Assault Advocate/
Counselor Training, https://www.ovcttac.gov/saact/
Trauma-focused CBT training (Medical University of South Carolina): https://tfcbt2.musc.edu/
Additional Reading
Abbey, A., Helmers, B. R., Jilani, Z., McDaniel, M. C., & Benbouriche, M. (2021). Assessment of
men’s sexual aggression against women: An experimental comparison of three versions of the
Sexual Experiences Survey. Psychology of Violence, 11(3), 253–263.
Aymer, S. (2011). A case for including the “lived experience” of African American men in
batterers’ treatment. Journal of African American Studies, 15, 352–366.
Camp, A. R. (2018). Pursuing accountability for perpetrators of intimate partner violence: The
peril and utility of shame. Boston University Law Review, 98(6), 1677–1736.
TABLE 9.3 Resources on Sexual Assault
(continued)

-- 334 of 545 --

306 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
helping victims, perpetrators, and general information for counselors and individuals
who work with sexual assault.
Sexual Assault and Current Issues
In early 2020, the world changed for everyone when the COVID-19 pandemic hit. While
lockdowns and quarantines were required in most of the world, many people experienced
a second silent pandemic because rates of sexual violence often increase during states of
emergency, such as health crises, natural disasters, or active conflicts. A report developed
by the Louisiana Foundation Against Sexual Assault and the National Sexual Violence
Resource Center found that during Hurricane Katrina and the subsequent recovery
period, reports of sexual assault increased by 45% (Klein, 2008).
Claxton, T. L., & Richards, T. N. (2021). A comparison of clients in a differentiated batterer
intervention treatment program: The importance of treatment level matching by referral sources.
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 65(16), 1804–1822.
Cunha, O., & Abrunhosa Gonçalves, R. (2013). Intimate partner violence offenders: Generating a
data-based typology of batterers and implications for treatment. European Journal of Psychology
Applied to Legal Context, 5(2), 9–17.
Duane, Y., Carr, A., Cherry, J., McGrath, K., & O’Shea, D. (2002). Experiences of parents
attending a programme for families of adolescent child sexual abuse perpetrators in Ireland.
Child Care in Practice, 8(1), 46–57.
Espelage, D. L., Rulison, K. L., Ingram, K. M., Valido, A., Schmeelk-Cone, K., & Wyman, P. A.
(2022). Social networks of adolescent sexual violence perpetrators: Peer friendship and trusted
adult characteristics. Prevention Science, 23(1), 154.
Expósito-Álvarez, C., Lila, M., Gracia, E., & Martín-Fernández, M. (2021). Risk factors and
treatment needs of batterer intervention program participants with substance abuse problems.
European Journal of Psychology Applied to Legal Context, 13(2), 87–97.
Gover, A., & Richards, T. (2017). A review of state standards for batterer intervention treatment
programs and the Colorado model. Court Review, 53(1), 36–44.
Guedes, A. (2012). Perpetrators of violence/batterers. http://www.endvawnow.org/en/
articles/229-perpetrators-of-violence-batterers.html?next=230
Krahé, B., & Berger, A. (2013). Men and women as perpetrators and victims of sexual aggression
in heterosexual and same-sex encounters: A study of first-year college students in Germany.
Aggressive Behavior, 39, 391–404.
Mulqueeny, D. M., Roberts, J., & Nkabini, S. M. (2020). Mapping evidence of young people’s
experiences of sexual aggression in the United Kingdom: A systematic scoping review protocol.
Systematic Reviews, 9(1), 1–7.
Newman, C., & Iwi, K. (2015). Engaging with perpetrators of domestic violence: Practical
techniques for early intervention. Jessica Kingsley.
Soloski, K. L., & Durtschi, J. A. (2013). Ethical issues regarding perpetrator involvement in the
systemic treatment of incest. Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 24, 188–207.
Wiggins, J., Hepburn, S., & Rossiter, R. (2013). Reducing harmful sexual behaviour in adolescents.
Learning Disability Practice, 16(8), 16–23.
TABLE 9.3 Resources on Sexual Assault (continued)

-- 335 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	307
While “stay at home” polices protected people from COVID-19, it also increased the
vulnerability of women and children who now lacked the resources needed to survive
sexual violence. Given that most perpetrators are known to victims, the possibility
of victims being subjected to violence by individuals in their home was a reality.
The National Sexual Assault Hotline reported an increase in contact from minors,
with the majority reporting sexual violence by a family member in their home. With
the close of schools, minors did not have access to school personnel to help intervene.
Additionally, financial stress and psychological stress caused by the pandemic led to an
increase in domestic violence (Cannon et al., 2021).
Like most businesses and organizations during the pandemic, sexual assault centers
were forced to close and then pivot their method of providing services once services could
be provided. Organizations were forced to rethink their method of providing services, as
well as reaching victims. One initiative by RISE, an organization formed in 2014
to bring equality to sexual assault survivors across the country and around
the world, was a campaign titled “Survivor SafeHaven,” which encouraged
businesses to post flyers aimed at reaching anyone who experienced violence.
For more information about the campaign, visit https://www.risenow.us/.
RAINN (2022f) developed guidelines to aid first responders, including
information on how to conduct virtual services. This included guidelines for
legal systems, law enforcement, medical facilities, social services facilities,
sexual assault centers and shelters, and child advocacy centers.
While the COVID-19 pandemic had a negative impact on most societal
aspects around the world, there were some positive aspects, including the
acceptance of virtual services in multiple settings. For the organizations pro-
viding services to victims of sexual violence, virtual services provided access
for communities that may have had limited resources prior to the pandemic.
RAINN (2022f) developed the Checklist for Facilities to Prevent & Respond to
Sexual Violence During the COVID-19 Public Health Crisis to help organizations
pivot to virtual services. This resource included guidelines and trainings
for offering tele-forensic services, including sexual assault forensic examina-
tions, typically conducted by sexual assault nurse examiners (SANEs).
MEDICAL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT INVOLVEMENT WITH
INDIVIDUALS WHO EXPERIENCE SEXUAL VIOLENCE
Learning Objective 9.5 Describe how medical and law enforcement personnel
assist individuals who experience sexual violence.
Early evaluation and intervention are vital for individuals who experience sexual
violence. Typically, two facilities provide intervention and evaluation services for
victims. The first is the emergency department (ED), where many victims of sexual
violence first present themselves after having been physically injured during an attack.
Once victims enter the health care system, they are treated for a variety of possible health
concerns (e.g., pregnancy, STIs, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B). The second treatment facility for
survivors of sexual violence is a crisis center, which is typically in a different location from
the emergency medical facility and can be a self-contained unit, providing all services
on-site. Most of these crisis centers have 24-hour crisis telephone services through which
victims can make initial contact. Often, if victims of sexual violence present to a law
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 9.1
Kyle Beach was an NHL player
who lived with the experience of
sexual assault for over a decade.
In the interview, Kyle tells his
story, including his personal reac-
tions, the impact of the sexual
abuse on his personal life and his
relationships, and how he is start-
ing to heal from the assault. What
are your first thoughts about
Kyle being the victim of a sexual
assault and would it impact you
working with him? What were
the common reactions he shared
in his lived experience?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Z_56yBz8IZI
Watch from 03:50 to 13:40

-- 336 of 545 --

308 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
enforcement facility, they will be taken to either an ED or a crisis center, depending on
which facility typically handles these types of cases in the local community.
Services that are provided at EDs or crisis centers may include (1) evidence
collection, (2) medical interventions to treat possible health concerns, and (3) examinations
by SANEs, who are specially trained to work with victims of sexual assault. The crisis
center may use trained, on-call volunteers to assist survivors of sexual assault when
victims present at the crisis center, police department, or ED. Counselors may participate
in this volunteer program, often by providing the services during regular hours and by
preparing, supporting, and supervising volunteer workers.
The most important functions of these volunteers are to support survivors during
the process of reporting and to help prepare them for future steps. Crisis counselors and
volunteers help victims understand the medical examination and evidence collection
process, anticipate legal requirements, and develop safety plans. The crisis center may
also offer additional services, including short-term or long-term counseling, education,
and legal assistance. Although these may be the two most prevalent places victims of
sexual violence present or are taken, it is important for all counselors to understand the
process and what may occur during medical examinations.
Medical Examinations
Medical examinations are a crucial crisis intervention strategy when dealing with sexual
assault. The medical exam, however, can be both uncomfortable and overwhelming to a
victim. Victims have experienced a violation that is both physically and psychologically
intrusive, and many may fear that the medical exam required to collect evidence will
lead to reliving the trauma they experienced.
It is important for counselors to become familiar with the medical exam process to
help victims understand and prepare for the exam. By offering information about what
to expect during the process, the counselor can allow the victim to gain some control.
The U.S. Department of Justice’s Office on Violence Against Women (2013)
developed a national protocol for sexual assault forensic exams (SAFEs) to recognize the
sensitive needs of victims of sexual violence and preserve evidence vital to the successful
prosecution of offenders. Once a victim presents to an ED or crisis center, a SAFE is
conducted by a trained medical professional, such as a SANE. The SAFE typically takes
about 4 hours to complete and involves collecting biological samples, including blood,
urine, hair, and saliva, and obtaining oral, vaginal, and anal swabs and smears that
may be used for DNA analysis and comparison. Urine samples help determine whether
victims were drugged during the sexual assault.
Clothing and any foreign materials on the body are collected, and many crisis centers
provide donated clothing to victims once their clothing has been collected for evidence. For
evidence preservation purposes, it is important for victims not to bathe, wash their hands,
or brush their teeth; counselors should be knowledgeable about the need for collecting
urine samples in case victims are unable to wait until the forensic examiner arrives.
A final aspect of the medical exam involves treating any potential medical
conditions that occur due to the sexual violence (e.g., pregnancy, STIs, HIV/AIDS,
hepatitis B). These conditions are treated with oral medications during the exam. The
CDC recommends follow-up testing for STIs 1–2 weeks after the assault and for syphilis
and HIV testing 6, 12, and 24 weeks after the assault.

-- 337 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	309
Law Enforcement Involvement
Because law enforcement may be an entry point for some victims of sexual violence,
many law enforcement departments are offering specific training and specialized
units for working with survivors of sexual violence. The first step for many depart-
ments is to train personnel to understand the dynamics of rape and sexual assault.
This training may range from basic 1-day training to a more extensive course to
help officers develop a deeper understanding of how to handle sexual violence.
Training should include understanding the victims they will encounter, common
reactions and responses victims may have, types of violence that may occur during
assaults, and patterns of perpetrators. Officers need to be aware of services avail-
able to victims and how to help victims who have been sexually violated access
those services.
Once the first responders have connected sexual violence victims to the health care
system, the next step for law enforcement officials is the investigation, which may be
handled by specialized units that are trained in investigating sexual violence, including
procedures for interviewing survivors and collecting evidence. After the conclusion of
the investigation, the case may be turned over to the local prosecutor’s office, which may
then develop a case to present to a judge and/or jury.
Victims may be referred to a victims’ assistance program to help deal with the
personal impact of the trial. These programs can help victims understand their rights
regarding the court case and provide funds to support victims. In 2004, the Justice for All
Act became law. Initially, this legislation allowed victims to write, submit, and present
impact statements (Office for Victims of Crime, 2006). According to the National Center
for Victims of Crime (2017), a victim impact statement allows the victim of a crime to
share the effect(s) of the crime. Statements typically focus on the harm that the offense
caused, including physical, emotional, and financial harm, as well as harm to family and
other significant relationships. Statements are most often given in either written or oral
form and can be used at sentencing.
The Justice for All Reauthorization Act of 2013 includes the following crime vic-
tims’ rights: (1) the right to be informed of a plea bargain or prosecution agreement in
a timely manner and (2) the right to be informed of one’s eligibility to receive victims’
services. In addition, victims can receive services from the Victims’ Rights Ombudsman
of the Department of Justice. Reauthorized in 2016, the Justice for All Reauthorization
Act focuses on rape kit backlogs, provides funding for hiring SANEs in underserved
areas, strengthens crime victims’ rights and services, and strengthens the use of DNA
testing related to crimes (RAINN, 2016).
TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUALS WHO EXPERIENCE SEXUAL VIOLENCE
Learning Objective 9.6 Describe and develop skills to treat individuals who
experience sexual violence.
As discussed earlier, rape trauma syndrome is an adaptation of PTSD used to understand
symptoms experienced by survivors of sexual violence. Because there are significant
similarities between rape trauma syndrome and PTSD, counselors should familiarize
themselves with both. PTSD, ASD, and other related diagnoses were discussed in
Chapter 1.

-- 338 of 545 --

310 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Short-Term/Immediate Interventions
Short-term interventions for sexual assault tend to be crisis intervention strategies and
begin with a victim advocate. Although counselors often do volunteer as advocates, most
are probably not trained mental health professionals. However, many sexual assault
service organizations provide extensive training to volunteers to help them establish
skills to work effectively with individuals who experience sexual violence.
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID APPROACH 	Decker and Naugle (2009)
stress the importance of victims determining their own needs and voicing
them before any intervention begins. They found little empirical evidence
for immediate intervention after sexual violence. After a thorough
investigation of the literature, they found that psychological first aid
(PFA)—a systematic set of skills known for working with victims of recent
traumatic events—is the most favorable approach for immediate
intervention with sexual violence victims. It is a practical set of actions that
is meant to be used immediately, within 24 hours following a trauma.
While PFA was originally intended for use following natural disasters,
increasing evidence supports its use with victims following sexual violence.
PFA can be used in a wide variety of settings and with a range of different
clients, including children and clients from various multicultural
backgrounds (Brymer et al., 2006).
PFA consists of eight essential components, referred to as “core
actions”: (1) contact and engagement, (2) safety and comfort, (3) stabilization,
(4) information gathering, (5) practical assistance, (6) connection with
social supports, (7) information on coping support, and (8) linkage with
collaborative services. The benefits of PFA are that it can be used by mental health
professionals who have been trained in the application of the core actions and it promotes
immediate support as well as long-term coping.
Currently there is a lack of PFA-qualified responders. Research shows that victims
of sexual violence who do not get help immediately following an incident are at higher
risk for mental health problems and increased risk of suicide (McCabe et al., 2014).
Training in PFA is often offered by the American Red Cross and other health-conscious
organizations. Chapters 1 and 12 provide more information on PFA.
In PFA, the first assessment is about the safety of the survivor. Approach the
victim gently and introduce yourself. Allow the victim to determine what role you will
have and respect these wishes. You can begin by explaining some of the supports you
could offer—for example, comfort items such as a blanket—or your willingness to just
sit quietly with the victim. Remember the factors that can impede the medical exam
process (e.g., no brushing teeth, eating, drinking, showering, or changing clothes before
the exam). While supporting the victim continually, assess their wish for your level of
involvement. It is crucial to allow the victim to feel in control of this process. Offer to
accompany the victim to the medical exam, if appropriate in your position. In some
agencies, schools, and private-practice settings, it may be more appropriate for support
systems to be contacted to assist in this role. Ask the victim if they would like you to
explain the exam process step by step. Let the victim lead the conversation; do not push
or direct the dialogue, especially toward the incident. If the victim does wish to speak
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 9.2
This video demonstrates the
impact of sexual assault on a
college campus and the reac-
tion from the faculty member
who was sexually assaulted.
The counselor gathers infor-
mation by asking questions.
What components of the
psychological first aid (PFA)
approach were evident in the
session?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=AOCa2gyap5Y
Watch from 00:00 to 06:08

-- 339 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	311
about the assault, it is crucial to be supportive; do not doubt or blame the victim. Use of
active listening and empathic statements have the most impact at this stage.
After the exam and any necessary protocol, such as speaking with law enforcement,
assess the victim’s need for safety. Determine the best place for the victim to go and the
types of support necessary and begin implementing those strategies.
Figure 9.1 is a Q-tree that helps crisis workers assist advocates and counselors when
identifying the short-term needs of a survivor of a sexual assault.
FIGURE 9.1 	Q-Tree for Identifying the Short-Term Needs of a Survivor of a Sexual Assault
Is immediate medical attention
needed?
Help the victim decide if they want to
access emergency medical services.
Prepare them for what they will
encounter when they arrive at an ED.
Explain the options and timing
restrictions regarding a forensic
exam.
• Does the victim want an evidence
kit collected?
Yes 	No
Is the victim likely to experience an
ongoing threat (actual or perceived)
from the perpetrator?
Yes 	No
Are you mandated to report the
incident?
Have the hotline number ready and
know your responsibilities to protect
victims based on disability, Title IX,
perpetrator/victim age differences,
etc.
Yes 	No
Identifying the Short-Term Needs of a Survivor of a Sexual Assault

-- 340 of 545 --

312 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Long-Term Interventions
After individuals have undergone the immediate procedures after the
assault (e.g., medical interventions), long-term counseling services should
be considered. Crisis counselors should perform a thorough evaluation to
determine the most appropriate treatment plan. Several assessments exist that
may be helpful when collecting information related to the assault, including
the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5—Child/Adolescent
Version (CAPS-CA-5; Pynoos et al., 2015), Clinician-Administered PTSD
Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5; Weathers et al., 2013), UCLA Child/Adolescent
PTSD Reaction Index for DSM-5 (Elhai et al., 2013), Assault Information and
History Interview (AIHI; Foa & Rothbaum, 2001), and PTSD Checklist for
DSM-5 (PCL-5; Weathers et al., 2013). Self-report measures include the Impact
of Event Scale–Revised (Weiss, 2004) and the Rape Aftermath Symptom Test
(Kilpatrick, 1988). As with any crisis, a risk assessment should be completed.
Another consideration is the length of the treatment program. Although
some victims have already experienced short-term interventions (e.g.,
victim advocacy, medical examination, involvement with law enforcement),
longer-term counseling may help them deal with the effects that occur long
after the sexual violence. Foa and Rothbaum (2001) offer these suggestions
to crisis counselors when working with survivors: (1) provide support
to the survivor for other issues being dealt with (e.g., involvement in the
legal system, family considerations, job stress); (2) take and maintain a nonjudgmental
attitude; (3) show a level of comfort with the traumatic events described; (4) demonstrate
competence with rape trauma syndrome; (5) feel confident about the treatments chosen;
(6) focus on personal resources; and (7) normalize the response to the assault.
Parcesepe et al. (2015) completed a systematic review to determine which mental
health interventions were most effective for adult female sexual assault survivors. They
reviewed articles from 1985 to 2012 that include studies pertaining to the treatment
of adult female sexual assault survivors. They carefully selected articles that met the
Downs and Black Checklist for Measuring Study Quality for inclusion in their review.
Only nine articles met the study inclusion criteria. The results indicated that there are at
least seven treatment modalities that are effective in treating adult female sexual assault
survivors’ symptoms and PTSD diagnosis, including assertion training, clinician-assisted
emotional disclosure, cognitive processing therapy (CPT), eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing (EMDR) therapy, prolonged exposure therapy, stress inoculation
therapy, and supportive psychotherapy with information. Furthermore, they found that
symptoms of depression related to the assault were best treated with CPT and EMDR,
while symptoms of anxiety were best treated with assertion training and supportive
psychotherapy with information. Studies using CPT and prolonged exposure therapy
reported long-term improvement for up to 6 years, whereas the other interventions
studied did not offer follow-up data.
The sections that follow discuss techniques and approaches for long-term
interventions with sexual assault survivors. They cover cognitive-behavioral approaches,
including trauma-focused CBT, CPT, prolonged exposure therapy, and EMDR; anxiety
management training programs, including stress inoculation training and relaxation
training; and other approaches to trauma treatment, including psychoeducation and
group counseling, and expressive arts. A final section provides information about
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 9.3
This older training video for
hospital staff offers an excellent
demonstration of a first crisis
interview in a hospital following
a rape. The counselor demon-
strates attending skills, normal-
izing, psychoeducation, and
taking a collaborative approach.
How were the skills of normal-
izing and psychoeducation
effective in this demonstration?
(Note: This film shows a reenact-
ment of a sexual assault in the
beginning of the video, which
is not part of the clip we have
asked you to watch.)
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=W_B_T_kGQPA
Watch from 26:33 to 30:23

-- 341 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	313
emerging approaches that focus on the treatment of trauma. Some of these techniques
and approaches may require additional training and education.
Cognitive-Behavioral Approaches
Cognitive-behavioral approaches are well researched and have been shown to
have positive results for survivors of sexual violence. Jaycox et al. (2002) outline a
12-session treatment plan using cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) that includes (1)
psychoeducation about trauma and the effects of trauma, (2) behavior techniques such
as breathing retraining to reduce anxiety, (3) real-life and imaginal exposure, and (4)
cognitive restructuring. Several of the most frequently used cognitive approaches are
outlined below: trauma-focused CBT, prolonged exposure therapy, dialectical behavior
therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, CPT, and EMDR.
TRAUMA-FOCUSED 	COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL 	THERAPY 	Created 	by 	Cohen
et al. (2017), trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TF-CBT) is specifically
geared toward working with children, adolescents, and their families. It consists of
eight components characterized by the acronym PRACTICE: (1) Psychoeducation,
(2) Relaxation and stress management skills, (3) Affective expression and modulation,
(4) Cognitive coping and processing, (5) Trauma narration, (6) In vivo mastery of
trauma, (7) Conjoint child–parent sessions, and (8) Enhancing future safety and
development. TF-CBT can decrease the symptoms of PTSD and other symptoms caused
by assault. The treatment also provides relief for caregivers of the victim, providing a
secondary gain for all those involved. In recent studies, TF-CBT improved PTSD
symptoms of survivors of sexual assault/abuse (Hébert & Amédée, 2020; Kenny et al.,
2019). Additional information can be found at https://www.nctsn.org/resources/
how-implement-trauma-focused-cognitive-behavioral-therapy-tf-cbt-implementation-manual
(see also National Child Traumatic Stress Network, 2012).
PROLONGED EXPOSURE THERAPY 	According to Foa and Rothbaum (2001), exposure
therapy is considered one of the most appropriate treatments for PTSD symptoms
related to sexual assault. It is a form of systematic desensitization that calls for repeated
exposure to a traumatic event to reduce the fear, anxiety, and pathology associated with
the event. During exposure therapy, clients, with eyes closed, are encouraged to recall
the traumatic event in the safety of a counselor’s office. These sessions are often recorded
to allow the client to review at home to continue the repeated exposure to the memories,
with the intent of continuing to lessen the fear and anxiety associated with the event.
Although this treatment may be stressful, it is considered one of the most effective
interventions for treating sexual assault survivors.
Another form of exposure therapy, in vivo therapy, involves repeated exposure
to real-life situations or places that remind the victim of the event to restore feelings of
safety. In a study conducted by Foa et al. (2013), prolonged exposure therapy improved
PTSD symptoms in female adolescent victims of sexual abuse.
DIALECTICAL BEHAVIOR THERAPY 	Developed in the late 1970s by Marsha Linehan,
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is an evidenced-based approach to help clients
change maladaptive patterns of behavior, such as suicidal ideation, self-harm, and
substance use (Linehan, 1993). DBT focuses on understanding triggers that allow for

-- 342 of 545 --

314 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
more emotional and cognitive regulation by helping clients develop effective coping
strategies. Although there are no recent studies using DBT to treat victims of sexual
assault, Steil et al. (2018) used DBT to successfully treat victims of child sexual abuse.
ACCEPTANCE AND COMMITMENT THERAPY 	Acceptance and commitment therapy
(ACT) is an empirically based approach using acceptance and mindfulness strategies
combined with commitment and behavior-change tactics to develop psychological
flexibility (Hayes et al., 2011). The goal of ACT is to encourage clients to be present in
life rather than eliminate difficult feelings. ACT encourages clients to embrace
unpleasant feelings and avoid overreacting.
Six core processes of ACT guide patients through therapy and provide a framework
for developing psychological flexibility (Harris et al., 2011): acceptance, cognitive
defusion, being present, self as context, values, and committed action. In a single-subject
study, Hiraoka et al. (2016) used ACT to treat a female veteran who experienced military
sexual trauma (MST). Based on the results of the treatment, ACT showed positive
implications for MST-related depression. In another single-subject study, Burrows (2013)
used ACT to treat a female survivor of sexual assault with PTSD symptoms. Results
showed a reduction in symptoms and increased quality of life.
COGNITIVE PROCESSING THERAPY 	Cognitive processing therapy is geared toward
relieving PTSD symptoms by combining cognitive and exposure interventions. CPT
is based on information processing theory, particularly related to how codes are
stored and the ability to recall information, to influence how the trauma is perceived.
Specifically, CPT focuses on the new information related to the trauma that does not
match the victims’ existing schema about themselves, the world, or the trauma.
A schema is a generic guide to help victims deal with the overwhelming information
that is processed daily, which influences coding, comprehending, and retrieving
information. When an event happens that does not fit into a schema, the information
must still be processed. Victims will either (1) alter the information or distort it in
some way to fit into their existing schema or (2) change the existing schema to accept
the new information. When using CPT with survivors of sexual violence, counselors
assess the schema and determine where clients are stuck, meaning where the new
information of being victimized does not fit into an existing schema. The goal is to
help survivors learn how to appropriately accommodate the new information instead
of distorting the information.
CPT is usually conducted in a 90-minute group format over a 12-week period.
However, it can also be used with individuals. The 12 sessions have the following themes:
(1) introduction and education, (2) understanding the meaning of the event, (3) identifying
thoughts and feelings, (4) remembering the incident, (5) identifying stuck points,
(6) challenging questions, (7) identifying faulty thinking patterns, (8) discussing
safety issues, (9) identifying trust issues, (10) identifying power and control issues,
(11) identifying esteem issues, and (12) identifying intimacy issues and the meaning
of the event. Several research studies have indicated that CPT can be beneficial as an
intervention strategy when treating survivors of sexual assault who were experiencing
acute stress disorder and substance use issues (Jaffe et al., 2021; Nixon & Bralo, 2019). To
hear from a clinician who uses CPT with survivors of sexual assault, read Voices from
the Field 9.2.

-- 343 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	315
Amber Hiott
When I graduated from college with my BA in psychol-
ogy, I did not have a clear idea of what I wanted to do.
So, instead of pressuring myself, I started to volunteer at a
local domestic violence and sexual assault center. Within
1 month of my volunteer work, I was offered a full-time
position as a victim advocate. In this role, I was able to
work directly with victims as a support and a resource.
Working at this center inspired me to go back to school
to become a mental health counselor; I wanted my life’s
work to revolve around helping survivors of trauma. After
receiving my MEd in clinical mental health counseling,
I began working at another sexual trauma center. At this
center, I served as an individual and group counselor and
I had the privilege of working directly with both ado-
lescents and adults. While each client was unique and
had a distinct life story, client goals were often the same:
“I want to get better.” As their counselor, I would gently
assist clients to concretely identify what “better” would
look like for them and, once these goals were identified,
the path to recovery and healing would begin.
One of the main tools I used when working with
survivors is an evidence-based practice called cognitive
processing therapy. This model suggests that after
experiencing trauma, a person can be affected in five
core areas: safety, trust, self-esteem, power and con-
trol, and intimacy. By using this model, I assisted clients
in identifying their thoughts in each of the five core
areas, and we worked together to shift these thoughts
over the course of treatment. CPT also has an expo-
sure component, which ultimately helps the survivor
to “stop avoiding” and to account for the trauma in a
safe and nonthreatening environment. This model pro-
vided enough structure to help clients feel secure yet
enough flexibility to offer personalized and individual-
ized treatment.
Although CPT has proven to be extremely effec-
tive with the victims I work with, it is also important to
evaluate individual needs and tailor the model accord-
ingly. This approach has allowed me to help clients “get
better,” while also leaving me amazed and humbled by
the resilience of every person, adult and adolescent I’ve
had the honor of working with. I thank each of them
for their testimony, their courage, their strength, and
their survival.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 9.2
Using Cognitive Processing Therapy with Survivors of Sexual Violence
EYE MOVEMENT DESENSITIZATION AND REPROCESSING 	EMDR therapy attempts to
help survivors process memories of their assault that cause psychological and
psychosomatic symptoms that interfere with their daily living. EMDR processes parts
of the trauma and uses bilateral stimulation such as eye movement, tapping, or sounds
to change the way the brain is processing a memory. EMDR therapy uses eight phases
of treatment to identify and deal with the trauma that creates a person’s current distress.
These phases include (1) discussion of the client’s history and treatment plan, (2) client
preparation, (3) assessment of the target event, (4) desensitization, (5) installation,
(6) body scan, (7) closure, and (8) reevaluation. In recent studies, EMDR improved
PTSD symptoms with survivors of sexual assault (Schwarz et al., 2021).
Anxiety Management Training Programs
Several anxiety management training (AMT) programs are effective for treating PTSD
symptoms following sexual violence. AMT programs are designed to help equip clients
with tools to better handle anxiety. AMT treatments that have been found to be most
successful working with sexual assault survivors include stress inoculation training and
relaxation training.
STRESS INOCULATION TRAINING 	Stress inoculation training (SIT) was developed by
Meichenbaum (1996) as a treatment to help clients deal with a stressful event and to

-- 344 of 545 --

316 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
prevent or “inoculate” them against future stressors. According to Meichenbaum, SIT
has three phases: (1) conceptualization, (2) skills acquisition and rehearsal, and
(3) application and follow-through. In the conceptualization phase, the counseling
relationship is developed, stressors are evaluated to determine severity, problem-
solving methods are employed to determine stressors that can be changed, and goals
are set. In the skills acquisition and rehearsal phase, coping skills are taught and
rehearsed in the clinical setting so they can be applied in stressful situations.
These coping skills include emotional regulation, self-soothing, relaxation training,
problem-solving skills, communication tools, and social support networks. In the application
and follow-through phase, the client applies the coping skills developed through modeling
and role playing. In this final phase, ways to prevent relapse are discussed.
RELAXATION TRAINING 	Relaxation techniques can be incorporated in any treatment
plan when working with survivors of sexual violence. Survivors can learn how and
when to use relaxation techniques and how to apply the techniques at times when they
are triggered by the traumatic event causing dysfunction. These techniques include
deep breathing, deep muscle relaxation, and cue-controlled relaxation, which involve
teaching the client to recognize body tension, using it as a cue for employing relaxation
techniques. It is crucial to practice and process any type of adjunctive therapies (e.g.,
relaxation, mediation) within a counseling session before having individuals integrate
them outside of the counseling environment. These types of therapies can allow intru-
sive thoughts and flashbacks of the sexual violence to become present.
Other Approaches to Trauma Treatment
A number of additional approaches to treating trauma have emerged and shown promise
over the past few decades. The following are discussed in this section: psychoeducation,
group counseling or therapy, expressive arts, and other emerging trauma techniques.
PSYCHOEDUCATION AND OTHER TREATMENTS 	During the process of recovery,
survivors must learn many things related to sexual violence, understand the myths that
surround sexual violence, and develop awareness of negative thoughts they may
experience, as well as any triggers associated with the assault. Several common reactions
may occur: (1) fear and anxiety; (2) reexperiencing the trauma through nightmares or
flashbacks; (3) increased arousal such as impatience or irritability; (4) avoidance of
situations that remind the client of the assault; (5) numbness; (6) anger; (7) guilt and
shame; (8) depression; (9) negative self-image; and (10) problems with intimate
relationships, including issues with sexual pleasure.
GROUP COUNSELING 	Group counseling is a common treatment modality for victims of
sexual violence. Most rape crisis centers and abuse shelters offer some form of group
counseling or therapy. The most common and most beneficial types of group counseling
for victims of sexual violence are support or therapy groups. The group format allows
survivors to share their stories with others in a supportive environment and gain an
understanding of their symptoms and concerns.
Group counseling encourages the feeling of belonging and facilitates the growth
process. Jacobs et al. (2015) recommend screening clients prior to having them enter a

-- 345 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	317
support or therapy group for sexual assault. They stress the importance of the client
having had individual counseling and being at a point where the client is dedicated to
moving forward in the treatment process. Jacobs et al. draw attention to the fact that
many survivors early in the recovery process are still trying to make sense out of the
assault and have not yet dealt with the guilt and shame that accompanies such abuse,
and so are not ready to enter into the group therapy process.
EXPRESSIVE ARTS TRAUMA APPROACHES 	Expressive arts approaches are frequently
used to treat trauma. Art therapy, music therapy, dance therapy and writing therapy
can be used to help survivors of sexual assault process their trauma through creative
activities when words may be difficult.
OTHER EMERGING TRAUMA TECHNIQUES 	Several other emerging approaches have
been shown to treat trauma effectively, including internal family systems (integrative,
holistic model that trusts clients/families to heal themselves) and brainspotting (i.e.,
locating visual field points that help clients access unprocessed trauma experiences
housed in subcortical portions of the brain), although there is no research using these
techniques as treatment for sexual assault yet.
In addition, several approaches are effective in treating children who have been
sexually abused that could be adapted to work with survivors of sexual assault, including
trust-based relational intervention (attachment-based, trauma-informed intervention for
children; Purvis, 2022) and attachment, self-regulation, and competence (ARC; a trauma-
informed treatment for children/adolescents relying on the components of normative
childhood development, traumatic stress, attachment, and risk and resilience; Blaustein
& Kinniburgh, 2010). Other child-centered approaches, such as sand tray therapy (use
of sand design and tactile contact to reprocess trauma and abuse), have been researched
with survivors of sexual assault (Doyle & Magor-Blatch, 2017). Finally, animal-assisted
therapy has been used as a trauma treatment.
Voices from the Field 9.3 provides an in-the-field perspective on working with
clients who have experienced sexual assault.
Alissa Sawyer Beuerlein
After working in a variety of clinical settings, I have had
my share of clients who are victims of sexual violence.
I can recall that only a few weeks into my first “real job”
in counseling at a community mental health center, I was
both shocked and heartbroken at the overwhelming
number of clients who reported being sexually violated.
I have found since then that this is a global issue with
far too little awareness. I have gone through various
training programs to better treat these clients.
Common themes exist among many sexual assault
victims. One such commonality is knowing who their
abuser is prior to the sexual assault(s). I find this frequently
among children, adolescents, and adults alike. There have
been less than a handful of clients over the years who
I have encountered who did not know the perpetrator
prior to the sexual assault(s). A second commonality
is repeated sexual assault by different people.
This is a phenomenon I am still attempting to understand.
The best way I can frame this in my own mind is that
sexual assault victims lose a sense of self, self-respect,
and self-esteem and thus are more vulnerable to those
who prey on others sexually than those who exude
more confidence and self-respect.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 9.3
Working with Victims of Sexual Assault in Mental Health Settings
(continued)

-- 346 of 545 --

318 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SPIRITUAL AND MULTICULTURAL ISSUES IN SEXUAL VIOLENCE
AND ASSAULT
Learning Objective 9.7 Describe important spiritual, religious, multicultural,
disability, and LGBTQ+ issues related to sexual violence and assault.
Ethical and legal issues regarding sexual violence include confidentiality, release of
information, counselor competence, and personal values. When working with victims
of sexual violence or assault, a counselor may experience ethical dilemmas related to
confidentiality, which may conflict with personal values. It may be quite obvious to the
counselor that reporting the assault may be in the best interest of the client. However,
the counselor is both ethically and legally obligated to maintain confidentiality, even if it
is counterintuitive to the client’s needs. In addition, the counselor is ethically obligated to
avoid imposing personal values on the client (American Counseling Association [ACA],
2014). The counselor must not persuade clients to report sexual assaults or endure forensic
examinations against their will. Empowering clients to make decisions about what happens
to their bodies is important, particularly after something as intrusive as a sexual assault.
According to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014, p. 8), counselors “practice only within
the boundaries of their competence, based on their education, training, supervised
experience, state and national professional credentials, and appropriate professional
experience.” Although working with survivors of sexual violence is not considered a
specialty area, counselors must develop knowledge and skills specific to dealing with
victims to help these clients improve through counseling. Counselors should gain
competence in treatment modalities applicable to sexual violence and assault issues (e.g.,
cognitive-behavioral approaches, exposure therapy, anxiety management programs) and
develop skills related to rape trauma syndrome and PTSD prior to working with this
population. Competence can be gained by attending workshops, seminars, or training
A final common theme I have found among
sexual assault victims is a willingness to “own” the
responsibility for the assault(s). Attackers are very adept
at making a victim feel responsible for the assault.
They will fuse logic with lies to confuse the victim into
believing that they are fully responsible for the attack.
This is a pivotal issue to address in counseling, even if a
client initially denies ownership of the attack.
One of the most important aspects of counseling
sexual assault victims is helping them realize and accept
that the assault was not their fault and that it was only
the fault of their attacker. An equally important aspect
of counseling with sexual assault victims is talking about
the assault(s). Many victims are tired of discussing it and
believe that if they could just “leave it behind” they
would be able to “move on.” However, this is far from
reality. The more that victims of sexual violence attempt
to repress memories and feelings about their assaults,
the more their minds and bodies will remind them, and
the more fearful they are likely to be.
The best way I can describe this to my sexual
assault clients is to compare their situation to a broken
bone. If a child breaks their leg and allows it to heal
on its own, it will heal improperly and will give the
child incredible pain and lack of mobility. If the child
then goes to the doctor, the doctor will have to first
break the bone again to set it to heal properly. This is
very similar to working with sexual assault victims. They
must go back to the point of pain, look at it in truth,
and hurt again—now in a safe place—to best heal and
move forward with their lives.
One of the approaches that I often use with sexual
assault victims is eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing, an effective way for clients to reprocess past
trauma so it is no longer in the forefront of their minds.
Another approach I frequently use with sexual assault
victims is trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy.
I have found both EMDR and TF-CBT to be very effective
tools for those who have suffered sexual assault, especially
when owning too much responsibility for the assault.

-- 347 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	319
sessions focused on how to work with sexual assault survivors. Counselors
can choose to read literature about sexual assault or conduct conjoint
counseling with another counselor who is experienced in working with
sexual assault survivors.
Because many survivors are involved in the legal system, it is
important to recognize that they may be particularly sensitive to having
their information disclosed. Voluntary release of information forms should
be in place to allow counselors of clients in crisis to share information with
attorneys, medical personnel, and law enforcement. If a survivor chooses
not to sign these documents, information cannot be revealed unless the
counselor is legally required to do so (i.e., via a court order). Counselors
should not assume that any subpoena received is “official” and would
require disclosure. Many subpoenas have not been properly filed with the
legal system and/or courts. Counselors should obtain consent from the
client even in cases of subpoenas sent by the client’s attorney.
As a best practice, understanding what information the client agrees to
share is crucial not only for ethical and legal purposes but also for the client–
counselor relationship. Counselors are encouraged to seek legal counsel in
any situation in which the legal system is involved. Legal representatives can
help counselors prepare for possible court testimony and become familiar
with state laws pertaining to sexual violence and crisis counseling.
Spirituality and Religious Issues Related to Sexual Violence
and Assault
Integration of spirituality and religious beliefs in counseling has gained significant focus
in recent years. Spirituality to improve mental health has long been an accepted practice
in dealing with substance use issues, as demonstrated by Alcoholics Anonymous.
According to Cashwell and Young (2020), the spiritual and/or religious life of clients
can be crucial to their development, particularly when dealing with personal problems.
Clients often create a spiritual existence that provides meaning, peace, and tranquility to
their lives, which needs to be acknowledged and accepted by the counselor.
Although research has been conducted to determine whether a person’s spirituality
and religious beliefs can be a way of coping with stressful events, particularly when
dealing with trauma, the findings of these studies are inconsistent. More specifically,
people may engage in positive or negative religious coping behaviors. Examples of
positive coping behaviors include (1) using religion to find meaning, comfort, and
support; (2) engaging in good deeds and helping others; and (3) involvement in church
activities and/or attending religious services. Examples of negative coping behaviors
include (1) using religion to avoid dealing with problems, (2) making bargains with
God to make things better, and (3) feeling dissatisfied with religion after the assault
(Ahrens et al., 2010).
Fallot and Heckman (2005) conducted research to examine the spirituality and
religious coping behaviors used by women who had experienced personal traumas.
According to their findings, participants in the study relied more on positive religious
coping behaviors than the general population. However, one important finding in the
study was that the more severe the trauma, the more participants engaged in negative
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 9.4
This video shows the impact of
rape from a global perspective
and with multicultural implica-
tions. It also demonstrates
the use of psychoeducation
and other clinical skills by
crisis counselors in the healing
process. What effective skills
and interventions are used in
this session? What cultural
implications would be needed
to work with this client or other
clients not from your same
background?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=td41tsCWmdk
Watch from 00:00 to 03:31

-- 348 of 545 --

320 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
religious coping behaviors. Ahrens et al. (2010) conducted a study of approximately
100 sexual assault survivors who reported a belief in God. According to their findings,
sexual assault survivors who used positive religious coping behaviors experienced
improved well-being and less depression than those who used negative religious coping
behaviors. It is important to note that race/ethnicity played a significant part in the focus
on religious coping behaviors. Survivors who were Black tended to rely more heavily on
their religious beliefs than White survivors.
In working with survivors of sexual violence who may have strong religious
and/or spiritual beliefs, clients should be able to initiate a discussion of religion when
they choose, and counselors should avoid imposing personal religious beliefs on clients.
According to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), “Counselors are aware of their own values,
attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors and avoid imposing values that are inconsistent with
counseling goals. Counselors respect the diversity of clients, trainees, and research
participants” (pp. 4–5).
When working with victims of sexual violence or assault who view their religious
beliefs as a significant part of their lives, counselors should consider the following
guidelines:
1. Do not ignore the strong spiritual/religious beliefs of clients. These beliefs are just
as important as any others clients may have. However, counselors should refrain
from imposing their own religious beliefs on clients.
2. Help clients see the benefits of their religious/spiritual beliefs to their wellness and
recovery process.
3. If clients are experiencing negative religious coping skills (e.g., using religion to
avoid dealing with problems, bargaining with God, feeling dissatisfied with reli-
gion), help them develop more positive religious coping skills (e.g., find mean-
ing through their religious beliefs, helping others, becoming involved in religious
activities).
The Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and Religious Values in Counseling
(ASERVIC), a division of the ACA, developed Competencies for Addressing Spiritual
and Religious Issues in Counseling (2016) to help counselors understand the skills and
knowledge necessary to develop spiritual and religious sensitivity when working with
clients. A discussion of all the competencies can be found at the ASERVIC website at
https://aservic.org/spiritual-and-religious-competencies.
Multicultural Issues and Victims with Special Needs
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors should be cognizant of the influence
of individual differences based on “age, culture, disability, ethnicity, race, religion/
spirituality, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, marital status/partnership,
language preference, socioeconomic status, or any basis proscribed by law” (p. 9).
In addition, counselors are encouraged to use appropriate language that is clearly
understandable by clients. When difficulty with a client’s ability to understand occurs,
counselors should “provide the necessary services (e.g., arranging for a qualified
interpreter or translator)” to help clients comprehend information (p. 4). Addressing
individual needs and services for victims of sexual assault who present with special
needs is a crucial part of a crisis counselor’s work.

-- 349 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	321
According to the 2013 National Protocol for Sexual Assault Medical Forensic
Examinations, counselors who work with victims of sexual assault should educate
themselves about various populations in their communities to increase the quality of
services provided to victims with special needs. Examples of special services may include
(1) interpreters for victims with partial or total hearing loss, (2) special equipment and
supplies to perform a SAFE for victims with physical disabilities (e.g., a hydraulic-lift
exam table), and (3) interpreters for non-English-speaking victims.
Other special services may include an understanding of the influence of cultural
values on the response of victims to sexual violence. Examples include (1) cultural values
that discourage a woman from disrobing in the presence of a man, particularly during
any medical examinations; (2) the belief that the loss of virginity prior to marriage is
disgraceful to the entire family and causes the victim to be undeserving of an honor-
able marriage; and (3) an awareness that certain cultures may have their own laws and
regulations addressing sexual assault.
In addition to understanding cultural beliefs, counselors need to be aware of
victims’ personal needs and beliefs that may be different from their overall cultural
beliefs. For example, some victims may choose to have friends or family present during
any services provided, but victims with disabilities may be reluctant to report a sexual
assault due to their ability to remain independent being challenged by family members.
Special victim populations such as male victims, those who are LGBTQ+, individuals
with varying physical abilities, and vulnerable adults may present with unique reactions
after sexual violence. It is important for counselors to treat clients as individuals and try
to understand their unique needs.
Confidentiality may need to be specifically emphasized with male victims who
are fearful of the effect any public disclosures may have due to social stigmas associated
with male sexual assault. Counselors should work to develop comprehensive services
to meet the needs of male victims, including becoming visible in the male community.
Counselors should honor a male victim’s wishes to have a particular gender provide
services. Male victims are often very reluctant to seek support from friends and family
and should be encouraged to seek professional help when needed.
LGBTQ+ Victims of Sexual Violence
The LGBTQ+ population who have experienced violence can present with unique
challenges. The CDC’s (2010) National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey
found that the prevalence of sexual violence, stalking, and intimate partner violence for
individuals who identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual is similar to that for heterosexuals.
However, bisexual women experience higher rates of sexual violence over their lifetime.
According to the CDC report, 44% of women who identify as lesbian and 61% of women
who identify as bisexual experience rape, physical violence, and/or stalking by a partner
over their lifetime. Twenty-six percent of gay men and 37% of bisexual men experience
rape, physical violence, and/or stalking by a partner over their lifetime. Approximately
22% of bisexual women have been raped by a partner over their lifetime. In addition,
of bisexual women who have been raped, almost half (48%) experienced their first
completed rape between the ages of 11 and 17 years.
Counselors should be aware that LGBTQ+ clients can experience discrimination
when they attempt to access services after a sexual assault. Because of the possibility

-- 350 of 545 --

322 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
of being rejected, victims may be reluctant to seek help from crisis services, hospitals,
shelters, or law enforcement. The LGBTQ+ population can experience hate-related sexual
violence, which can lead these individuals to feel unsafe in many settings. In addition,
they may have to deal with stereotypes that present them as overly sexualized, which may
lead them to being treated dismissively as overreacting to an incident of sexual violence.
Because the LGBTQ+ community may be small and tightly connected, victims may
fear they will be betrayed by other members of the community if they accuse another
member or fear they may be “outed” with friends and family if they access services.
Providing a safe and supportive environment to deal with their concerns, including the
sexual violence as well as other challenges, is crucial to helping them deal effectively with
sexual violence. Counselors may also consider becoming a “SafeZone” to demonstrate
their acceptance of working with the LGBTQ+ population. For more information about
becoming a SafeZone, visit https://thesafezoneproject.com. Case Study 9.4 considers sexual
assault in the LGBTQ+ population.
CASE STUDY 9.4
What Is Sexual Assault? Jane’s Story
Imagine that you are a counselor in a private practice. Jane is a 45-year-old computer
programmer who has initiated services with you for problems associated with stress
at work. She tells you she is having difficulty dealing with the extremely competitive
environment. Jane identifies as lesbian and has recently come out to her adult children
from a previous marriage, who want little contact after her disclosure. She looks
disheveled and tired when she comes into the session, often telling you she is lonely.
Jane has recently ended her first lesbian relationship since divorcing her husband several
years ago.
During one session, Jane discloses that she gets angry easily. Upon further
exploration, she reveals several incidents when she became very angry with her then
girlfriend. After arguing for weeks, Jane recalls slamming her fists into the wall and
threatening to hit her girlfriend. She graphically describes how the last time they
fought, she was angry with her girlfriend for staying out all night and insisted that
she was cheating on her. Jane goes on to describe how their last fight was when her
girlfriend came home late. She shares that during the fight, Jane grabbed her girlfriend
by the throat, pushed her down to the floor, ripped her shirt off, bit her breasts, and
then she pulled down her girlfriend’s pants and penetrated her with her fingers. Jane’s
girlfriend ran out of their apartment crying and has only returned to get her personal
items. She will not respond to Jane’s calls or texts. Jane is remorseful but still blames
her girlfriend for provoking her by cheating. However, she wants to make amends
with her girlfriend.
Discussion Questions
1. Would this incident meet the definition of sexual assault?
2. If this incident does meet the definition of sexual assault, what type is described
in the scenario?
3. Considering legal and ethical issues, are there any steps you are required to take
as a mandated reporter in this case?

-- 351 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	323
4. Would you incorporate a DSM diagnosis for this client? Explain.
5. What treatment modality would you use with this client?
6. Talk about what personal issues would come up for you while listening to the
client’s story.
7. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model for crisis assessment and
intervention featured in Chapter 1.
PERPETRATORS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE
Learning Objective 9.8 Describe and develop skills to treat offenders and
perpetrators of sexual violence.
When discussing sexual violence, it is important to consider treatment of not only the
victims but also the perpetrators, to prevent future occurrences. In the sections that
follow, the motivators of rape as well as the prevalence, characteristics, and treatment
options regarding perpetrators of sexual violence are described.
The Motivators of Rape
The majority of sexual violence is perpetrated by males. According to the Bureau of
Justice Statistics, almost 98% of offenders are male, with only 2% being female (Morgan
& Truman, 2022). More than 40% of male offenders are over the age of 30 years. The
vast majority (85%) of these perpetrators used no weapons during the assaults. In the
assaults that used weapons, firearms were typically used. The Bureau of Justice Statistics’
examination of four datasets (i.e., arrests in the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports, state felony
court convictions, prison admissions, and the National Crime Victimization Survey)
revealed that sex offenders are older (over 30) and more likely to be White than are other
violent offenders.
Nicolas Groth wrote the classic book Men Who Rape (2001), which defines different
types of rape. The book has been updated multiple times and continues to be the
definitive source for understanding the dynamics of rapists. Groth defined rape as a
“pseudosexual act, complex and multidetermined, but addressing issues of hostility
(anger) and control (power) more than passion (sexuality)” (p. 2). Sex occurs during
rape, but it is also the method by which aggression is expressed. Groth discovered
three basic motivators of rape: power, anger, and sadism. Power accounts for most
rapes committed (55%), while anger accounts for 40% and sadism accounts for 5%.
Understanding the types of rape is important for understanding treatment for victims
and perpetrators.
According to Groth (2001), several misconceptions exist about rapists: (1) they are
sexually compulsive males who see women as provocative and malicious, (2) they
are sexually frustrated males reacting to repressed stress, and (3) they are “demented
sex-fiends” who harbor perverted desires. These misconceptions assume that the
perpetrator’s primary motivation is based on sexual needs and desires and that rape is
the method for gratifying these desires. The rape of an adult is based on the nonsexual
needs of the perpetrator, which include power and control rather than sexual needs.
The basic characteristics of perpetrators who commit power, anger, and sadistically
motivated rapes are detailed below (Groth, 2001).

-- 352 of 545 --

324 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
PERPETRATORS OF POWER-MOTIVATED RAPE 	A power-motivated rapist may be
attempting to validate strength and control in compensation for feelings of inadequacy
(Groth, 2001). Like the perpetrator of anger rape, a power rapist finds little sexual
gratification with the act; unlike the anger rape perpetrator, however, the power rapist
may have fantasized about or planned the event. The fantasy may include a desire that
the victim will not protest and will find the sexual prowess difficult to resist. When the
victim does resist, the act is disappointing to the perpetrator because the fantasy does
not come to fruition. At this point, the aggressor may feel the need to experience another
rape to continue to pursue the fantasy. The power rape diverges from the anger rape in
that the power rape may be premeditated, with the perpetrator often searching for
victims or acting on opportunities. Victims of the power rape may be the same age as or
younger than the perpetrator and are chosen based on availability, accessibility, and
vulnerability. The power rapist may deny that the encounter was forced, often believing
that the victim actually enjoyed the encounter. The rapist may attempt to make a kind
gesture following the encounter to discredit the victim.
PERPETRATORS OF ANGER-MOTIVATED RAPE 	As described earlier, the purpose of an
anger-motivated rape is to hurt, humiliate, or demean the victim (Groth, 2001). Methods
employed by an anger rapist include both physical violence and verbal aggression. This
rapist, however, finds that physical and verbal aggressions alone do not meet the desire
and need for power and control, and sex becomes a weapon to release anger. Anger
rape may also include other acts thought by the rapist to be particularly objectionable,
such as sodomy or fellatio, or humiliating, such as urinating or ejaculating onto the
victim. This rapist may have difficulties with an erection and may find little sexual
gratification with the act. Anger-motivated rapes are typically brief, often unplanned
by the rapists, and not a focus of the rapists’ fantasies prior to the act.
PERPETRATORS OF SADISTICALLY MOTIVATED RAPE 	The sadistically motivated rapist
finds pleasure with the torment, anguish, suffering, and pain of the victim (Groth, 2001).
The main goal of the sadistic rapist is to achieve sexual gratification through inflicting
pain, even finding pleasure in the victim’s futile resistance. The sadistically motivated
rape is often premeditated, and the perpetrator goes to great lengths to avoid detection,
often wearing gloves, wearing disguises, or blindfolding victims. A sadistically
motivated rapist is frequently considered a psychopath, although the perpetrator is
often married and employed and can appear personable and friendly.
Treatment of Sex Offenders
Because there is limited evidence-based guidance about the most effective approaches
to working with female sexual offenders (Cortoni & Gannon, 2013), the primary focus of
this treatment section is on male offenders, with “sex offender” referring to a male unless
specifically stated otherwise. When considering treatment for sex offenders, counselors
should consider three aspects: client dynamics, treatment setting, and treatment modality
(Groth, 2001).
First, client dynamics must be assessed through a comprehensive psychological
evaluation that includes demographics, family background, medical history, education
level, military history, interpersonal development (e.g., social, sexual, and marital
information), occupational history, and criminal history. In addition, assessments

-- 353 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	325
should include behavioral observations, field investigations, medical examination, and
psychometric examinations. The clinical assessment must obtain information about
the perpetrator’s sexual behavior, including premeditation, victim selection, style of
attack, accompanying fantasies, role of aggression, sexual behavior (contact, duration,
dysfunction), mood state, contributing factors (stressors), acceptance of responsibility,
and recidivism and deterrence.
Second, appropriate treatment settings should be considered (Groth, 2001). Most
offenders enter the mental health system through either the criminal justice or health
care systems. The perpetrator may have been hospitalized for a mental illness or referred
by the courts for treatment. Treatment facilities may typically specialize in the treatment
of sex offenders and offer either inpatient or outpatient treatment. Group counseling
may be the primary method of delivery of services to provide confrontation to a client
population that may be prone to denial.
Lastly, there are specific treatment modalities that may be effective when treating
sex offenders. However, it is important to recognize that no single treatment modality
was the most effective treatment for sex offenders (Groth, 2001). Counselors should
consider court requirements and the specific needs of each client to determine a course of
treatment and possibly combine treatments to find a successful plan of action. Available
treatment modalities include counseling, psychoeducation, behavior modification and
cognitive-behavioral approaches, and incapacitation.
COUNSELING 	Various methods of counseling are used to treat sex offenders. Individual,
group, family, and marital counseling are all used to help clients develop insight into
their inappropriate behavior and choices, which are typically thought to be based on
internal and emotional conflicts (Groth, 2001). Although counseling may be the most
common treatment for sex offenders, it has several limitations. First, there is no clear
evidence that this type of treatment works, particularly in isolation. Second, clients’
intellectual functioning can affect their ability to develop insights related to their behavior;
in addition, their ability to think abstractly, as well as their level of self-awareness, is
crucial to the success of counseling. Third, the ability to develop a counseling relationship
with clients is important. It is highly possible that this population is distrustful of any
professional perceived as punitive. If clients have been required to attend counseling by a
third party (e.g., a judge), the challenge to developing a relationship increases.
PSYCHOEDUCATION 	Life-skills training involves focusing on several areas where
deficiencies may exist, such as sex education, social skills, empathy skills, and emotion
regulation (Groth, 2001). Sex education can help the sex offender understand normal
sexual functioning, as most experience sexuality in a dysfunctional way. Social skills
training allows sex offenders to understand healthy relationships and develop improved
interpersonal skills. Empathy-building skills help the sex offender develop sensitivity
to people and recognize the needs of others. Possible techniques for inducing empathy
include imitation, imagination (e.g., place yourself in someone else’s shoes), or simple
identification of emotions (e.g., I feel upset when someone else feels upset). What is
important in a treatment program is that offenders act empathetic rather than feel
empathetic (Ward & Durrant, 2013). Emotion regulation is important for helping sex
offenders cope with anger and aggression, which they typically release via a sexual
assault. Relaxation techniques may also be used to address their feelings of frustration.

-- 354 of 545 --

326 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION AND COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL APPROACHES 	Behavior
modification for sex offenders primarily involves aversive conditioning in which a
sexual response (such as an erection) is repeatedly paired with a noxious event, such as
an electric shock or unpleasant smell (Groth, 2001). One behavior modification technique
is to have an offender masturbate to ejaculation while fantasizing about an appropriate,
nondeviant sexual encounter and partner; then, post orgasm, to have the offender
continue to masturbate for an additional hour to a fantasy involving his preferred (and
deviant) partner or sexual encounter, thus pairing the pleasurable experience with a
socially appropriate partner and the uncomfortable experience with the behavior to be
extinguished (Miller-Perrin & Perrin, 2012). Another behavior modification technique
is covert sensitization in which guided imagery is used to help the client imagine the
offense and then imagine a frightening or disgusting event. In both treatment modalities,
repeating the techniques until the behavior is extinguished is the key to success.
Although aversion therapy is commonly used, there is debate over whether it produces
permanent results (Marshall et al., 2008; Olver et al., 2020).
CBT has also been used to treat offender populations, targeting cognitive distortions,
deviant sexual practices and preferences, concurrent nonsexual behavioral and social
challenges, and relapse prevention (Jennings & Deming, 2013; Mpofu et al., 2018; Olver
et al., 2020). The Sex Offender Treatment and Evaluation Project (SOTEP) is a cognitive-
behavioral treatment program for sex offenders in California (see Marques et al., 2005) that
has tracked participants longitudinally for 8 years. Results are mixed, with no statistical
difference in rates of recidivism between participants and nonparticipants. However, the
treatment has been associated with a significant reduction of reoffending in individuals
who exhibit high levels of motivation and complete program goals, suggesting that there
is potential for cognitive-behavioral approaches to reduce reoffending with at least some
segment of sex offenders, those who are heavily motivated (D’Orazio, 2014).
Sex offender-specific treatment groups should seek to support and reinforce pro-
social behavior as well as facilitate healthy social interactions. According to Jennings
and Deming (2013), cognitive-behavioral techniques for such groups should effectively
address the “behavioral” side of CBT. Behaviorally focused techniques include those
that prompt group members to engage in self-disclosure, encourage members to identify
problem behaviors, enhance members’ self-esteem and empathy, and support members
in managing deviant thoughts.
INCAPACITATION 	Incapacitation for the sex offender can take several forms, including
neurosurgery, 	surgical 	castration, 	and 	imprisonment/institutionalization.
Neurosurgery involves removing parts of the hypothalamus, which decreases male
hormone production and diminishes sexual arousal and impulsive behaviors. Surgical
castration involves a sex offender losing the functions of his testes. Sex offenders may
voluntarily undergo this procedure to help lessen sexual drive. Involuntary castration
is extremely controversial, based on legal, moral, and ethical ambiguity. Imprisonment
is the most common type of incapacitation (Groth, 2001), as the confinement of the sex
offender prevents commission of future acts. Case Study 9.5 asks you to consider how
to work with a perpetrator.
TREATMENT FOR FEMALE OFFENDERS 	Although there is limited evidence-based
guidance regarding treatment of female sex offenders, female perpetrators have higher

-- 355 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	327
CASE STUDY 9.5
How Do You Work with a Perpetrator?
Refer to Case Study 9.2, and now consider that James presents at the mental health
center as your next appointment. Although he has not been charged with a sexual
assault, he is disturbed by what he did to Sherry. After the incident, he was afraid
Sherry would report him to the staff and that he would be asked to leave the rehab
center. James knew he did not have any other place to go and would probably end up
homeless if forced to leave. He asked the rehab center staff to make an appointment
for him at the local mental health center. James reported the incident to you in detail.
Although he can discuss the details of what he calls “the incident,” he reports feeling as
if he was outside of his body looking down at what was going on. He says he does not
know why he did what he did to Sherry, who is someone he really cares about. James
tried to call Sherry, but she will not answer the phone. He would like to apologize to
her, but he is concerned she will never talk to him again. James is asking you to help
him figure out what to do.
Discussion Questions
1. What additional information would you like to know about James through your
initial interview?
2. What information would be helpful in understanding how you will work with
James?
3. In this case, how would you proceed to work with James?
4. Discuss any ethical issues you need to consider when working with James.
rates and more severe experiences of sexual victimization than do male perpetrators
(Cortoni & Gannon, 2013). Treatment, therefore, may need to address the trauma that
these female perpetrators (and male perpetrators who may have sustained similar
sexual abuse) have encountered. Thus, while addressing victimization issues, it is
important for clinicians to be empathetic regarding the abuse that perpetrators have
sustained without minimizing or excusing the sexual offenses that they have committed.
In treating any perpetrator of rape, the priority of treatment must be focused on the
perpetrated act in the attempt to decrease the rate of recidivism.
Recidivism Rates of Adult Sex Offenders
As with any population, the overall recidivism rate for adult sex offenders is categorized
by the type of sexual offense. Accurate recidivism rates are hard to find because sexual
crimes often go unreported to authorities. Thus, rates are based on arrest and rearrest
records of sexual offenders. Many studies have suggested that the older a victim is,
the less likely the offense will be reported (U.S. Department of Justice, 2017). While it
would be easy to assume that sexual offenders have high rates of sexual recidivism, sex
offenders are more likely to be charged with non-sex-related crimes later. However,
research also states that a former sex offender charged with a nonsexual crime may have
been motivated by sexual pleasure. A Bureau of Justice Statistics study conducted by

-- 356 of 545 --

328 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Langan et al. (2003) found that at a 3-year follow-up of 9,691 sex offenders released from
prison, 5.3% were rearrested for sexual crimes; 17.1% were rearrested for violent crimes;
and 43% were rearrested for other crimes (U.S. Department of Justice, 2014). Rettenberger
et al. (2015) confirmed a 6% recidivism rate over 5 years: 4% for the rapist subgroup and
8% for the child molestation subgroup.
Studies show that treatment, specifically cognitive-behavioral and relapse-
prevention approaches, show significant differences in sexual recidivism rates between
treated and nontreated sex offenders. Oliver et al. (2008) found that sex offenders who
received treatment ( 	)	=	N 	472 had sex-related recidivism rates of 11.1% at 3 years, 16.9%
at 5 years, and 21.8% at 10 years; by contrast, nontreated sex offenders ( 	)	=	N 	265 had
sex-related recidivism rates of 17.7% at 3 years, 24.5% at 5 years, and 32.3% at 10 years
(U.S. Department of Justice, 2017). When interventions are used to treat this population,
it is important to recognize that certain treatments are effective in reducing rates of
sexual recidivism and some are not. Sex-related recidivism rates for some sex offenders
who have received appropriate treatments are more likely to decrease compared with
rates for sex offenders who have not received treatment.
Sex Offender Registry
In 2006, Congress passed the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act (AWA)
“to protect children from sexual exploitation and violent crime, to prevent child abuse
and child pornography, to promote Internet safety, and to honor the memory of Adam
Walsh and other child crime victims.” Title I of the AWA established the Sex Offender
Registration and Notification Act (SORNA). SORNA allows the public to look up
information on and track registered sex offenders for life. Information available to the
public includes the offender’s name, photograph, current and past address of residence,
and the crime for which the individual was convicted (e.g., sexual act and sexual contact
[any type or degree of genital, oral, or anal penetration, or any sexual touching of or
contact with a person’s body, either directly or through the clothing]; specified offenses
against minors; possession, production, or distribution of child pornography).
As part of the SORNA requirements states must comply with, juveniles 14 years
of age and older are adjudicated delinquent for certain sex offenses. However, it is up
to the state to determine the age at which the juvenile will be eligible or mandated to
register (some states do not require a minimum age). Moreover, certain states require the
juvenile offender to remain on the registry for life, without eligibility for removal. That
means that once the juvenile sex offender (JSO) turns 18 years of age, the information will
be moved to the adult sexual offender (ASO) registry, where it will remain for life and
be available for the public to view online. SORNA offenders include convicted juveniles
who were tried as adults. Unlike adults convicted of a sexual offense, SORNA does not
require all juveniles to be registered for all types of sexual offenses. Instead, SORNA
requires registration “only for a defined class of older juveniles who are adjudicated
delinquent for committing particularly serious sexually assaultive crimes (or attempts
or conspiracies to commit such crimes)” (U.S. Department of Justice, 2014, p. 20).
Originally, the juvenile court system had a goal of making decisions that were
best for the child and to help guide the “juvenile offender toward life as a responsible,
law abiding adult” (Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending,
Registering, and Tracking [SMART], 2016, p. 2). However, through the years, the justice

-- 357 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	329
system has blurred the lines between what consequences are appropriate for juvenile
offenders as compared with adult offenders.
Two factors determine whether an individual will be tried in court as an adult
or juvenile: “(1) the age of the offender at the time of the offense, and (2) the specific
offenses with which a juvenile is charged” (SMART, 2015, p. 4). In addition, the severity
and type of offense the juvenile is being charged with influences the prosecutor’s deci-
sion. Because the age of the offender cannot be altered, ultimately it is the prosecutor’s
decision as to how the offender will be classified (adult or juvenile).
How the offender is classified will affect the course of action through the entire
judicial process with possible lifetime consequences. However, even if an offender is not
the legal age of an adult (an age set by the state), 49 out of the 50 states have implemented
at least one procedure that provides a way for a juvenile to be tried and charged as an
adult for a serious sex offense (SMART, 2016). The three methods states may use to try
a juvenile as an adult are as follows:
• Legislative waiver: States that use this method mandate that juveniles (of a certain
age) charged with certain serious crimes will be prosecuted in adult criminal court.
• Prosecutorial waiver: States that use this method provide the prosecutor with either
full discretion in deciding whether to directly file in adult court or, upon motion
of a prosecutor (and sometimes the court sua sponte) in juvenile court, mandate
that the case will be transferred from juvenile court for trial in adult criminal court.
• Judicial waiver: This method is the most common. Upon motion of a prosecu-
tor (and sometimes the court sua sponte), a transfer hearing is conducted in juve-
nile court to determine whether the juvenile is amenable to further treatment and
rehabilitation through the juvenile court system and whether the juvenile should
be transferred for trial in adult criminal court. Generally speaking, if the juvenile
court finds that the juvenile is no longer amenable to treatment or rehabilitation in
juvenile court, that juvenile will be transferred for trial as an adult.
A report by the Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (2006) states,
“policies placing children on public sex offender registries or segregating children with
SB[P] may offer little or no actual community protection while subjecting children to
potential stigma and social disadvantage” (p. 2). Emotions drive decisions, especially
when considering the consequences for sex offenders. However, the long-term
implications of allowing emotions to dictate laws are neither ethical nor effective. For
example, JSOs have more in common with non-sexual-offending juvenile delinquents
than with adult sex offenders (U.S. Department of Justice, 2014). Yet, the community and
justice system continue to view JSOs and ASOs as equals in terms of legal consequences
and treatment, even though research shows these are not effective for juveniles.
Treatment of Juvenile Sex Offenders
When defining sexual problem behaviors in children and adolescents, professionals
must consider the developmental level of the individual(s), the environment, and the
context before prosecuting and treating the juvenile—sexual problem behaviors and
consequences do not fit into a “one size fits all” model.
What is inappropriate sexual behavior for children and adolescents? There is
no definitive answer to that question; however, the most accurate way to answer the

-- 358 of 545 --

330 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
question is to assess what is developmentally appropriate verbally, physically, and
cognitively for the individual:
When assessing these behaviors, professionals should pay attention to the
context of the behaviors. Of particular importance is to determine whether
the children engaged in the behaviors are of similar age, size, and
developmental levels. If there are no power differentials between the
children, and if the participation of the children is mutual and voluntary, it
may be considered normative developmental behavior. (Russell, 2013,
p. 1060)
To better understand and treat JSOs, it is important to be familiar with etiology as
it relates to the “development, onset, and maintenance of sexually abusive behavior in
this population” (U.S. Department of Justice, 2017, p. 181). (For an excellent summary
of etiology research on five areas that contribute to the increased likelihood of sexual
offending behaviors, see SMART, 2017, pages 186–187.)
Prior to creating a treatment plan, it is essential for counselors to assess whether the
sexual behavior problems are secondary to a trauma or diagnostic disorder (e.g., conduct
disorder). “Understanding maltreatment history, as well as the consequences of that
history is an essential aspect of correct assessment and treatment of [J]SOs” (Pullman &
Seto, 2012, p. 208). If the sexual behavior is secondary to abuse, treatment will focus on
the behavior as a symptom.
Targets of therapy for JSOs are to reduce problematic sexual behaviors and
reduce the rates of recidivism. Previously, treatment for JSOs was similar to treatment
for ASOs; however, through additional research and developments in the field,
interventions individualized for JSOs were found to be effective. Meta-analysis not only
suggests that treatment for JSOs reduces recidivism but also illustrates that treatment
is cost-effective for taxpayers (U.S. Department of Justice, 2017). Studies suggest that
multisystemic therapy is effective in treating JSOs and other treatments that include
cognitive-behavioral interventions produce positive outcomes. Reitzel and Carbonell
(2006) conducted a meta-analysis of nine studies on JSO treatment effectiveness with a
sample size of 2,986 JSOs; the resulting average weighted effect size of 0.43 indicated
that treatment has a statistically significant effect on recidivism. In another meta-analysis
comparing seven recidivism studies, Winokur et al. (2006) found that JSOs who were
treated had recidivism rates of 0–5%, while JSOs in the untreated comparison group had
recidivism rates of 5–18%.
When sexual problem behaviors are identified early and treatment is introduced, the
outcome can be very effective. Caregiver involvement in counseling is a core component,
especially when treating JSOs who are 12 years old and younger. Counselors educate
caregivers about providing supervision and creating a nonsexualized environment (e.g.,
change clothes with door closed, monitor what is on the television). “The enhancement
of behavior management skills in parents may be far more important in the treatment
of sexually abusive behaviors in children than traditional clinical approaches” (U.S.
Department of Justice, 2017, p. 249). Age-appropriate sex education should be a focus of
treating sexual behavior problems with the child or adolescent. In a 20-year follow-up
study, Worling et al. (2009) found that specialized treatment for JSOs helps produce
significant reductions in sexual and nonsexual reoffending. Multiple studies have shown
that using more general treatments that are also used with other juvenile delinquent

-- 359 of 545 --

Chapter 9 • Sexual Violence 	331
populations are more effective than the sex offender–specific treatments commonly used
in the juvenile justice system.
MULTISYSTEMIC THERAPY 	Multisystemic therapy (MST) is a comprehensive approach
that simultaneously applies individualized interventions in five domains: individual,
family, peer, school, and community. Treating JSOs with MST is similar to treating
adult sex offenders (Borduin et al., 2009). MST is often used with a variety of adolescent
populations. MST treatment for JSOs differs from MST treatment for other delinquent
populations in that the counselor links how the offender’s sexual behaviors relate to
each of the five domains. Various objectives are outlined in each domain. Compared
with community-based treatment services, MST treatment for JSOs significantly reduces
rates of reoffending (sexual and nonsexual) after an average 8- to 9-year follow-up
(Pullman & Seto, 2012). In the context of social skills training, it is worth noting that
some JSOs do not lack social skills; however, the individuals do lack an understanding
of how to use these skills in a socially acceptable manner.
COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY 	Treating children and adolescents with sexual
behavior problems using brief CBT significantly reduces the risk of sexual offending in
the future (Pullman & Seto, 2012). Using CBT, counselors should focus on cognitive
restructuring—“attacking” the antecedent and consequent (self-reinforcing) thought
after engaging in the sexual offending behavior. Restructuring the antecedent will help
the JSO refrain from engaging in the behavior. In addition, treatment should help alter
the thoughts the individual may have after acting out the behavior to create a “discon-
nect” between the self-reinforcing thoughts and sexually problematic behaviors.
RATIONAL EMOTIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY 	Rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) is
also effective with treating JSOs because it includes the emotional aspect in addition to
the cognitions and behaviors—helping the individual challenge irrational thoughts,
regulate emotions, and change behaviors. Adding the emotional aspect of REBT helps
JSOs identify the feelings associated with the consequences of engaging in sexually
problematic behaviors in relation to the juvenile’s beliefs.
SUMMARY
Sexual violence is a broad term used to describe
an unwanted sexual act that is perpetrated on an
individual via force or manipulation without the
individual’s consent. Sexual violence can take
many forms, including rape, sexual harassment,
intimate partner violence, and stalking. These
crimes continue to be underreported despite
emerging social and legal implications for
perpetrators (e.g., the Violence Against Women
Act, “shield laws”). According to RAINN (2022h),
a sexual assault occurs every 68 seconds in the
United States. Victims of sexual violence are
a significant proportion of society, with some
reports estimating that at least 20% of women and
up to 10% of men are sexually victimized in their
lifetimes. The definitions of sexual violence vary
from state to state, so it is important for counselors
to be knowledgeable about legislation, resources,
and best practices for working with survivors of
sexual violence in their state and community.
Sexual assault is a type of sexual violence
characterized by an attack or attempted attack
involving unwanted sexual contact between the
victim and the offender. It includes the use of
force, but also verbal threats of an attack or threat
of force. Rape is a type of sexual assault and is

-- 360 of 545 --

332 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
defined as forced sexual intercourse, which may
take many forms.
Myths regarding rape still exist and should
be debunked when working with victims of
this crime. Those myths include the idea that
a victim of rape was “asking for it” based on
provocative dress or behavior, as well as the
notion that only strangers in dark alleys commit
sexual assault.
Counselors should be knowledgeable
about the three main motivators of rape: power,
anger, and sadism. More recently, there have
been growing concerns in the United States
about sex trafficking, also discussed in this
chapter. These are important concepts for both
clinical counseling and school counseling.
The 	effects 	of 	sexual 	violence 	can
manifest physically, behaviorally, emotionally/
psychologically, or in combination. It is important
to understand that not all victims of sexual
violence will react the same way. While some may
show immediate physical, cognitive-behavioral,
or psychological problems, others may appear
without symptoms. One responsibility of a crisis
counselor is to provide support while keeping
ethical and legal guidelines and respecting a
client’s right to decide whether to report sexual
violence. Counselors should also be aware of the
possible increase in substance use following a
sexual assault, as many victims use substances
as a way of emotional numbing, which can
heighten the chance of developing a substance
addiction following an attack. Primarily, clients
need empathetic understanding, abuse-specific
cognitive-behavioral strategies, and connection
to resources in the community that best fit their
needs.
Evidence-based treatments for victims of
sexual violence include psychological first aid,
trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy,
cognitive 	processing 	therapy, 	prolonged
exposure therapy, eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing, and stress inoculation therapy.
Counselors should always take ethical and legal
issues into account and consult the ACA Code of
Ethics throughout treatment. Counselors should
also pay close attention to any multicultural
issues that may arise with special populations,
such as LGBTQ+ clients and clients with
disabilities.
Sexual offenders who perpetrate sexual
violence are often perceived as a highly difficult
population to treat. Offenders may be men,
women, or children/adolescents. However,
through education about the motivations of
these individuals, counselors may be able
to better implement treatment strategies or
programs to rehabilitate sexual offenders. When
working with perpetrators of sexual violence,
the main goal is to reduce recidivism rates, or
the chance of reoffending. For some offenders,
it will be important to focus on trauma that
the offender has experienced. Evidence-based
treatments for perpetrators of sexual violence
include counseling (individual, group, family,
marital), psychoeducation, and CBT with a focus
on behavior modification.
When dealing with crises related to sexual
violence, it is important to recognize that victim
reactions will vary and that no one reaction
necessarily points to pathology. Victims of sexual
violence may have many different reactions
along the spectrum to their particular trauma;
however, it is important to remain vigilant for
symptoms of common disorders that may result
from sexual violence, such as PTSD. Counselors
may also pay close attention to the symptoms of
rape trauma syndrome listed in Table 9.2.
Interventions employed during a crisis
embody a range of theories and techniques,
as well as a range of times from short-term
preventative measures to long-term treatment
measures. Counselors should be aware that when
working with crisis and victims of traumatic
situations, they may be opening themselves up to
compassion fatigue, burnout, or even vicarious
trauma. Counselors should also be mindful of
their own reactions to and history of traumatic
events and practice consistent self-care to avoid
vicarious trauma with this population.

-- 361 of 545 --

333
PREVIEW
Child sexual abuse is one of the most underreported crimes, with survivors facing
potential physical, psychological, cognitive, behavioral, emotional, and spiritual
consequences. Crisis counselors who intervene with victims of child sexual abuse need
to be aware of the multitude of challenges these individuals face, best practices for
treatment, and support services available in the local community. This chapter defines
child sexual abuse, describes its signs and symptoms, and discusses intervention
strategies. Specific training in working with children who have been sexually abused
is required. In addition, this chapter addresses perpetrators of child sexual abuse, their
patterns of behavior, and common treatment options.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
10.1 Explain the prevalence of child sexual abuse and describe the importance of
prevention of child sexual abuse.
10.2 Define child sexual abuse and related terms, including statutory rape.
10.3 Articulate the cycle of child sexual abuse.
10.4 Identify the signs and symptoms of child sexual abuse.
10.5 Apply intervention strategies for victims of child sexual abuse, including
handling the initial disclosure, collecting information, conducting forensic
interviews, reporting, and understanding the future treatment process.
10.6 Describe the future treatment process and coping responses of sexually abused
youth.
10.7 Demonstrate an understanding of the characteristics of child sexual abuse
perpetrators and treatment of adult and adolescent sex offenders.
10.8 Describe the elements of crisis intervention related to child sexual abuse,
including safety and diagnostic considerations during a crisis and essential
intervention skills.
10 	Child Sexual Abuse
Carrie Wachter Morris
C H A P T E R

-- 362 of 545 --

334 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
PREVALENCE AND PREVENTION OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.1 Explain the prevalence of child sexual abuse and describe
the importance of prevention of child sexual abuse.
In this section, we discuss the prevalence of child sexual abuse by various demographic
categories (i.e., sex, age, race, disability). We also discuss the importance of its prevention.
Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
Child sexual abuse (CSA) affects children, families, and communities worldwide. Despite
national efforts in the United States through the National Child Abuse and Neglect Data
System (NCANDS) and the National Incidence System (NIS), exact statistics regarding
the number of children and families affected by CSA are difficult to derive. There
were over 58,000 substantiated CSA cases in 2020 (Administration for Children and
Families, 2020), but this statistic is thought to be an underestimate. It is estimated that
approximately 1 in 10 children will be sexually molested or abused by the time they reach
18 years old (Townsend & Rheingold, 2013) and that there are between 50 and 60 million
adult survivors of CSA in the United States (National Association of Adult Survivors of
Child Abuse, 2022). The difference in numbers is because NCANDS data include only
the reports of state Child Protective Services (CPS) workers, while the NIS contains
data from CPS agencies and community professionals from nationally representative,
randomly sampled counties.
The NIS–4, which is considered the most comprehensive collection of child abuse
and neglect data, does not include incidences of sexual abuse by perpetrators who are
not in parental or caregiving roles. Although most of the sexual abuse cases that come
to the attention of CPS involve intrafamilial relationships, most reported perpetrators
of CSA are not immediate caregivers but nonfamily (extrafamilial) individuals known
to the child or strangers (Administration for Children and Families, 2020). Of the
extrafamilial CSA incidences, only 20% are perpetrated by strangers, which means that
the vast majority of extrafamilial CSA occurs at the hands of individual(s) whom the
child or adolescent knows (Hassan et al., 2015). Thus, many CSA cases would not fall
into the definitions used for data collection of these national samples, leading to an
underestimate of CSA incidents.
In addition to those victims who do not meet an agency definition, children
who fail to come to the attention of these agencies and individuals are not included
in estimates. Children and adolescents who have been sexually abused but have not
disclosed the abuse, those who have disclosed the abuse but have not had that disclosure
come to the attention of CPS, and those who have disclosed the abuse but have not had
it substantiated are not included in the official count.
About 20% of females and less than 30% of males who reported being sexually
abused as children ever disclosed the abuse to another person. When disclosures were
made, 63% of females and 45% of males told friends their own age rather than parents,
teachers, or mandated reporters (Priebe & Svedin, 2010). Thus, the incidence rates of
CSA reported by government agencies are likely to be significantly lower than the actual
incidence rates.
Also, it should be noted that although the average percentage of substantiated
child maltreatment cases that involved CSA was only 9.0% (Administration for Children

-- 363 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	335
and Families, 2020), state reports of substantiated cases ranged from 2.7 to 62.5% of
all substantiated child maltreatment cases. These data suggest a wide variability of
substantiation among states and perhaps point to an underlying variability in the veracity
with which these charges are pursued. In summary, there are considerable complications
with determining incidence rates for CSA.
LIFETIME PREVALENCE 	Determining lifetime prevalence rates for CSA is no easy task.
Although more conservative agencies report that 20% of women and 10% of men are
sexually victimized in their lifetime, modern researchers have found significantly
higher numbers. For example, de Tychey et al. (2015) estimated that one in three females
experiences CSA; Young et al. (2007) estimated that 42% of a sample of female public
university students and 31% of a sample of male public university students were victims
of CSA; and Stander et al. (2002) reported CSA in 26% of males in a sample of Navy
recruits. Decades ago, renowned CSA researcher David Finkelhor (1981) predicted that
one day, as social barriers to males’ CSA disclosure ameliorate, prevalence rates for
CSA in males and females would match. This prediction was radical at the time; today,
it is closer to reality. Complete Think About It 10.1.
Think about the ramifications of CSA more deeply.
If the prevalence for CSA in minor children is, at
minimum, 1 in 10 in the United States, and there are
over 50 million adult survivors of CSA in the United
States, how might this pervasive, silenced history of
abuse be affecting our culture? We might ask ourselves
what remembered or repressed abuse memories
linger in the conscious and unconscious minds of
our nation’s citizenry, and how those histories might
impact the fears, thoughts, decisions, behaviors, and
experiences of those with whom we work—both as
service providers and as colleagues. Specifically, how
might our clients’ thoughts, feelings, behaviors, and
experiences stemming from CSA present subtly in
counseling, independent of disclosure? How can we
sensitize ourselves to those presentations?
THINK ABOUT IT 10.1
PREVALENCE BY SEX 	Females appear to be the victims of CSA more often than males
(see Aaron, 2012). This pattern has been consistent over time, with multiple iterations
of the NIS reporting rates and retrospective studies underscoring this differential.
One study found that about 40% of college undergraduate females and 31% of males
reported a history of CSA (Young et al., 2007). Presently in the United States, some
sources approximate that 1 in 3 females and 1 in 6 males experienced sexual abuse as
children, while others place the total incidence rate at 1 in 10 (Townsend & Rheingold,
2013). It is also important to keep in mind that males are significantly less likely to
disclose CSA than are females (Sorsoli et al., 2008). Therefore, the statistics available
may not yet represent the true differential in the rates of male and female
victimization.
PREVALENCE BY AGE 	The average age of victimization varies, with sources reporting
the mean age of onset between 7 and 12 years of age (Trickett, 2006), but national
statistics indicate higher rates of substantiated abuse at higher ages—e.g., 12 to 15 years
of age (Administration for Children and Families, 2020). Therefore, it appears that
individuals may be substantially at risk for CSA across their childhood and adolescent

-- 364 of 545 --

336 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
years. During the COVID-19 pandemic, when many schools moved to virtual education,
reports of child maltreatment dropped across all types by over 10%—particularly for
children age 6–12. A large reason for that drop was that reports by education personnel
decreased by 27% in 2020 due to the pandemic as compared with 2019.
PREVALENCE BY RACE 	Race does not appear to be a differentiating characteristic in
occurrence of CSA, with consistent rates of CSA victimization in children of all races
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS], 2019). White children,
however, had a slightly higher proportion of reported sexual abuse at the hands of
biological parents than did children of other racial-ethnic backgrounds. This could be
due to higher incidence rates, but it could also be linked to factors such as a greater
distrust of the systems involved in child protection or a reliance on less formalized
support systems to address issues of CSA. Reporting by this group may also be higher.
CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 	Finally, children with certain disabilities appear more
likely to be sexually victimized than other children. Specifically, children who are at
increased risk are those who are blind or deaf or who have intellectual disabilities.
These groups have an increased prevalence of abuse, may be perceived as having lower
credibility in the eyes of adults (Mitra et al., 2013), or may lack the ability to disclose
abuse.
Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse
Child advocates widely recognize that the best way to lower the staggering numbers of
CSA is for those agencies, institutions, and individuals that serve children and families
to focus their efforts and resources on preventing CSA. Schools and some community
organizations across the United States have responded to this charge by offering annual
group instruction to students in recognizing potentially dangerous adult behaviors,
enforcing personal physical and psychological boundaries, getting away from those who
violate those boundaries, and reporting odd adult behavior and boundary violations to
caring and trusted adults.
Although programs such as “Stranger Danger” and “Funny Tummy Feelings” have
increased the number of after-the-fact disclosures of sexual abuse, it is unclear whether
such programs are effective in preventing it. Still, those seeking to prevent sexual abuse in
children should use prevention programs that involve children acting out for themselves
and demonstrating for other children how to enforce personal boundaries with, get away
from, and report such persons.
One recent and popular CSA prevention initiative places less emphasis on the
refusal skills of children and more on the awareness and training of adults who work
with children. Darkness to Light (2016) is an organization that seeks to educate multiple
sectors of the community about CSA trends, prevalence, warning signs, child advocacy,
prevention, and interventions under the presumption that it takes a whole community
to keep children safe and protected from perpetrators. Using Darkness to Light’s CSA
prevention training program called “Stewards of Children,” schools and community
groups (e.g., club sports, youth groups, Scouts) across the United States are teaching
school- and group-based CSA prevention facilitators to train employees to provide
oversight of child safety procedures. More information is available at www.d2l.org.

-- 365 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	337
DEFINING CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE AND RELATED TERMS
Learning Objective 10.2 Define child sexual abuse and related terms, including
statutory rape.
In addition to the difficulty in tracking actual numbers of children and adolescents
who have been sexually abused, there is no single agreed-on definition of CSA. Further
complicating the process of defining CSA is how to distinguish it from statutory rape. In
the section that follows, CSA and statutory rape are defined, with an explanation of the
distinction between them and how statutory rape may be handled differently.
Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
Definitions of CSA vary across states and advocacy organizations. Broader definitions
may include any sexual activity with a minor where consent cannot be or is not
granted (for a review, see Collin-Vézina et al., 2013). Definitions used by some states
or research groups may be more detailed and include only specific sexual behaviors
(e.g., penetration), specific perpetrator groups (e.g., intrafamilial), or specific ages or age
differences (e.g., an age difference of 4 years). These narrower definitions place other
sexual acts (e.g., showing pornography to a child, exposing one’s genitalia to a child)
or perpetrator groups (e.g., neighbors, acquaintances, strangers) in categories such as
child exploitation, child molestation, or statutory rape. In the Child Abuse Prevention
and Treatment Act (CAPTA; 2010 [Public Law No. 93-247]), child abuse and neglect are
limited to “a parent or caretaker,” and CSA is defined as
the employment, use, persuasion, inducement, enticement, or coercion of
any child to engage in, or assist any other person to engage in, any sexually
explicit conduct or simulation of such conduct for the purpose of producing
a visual depiction of such conduct; or . . . the rape, and in cases of caretaker
or inter-familial relationships, statutory rape, molestation, prostitution, or
other form of sexual exploitation of children, or incest with children. (p. 44)
CAPTA specifies that “child” is specific to all individuals under the age of 18 years for
sexual abuse.
Although CAPTA does give a definition of CSA, age of consent differs from state to
state. Even within the same state, ages of consent may differ for heterosexual and same-
sex relationships and for males and females. It is important for counselors working with
children and adolescents to be aware of the most recent legislation for the state(s) within
which they practice regarding CSA, age of consent, mandated reporting laws regarding
sexual behaviors, and relationships involving individuals under the age of consent. For
the purposes of this chapter, child sexual abuse is defined as any sexual contact, behavior,
or exposure for the purposes of sexual gratification of another individual that involves
a child who is unable or unwilling to give consent.
It should be noted that a state-sanctioned or researcher-operationalized definition
of CSA may have little in common with CSA survivors’ perceptions of their experiences.
For example, one 15-year-old who has sexual contact with a 20-year-old may perceive
the experience as abusive, whereas another 15-year-old having sexual contact with a
20-year-old may not—regardless of age, sex, consent at the time of the contact, or the
presence of injury.

-- 366 of 545 --

338 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Although clients’ perceptions of their experiences cannot necessarily influence the
mandate of practitioners to report events that meet legal criteria for abuse, those percep-
tions are important to integrate into the therapeutic treatment. Research has shown that
outcomes for sexual abuse survivors are determined in part by survivor perceptions of the
experience as abusive or gratifying and that the narratives about the experience can change
over time (Hunter, 2010). Therefore, it is important to explore clients’ perceptions of their
sexual contact/abuse experience as counselors and work with them to create resilience.
Statutory Rape
Complicating the definition of CSA further is the delineation between CSA and statutory
rape. Legally, CSA usually includes only those individuals who are in parental or
caretaking roles (e.g., babysitter, teacher, coach) with the child or adolescent. Statutory
rape, however, refers primarily to a relationship “between a juvenile and an adult that is
illegal under the age of consent statutes, but that does not involve the degree of coercion
or manipulation sufficient to qualify under criminal statutes as a forcible sex crime”
(Hines & Finkelhor, 2007, p. 302). Just as age of consent statutes may vary from state
to state, legal definitions and terminology for statutory rape also vary from one state
to another. The Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network (RAINN) keeps an up-to-
date list of a variety of laws by state on its website, at www.rainn.org. The website also
includes rape and sexual assault definitions by state. Complete Think About It 10.2 and
Activity 10.1 to further explore these complex and sometimes confusing concepts.
Think about the case of an adolescent boy having sex
with a much older woman. Imagine that an adolescent
client with whom you have been working for some time
discloses to you in a boastful tone that when he turned
16, his best friend’s 42-year-old mother offered to “rid
him of his virginity.” He shares with you that he believes
this is why he “gets the girls,” because she taught him
how to “please the ladies.” The laws in your state
require you to report this to law enforcement, which
you do. The perception this client has of his experience,
however, is not one of “abuse.” What approach might
you choose as you go about working with this client in
the aftermath of the disclosure?
THINK ABOUT IT 10.2
Find the legislation for three different states (including
one in which you hope to practice) on CSA, statutory
rape, and the age of consent for sexual relationships.
Note the key definitions in the laws and whom the
laws identify as prosecutable perpetrators of CSA,
statutory rape, and sexual victimization. Pay particular
attention to issues of sex, age discrepancies, and legal
guardianship/designated caretakers.
ACTIVITY 10.1
THE CYCLE OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.3 Articulate the cycle of child sexual abuse.
CSA typically develops through a cycle of behavior (Bennett & O’Donohue, 2014). This
process begins when a perpetrator identifies a child who may be an easy target due to
some sort of neediness, passivity, or suggestibility. In most cases, once a child has been

-- 367 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	339
identified, the perpetrator will begin “grooming” the child for sexual abuse by starting
with nonsexual contact and behavior and progressing slowly to more sexual activity
and behavior. By enticing the child though reinforcement (e.g., toys, candy, ice cream,
attention, distorted acts of affection) and punishment (e.g., anger, threats against the child
or the child’s loved ones), a child can be coerced into a sexually abusive relationship.
CSA can lead to intergenerational abuse. Although it may seem that adults who
were sexually abused as children should have a lower rate of CSA incidence in their
own children due to increased vigilance and heightened awareness of the danger of
victimization, the opposite appears to be true. As compared with the children of parents
who were not subject to CSA in childhood, children whose parents have a history of
CSA may experience a higher rate of sexual abuse. The reason for the higher rate is not
necessarily that parents with a history of CSA, in turn, abuse their own children. In fact,
only a fraction of victims of CSA experience sexual interest in children as adults; even
fewer become CSA perpetrating adults (Underwood, 2015). Rather, several other reasons
may explain this higher risk.
First, since interfamilial CSA perpetrators tend to abuse children across several
generations of family members, children in such families are often at greater risk for
CSA (for a review, see Thomas et al., 2013). Second, it may be that these parents, having
had their own physical and psychological boundaries violated as children, may be less
apt to know and teach appropriate boundaries to their own children or to detect when
their children are already caught in the grooming process (Wearick-Silva et al., 2014).
Furthermore, because CSA can affect victims’ ability to establish and maintain
intimate bonds well into adulthood, those who experienced CSA as children sometimes
may be less able to develop the parent–child bond than other parents (Kim et al.,
2010) and, therefore, may be less able to detect that something is amiss. Victims from
one generation may have internalized responsibility for their sexual abuse or do not
understand that perpetrators of CSA are most likely repeat offenders. Psychoeducation
about CSA, even at the crisis level, may be needed to help decrease intergenerational
cycles of abuse.
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.4 Identify the signs and symptoms of child sexual abuse.
Children and adolescents who have experienced CSA may respond and react in a variety
of ways, ranging from nonresponse to more severe reactions, including posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) symptomology (Amado et al., 2015). Given this range of reaction,
it is important to view children or adolescents in the context of developmentally
appropriate behavior patterns, giving special attention to significant deviations from
those norms and from typical developmental behaviors and milestones.
For example, a kindergarten-age boy who touches his penis in class or a 4-year-old
girl who lifts her dress in a grocery store may be exhibiting developmentally normal
behavior. If that kindergarten boy, however, accompanies the touching of his penis with
moaning or thrusting behaviors or if the 4-year-old girl lifts her dress and rubs up against
another individual in a seductive manner, those behaviors are not developmentally
appropriate and may signify that those children have witnessed sexual behaviors or
been the victims of CSA.

-- 368 of 545 --

340 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Furthermore, researchers have suggested that an effective method of evaluating
children’s sexual behaviors as normal or concerning is to evaluate the motivation behind
the behavior (Chaffin et al., 2008). If the motivation appears to be curiosity and the
behavior falls within a developmentally appropriate range, there may be little to fear.
However, if the motivation appears to be coercion or compulsion, or if it is accompanied
by physical or psychological distress, there may be good cause for alarm (Kellogg, 2010).
Table 10.1 provides summaries of cues that may indicate CSA. One notably
consistent symptom of CSA history across this body of research literature is substance
use. In fact, researchers have found consistently high rates of sexual abuse survivors in
substance use treatment centers (Banducci et al., 2014) and in populations of adolescents
who are homeless (Rosario et al., 2012).
Symptom Domain 	Potential Signs of CSA
Behavioral cues 	Difficulty in walking or sitting
Frequent vomiting
Sexually explicit drawings/writing
Sexual interaction with others
In-depth sexual play with peers
Sexual interactions with animals/toys
Exceptionally secretive behavior
Extreme compliance or withdrawal
Overt aggression
Extremely seductive behavior
Sudden nonparticipation in school activities
Crying without provocation
Regressive behaviors (e.g., thumb sucking,
clinging, separation anxiety)
Sudden onset of wetting or soiling
Talk about being damaged
Attempting to run away
Cruelty to animals (especially pets)
Fire setting
Eating-disordered behavior
Sudden phobic behavior
Suicide attempt
Self-injurious behavior
Sexual victimization of others
Use of sexual language inappropriate to
developmental level
Masturbation (if masturbation behaviors
include masturbating to point of injury;
masturbating repetitively or obsessively;
being unable to stop masturbating;
making groaning or moaning noises while
masturbating; thrusting motions while
masturbating)
Cognitive cues 	Decreased school performance 	Suicidal ideation
More sexual knowledge than is appropriate 	Fear of males or fear of females
Physical cues 	Blood or discharge on undergarments 	Frequent psychosomatic illnesses
Pregnancy at young age 	Sexually transmitted infections at young age
Sleep disturbances, nightmares, night terrors 	Older, more sexualized appearance than peers
Complaints of genital or anal itching,
pain, or bleeding
Psychological cues 	Feelings of low self-worth 	Depression
Anxiety 	Guilt
Shame 	Hostility
Flashbacks 	Nightmares
TABLE 10.1 Cues That May Indicate Child Sexual Abuse

-- 369 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	341
Although most research indicates that CSA outcomes and symptoms tend to
be remarkably similar in boys and girls (Yuce et al., 2015), a fair amount of evidence
also suggests otherwise. When sex differences present, they tend not to be in terms of
severity or magnitude but rather in the way they manifest. Specifically, boys tend to
act out or externalize their symptoms, while girls tend to internalize their symptoms
(Sigurdardottir et al., 2014). This means that boys who have experienced CSA may be
more likely to engage in aggressive, violent, or risky behaviors, while girls who have
experienced CSA may be more likely to present with depression, anxiety, or self-harming
behaviors.
Finally, it is important to note that researchers have found that some
children who were victims of CSA present without symptoms at the time
of their evaluations (Trask et al., 2011). Reasons for these asymptomatic
presentations may include narrowness of symptomology being studied,
symptoms that have not yet manifested, or children’s perceptions that the
CSA was not intolerable, was not threatening, or did not exceed their normal
functioning. Nevertheless, what researchers in this field call sleeper effects—
the tendency of symptoms to present over time and across many phases
of lifespan development—tend to be the norm for children who are either
symptomatic or asymptomatic for CSA. As a result, it is standard practice for
counselors to provide sexually victimized children (regardless of symptom
presentation) with psychoeducational treatment that helps them express their
feelings and understand their feelings as normal, create a plan to prevent
revictimization, and educate children’s caregivers about CSA.
INTERVENTION STRATEGIES FOR VICTIMS OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.5 Apply intervention strategies for victims of child sexual
abuse, including handling the initial disclosure, collecting information, conducting
forensic interviews, reporting, and understanding the future treatment process.
When working with victims of CSA, it is important that counselors understand the
dynamics of not only their own personal work with the client but also how the counsel-
ing process might affect the legal and social services processes and professionals that
might also be working with the child and family. Counselors must understand how the
crisis or therapeutic relationship will act in concert with other support services for the
child from the initial interview through the reporting and counseling process. Without
a thorough understanding, counselors may impede the progress of legal proceedings.
In the sections that follow, intervention strategies are discussed; however, counselors
must become familiar with the local legal and social services entities and professionals
with whom they will interact to understand local procedures and laws regarding CSA.
Thus, the reader is cautioned against treating children for CSA in any context without
specialized training in child counseling techniques to avoid doing harm. CSA specialists
should assess and intervene with CSA survivors.
Initial Disclosure and Interviewing for Child Sexual Abuse
When working with a child or adolescent who has recently disclosed CSA, it is critical to
both the success of treatment and potential prosecution of the perpetrator that counselors
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 10.1
This video reports the
prevalence of child sexual abuse,
common reactions of victims,
and effective treatment options
for children and adult survivors
of child sexual abuse. What are
some additional reactions a cli-
ent may demonstrate that were
not mentioned in this video?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=OP-t0p7wNzY
Watch from 00:00 to 02:53

-- 370 of 545 --

342 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
respond to the disclosure with informed intention; that is, the intent to do no further
psychological harm to the victim with statements that may be perceived as blaming.
Informed intention is applied to the verbal and nonverbal responses made directly
to survivors as well as the steps taken in the aftermath of the disclosure to respond
appropriately.
According to Whiffen and MacIntosh (2005), the worst long-term outcomes for
clients with histories of CSA are consistently found in those children who met with
unsupportive verbal or nonverbal responses following their disclosure of sexual abuse.
All too often, common responses to such disclosures tend to be disbelief (e.g., “It is hard
to believe that Coach would do such a thing—everyone knows he’s so good with kids”),
blame (“If it was so awful for you, then why did you go back to that house the next
day?” or “Perhaps if you weren’t so flirtatious, this wouldn’t have happened”), shame
(“That is disgusting—I can’t believe you were involved in all that”), or catastrophizing
(“You’re damaged goods now—you’ll never be the same again”). The result of such
responses tends to be that the feelings of guilt, self-blame, and low self-worth initiated
during the grooming process and reinforced in the abuse process are further deepened
and internalized in the victim. Both short- and long-term outcomes for those receiving
responses like these are poor.
The same is true for nonverbal responses to disclosure. Looks of skepticism, rolling
of eyes, or a disapproving shaking of the head communicate disbelief, blame, and dis-
gust. Affirmative responses to a child’s disclosure of CSA include attentive body posture,
empathic facial expression, nodding head with belief, and refraining from expressions
of alarm or shock. When children receive affirmative responses such as these, they sense
that they have done the right thing in reporting the abuse, feel trust that the adult they
told will respond appropriately, and have hope that the abuse will cease.
Similarly, it is important that the counselors receiving the disclosure follow
appropriate procedural guidelines. Counselors should not ask leading questions
regarding the veracity or nature of the abuse. There are specific protocols that CPS
workers and law enforcement officers use when working with children and adolescents
who have reported abuse, and members of those agencies should be responsible for
the investigation of the alleged abuse. Many communities have child advocacy centers
in which trained forensic interviewers work in concert with CPS, law enforcement,
medical officials, and counselors to interview the child only once and document the
interview.
When making a report regarding abuse, CPS will want to know the child’s directory
information, what other children are in the home, the nature and extent of the abuse that
has occurred, and any other information that may be cause for protective intervention
on behalf of the child (Mason, 2013). While each state’s procedures on reporting abuse
can vary, gathering this information with as much detail and accuracy as possible is
crucial in aiding CPS with its report and, consequently, in getting the proper help and
protection for the child. Therefore, while it may be appropriate to ask some general
probing questions, crisis counselors should not suggest or make inferences that CSA has
occurred. A question such as “It sounds like this was a difficult weekend for you, and
you seem really upset. Is there some way I can help you?” is an appropriate prompt.
Conversely, “Did someone sexually abuse you this weekend?” and “Sometimes daddies
touch little girls and make them feel uncomfortable. Did that happen to you?” are
inappropriate prompts.

-- 371 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	343
It is important for counselors to be sensitive to the fear, emotional fragility, or
flat affect of children and adolescents who are making a disclosure of CSA. Often
children and adolescents may be afraid of making the disclosure because of the potential
ramifications of the disclosure. These fears may be the result of a promise of retaliation
by the perpetrator for the disclosure (e.g., a threat to harm the child or a family member);
a belief that the perpetrator may go to jail; a fear that the victim will be blamed for the
perpetrator’s removal from the home; and feelings of loyalty, attachment, or love for the
perpetrator. In addition, the child or adolescent may appear to have an inappropriately
flat affect or a matter-of-fact attitude. Such presentations may indicate the belief that
the abuse is normal (e.g., a form of sex education, a ritual to initiate one into manhood/
womanhood) or reflect the preferred manner of coping with the abuse (dissociative
responses).
It is important when working with a child or adolescent who is disclosing CSA
to help maintain a sense of control of the information given and understand the steps
involved in the reporting process. This could include involving the child or adolescent, as
appropriate, in making the report to CPS or describing the steps in the process as clearly
as possible. It is very important not to make promises that cannot be guaranteed or
kept. Counselors may find it helpful to involve appropriate individuals (e.g., CPS social
worker, law enforcement officer, medical personnel) in helping lay out when the child
can expect to be interviewed, any physical examination that might take place, what the
potential consequences may be for the perpetrator of the abuse, and what sort of process
will be involved if the child is, in fact, removed from the home.
Equally important is reiterating, even multiple times, that the child is not at fault,
not in trouble, and not to blame in any way. This can help the child maintain some sense
of control and stability, even in an unfamiliar circumstance. See Case Study 10.1, which
provides insight into what this reporting process might look like.
It should be noted that in Case Study 10.1, Justin had an established counselor–
client relationship with Marcus and so was aware of some of the details needed to make
a report to CPS. In some instances (i.e., when a child in crisis is seen for the first time by
a counselor with no previous knowledge of the child), more time and attention may need
to be given to gathering some of the basic information needed to make a CPS report.
CASE STUDY 10.1
Crisis Intake with a Child Sexual Abuse Client: Eliminating Blame
Eight-year-old Marcus has been seeing Justin, his clinical mental health counselor, for the
past 3 months. Marcus was referred to Justin by his mother, who expressed concern that
Marcus began wetting his bed about 10 months ago, responding to the slightest criticism
with emotions incongruent with the situation at hand, and refusing to play with other
children at home or at school. While routinely discussing his week at the start of the
session, Marcus discloses to Justin that his stepfather “hurt my penis again.” Although
Justin is stunned, he remains outwardly calm and focuses on simply reflecting Marcus’s
words as a prompt for the child to continue.
Marcus: 	Yeah. All that happened last week. And then . . . my stepdad
hurt my penis again.

-- 372 of 545 --

344 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Justin: 	Your stepfather sometimes hurts your penis. And he did it
again last week . . .
Marcus: 	Yeah . . . (Long silence ensues)
Justin: 	(Says nothing but inclines his head downward as if to scoop up
Marcus’s eyes, which are fixed on the floor)
Marcus: 	It really hurts when he does it. But I’m not allowed to talk
about it or else he’ll hurt me worse. And he said he’d tell
mama what I’ve done to him if I tell anyone.
Justin: 	He has told you that, if you tell, bad things will happen to
you— that your mom will blame you for it all.
Marcus: 	(Suddenly raising fear-filled eyes to meet Justin’s; he is nodding
emphatically. She will, too. I get blamed for everything bad that
happens even when it’s not my fault.
Justin: 	You’re afraid that your mom won’t understand—that she’ll get
mad at you. (Pause) Here’s the thing, Marcus. You and I know
that it’s not your fault. It’s your stepdad’s fault because he is the
adult who is supposed to take good care of you—not hurt you.
It’s never okay for people to do what he’s been doing to you.
Marcus: 	Yeah, but he makes me do stuff. Stuff that makes me feel sick.
It’s really bad what he makes me do—and I have to do it.
I have to do whatever he says. (Drops his eyes to the floor)
Justin: 	You’re really scared of your stepdad. You do whatever he tells
you so he won’t hurt you worse. That tells me that you sure
mustered up a lot of courage when you decided to tell me
this today—and that was the right thing to do. (Short silence)
Although I’m really sad that your stepdad has been hurting
you, I also feel really glad that you told me because that tells
me that you trust me to do the right things to keep you safe.
Marcus: 	(Nodding, but with some uncertainty in his eyes) Does that mean
you’re going to tell mama? (His expression conveys a look of both
anxiety and hopefulness.)
Justin: 	(Nodding) Your mama needs to know this has been happening
to you because it is her job to keep you safe. There are also some
other people who need to know, too—people whose job it is to
protect kids when adults do things like hurt little boys’ penises
and do stuff that’s wrong. Sometimes it takes a few important
people knowing this stuff for it to stop and stay stopped.
Marcus: 	(Lets out a soft but high-pitched whine and starts to shake and cry)
Justin: 	(Leaning forward) I know it seems pretty scary right now to
think about your mom finding out that this has been going on.
I also know that, together, we can figure out the best way for
her to learn this news today. I’ll be right here with you, Marcus.

-- 373 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	345
Marcus: 	(Continues to cry quietly as Justin waits; after a minute or so, he
nods and lifts his head)
Justin: 	I wonder if it would help to stand up and take a deep breath so
we can think clearly about how best to do this . . .
Justin and Marcus stand up and do some breathing exercises that he often does
with his minor clients to help them calm and center themselves. Justin explains that kids
have told him things like this in the past and asks Marcus if he would like to know what
typically happens after they do. Marcus indicates he would like to know. Justin explains
that he has a friend named Joan in Child Protective Services (and/or law enforcement
office) that he tells these things to, that she takes kids’ stories like this very seriously, and
that she sometimes helps moms understand that it is never the child’s fault.
Justin explains that both Marcus’s mom and Justin’s friend Joan need to hear his story
and asks how he would like for them to find out (who should tell the story, who should
find out first). Marcus decides that he wants Justin to tell his mom for him, but that he
wants to be in the room while he does. He says he does not care who talks to Joan or when
she is told. Because Justin is not sure about how Marcus’s mother will react, he decides
to tell Marcus that he thinks it is a good idea to tell Joan first because she might be able to
come over either now or sometime soon and help. Justin calls the designated law enforce-
ment officer with whom he has a relationship of trust while Marcus is in the room, telling
her that there is a little boy with him right now who has told him something that worries
him and that she needs to hear. The officer is available and agrees to come to Justin’s office.
Justin explains that he needs to speak to Marcus’s mother now. Justin reinforces
that Marcus has done the right thing by telling him and that his job as his counselor is to
make sure that his mother understands it is not Marcus’s fault. Justin goes to the lobby
to meet the mother. Together, Justin and Marcus tell the mother that Marcus’s stepdad
has been “hurting his penis.” When her look of shock turns to anger and she demands
to know details, Justin intervenes to help the mother understand that Marcus is very
afraid that she will be mad at him and that part of why he has not told this in the past is
that he is afraid of being blamed for this—that the stepdad has told Marcus that all this
is Marcus’s fault. Justin tells the mother that, in accordance with a state mandate, he has
called the local law enforcement authorities and that they will be on their way soon to
come to the office to help Marcus and his mother get through the next few days.
It should be noted that Justin took pains to do several things correctly. First, when the
boy was disclosing the abuse to him, he merely reflected the boy’s own words, careful not
to sabotage a potential prosecution by requiring the boy to tell his story in detail. In this
case, the counselor gathered only enough information as was necessary to substantiate his
own reasonable suspicions that the boy might have been sexually abused and then made
the mandated report to the proper agency. He did not ask questions or pump the child for
details about when, where, how often, and so on, the abuse had occurred. Rather, with the
amount of information that Marcus had already volunteered (that his stepfather had “hurt
his penis again” and the most recent time was within the past week), when combined with
information that he already had (e.g., the identity of the stepfather and the knowledge that
the stepfather resided in the same home as Marcus and a younger sibling), he focused on
the feelings the boy was having, validated those feelings, reinforced the boy’s decision to
disclose the abuse, supported him by letting him know that it was not his fault, and reas-
sured him that he would help him through the process of telling and reporting.

-- 374 of 545 --

346 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Whom do you notify?
• What specific information do you need to know to report?
• What other agency/school personnel should be involved?
• Who makes the report to CPS? How?
• Is there a time frame for making a verbal report followed by a written report?
• Who is responsible for monitoring or receiving feedback from CPS once the report is filed?
• What information should be included in the report? (This is dictated by state law and CPS
policy.)
• What does the protocol indicate regarding confidentiality?
• Is the written report kept in a separate location from the client’s normal file or cumulative
folder?
• What follow-up is expected on reported cases?
• What role will you play in possible community or child protection teams?
TABLE 10.2 Information and Policies to Know Regarding Child Sexual Abuse Reporting
Second, Justin did not use the word abuse. Knowing that this is a term that boys can
sometimes find emasculating and disempowering, Justin chose only to use Marcus’s own
words in very concrete (rather than euphemistic) terms such as “he hurt your penis.”
Third, Justin remained calm and matter of fact, while communicating empathy with
his tone and body language. The message this manner conveyed to the child was that
adults can handle these things calmly without the response of blame or anger, which can
be scary for children; that they care; and that they should be told to keep children safe.
Finally, Justin gave Marcus as many choices as he could. Some of those choices
were who to tell first, who should do the telling, and where the telling should happen.
This facilitated the child’s sense of empowerment, restored the child’s confidence in his
choices and, by proxy, reinforced his sense of self-worth.
In the weeks immediately following, Justin maintained consistent contact with
Marcus’s mom, the assigned CPS caseworker, law enforcement, and the local children’s
advocacy center. Although Justin agreed to see Marcus twice a week, Marcus was very
reluctant to talk about the abuse. Justin therefore decided that play therapy might be
the best course of treatment. They undertook about 20 sessions of child-centered play
therapy before Marcus’s original presenting symptoms and his later anxiety, depression,
and anger dissipated.
Discussion Questions
1. What information do you need to collect for CPS?
2. How can you determine the safety of other family members?
Collecting Information for an Initial Report of Child Sexual Abuse
Counselors should be aware of not only the information they need to collect to report a
case of CSA but also the CSA policies where they work to practice legally and ethically.
Table 10.2 provides a list of questions related to the information and policies counselors
should know about when reporting a case of CSA.

-- 375 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	347
• Reporter’s name, location, and contact information
• Child’s name, age, address, and sex
• Parents’ names and addresses
• Nature and extent of the condition observed
• Actions taken by the reporter (e.g., talking with the child)
• Identity of alleged perpetrator
• Type of abuse
• Time frame of the abuse and where the act occurred
• Issues of potential risk for the child (e.g., Is the perpetrator in the home? Is there a threat
of physical abuse for the child disclosing information? Might the child be kicked out of the
home for reporting?)
• Are there other children who might be at risk from the alleged perpetrator?
TABLE 10.3 Information to Include in an Initial Report of Child Sexual Abuse
States have required mandated reporting forms that counselors, in any setting, are
required to submit, usually online. Important information to include in a CSA report
is presented in Table 10.3. When making an initial CSA report to CPS, it is important
for the mental health professional to document that the report was made, including to
whom the report was made (both the agency and the name of the individual taking the
report, if applicable).
Each case of child abuse differs, and while some counselors may not want to
scare a child by introducing what could be perceived as scary questions, it is possible
to carefully ask follow-up questions on some of the basic and most crucial information
that is often requested by CPS when filing a report. Depending on the unique situation
and disposition of the child and the experience of the counselor, more information
could be obtained (perpetrator name, place where alleged incident occurred, when the
abuse took place, type of alleged abuse, knowledge of other children in the house) to
provide CPS reviewers more information that may be needed for their processing and
decision making on the case. Similarly, it is important for crisis counselors to weigh
the safety of the child in determining whether family members should be contacted
about the abuse.
Forensic Child Sexual Abuse Interviews
Conducting forensic CSA interviews requires additional training and credentialing.
In addition, there are a number of assessments used to determine types of abuse and
gathering information for reporting purposes. Understanding the structure of the
forensic interview can assist crisis counselors in providing insight into the interviewing
process and may be a helpful structure for crisis counselors to assist in determining
sexual abuse in order to make a referral for forensic evaluation. The Child Sexual Abuse
Interview Protocol (CSAIP) Version 2012-IV, developed by Cheung (2012), provides a
structured interview process and specific questions to assess CSA. As a summary, the
CSAIP has four main stages:

-- 376 of 545 --

348 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Stage 1: Rapport building. This stage starts with an introduction by the
interviewers, determination of competency of the child to answer the
4WH questions (see Stage 3 and Table 10.4), expectations, and ground
rules.
• Stage 2: Free narrative account. By simply asking “What happened” or
“Do you know the reason for seeing me?”, the child has the freedom to
recall the events in their own words without additional prompting, clari-
fications, or additional questioning.
• Stage 3: Questioning. This stage consists of working with both willingly
disclosing and reticent children:
✓ Reticent children who may not willingly disclose the abuse may need
additional time to focus on the following: What has been happening
lately? Are any recent events causing distress? Has any adult asked the
child to keep a secret? Whether or not the child discloses, the 4WH
questions (see Table 10.4) should be integrated into the interview.
✓ For disclosing children, the implementation of the 4WH will be used
(When, Where, Who, What, and How; see Table 10.4). It is important
for counselors to focus on one incident at a time. Focusing on the most
recent event or the event that is the most remembered is often the
standard practice. See Table 10.4 for common 4WH questions.
During the questioning stage, additional information is sought to:
• Understand the progression of abuse: What else happened? Are
there other child victims? Other sexual acts? Exposure to pornogra-
phy?
• Determine whether there was more than one perpetrator involved:
Has anyone else done something like this to you?
• Determine the motive of the child to report: Who was the first per-
son the child told about the abuse? What was that person’s reaction
or action? What made the child decide to make the report?
When 	Date and time. The answers may be abstract such as certain holidays and times of days
(after school, night, day).
Where 	Abuse location (e.g., bedroom, locker room)? Address of the location? Where were
other family members during the abuse?
Who 	Who is the alleged perpetrator? Relationship of the alleged perpetrator to the child?
Who else was there when the abuse occurred? Who else knew about the abuse?
What 	The intent of the “what” questioning allows the counselor to document if coercion
may have been used: What did the alleged perpetrator do? What did the child see,
hear, say, feel? What did the alleged perpetrator say?
How 	This may be the most difficult stage for the child as the questions center on frequency
of the specific acts (How many times was this done to you?), duration and length of
abuse incidents (How long have they been doing it to you?), how the child felt before/
during/after the abuse (How did you feel or think when this was done to you?).
TABLE 10.4 4WH Questions
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 10.2
This video provides an over-
view of forensic interviewing
with children of sexual abuse.
It discusses the skills and
techniques that allow for a safe
environment and how to be
non-directive in the interview-
ing stages. What skills were
discussed as effective and how
do the 4WH work into this
interview process?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=sDJS6P2vfi0
Watch from 00:00 to 06:40

-- 377 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	349
It is important to (a) not use “why” questions, which may be interpreted
as accusatorial and as blame placing on the child for being abused, (b) not use
leading questions, (c) not be judgmental, (d) not touch the child, and (e) be pres-
ent with the child.
• Stage 4: Closing the Interview. This final stage includes confirmation of the
name(s) of the perpetrator(s), the type(s) of abuse, and confirmation that no one
coerced the child to disclose the abuse. The counselor should be honest with the
child about what may happen next and offer time for the child to ask questions.
Reporting Child Sexual Abuse
In the United States, every state has mandated reporting of CSA. Mandated reporters
may differ by state but typically include mental health professionals, law enforcement
officers, medical staff, and all personnel working in educational institutions who have
contact with minor children (Administration for Children and Families, 2020). The
DHHS maintains a website that allows counselors to search mandated reporting statutes
by state and find the required mandated reporter in their region (see www.childwelfare.
gov/topics/systemwide/laws-policies/state/).
Despite the legal responsibility to report child abuse and neglect, there may be
times when professionals choose not to report such information. This, however, can put
the professional in conflict with legal (CAPTA, 2010) and ethical (American Counseling
Association, 2014) guidelines that require disclosure of suspicion of CSA. It is important
for individuals serving children and adolescents to be knowledgeable of a counselor’s
legal and ethical responsibilities regarding CSA. This includes knowing not only the laws
governing the reporting of CSA and the statutes of limitations for their state(s) but also
the policies of the agency, organization, or school in which they practice. Many states
have strong sanctions for mandated reporters who do not report suspected CSA cases.
Complete the interviewing exercise in Activity 10.2.
Contact a member of Child Protective Services or a
member of local law enforcement with experience in
working with children and adolescents who have been
sexually abused. Interview that individual about the
process of making reports, including agency procedures
when CSA has been reported, the process involved in
interviewing and investigating CSA, and the timeline
during which major events occur (e.g., initial interview
of child, interview of family and/or alleged perpetrator,
filing of legal charges, removal from home).
ACTIVITY 10.2
The mandate for reporting suspicion of CSA can make it difficult to determine
when steps should be taken, especially in cases where a child has not disclosed abuse but
rather has exhibited some behaviors that seem to demonstrate a potential history of sexual
abuse. While it is important to know your state(s) statutes regarding abuse, generally a
report must be made within the first 48 hours after there is reasonable cause to believe or
suspect a child is being abused (Administration for Children and Families, 2020).
Although “reasonable cause” can feel vague, most state statutes hold personnel
responsible for reporting when they can connect suspicions of abuse to observable
evidence, such as statements made by a child, the child’s appearance, or concerning
behaviors (Mason, 2013). One way to help provide some clarification on when it is

-- 378 of 545 --

350 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
necessary to report is to develop professional relationships with contacts within the local
CPS agency and local law enforcement, preferably prior to having a client who may be
a victim of CSA. These contacts can help the counselor understand the process of local
agencies and be individuals with whom that counselor can discuss hypothetical cases
and appropriate action(s) or reporting procedures. These professional relationships can
be especially helpful in cases where the line between CSA (and thus mandated reporting)
and statutory rape (for which reporting is not typically mandated) is blurred.
CPS traditionally works with CSA cases involving parents or caregivers, especially
those in the home. While CPS may be involved in other CSA cases, the primary focus will
typically be on parent/caregiver cases. Law enforcement agencies will typically handle
extrafamilial cases or those that involve individuals who are not in a caretaking role.
CPS reports may be filed anonymously. However, even if an anonymous report
is made, counselors are mandated reporters and should document their reports. The
documentation should include the report made, the date and time the report was made,
and the name of the individual to whom the report was made. It should be cautioned
that by reporting anonymously, the only record of mandated reporting is from the
counselor’s notes, since CPS will not have on file the identity of the reporter.
Reporting Past Incidents of Child Sexual Abuse
When working with adults who disclose past CSA, multiple factors must be taken into
consideration. However, the most important consideration is one’s state law on reporting
past allegations of CSA. It is crucial for crisis counselors to understand when state law
requires reporting past incidents. Duty to report statutes are also why the limits of
confidentiality are an integral part of the counselor–client relationship. By reviewing
the limits of confidentiality with clients, clients have the power and control in releasing
information to the counselor that may also require a counselor to report past CSA.
Crisis counselors also need to consider adult clients in their own context regarding
desired treatment outcomes (e.g., Is the client presenting with sexual dysfunction, relationship
issues, difficulty in regulating mood, PTSD?), client abuse history (e.g., Who was the
perpetrator? When did the abuse take place? What was the duration of the abuse?), as well as
factors that might necessitate involving law enforcement or CPS (e.g., Is the abuser still alive?
If so, does the abuser have access to children or adolescents who might also be victimized?).
Another factor to consider in treatment planning is whether adult clients have
previously disclosed their abuse and, if so, what the outcomes were of the disclosures.
Is there documentation to substantiate a report being made? Crisis counselors should
empower and respect the autonomy of the adult CSA survivor while also taking
necessary steps to protect any children or adolescents who might be at risk as outlined
by the laws of their practicing state.
TREATMENT OF SURVIVORS OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.6 Describe the future treatment process and coping
responses of sexually abused youth.
Although crisis counselors are often not part of the long-term clinical work with the
client, they should be aware of professional counselors in the community who specialize
in treating survivors of CSA as well as the various treatment options available. Many

-- 379 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	351
difficulties exist in identifying evidence-based practices for effectively treating survivors
of CSA, based in part on the range of symptomology presented; the challenges that
children have verbalizing their current mental, emotional, and physical states; and the
reliance on parent and teacher reports, which may differ substantially both from each
other and from the experience of the child (Benuto & O’Donohue, 2015). Although
children and adolescents who have survived sexual abuse are usually served through
a combination of individual and group counseling, the types of counseling offered can
vary widely.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) continues to be the most common approach
used in working with CSA clients. CBT approaches have been the most widely used
therapies in treating children and adolescents with posttraumatic symptomology
(Benuto & O’Donohue, 2015), therefore such strategies may be most beneficial to children
and adolescents who are struggling specifically with posttraumatic stress, anxiety, or
depression after being sexually abused.
The most popular CBT treatment is trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy
(TF-CBT; Cohen et al., 2017); it employs eight components including psychoeducation,
relaxation and stress management skills, cognitive coping and processing, and conjoint
child–parent sessions (see Chapter 9). Any treatment using prolonged exposure therapy
(or other forms of systematic desensitization) or cognitive restructuring must be careful
to avoid interference with the child’s story that could affect court testimony or the CPS
investigation and cause potential retraumatization of the sexual abuse (van der Kolk,
2015). It is important for crisis counselors to take advantage of training opportunities
and continuing education on working with CSA survivors and seek specialized training
in CBT-based therapies.
In their review of meta-analyses on the treatment outcomes for sexually abused
children, Benuto and O’Donohue (2015) found CBT to be no more effective than any
other treatment modality in working with this population. In response to this finding,
one group of researchers suggested that the type of treatment employed should depend
on the child’s developmental level and presenting complaints (Hetzel-Riggin et al., 2007).
For example, since CBT appears to be most successful with children who present with
behavioral problems, group counseling appears to be most successful with those children
with low self-concept or depression, and play therapies appear to be most successful
with children who have deficits in social functioning, the modality should be tailored
to the specific needs and characteristics of the child. Indeed, other meta-analytic studies
have indicated that TF-CBT is most successful when combined with play therapies and
other similar psychodynamic interventions as well as with supportive therapies such as
group therapy and parent-attachment therapies (Hoogsteder et al., 2022; Lewey et al.,
2018; Mavranezouli et al., 2020).
Play therapy has also been integrated into the treatment of children who have
experienced CSA (Singhal & Vahali, 2014). Although play therapy may lack the
widespread acceptance of CBT, reviews of meta-analyses undertaken over the last
few decades have consistently shown that play therapy significantly improved
treatment outcomes in children across a diverse spectrum of issues (Ray et al., 2015).
Many counselors with extensive experience in working with children prefer play
therapy because the developmentally responsive nature of the therapy lends itself more
naturally to children’s innate communication style than does a therapy such as TF-CBT,
which may rely on more advanced cognitive and verbal skills. In choosing a particular

-- 380 of 545 --

352 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
play therapy approach (e.g., child-centered, Jungian, Adlerian, theraplay), the needs of
both the child and family need to be considered.
Parent–child interaction therapy (PCIT) is another treatment approach that is
becoming popular among counselors who treat CSA populations (Allen et al., 2016). PCIT
draws from play and operant therapy techniques and focuses on the psychoeducation
and training of parents in the use of play therapy–type strategies to increase the stability,
trust, and communication in the parent–child relationship. As the relationship between
parent and child strengthens across several counselor-directed play sessions, counselors
and researchers have observed both significant decreases in the child’s externalized
behavioral problems and increases in the caregiver’s parenting self-efficacy. These two
issues are foremost in families struggling to recover from abuse events (Cooley et al.,
2014). For this reason, PCIT may be appropriate for children demonstrating problematic
externalized behaviors following abuse or who have suffered an attachment break with
a primary caregiver because of the abuse events.
Finally, eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) has gained
attention in recent decades for its effectiveness in treating children who are survivors
of various forms of trauma, including sexual abuse (Chen et al., 2014; Hoogsteder
et al., 2022; Lewey et al., 2018; Mavranezouli et al., 2020). Trained counselors use a
standardized EMDR protocol that accesses client memories of traumatic events that
trigger any symptoms in the present, and then work to install more adaptive coping
processes for trauma triggers that may be experienced in the future. EMDR is a notable
therapy for use with CSA populations because it is effective both in the immediate
aftermath (e.g., hours, days) of abuse as well as past abuses with adolescent and
adult clients. Studies showed that EMDR was more effective than TF-CBT in reducing
depressive symptoms in trauma survivors (Hoogsteder et al., 2022; Lewey et al., 2018;
Mavranezouli et al., 2020) and may be a resilience-building therapy that prevents further
accumulation of traumatic recall, which can lead to later-developing disorders. Read
Voices from the Field 10.1.
Maegan Vick
Seven-year-old Shelby sat down with me as usual
and traced the blisters she got on her palms from the
monkey bars in our school’s playground. By now, I was
accustomed to Shelby asking to see me. We would talk
about anything—from what she did at recess that day to
how she was not getting along with her sister. However,
I always felt she left something unsaid, something much
bigger. During this session, Shelby was really trying to
convey to me that she did not want to go to her father’s
house for her usual weekend visit. She took a deep
breath and finally said that her father had touched her
bottom and that he got naked in front of her. Shelby
said she closed her eyes because she did not want to
see. He made her get in the shower with him as well.
I praised Shelby for being brave enough to share that
information with me and promised I would get her some
help, so her father would never do that again. She was
apprehensive and worried her father would be in trouble.
I eased her fear by saying that the people I would call
would help him because what he was doing was not
okay. Our bodies belong to us and no one should ever
touch us where our swimsuits cover our private areas.
I contacted Child Protective Services and then referred
Shelby to Owens’s House, a nonprofit organization that
helps children who are sexually abused and exploited.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 10.1
Protecting Shelby

-- 381 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	353
Child Sexual Abuse Coping Strategies and Their Impact on
Treatment
A critical issue in the treatment and recovery of children who have experienced CSA is to
determine the methods clients use to cope with the abuse. The worst outcomes are seen
in those children and adolescents who chose avoidant coping strategies (Shapiro, 2012).
Avoidant coping strategies can be characterized by verbal or psychic denial of the abuse,
withdrawal from one’s social network, dissociation, or dissociative forgetting of the abuse.
Approach coping strategies can be characterized by reaching out to others for support,
disclosing the abuse, or discussing the abuse with friends, family, and/or counselors.
Van der Kolk (2015) hypothesized that the psychic stress resulting from various
traumas may exceed a child’s ability to cope. As a result, the child dissociates from
the abuse for survival. Therefore, if children have been traumatized by their abuse,
counselors should allow for a period of stabilization, safety, and normal routines before
attempting to facilitate treatment that directly addresses the abuse. Many scientist-
practitioners who specialize in trauma treatment have addressed this dynamic by
allowing for a period of safety-building and stabilization before addressing the sexual
trauma (Rothschild, 2010). Case Study 10.2 considers the role of a school counselor in
reporting a case of CSA.
CASE STUDY 10.2
The Role of a School Counselor in the Disclosure of Child Sexual Abuse
Eleven-year-old Alicia arrives in her school counselor’s office one day in tears. She is
accompanied by a friend who holds her hand and speaks for her. The friend explains
to Cherise, the school counselor, that something really bad is happening to Alicia and
that it’s got to stop because Alicia can’t take it anymore. Cherise knows Alicia well from
years of working with all students in classroom guidance and small groups, and she asks
her if she feels comfortable talking about what has happened with her alone. After the
friend leaves, Alicia discloses that her grandfather has been sexually abusing her for at
least the past year.
After making the proper reports to the authorities and helping Alicia tell her
parents about the abuse, Cherise makes a referral for clinical mental health counseling.
Several months go by with Cherise checking on Alicia and checking in with her teachers
and family. All seems to be going well until one day, Alicia’s mother calls Cherise asking
her to see Alicia. She informs her that Alicia refuses to speak about the abuse to anyone
but Cherise. Cherise agrees to see Alicia for six half-hour sessions over the next several
weeks until the mother can find another clinical mental health counselor.
Alicia arrives after lunch one day for her session and says that she wants to write
her story so she can finally get it out of her head. She reports that she wants to stop
thinking about what happened because she is tired of feeling sick to her stomach all
the time. Cherise affirms Alicia’s courage to work on this goal, but she also expresses
her concern that discussing the abuse may get in the way of Alicia’s ability to focus on
her schoolwork and be her usual self around her friends. Alicia dismisses this concern
and starts decorating the front cover of her book. Over the next 6 weeks, Alicia and
Cherise worked together to write her story. In keeping with the tenets of some narrative

-- 382 of 545 --

354 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
PERPETRATORS OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.7 Demonstrate an understanding of the characteristics of
child sexual abuse perpetrators and treatment of adult and adolescent sex offenders.
When discussing CSA, it is important to consider not only the survivors but also the
perpetrators. One issue that may be particularly challenging for some counselors who
find themselves working with perpetrators of CSA is getting past their own negative
reactions to the actions of their clients. Being able to provide perpetrators of CSA with
the same unconditional positive regard as other client populations may be challenging.
This population encounters societal issues including restrictions on movement and
housing as well as a range of negative emotional and behavioral responses from fam-
ily, friends, and members of the community. In the sections that follow, the prevalence
of child sexual perpetration, the characteristics of perpetrators, and treatment options
are outlined.
The Characteristics of Child Sexual Abuse Perpetrators
Perpetrators of CSA are both male and female, and they commit sex crimes against
children for a variety of reasons. Some of these may be parallel to the reasons of sexual
assault perpetrators, but some are distinctly different. In the following sections, male
and female perpetrators of CSA are described, with a focus on the motivation that may
drive behavior that is sexually abusive toward children or adolescents.
THE VICTIM–OFFENDER CYCLE 	An important feature of CSA is that it often occurs in
cycles. Although many researchers have investigated this relationship and found
differing rates of the victim–perpetrator cycle, the ratio consistently fell within the 3:1
range. For example, recent research by Jennings et al. (2014) demonstrated that 40% of
males with sexual assault or rape histories prior to 16 years of age later became offenders
therapies, Cherise suggested that Alicia write the ending to the story first. Alicia
decides that she wants her story to end when she is 25 years old and has a family of
her own, that her story has a happy ending, and that her grandfather (who also would
eventually serve a jail sentence for taking indecent liberties with a minor) would one day
love and accept her again and be able to look her in the eye with pride.
At the end of their sessions together, Cherise agrees to invite Alicia’s parents to
school so that their daughter can read her story to them. The parents listen closely to
Alicia’s story, cry healing tears, and affirm their love for and pride in their daughter.
Her parents then get permission for their daughter to leave school to have a celebratory
lunch together.
Alicia eventually saw a counselor the following year, after moving on to middle
school. Her school performance didn’t suffer the drop that her parents and doctors
expected. Throughout high school, Alicia’s academic and social achievements thrived.
Discussion Questions
1. What are your state’s laws regarding mandated reporting?
2. What are the primary treatment methods a counselor could use in this case?

-- 383 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	355
of sexual abuse themselves, while 60% did not. This is an important feature of CSA.
Although most offender treatment programs do not differentiate their interventions by
personal abuse history of the perpetrator, it is possible that addressing the etiology of
offending behaviors may hold insight to constructing more successful treatment
programs in reducing recidivism rates. It is important for the crisis counselor to educate
parents about signs, symptoms, and the cycle of perpetrated victimization.
MALE PERPETRATORS OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE 	Like sexual assault perpetrators,
individuals who sexually abuse children are predominantly male. Indeed, males are the
perpetrators in 75–96% of reported child victimization cases (Lanning, 2010). Unlike
sexual assault perpetrators, individuals who sexually abuse children fall along a
continuum of motivation for committing the sexual abuse, ranging from manipulative
to opportunist (Rebocho & Goncalves, 2012). Manipulative perpetrators are compulsive
and driven by fantasies about their victims; they may participate in behaviors that
groom their potential targets. Manipulative perpetrators are more likely than
opportunist perpetrators to sexually abuse children or adolescents. By contrast,
opportunist perpetrators commit sexual abuse because they are driven by basic sexual
and nonsexual (e.g., power, anger) needs. In the case of opportunist offenders, the
preferred sexual partner may or may not typically be a child. Thus, the child serves as a
sexual substitute and may be part of a larger pattern of abusive behavior.
Based on a behavioral analysis of child molesters, Lanning (2010) describes a similar
motivational continuum (situational to preferential) as well as a typology of perpetrators.
These motivations and typology are not meant to be a basis for clinical treatment or
diagnosis; instead, they are meant to help law enforcement officials recognize, identify,
and gather relevant evidence about individuals who sexually abuse children.
Lanning (2010) identified three behavioral patterns of situational-type perpetrators
(like opportunist perpetrators) of sexual abuse: regressed, morally indiscriminate, and
inadequate. Offenders who fit a regressed pattern are driven by a precipitating stressor
and may find a readily available child to serve as a sexual substitute for a preferred adult
partner. Offenders who fit a morally indiscriminate pattern abuse all or many types of
individuals, so the sexual abuse of a child is less a specific preference for children than
the result of a sociopathic level of indiscriminate abuse of people, regardless of their age
or background. Finally, offenders who fit an inadequate pattern are typically perceived
as nonmainstream, perhaps with preexisting mental or emotional problems, who may
sexually abuse a child out of insecurity or curiosity about sexual behavior.
Individuals who are on the preferential side of the motivation continuum tend
to sexually abuse children or adolescents either because children and/or adolescents
are their preferred sexual partners or because they are less-threatening individuals
with whom the perpetrator can participate in sexual behaviors that are more bizarre or
more shameful to the perpetrator. Not all preferential-type perpetrators, therefore, are
pedophiles; many, however, have a paraphilia, which is defined in the fifth edition, text
revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric
Association, 2022) as a strong sexual preference for nonhuman objects, nonconsenting
individuals, or the suffering and/or humiliation of themselves or their partners. Not all
individuals who have a paraphilia (including pedophilia) commit CSA; therefore, it is
important that counselors not assume that all, most, or even many individuals who have
a paraphilia will sexually abuse children.

-- 384 of 545 --

356 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
The four behavioral patterns of preferential-type perpetrators of sexual abuse
are seduction, introverted, diverse, and sadistic (Lanning, 2010). Offenders who fit
the seduction pattern form the largest group of acquaintance child molesters. They
can identify with children and engage in grooming potential victims. When grooming
children, the perpetrator will give potential victims gifts and positive attention, making
them feel loved and understood to the point where they may willingly participate in sexual
acts. Unlike those who fit the seduction pattern, offenders who fit the introverted pattern
lack the verbal and social skills to seduce children and may resort to the traditionally
stereotypical behaviors of lurking around playgrounds or abducting children with
whom they have no prior relationship. This pattern parallels the inadequate pattern of
situational-type offenders, but with a specific preference for children. Offenders who
fit the diverse pattern are interested in sexual experimentation, and they choose a child
target because of the novelty or taboo or because the child is a more vulnerable partner
with whom sexual experimentation can take place. Finally, offenders who fit the sadistic
pattern represent a small percentage of perpetrators, but they are the most likely to
abduct or kill their victims. Sadistic perpetrators are aroused by the infliction of pain,
humiliation, and suffering in victims.
FEMALE PERPETRATORS OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE 	Recent statistics collected by Child
Protective Services agencies across the United States show that between 15 and 20% of
reported CSA cases are perpetrated by women (McLeod, 2015). Thus, female
perpetrators of sexual abuse appear to be fewer in number than their male counterparts.
However, the perception of female perpetrators of CSA is distinct from that of male
perpetrators. For example, there is more of a social media acceptance of older females
seducing younger males (e.g., the American Pie series of movies, the songs “Stacy’s
Mom” and “That Summer”) than there is of similar relationships between older males
and adolescent females (e.g., Lolita). Moreover, males themselves often fail to see sexual
behavior toward them that is initiated by significantly older women as abuse, even
though it more than meets the legal criteria (Deering & Mellor, 2011). Therefore, law
enforcement officers, criminal justice personnel, and mental health providers must be
aware of their own biases and stereotypes about the demographic characteristics of sex
offenders to understand the severity of abuse for the victim and properly treat the
female perpetrator.
Due to the relatively smaller numbers of female perpetrators, the literature is
still sparse compared with that on male perpetrators. In groundbreaking research,
Mathews et al. (1989) clustered female offenders into three subtypes: male coerced,
predisposed, and teacher/lover. Male-coerced female offenders tend to abuse children
in concert with a dominant male partner, and they may grant access to children out
of a fear of abandonment by a dominant male partner. Predisposed female offenders
typically act alone in victimizing their own children or other easily accessible young
children. They are typically survivors of incestuous relationships with continued
psychological problems and deviant or paraphilic sexual fantasies. Teacher/lover
female offenders have a more regressed pattern of behavior, have strained peer
relationships, and perceive themselves as being in romantic relationships or as
sexually mentoring their victims, therefore resisting the idea that their actions might
be criminal in nature.

-- 385 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	357
Since then, Vandiver and Kercher (2004) and Sandover and Freeman (2007)
analyzed larger samples of female sex offenders in Texas and reported finding six clusters
of female offenders, differing on characteristics that included offender age, victim age,
victim sex, total number of arrests, any drug arrest, any incarceration term, and whether
the offender was rearrested after the arrest for a sexual offense. Although the two studies
had some differences in identified clusters, in both the average female sex offender was
White and in her early 30s and the average victim age was just under 12 years old. In
the Sandover and Freeman study, all six clusters targeted victims under 18 years old. It
is important to note, however, that these clusters are inclusive only of women who had
been arrested for sex offenses and labeled as sex offenders, and thus may not be inclusive
of female perpetrators of CSA who have not been arrested or identified.
Treatment of Adult Sex Offenders
Because there is no evidence-based guidance about the most effective approaches to
working with female sexual offenders (Cortoni & Gannon, 2013), the primary focus of
this treatment section is on male offenders, with “sex offender” referring to males unless
specifically stated otherwise.
When considering treatment for sex offenders, crisis counselors should structure
their work to target the following: (1) matching interventions to meet the level of risk
posed by the offender, (2) targeting the specific remedial needs of the offender, and
(3) tailoring approaches to the offender in a culturally responsive way (Schmucker & Lösel,
2015; Yates, 2013). By following these risk, need, and responsivity (RNR) principles (Seewald
et al., 2018), those treating sexual offenders can optimize treatment and reduce rates of
recidivism. This approach represents a shift from viewing sex offenders in a problem-
oriented way that tries to fit them into neat categories with one-size-fits-all solutions
toward viewing sex offenders as whole people whose treatment should be individually
tailored to address their specific needs and strengths (D’Orazio, 2014; Stinson & Becker,
2018)—much like how we might approach counseling with a nonoffending population.
Within the RNR framework, it is first imperative that intensity of interventions
be specifically matched based on the “risk principle,” or the risk of recidivism by the
identified offender. Doing so is a more effective use of sometimes limited resources.
Moreover, evidence exists that recidivism rates increase when the intensity of
intervention does not match the risk presented by the offender. This is the case not
only for higher-risk offenders who receive less intensive intervention but also for low-
risk offenders who receive a higher-intensity intervention (Yates, 2013). In fact, some
researchers recommend no specialized treatment for those at the lowest end of the risk
spectrum, 100–200 hours of treatment for offenders with moderate risk, and at least
300 hours for offenders who present at the top 10–20% of the risk spectrum (Hanson &
Yates, 2013; Hanson et al., 2012).
Because of the variations among perpetrators of sexual abuse, no single assessment
has emerged as the standard for predicting recidivism, although actuarial assessments
are currently thought to be the best predictors (Association for the Treatment of Sexual
Abusers, 2012). Common examples of actuarial assessments are the Static-99 (Phenix &
Epperson, 2016), the Level of Service/Case Management Inventory (LS/CMI; Andrews
et al., 2004), and the Sex Offender Risk Appraisal Guide (SORAG; Rettenberger et al.,

-- 386 of 545 --

358 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
2017; Rice & Harris, 2016). Although actuarial assessments are the current benchmark,
there is some support for using structured guides, which combine standardized aspects
and actuarial assessments with clinical judgment. Some examples of structured guides
include the Sexual Violence Risk–20 (SVR-20; Hart & Boer, 2021; Kanters et al., 2017)
and the Risk of Sexual Violence Protocol (RSVP; Hart et al., 2003). The Estimate of Risk
of Adolescent Sexual Offense Recidivism (ERASOR; Rojas & Olver, 2020) is a structured
guide for adolescent risk assessment.
Second, the needs principle means targeting individual factors that increase
likelihood of recidivism (particularly those that can be changed) for intervention. Some
examples of these include lack of positive role models and influences, issues with both
overall self-regulation and sexual self-regulation, attitudes that support sexual assault,
issues with intimacy, and problems cooperating with supervision (Yates, 2013). These
factors need to be assessed prior to beginning treatment and used to tailor an individual
treatment plan.
Third, treatment should be delivered in a way that is culturally responsive and
individualized for the preferences and characteristics of the individual. While a cognitive-
behavioral approach is often preferred, learning style, cognitive ability, personality,
language, culture, and anxiety level are all factors that should be considered when
delivering treatment. This culturally responsive approach increases engagement and
reduces recidivism (Yates, 2013).
D’Orazio (2014) recommends five ways of improving sex offender treatment within
the RNR framework. First, focus on assessing the client in totality, including examining
and treating past trauma. Childhood trauma in sex offenders is significantly higher than
in the general population and, without attending to healing some of those long-ago
wounds, the remainder of treatment is likely to fall short. This step includes empathetic
validation of those wounds (although not the offender’s behaviors). Much like with other
client populations, this ability to meet clients where they are and receive them as fellow
human beings is key to establishing a therapeutic alliance that will benefit the remainder
of treatment (Seewald et al., 2018).
Second, attend to the affective aspects of the offender (D’Orazio, 2014). Many
treatment programs focus on cognitions and behaviors, but by ignoring the emotion, we
ignore a main component of the offender’s world that may drive the behaviors that we are
trying to decrease. Allow room for present affective responses to the people in the client’s
life as well as the client’s experience of treatment and interactions with the treatment
provider. This may also include attention to modeling facilitative communication skills
and appropriate self-disclosure of feelings by the counselor.
Third, cultivate empathy for the offender to facilitate the change process (D’Orazio,
2014). Offender clients are individuals who need our empathy to see themselves as capable
of and deserving of change. Particularly when working with this population, counselors
must remind themselves of Rogers’s (1995) core conditions and use accurate empathy to
help clients feel understood and cared for to remain open to the treatment process.
Fourth, embrace the “mystery of wholeness” (D’Orazio, 2014, p. 6) and resist
the pull to standardize all treatment processes. This is a reminder that the offender
is more than just the sum of their parts and needs to be seen as an individual. It
relates specifically back to the responsivity principle and allows us to tailor our work
specifically to the needs of each individual. With this step, D’Orazio (2014) urges us to
be fully present in the moment with these clients, be attentive to verbal and nonverbal

-- 387 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	359
responses, and attend to creative, holistic, and multimodal treatment approaches for
additional ways to work with the whole client, rather than just specific aspects of their
experience or existence.
Finally, take care of the therapist (D’Orazio, 2014). Vicarious traumatization and
burnout are two factors that counselors battle when working with any clients who have
experienced trauma, and this population is no different. Self-care and prioritizing our
own health and well-being as a vehicle for provision of effective treatment for others is
vital.
FAMILY SYSTEMS COUNSELING 	In the case of incestuous CSA, a family systems
approach to treatment may be taken (e.g., the Child Sexual Abuse Treatment Program;
Mohl, 2010). Systems-oriented counseling may involve individual counseling for the
child, the nonoffending parent(s), and the perpetrator; marital therapy; counseling with
the nonoffending parent(s) and child; counseling with the offender and the child; group
counseling; and family therapy with the purpose of retaining or reunifying the family.
It should be noted that family counseling with the offender and the child would need to
be undertaken with great care.
FEMALE OFFENDERS 	Virtually no current evidence-based guidance regarding
treatment of female CSA offenders exists in the literature. Most modes of treatment for
male offenders have been applied to female offenders, considering the unique issues
leading a female to offend in CSA situations. If the female offender was also a victim of
CSA, a portion of the treatment may need to address the trauma encountered. While
addressing victimization issues, it is important for counselors to be empathetic
regarding the abuse that perpetrators have sustained without minimizing or excusing
the sexual offenses committed. For any perpetrator of CSA, the priority of treatment
must first be focused on the perpetrated act to decrease the rate of recidivism and,
second, on the perpetrator as victim.
Treatment of Adolescent Sex Offenders
As more research has been done on adolescent sexual offenders, it has become clear that
there are extensive differences between adolescent and adult sexual offenders. As such,
juvenile sexual offenders should be seen as a distinct population from adult offenders,
and treatment of juvenile sexual offenders should, thus, look different from the treatment
of adult sexual offenders. For example, juvenile sexual offenders as a group appear
to have more similarities to juvenile nonsexual offenders than they do to adult sexual
offenders (U.S. Department of Justice, 2017). Even without treatment, adolescents are far
less likely to reoffend than adult sexual offenders.
That said, research on treatment for adolescent sexual offenders is emerging that
suggests that multisystemic therapy and cognitive-behavioral treatments are particularly
promising (U.S. Department of Justice, 2017). Treatment services for adolescent sexual
offenders also need to be tailored to the contexts of the individuals, however, and there
is some indication that the family, peer, and environmental contexts of the youth are
relevant and important to increasing the effectiveness of treatment of juvenile sexual
offenders (Letourneau & Bourduin, 2008; U.S. Department of Justice, 2017). Read Voices
from the Field 10.2.

-- 388 of 545 --

360 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Sherdene Simpson
As I entered the lobby of my office building, I heard the
phone ringing and noticed an array of people sitting
around talking. Even though the environment appeared
normal, I noticed that there was a man and woman
sitting stoically in the corner of the waiting room.
I noticed that the woman had two little girls sitting
next to her. Two boys stood near the man; both stood
motionless. As I walked by, I offered an enthusiastic
“Good morning.” The parents looked up with tears
in their eyes and said hello. The children in an almost
rehearsed manner waved and looked away. I entered
my office and stood still for a moment. Something
about my interaction with them had felt uncomfortable.
The phone rang; it was a call from the office manager
calling to say that there was a family in the lobby who
needed to be seen immediately. She shared that the
man expressed that they were not leaving until they
met with me. I told her that I would see them and
instructed her to give them the intake paperwork. At
first, I did not find the situation to be that unusual.
I work on a church staff, so it is not uncommon for
parishioners to stop into our counseling center and
request to see me without a scheduled appointment.
After they completed the paperwork, I invited
the family into my office. The parents stood up to come
with me, and all four children remained positioned
on the sofa like mini figurines. I looked back several
times as the parents and I left the waiting area, but
the children remained motionless. I was taken aback
because even the youngest child, who appeared to be
about 3 years old, sat perfectly still.
I intended to facilitate my usual routine of
conducting a thorough clinical assessment, but the
father dominated the next few minutes by explaining
that he wanted help for his family but was afraid to
share with me. The mother said that she did not want
anyone “to go to jail.” The father interrupted his wife,
saying that he was angry and did not know what to do.
I immediately felt that they had experienced a tragedy.
My thoughts started racing as I considered the word jail
and all that word could imply.
I quickly stopped them both from sharing and
reviewed in detail my informed consent procedures
and the limits to confidentiality. When I stopped
talking, I felt that they stopped breathing. The room
felt thick with silence, and I could hear every movement
in the hallway. It felt like we sat in silence for days. In a
harsh voice, the man uttered, “I thought we were safe
coming to our church.” As I began to talk, a scream
came from the chair across from me that changed the
entire climate of the room. The woman, gripping her
chair, yelled, “I’m not leaving here! We’re getting help
or else!” The husband sat back with streams of tears
falling from his eyes. He began to share their story.
He explained that his 10-year-old daughter was
being sexually abused by her brother, age 12 years.
As he spoke, his voice faded in and out. He shared
his confusion, frustration, and feelings of failure. He
continued to report the anger and disdain that he felt
toward his son. The wife chimed in and expressed her
feelings of grief and numbness. Sadly, in graduate
school, no one had taught me what to do when
emotionally charged crisis situations like this emerged.
As a grief recovery specialist, I knew that this family
needed a heart with ears. So, I listened, and I listened,
and I listened.
I invited the 10-year-girl into my office and heard
the stories of sexual abuse that she had endured over
the past 2 years. She was very candid in her emotions
and shared the anger and disappointment she felt for
her brother. She also said that she forgave him for his
“sinful” behavior and was hopeful that God would heal
her heart. The resilience that this child possessed left
me in awe. After she left the room, I continued to hear
her small voice saying, “I know that God will heal my
heart.”
Afterward, I invited the 12-year-old brother into
my office; he appeared overwhelmed with fear and
nervousness. I told him quickly that I was a counselor,
not a police officer. He settled in and shared with
me stories of his journey through pornography and
masturbation and ultimately described the sexual urges
that led him to abuse his sister. He appeared remorseful
and said that he never meant to hurt his sister and that
he is hopeful that she will forgive his behavior. He said
in an almost adult manner, “I need to be healed from
my sexual desires.”
Nothing could have prepared me for the stories
that I was exposed to by this family. The graphic
depiction of the sexual abuse and the emotional
devastation of this family will ring in my memories for
years to come. What do you do when the victim and the
perpetrator are siblings? How do you manage having
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 10.2
The Troubled Family

-- 389 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	361
OVERVIEW OF THE ELEMENTS OF CRISIS INTERVENTION RELATED
TO CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Learning Objective 10.8 Describe the elements of crisis intervention related to
child sexual abuse, including safety and diagnostic considerations during a crisis and
essential intervention skills.
When intervening in crisis situations involving CSA, counselors need to consider and
adjust to several essential elements. These include safety and safety planning, caution
when considering diagnoses during a crisis event, and implementing child abuse–
specific crisis intervention skills.
Safety
In the immediate aftermath of disclosure, it is important to ensure minor clients’ physical
and emotional safety. Responsibility for the child’s physical safety is often transferred to
law enforcement or other agencies once the investigation begins, although safety should
not be promised by the counselor. If the primary caregiver is not the reported perpetrator,
then the counselor should work with the caregiver to ensure that no further interaction
between the child and perpetrator takes place until law enforcement or the court can
put the needed child safety plans into place. If the perpetrator is a custodial caregiver,
then the counselor should report this to CPS or, in some instances, to law enforcement
immediately. Guaranteeing the child’s emotional safety can be more abstract and,
therefore, sometimes more challenging. Safety of any kind can only be assured while
the child is in the office. False promises of safety should not be made to victims.
Diagnostic Considerations during a Crisis
Counselors working with children who have a history of CSA should be aware that
reactions to sexual abuse are very specific to the individual. Some individuals may
present with symptoms mimicking anxiety or mood disorders, dissociative disorders,
sleep disorders, or other physical disorders, and even personality disorders. Those
suffering particularly traumatic abuse can present with posttraumatic symptoms
consistent with PTSD and other stress disorders. Furthermore, because sexual abuse
is an interpersonal crime often perpetrated by family members, family friends, and
such a close connection to all the players involved in a
situation such as this?
The emotionally drained father looked at me and
asked, “Will my family ever be healed?” This was the
first time in years of practicing as a counselor that I was
utterly speechless. Because we were in a church setting
and their resource as a family was their religion and
faith, I pulled on this source of strength and reinforced
their belief that their faith, combined with counseling,
would glue their family back together.
The layered complexity of the situation and its
immediacy was affecting me on multiple levels. Amid
all these emotions, as a counselor, I knew that legally
and ethically I had to report this case. Emotionally,
I empathized with their pain. Professionally, I needed
to explore support services for this family. Cognitively,
I was perplexed. There were layers of presenting
concerns that emerged in the stories of sexual abuse.
This situation, while overwhelming, taught me the
importance of being calm in crisis situations. It also taught
me that clients find a sense of stability in counselors’
comportment and composure in crisis situations. Finally,
it taught me the importance of building on clients’
strengths and resources in times of crisis.

-- 390 of 545 --

362 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse
American Psychological Association. (2009). Understanding and preventing child abuse and
neglect. www.apa.org/pi/families/resources/child-sexual-abuse.aspx
Darkness to Light: Stewards of Children Training: www.d2l.org
Scholes, L., Jones, C., & Nagel, M. (2014). Boys and CSA prevention: Issues surrounding gender
and approaches for prevention. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 39(11), 1–16.
UNICEF. (2022). Protecting children online. https://www.unicef.org/protection/violence-against-
children-online
Wurtele, S. K., & Kenny, M. C. (2010). Preventing online sexual victimization of youth. Journal of
Behavior Analysis of Offender and Victim Treatment and Prevention, 2(1), 63–73.
Treatment of Child Sexual Abuse
1in6 (support and treatment of males who have experienced CSA): 1in6.org
Azzopardi, C., Shih, C. S.-Y., Burke, A. M., Kirkland-Burke, M., Moddejonge, J. M., Smith, T. D.,
& Eliav, J. (2022). Supporting survivors of child sexual abuse during the COVID-19 pandemic:
An ecosystems approach to mobilizing trauma-informed telemental healthcare. Canadian
Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 63(1), 43–55.
National Children’s Advocacy Center: www.nationalcac.org
Racine, N., Hartwick, C., Collin-Vézina, D., & Madigan, S. (2020). Telemental health for child
trauma treatment during and post-COVID-19: Limitations and considerations. Child Abuse &
Neglect, 110(Pt. 2), 104698.
TABLE 10.5 Resources on Child Sexual Abuse
other known and trusted adults, symptoms can present in ways consistent with what
may look like a child’s disordered attachment to caregivers. It is important, therefore,
that counselors are careful not to pathologize presenting behaviors when it is clear that
situational stressors like sexual abuse may be operative forces.
In a crisis, most victims of CSA are reacting normally to an abnormal event.
Therefore, providing a diagnosis during a crisis is usually not appropriate. It is
important for the counselor to know whether the client has a preexisting mental
health or medical issue to be able to undertake a thorough assessment. How a child
reacts may be complicated by an existing mental health or medical issue and knowing
about any such issues allows the crisis counselor to make appropriate referrals. The
counselor should conduct a thorough developmental history of minor clients and
remain sensitive to indicators of potential abuse or disordered attachment styles over
the entire course of treatment. It is not uncommon for children to disclose their sexual
abuse history to their counselor in the termination session. Both being aware of one’s
own intuition about potential abuse and being sensitive to more concrete indicators
of abuse can place the counselor in a better position to address abuse, regardless of
abuse history disclosure.
Essential Child Sexual Abuse–Specific Crisis Intervention Skills
Skills essential to providing crisis intervention counseling to children with sexual abuse
histories are the same skills that are activated when working with clients experiencing
other types of crises. Being able to skillfully reflect both the affect and content of the

-- 391 of 545 --

Chapter 10 • Child Sexual Abuse 	363
SUMMARY
Child sexual abuse continues to be a pervasive, yet
elusive, social phenomenon. Although survivors
of CSA may comprise a small percentage of
society, it is important to keep in mind that all
authoritative CSA data-collection agencies openly
acknowledge that reported CSA prevalence and
incidence rates are underestimated. Therefore,
much progress is needed in the way of both
preventing CSA and creating support systems
for all children so that they have a safe adult to
whom they can disclose shame-provoking abuse
experiences and receive help. Recent prevention
programs such as Darkness to Light’s “Stewards
of Children” raise social awareness of CSA, help
adults involved in children’s lives protect the
safety of those children, and help foster trusting
child–adult relationships wherein children may
be more likely to disclose their abuse and get
help. However, there is still much ground to
gain in educating parents and primary caregivers
about society’s hidden dangers and in training
children in personal safety planning and adult
refusal skills. As technology continues to change
and expand, so too will such programs, as law
enforcement agencies consistently find that
those who seek to sexually victimize children are
often at the forefront of pushing the envelope of
emerging technologies’ capacities (Wolak et al.,
2012). In summary, there is much to be done both
to keep children safe now and to keep abreast of
maintaining children’s safety well into the future.
Crisis 	counselors 	may 	be 	the 	first
professionals to whom abuse is disclosed
and should understand mandated reporting,
appropriate assessment tools for screening CSA,
and the process for making appropriate long-
term referrals. Treatment for children in the
aftermath of sexual abuse continues to evolve
as well. Attachment-based therapies (such as
child-centered play therapy or parent–child
interaction therapy) appear to work well for
children who have been abused by close family
members or family friends or for those whose
primary attachment figures were unavailable
when the abuse occurred. Body-based therapies
(such as EMDR) seem to work well with children
whose abuse experiences meet criteria for a
traumatic experience. Researchers and therapists
continue to grapple with therapies that work best
for those who have not storied their sexual abuse
as “abuse,” but who nevertheless suffer similar
detrimental outcomes of CSA. Getting survivors
of CSA to help in storying and assimilating their
abuse experiences is important for the sake of
their own life trajectories, but also for the sake
of generations to come. As researchers continue
to learn more about trauma-induced DNA-
structure changes that are passed down through
generations of offspring, it is becoming apparent
just how critical effective clinical practice with
this population really is. Certainly, greater
research is needed to establish more and varied
evidence-based therapies that can help survivors
find their way to recovery and resilience.
Although much may still be unknown about
CSA prevalence and the neuroscience of trauma,
a good deal is known about how a counselor can
best help a child in the immediate aftermath of
disclosure. First and foremost, it is critical that the
counselor believe the child, receive the disclosure
with both professionalism (competence and
composure) and empathy, and report the
abuse to the proper state agency or authorities.
Concretely speaking, empathic reflection of the
child’s experience should be the primary skill
employed during the session. Keep in mind that
repeated questions can feel like interrogations or
investigations, overuse of content reflections can
child’s words without imbuing them with added meaning is key to helping them
unfold the story. Crisis counselors must be comfortable in asking questions about
sexual interactions to gather information to make an appropriate decision on mandated
reporting and for referrals to long-term counseling. Counselor disposition is equally
important during intervention. The ability to remain calm, unruffled, warm, open,
reassuring, and nonjudgmental is essential to maintaining a therapeutic relationship
that can help minor clients weather the storm of what has happened and what lies ahead.
Table 10.5 provides additional resources on CSA.

-- 392 of 545 --

364 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
communicate practitioner fear, and silence can
feel judgmental. Some children may want to story
their experience, a process that helps them make
meaning from the abuse and even, eventually,
perhaps find benefits from it (i.e., “This was a
terrible thing, but it has allowed me to reach out
to others who have had this happen, too—and it
has made me a stronger person”). Other children
may not want to discuss their abuse experiences
for a long time or at all. Finding therapeutic
interventions to accommodate the varying needs
and developmental levels of minor clients is as
much art as science.
Regardless 	of 	the 	therapy 	chosen,
the strength and quality of the therapeutic
relationship and how it is maintained are critical.
Counselors need to build a relationship with
their minor clients that is strong enough to help
them trust another adult again, trust themselves,
and venture out into the world with confidence.
It is important to remember that no two victims
of sexual abuse react in the same way. While
some may show immediate physical, cognitive-
behavioral, or psychological signs, others may
present without any apparent symptoms. Parents,
teachers, caregivers, and all involved in the
child’s treatment plan need to be educated about
such responses so that the child’s experience
after disclosure is one of support rather than
judgment. As a critical player in facilitating that
network of support, counselors should remember
to always act ethically, in accordance with laws,
and with supervision and/or peer consultation
in order that the therapeutic relationship sustains
recovery from abuse and fosters growth in the
aftermath. Treating CSA can be complex and
both personally and professionally challenging.
Self-care is always an important ethic to maintain,
but particularly so in working with victims or
perpetrators of CSA.

-- 393 of 545 --

365
PREVIEW
This chapter focuses on the unique needs of and crisis intervention with military
personnel and first responders. The first part of this chapter explores the challenges
and needs of military personnel and their families. Whether they provide services in
a community agency, a K–12 or postsecondary school setting, or in a rehabilitation
context, counselors encounter military personnel and/or families in crisis and in need
of assistance. The mental health needs of military personnel and their family members
and the increasing demand for counseling services requires that counselors understand
military culture and effective methods for supporting this population. This chapter
provides an in-depth discussion of the military experience and offers approaches to assist
military service members and their families. The second part of this chapter explores
the unique issues encountered by first responders and what crisis counselors should be
aware of when working with this population. First responders and their family members
experience unique needs. Exposure to daily life-threatening situations and witnessing
violent and often fatal atrocities against individuals, while focusing on concern for safety
of the community, self, and family members, can influence first responders.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader will:
11.1 Describe the culture of military personnel and their families.
11.2 Describe the impact of war-zone deployments and separation on military
personnel.
11.3 Explain issues for military families related to deployment.
11.4 Outline crisis intervention as it applies to military service members.
11.5 Describe the special risks that first responders face.
11.6 Describe the culture of law enforcement officers and their unique stressors.
11.7 Summarize the unique stressors of emergency medical services professionals.
11.8 Summarize the unique stressors of firefighters.
11.9 Outline crisis intervention as it applies to first responders.
11 Military and First Responder
Populations
Seth C. W. Hayden and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
C H A P T E R

-- 394 of 545 --

366 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
MILITARY PERSONNEL AND THEIR FAMILIES
Learning Objective 11.1 Describe the culture of military personnel and their
families.
Military personnel and their families comprise a significant segment of the U.S.
population. As of 2020, more than 1.3 million Americans were on active duty in the
military (U.S. Department of Defense, 2021). An additional 1 million service members
comprise the National Guard and the Reserve service. The impact of serving in combat
and the effects of deployment on our military personnel and their family members was a
media and research focus since the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq
Resolution was passed in 2002 and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) began on March 20,
2003. The removal of forces from Afghanistan created a shift in the allocation and
deployment of forces abroad.
Since 2001, over 1.9 million U.S. military personnel have been deployed in
conjunction with OIF and Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) (U.S. Department of
Defense, 2021). Statistics on fatalities and physical injuries during OEF and OIF are
staggering. According to the U.S. Department of Defense (see www.defense.gov/releases/
default.aspx), as of November 2015, there were 4,409 total fatalities (including soldiers
killed in action and nonhostile action) and 31,928 wounded in action. Of the total reports of
fatalities, 98% were male; 91% noncommissioned officers; 82% active duty; 11% National
Guard; 74% White; 9% Black; 11% Latino/a; 54% under the age of 25 years; and 72% from
the U.S. Army. Of the total number of wounded troops reported, 20% include serious
brain or spinal injuries. This total of wounded troops excludes psychological injuries.
When considering that 55% of those deployed to OEF and OIF were married,
millions of spouses and children in military families comprise an additional segment
significantly affected by the military experience. Within military service, deployment
affects a large portion of service members and their families; 55.2% of active-duty
military members are married, and 37.8% of active-duty military members are married
with children. This ever-expanding community of people associated with the military
experience demonstrates the need for counselors to understand the unique needs of this
population as it relates to wellness and healthy functioning.
In addition to the recent veterans of OEF and OIF, crisis counselors should be
aware that veterans from other foreign wars may present in crisis centers with a variety
of mental health symptoms and psychological disorders. The wartime era and societal
issues and perceptions of wars may impact a veteran in crisis, so it is imperative for crisis
counselors to explore the impact of wartime exposure and experiences with veterans.
The 22 A Day Campaign on suicide awareness is inclusive of veterans across a variety
of foreign wars.
The Pew Research Center (2021) reports that the Gulf War–era veterans are now
the largest of all U.S. veteran groups, surpassing the number of Vietnam-era veterans in
2016. The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (2021) reports there were 19 million U.S.
veterans in 2021; 5.9 million who served during the Vietnam era; 7.8 million who served
in the Gulf War era (August 1990 through the present); 240,000 who served during World
War II; and approximately 933,000 who served during the Korean conflict. Important to
note is that veterans who served through multiple eras are counted only in their earliest
era. Roughly three-quarters (78%) of veterans in 2021 served during wartime and 22%
served during peacetime.

-- 395 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	367
While counselors have a long history of working with military service members
and their families in various capacities, the current and anticipated need has necessitated
military systems such as the Veterans Health Administration to formally incorporate
licensed mental health counselors into the treatment mechanism of the organization.
The Veterans Benefits, Healthcare, and Information Technology Act of 2006 established
explicit recognition of both mental health counselors and marriage and family therapists
within the Veterans Health Administration (Public Law 109-461). While this development
provided the needed emphasis for counselors to operate within the military mental
health apparatus, an occupational code to allow the Veterans Health Administration
to hire counselors was not created until late 2008. With the creation of the occupational
code, positions for licensed mental health counselors are now posted within the federal
government for the purposes of providing direct counseling services to military
personnel and their families.
Counseling is a resource that is frequently used by military personnel. A survey by
the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America (2020) found that 73% of its members who
reported a mental health injury have sought counseling services. The level of access and
use of services means that counselors must understand various aspects of the military
experience to provide competent assistance to service members and their families.
Military Culture
The military has a culture consisting of shared values that significantly affect service
members and their families and (to a lesser and more variable degree) veterans and their
families; that is, once enculturated, the shared values tend to persist beyond active duty.
Roughly 7% of the population of the United States, or more than 18 million people, are
veterans (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020). Central themes within military culture are loyalty,
teamwork, leadership, obedience, and hierarchy. Additional values, philosophies, and
traditions of military culture include military time, acronyms, and language. These
elements are connected to concepts such as discipline, patriotism, subordination,
ceremony, and cohesion (Redmond et al., 2015). This culture is the unique context in
which military service members and families function and it can significantly affect the
work of counselors.
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN THE MILITARY 	When discussing military culture, it is
important to consider the within-group differences as opposed to viewing the
military as a monolithic entity. Cultural differences exist among branches (i.e., Army,
Navy, Air Force, Marines, and Coast Guard), and each branch has its own operational
structure and procedures (Redmond et al., 2015). In addition, there are considerations
among officers and enlisted members and active-duty and reserve components.
Counselors working in a variety of settings (e.g., community agency, private practice,
schools, veteran-specific locations) who encounter a service member or service
family member would benefit from learning the specific organization, common
language, hierarchy, and unique characteristics of the person’s affiliated branch of
the military.
The different branches of the military also have their own subcultures based on
the type of unit, primary mission, distinct values, and hierarchical structure. Across all
branches, officers and enlisted members have cultural differences, expectations, and

-- 396 of 545 --

368 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
experiences due to their status and rank. The military is also not monolithic in terms of
various identities such as ethnicity/race, gender identity, sexual orientation, and political
affiliation. Eliciting insight from service members regarding these aspects of self-identity
is important. Though united in many ways, these differences have implications in
relation to service delivery such as the composition of a group. Within a group therapy
context, having enlisted members and officers in the same group may create barriers
to participants fully benefiting from this modality of treatment. This is one example in
which within-group differences can impact the counseling process.
RESERVISTS AND NATIONAL GUARD VERSUS CAREER ACTIVE-DUTY MILITARY 	Cultural
differences also exist between active-duty service members and National Guard/
reservists. The more recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan have called reservists to
active duty in unprecedented numbers, requiring them to maintain a balance of civilian
life and active-duty deployment. Sudden changes in cultural context can be difficult for
reservists and their families. Counselors who encounter reservists would benefit from
assessing the degree to which their issues may be related to and distinct from this
cultural dynamic.
Apart from the cultural dynamic, reservists experience significant concerns in
relation to their military service. There has been an increase in suicides among reservists
(U.S. Department of Defense, 2020). Counselors working with National Guard and
reservists and their families should be aware of the unique aspects of this population’s
experience within the military to properly address their needs. Reservists may receive
less support and possibly decreased benefits after the deployment ends.
Mental Health and Military Stigmatization
Perceived stigma for receiving mental health intervention may prevent an individual
from seeking counseling services. Research has found that veterans of the OEF and OIF
who met screening criteria for a psychological disorder were more likely than veterans
who did not meet these criteria to perceive increased stigma and barriers to mental health
care. In relation to seeking mental health support, stigma-related concerns (e.g., fear of
career consequences, fear of social rejection, the “strong worker” workplace culture)
were indicated as barriers to treatment. Social support from family, peers, supervisors,
and professionals were identified as important facilitators for military personnel to
access mental health care (Bogaers et al., 2020).
Not only is the service member influenced by this stigma, but also the service
member’s family may avoid accessing services because of the stigma associated with
seeking mental health assistance. The stigma attached to receiving services can be a
challenge for counselors working with service members and their families.
MENTAL HEALTH CHALLENGES 	Significant mental health concerns have arisen in
military veterans, especially those who have participated in the most recent
engagements. Fifty-three percent of respondents in a recent survey indicated some kind
of mental health injury; of those respondents, 18% were diagnosed with traumatic brain
injury and 44% were diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Iraq and
Afghanistan Veterans of America, 2014). In addition, 31% of respondents had considered
taking their own life since joining the military.

-- 397 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	369
Finally, it is important to consider the relational quality of the military couple. Since
2014, the annual divorce rate among service members across the services has fluctuated
between 3 and 3.1%, with female service members experiencing triple the divorce rate of
their male counterparts (Bushatz, 2020). This reflects a steady and consistent indication of
marital issues. A counselor working with a military family should evaluate the relational
satisfaction within the marriage or determine ways to enhance relational bonds prior to
prolonged periods of separation. This also impacts school counselors who encounter
children in military families who are affected by familial stress.
The Cycle of Deployment
Deployment is an experience not shared by other segments of our population. Although
this experience may not rise to the level of a crisis, the unique aspects of deployment
can be significantly stressful for military service members, potentially exacerbating
combat-related stress responses. However, preplanning for deployment may decrease
crisis situations. The length of deployment, which was once predictable, became less
certain for OEF and OIF in the face of frequent deployment extensions and multiple
deployments in a short period of time. The deployment cycle does not solely cover
the service members’ time in theater, since military members are also involved in pre-
deployment and postdeployment processing requirements (Erbes et al., 2008).
Logan (1987) first conceptualized deployment as a cycle as opposed to a singu-
lar event (see also Lincoln et al., 2008). Pincus et al. (2005) developed this idea further
and divided the cycle into five distinct phases: (1) pre-deployment (from notification
to departure), (2) deployment (from departure to return), (3) sustainment (continuing
deployment), (4) redeployment, and (5) postdeployment. Each phase can affect both
service members and their families.
During pre-deployment, partners prepare to rely on alternative sources of social
support (Erbes et al., 2008) and form new roles and norms for the household. Children
within the family require significant logistical arrangements, as the nondeployed
caregiver likely will function as a lone parent for an extended period. There also exists
the potential that the serving member may not return on time, requiring additional
family preparation and coping.
During deployment, it is typical for both partners to worry about the safety and
well-being of family members in addition to their concern for maintaining the relational
bond (Erbes et al., 2008). Safety concerns occur with both war-zone deployments and
non-war-zone deployments, although these concerns are certainly stronger in war-zone
activities. Current technology allows for unprecedented communication between service
members and family members, but these interactions do not always prevent stress.
Issues experienced by both the deployed service member and nondeployed partner still
occur. Because the partners are apart, full engagement in problem solving is a challenge.
Children in the family may also struggle with the absence of a caregiver. Celebrations
and milestones are often missed by the deployed member, which may cause a sense of
isolation and disconnect within the family and resentment by family members.
Postdeployment (or reintegration) presents the potential for a wide range of
concerns regarding the adjustment of having the service member return to the family
(Erbes et al., 2008), such as adapting to new roles and rules in the family, reinforcing
one’s authority in the house, and coping with internal or external feelings of blame or

-- 398 of 545 --

370 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
guilt for the absence. The reintegration period requires that the service member and
partner reconstruct their relationship and roles at home, as both have inevitably changed
because of the deployment. The family must also adjust to the resumption of roles of
partner or parent (Lincoln et al., 2008) and changes in caregiving roles, discipline, and
other familial functions. Complete Think About It 11.1.
Think about working with a family seeking counseling
prior to the deployment of a family member. You
may have only one session to work with the family.
What would you discuss to prepare the family for
the separation? What questions would be important
to ask?
THINK ABOUT IT 11.1
This cycle of deployment presents significant elements to consider when assisting
military personnel and families. Most families possess the skills to successfully cope with
deployment, but some do struggle with the stress and experience negative consequences
(Chandra et al., 2011). Deployment, when conceptualized as a cycle, provides a more
accurate framework within which to consider the challenges of service members and
their families related to their time in the military.
THE PHYSICAL AND EMOTIONAL EFFECTS OF WAR-ZONE
DEPLOYMENT
Learning Objective 11.2 Describe the impact of war-zone deployments and
separation on military personnel.
Waitzkin et al. (2018) found significant concerns. Depression (72%), PTSD (62%), alcohol
use disorder (27%), and panic disorder (25%) were the most common diagnoses. Of
clients, 48% reported suicidal ideation and combat-related stress-predicted PTSD,
indicating significant unmet mental health needs within this population.
Apart from the high prevalence of mental health issues, traumatic brain injury (TBI)
is especially significant in recent military conflicts. This type of injury has become known
as a “signature wound” of OEF and OIF veterans, with the incidence of TBIs reported
as being far higher in these conflicts than in previous conflicts (Bagalman, 2013). The
prevalence of TBI within our military population increases the likelihood a counselor
will encounter this issue when working with service members. Crisis counselors should
be aware of this rate and inquire as to the experiences during war-zone deployments
that may have increased a veteran’s chances of developing a TBI.
Appropriate referrals should be made to medical professionals to ensure
the treatment of the whole person. While injuries and mental health issues may
manifest over time, there is also an indication that symptoms of combat-related mild
traumatic brain injury (mTBI) or PTSD may disappear or be significantly reduced
after returning from combat. A counselor encountering these issues would benefit
from determining both the symptomatology related to PTSD and mTBI, the time
frame associated with the injury, and the past and current treatment implemented
to address these issues.

-- 399 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	371
Other physical injuries may also be present at the same time as mental health and
other medical issues. Advances in lifesaving medical procedures and medical technologies
mean that counselors may be working with military personnel with many physical and
mental health issues. Many service members have returned with polytraumatic injuries,
including TBI, injuries to several body systems (e.g., skin/soft tissue, eye injuries),
complex pain syndromes, and PTSD (Collins & Kennedy, 2008). This reality presents
a special clinical situation in which counselors may need to work closely with other
providers who are serving military members and their families to address complex issues
of mental and physical injuries related to their experiences during deployment.
Separation from the Military and Mental Health Issues
Not all mental health issues are linked to military service, as indicated by a large study
that explored suicide rates of military members and found no link between combat
deployment and suicide (Kime, 2015). This study consisted of 3.9 million service
members either in active or reserve duty from 2001 to 2009. The study reported that a
total of 31,962 deaths, including 5,041 suicides, took place during that time. It found that
the suicide rates were not higher for military personnel deployed to Iraq, Afghanistan,
or other war-zone countries.
Of the 5,041 total suicides, 1,162 involved military personnel who had deployed
and 3,879 involved military personnel who had never deployed. The study found the
suicide rate for the military was 17.78 per 100,000 person-years (a statistical measure)
compared with 18.1 per 100,000 person-years in the general population. The suicide rate
increased slightly to 19.92 per 100,000 person-years for those who experienced multiple
deployments. However, a much higher suicide rate of 26.48 per 100,000 person-years was
associated with those who had early separation with deployment. Another important
finding was that the suicide rate for those in the Army who had experienced early
separation and no deployment was 28.1 per 100,000 person-years. Similarly, the suicide
rate for Marines who had experienced early separation and no deployment was 32.6 per
100,000 person-years.
In addition, separation from the military appears to be a determining factor when
evaluating increased suicide risk in the military: 26.06 per 100,000 person-years after
separating from military service compared with 15.12 per 100,000 person-years for
those who did not separate from the military (Kime, 2015). It is possible that many
military members who separate from the military may have had preexisting mental
health or medical risk factors that contributed to their separation, leading to a “less than
honorable” or “dishonorable” discharge.
In the military, the connection of meaning, purpose, and identification to one’s
career may be another reason the link between separation from the military and higher
suicide rates was discovered. Likewise, the support and connection while in the military
is considered a strong support mechanism. Separation from this support may increase
suicide rates, especially when some sense of humiliation is felt due to the type of military
discharge. Kime’s (2015) findings provide critical information to crisis counselors and
the field of counseling. When working with military personnel, asking about military
separation is crucial.
Case Study 11.1 considers how to provide counseling to a client who experiences
TBI and PTSD and separation from the military.

-- 400 of 545 --

372 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
MILITARY WOMEN 	After women return from deployment, they tend to present with
similar mental health problems as their male counterparts: PTSD, depression,
relationship difficulties, and increased substance use. Though having a long history of
service in the U.S. military, female service members only recently have been actively
involved in combat operations (i.e., since 2015). Compared to their male counterparts,
female veterans had less combat exposure but were more likely to have lifetime PTSD
(29% vs. 12%), depression (46% vs. 21%), suicidal ideation (27% vs. 11%), and lifetime
mental health service use (67% vs. 47%) (Adams et al., 2021).
ISSUES FOR MILITARY FAMILIES RELATED TO DEPLOYMENT
Learning Objective 11.3 Explain issues for military families related to deployment.
It is important to recognize that many military families display a high level of resilience
regarding the stress of deployment. Although many successfully manage the situation,
military families often experience problems meeting the challenges. The following
section discusses how military families may struggle with the deployment experience.
Familial Stress Associated with Deployment
Given the high rate of veterans who are married and have children, it is important
to consider the influences deployments have on family members. Deployment was
associated with increased stress among nondeployed parents (Chandra et al., 2011).
Factors such as length of parental deployment and poorer nondeployed caregiver mental
health were significantly associated with more challenges for children both during
deployment and deployed-parent reintegration. In relation to OEF and OIF, evidence
indicates higher rates of separation and divorce as well as incidents of domestic violence
with combat veterans (Sayers et al., 2009).
Extensions in deployment and multiple deployments because of extended conflicts
in Iraq and Afghanistan have affected nondeployed spouses and deployed spouses and
partners. A counselor who assists families experiencing multiple deployments may
CASE STUDY 11.1
Dealing with Traumatic Brain Injury and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Raul is Latino and provided 12 years of quality service as a Marine prior to suffering a
TBI. In addition to TBI, he experiences PTSD and is not able to serve with his unit. He
indicated, “I feel like a failure due to my not being there for them.” Raul talks about the
stress of his injury and the sense of isolation he has been experiencing due to his health
issues related to not returning to combat with his unit.
Discussion Questions
1. What unique stressors does Raul present based on your understanding of PTSD
and separation from the military?
2. What specific questions would you want to ask Raul to better understand the
impact of his situation based on the information you have been given?
3. What referrals and resources would be helpful to offer Raul?

-- 401 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	373
encounter high levels of stress and frustration within the family and expressions of
frustration with the military structure related to the prolonged deployments.
Overall, military-connected children had equivalent well-being to civilian children,
although those with deployed parents and older military-connected children were at
greater risk of some adjustment difficulties such as substance use and externalizing
behavior (Williamson et al., 2018). Dealing with the unavailability of a parent for an
extended period, along with the heightened stress within the family, can contribute to
emotional issues that manifest in children of deployed service members.
Reunification
In addition to the time apart, challenges exist during the reunification of the service
member with the nondeployed spouse and family. During reintegration, adolescent
psychosocial health was indirectly related to indicators of family conflict and interparental
conflict (O’Neal & Mancini, 2021). There may be conflict associated with familial roles
and boundaries that require renegotiation. There may be conflict over ways the house
was managed and the loss of the partner’s newfound independence.
Military family members may also struggle with adjusting to new relationships
that were developed during deployment. Feelings of abandonment during the
prolonged separation may also exist. Unresolved issues may also re-emerge and occur
simultaneously with new issues related to readjustment to the new familial dynamic.
Family members may also struggle with negotiating a balance between the support
networks formed during deployment and independence. Children within the family
may reject, show apathy toward, or have anxiety around the returning family member.
Children may also display loyalty toward the nondeployed parent while also being
resistant to the disciplining of the returning parent. Complete Think About It 11.2.
Think about what it would be like to provide couples
counseling where one partner is in the military. That
partner just came home from a second deployment;
each deployment lasted 13 months. The presenting
issue is centered on the postdeployment partner not
feeling involved in the family and the children not
acknowledging their authority. During the session,
the partner reports feeling restless and has difficulty
sleeping, is unable to concentrate, has headaches,
and sometimes feels dizzy. What are your primary and
secondary priorities?
THINK ABOUT IT 11.2
COUNSELOR INTERVENTION WITH MILITARY SERVICE MEMBERS
Learning Objective 11.4 Outline crisis intervention as it applies to military service
members.
The U.S. Department of Defense and the Veterans Health Administration provide myriad
services designed to support military personnel and families. While these organizations
strive to support service members and their families, there is recognition of the need for
quality interventions from community-based organizations and personnel to address the
ongoing needs of this population (Burnam et al., 2009). Despite the counselor’s setting or
primary focus, there is a strong possibility of encountering service members and veterans
in one’s counseling practice.

-- 402 of 545 --

374 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
The discussion of interventions that follows largely focuses on systemic
interventions as opposed to viewing an issue in isolation. In addition, this section
provides specific strategies to address common issues among military personnel, such
as PTSD, TBI, suicide, and family issues. Collaboration between civilian and military
counselors and integration of support services by military family service providers is
useful when assisting families (Hayden et al., 2017).
The approaches reviewed here are by no means an exhaustive list of ways to
support military personnel and families. This discussion is intended to provide tangible
means to intervene in crisis situations. Collaboration and service integration are key,
but clinical expertise and experience will be a preeminent resource for assisting this
population as you consider their unique needs. Crisis counselors should be aware of the
issues outlined in this chapter and gather information from the military service member
and family to make a referral to the appropriate treatment provider. Crisis counselors
should have knowledge of various treatments to appropriately make a referral to the
next level.
Interventions for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
When addressing PTSD, collaborating with other service providers is a critical
component of effective intervention. A counselor addressing various issues associated
with PTSD would benefit from considering the previously mentioned aspects of the
military context in which military members and their families operate. Doing so involves
acquiring general knowledge of the cultural realities of this population via education,
training, and supervision. Lack of awareness of military culture can be a therapeutic
barrier in counseling. Learning about the context within which military personnel and
families function will enhance the counselor’s ability to engage with service members in
counseling. The interventions that follow were chosen because of empirical evidence that
supports their use. The goal is to provide the reader with some tangible interventions to
address common issues within this population.
PREVENTIVE RESILIENCE TO POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER 	Military mental health
has focused on building preventive resilience to PTSD prior to exposure to traumatic
events. Working with service members to develop resilience when it is apparent they
are likely to be exposed to traumatic events provides a preventive approach as opposed
to a reactive approach in addressing PTSD. Prevention is an important aspect in crisis
intervention. Education and counseling prior to a deployment can assist in decreasing
crises, in this case PTSD. Evidence indicates that pre- and postdeployment resilience
resources were predictive of PTSD (Kamphuis et al., 2021).
TRAUMA-FOCUSED COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY 	One intervention often used to
address PTSD is trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TF-CBT), an approach
endorsed in clinical practice guidelines by the Veterans Health Administration (2017).
These guidelines provide evidence-based practices related to commonly encountered men-
tal health issues within the military population. TF-CBT involves confronting the memories
of the traumatic events and the feared and avoided external situations that remind clients of
the events (Creamer et al., 2011). The maladaptive interpretations and beliefs associated
with the events interfere with adaptation and recovery (Forbes et al., 2007).

-- 403 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	375
This cognitive-behavioral approach offers a framework within which to address
PTSD (see Chapter 10).
Some TF-CBT approaches have evidence of effectiveness. Prolonged exposure
techniques, where the service member is subjected to the avoided or feared event in vivo,
have demonstrated effectiveness in the treatment of PTSD (Powers et al., 2010). There
has been support for the use of TF-CBT in adults (Bisson et al., 2013) and specifically
with veterans (Goodson et al., 2011). Crisis counselors implementing this intervention
are cautioned to ensure that they are competently trained in this technique due to the
intensity and affective elements associated with exposure to traumatic stimulus.
COGNITIVE PROCESSING THERAPY 	Cognitive processing therapy has shown positive
effects for addressing PTSD. Cognitive processing therapy focuses on the range of
emotions, in addition to anxiety (e.g., shame, sadness, anger), that may result from
traumatization. A benefit of this approach to PTSD is that cognitive processing therapy
can be generalized to comorbid mental health conditions and day-to-day problems, and
it is in a manualized format that allows for widespread dissemination (Resick et al.,
2015). Cognitive processing therapy can be implemented using a 12-session, manualized
approach (Resick et al., 2017) focused primarily on cognitive interventions. The following
provides a brief overview of how to implement this intervention. Crisis counselors
should know who is able to provide these services (i.e., to be able to make a referral) if
the services cannot be provided during a limited exposure to the military client.
A counselor begins cognitive processing therapy by offering psychoeducational
information related to the symptoms of PTSD, keeping in mind the cognitive and
information processing aspects of the condition (Resick et al., 2017). After the initial
session, the client is asked to write an “impact statement” detailing the meaning of the
traumatic event, including beliefs about why the event happened. This statement is then
discussed in subsequent sessions with the counselor, evaluating various problematic
beliefs and cognitions. The client is then taught to identify the connection between
events, thoughts, and feelings with homework assignments related to understanding the
relationship among these elements. The counselor then follows up with the client on the
homework. Various activities, such as having the client consider current stressful events
and gradually processing these events, are aspects through which the counselor guides
the client to reprocess various experiences. The counselor challenges problematic beliefs
and cognitions when clinically appropriate. Typical homework assignments involve
worksheets for the service member to process day-to-day life experiences to enable
analysis and modification of various maladaptive beliefs and cognitions. Counseling
concludes with the consolidation of treatment gains.
EYE MOVEMENT DESENSITIZATION AND REPROCESSING 	Eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing (EMDR) is a one-on-one form of psychotherapy designed to reduce
trauma-related stress, anxiety, and depressive symptoms of PTSD (U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, 2022). Steps in this approach include first reviewing the client’s history
and assessing for readiness for this intervention. This is followed by a preparation
phase, in which the client identifies a positive memory associated with feelings of safety
or calm that can be used if psychological distress associated with the traumatic memory
is triggered. The counselor then works with the client to elicit the target traumatic
memory, with attention on the image, negative belief, and body sensations.

-- 404 of 545 --

376 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
EMDR includes repetitive dual-attention exercises, combining motor task and
traumatic memory, then processing the negative thought, associations, and/or body
sensations. A common motor task is a side-to-side eye movement to follow a counselor’s
finger. Other potential dual-attention tasks include hand tapping or auditory tones.
This activity is repeated until the client reports no distress. Client progress is monitored
as scenarios recalling the target trauma are discussed. Ongoing supportive activities
include journaling, noting any material related to the traumatic memory, and focusing
on the previously identified positive, safe, or calm memory whenever distress with the
target trauma is activated.
This approach has been endorsed as an effective treatment for PTSD within the
Veterans Health Administration (2017), although there are indications of a lack of
extensive quality research to support using EMDR in the treatment of PTSD for military
service members (Verstrael et al., 2013). This means it is important for the counselor to
determine the appropriate situation in which to implement this approach in addition
to determining whether a referral for EMDR is warranted. Additional research studies
into the use of EMDR with veterans that consist of larger sample sizes would be useful.
MINDFULNESS-BASED STRESS REDUCTION FOR MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES 	While cognitive-
based approaches such as the prolonged exposure technique have shown utility in
stress reduction, a trial of cognitive processing therapy for military-related PTSD found
that 30–50% of veterans who participated in prolonged exposure or cognitive processing
therapy did not exhibit clinically significant improvements (Forbes et al., 2012). In
addition, the dropout rate for these treatments appears to be high (Kehle-Forbes et al.,
2015), indicating the need to develop alternative techniques to address PTSD.
Polusny et al. (2015) found that a mindfulness-based group intervention was
effective in reducing the severity of PTSD symptoms. The intervention involved
focusing on the present moment (i.e., immediate emotional and physical states, including
discomfort) in a nonjudgmental and accepting way. The sessions included didactic
training and formal practice of three meditation techniques (i.e., body scan, sitting
meditation, and mindful yoga). These sessions, coupled with a day-long silent retreat,
allowed for prolonged practice of these techniques. Participants were also encouraged
to practice these techniques at home. Cultivating present-moment awareness in ordinary
daily activities was an additional element of this approach.
This approach can be useful when considering alternative forms of treatment due
to the apparent lack of effectiveness in previous treatments such as prolonged exposure,
or when a client either already engages in mindfulness-based activities or prefers an
alternative approach. This approach can also be used for a variety of mental health
issues, including anxiety and depression.
Traumatic Brain Injury
The severity of TBI injuries ranges from mild—involving a brief change in mental status
and consciousness—to severe—involving an extended period of unconsciousness or
amnesia after the injury (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022a). Due to
the potential for TBIs being undiagnosed or misdiagnosed, a clinician should inquire
about any sort of head trauma when working with service members who may come to
counseling for other issues, such as PTSD, anxiety, or depression (Landau & Hissett, 2008).

-- 405 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	377
The most frequent unmet needs of this population are improving memory
and problem solving, managing stress and emotional upsets, controlling anger,
and improving job skills. Several of these issues fall within the realm of counseling,
heightening the likelihood of counselor involvement in treatment. Asking about direct
or indirect exposure to improvised explosive devices is crucial to treat the whole person
and make appropriate referrals to medical professionals.
Suicide Risk Assessment
Suicide risk assessment should always be a focus of crisis counselors. Equally important
in this assessment, although less evident, is the risk of harm to others. Assessing for the
potential to harm oneself and assessing for indications of isolation are critical to ensure the
safety of the client. It is important for crisis counselors to ask questions about separation
from the military, current relationship issues, psychological and physical injuries, and
unresolved memories when assessing for suicide or homicidal ideation and behaviors.
Joiner’s interpersonal-psychological theory of suicide (Monteith et al., 2013) has
relevance to this population. Joiner’s theory holds that people who die by suicide may
perceive themselves as a burden to others, have a thwarted sense of belonging, and have
the capability to engage in a lethal act because of experiences that caused pain and fear
(Joiner, 2007). There is indication that perceived burdensomeness and its interaction
with belongingness are significant predictors of suicidal ideation (Monteith et al., 2013).
Exploring or helping to develop a new sense of meaning after a deployment may also
be an essential aspect in decreasing lethality.
Supporting Military Families
Military families may be affected by deployment and by the potential physical and mental
health issues that service members develop related to their combat experiences. This
highlights the need to continually consider the family when working with service members.
It is essential for civilian and military providers to collaborate with each other to ensure
that the family’s needs are being effectively addressed (Hoshmand & Hoshmand, 2007).
Hayden et al. (2017) surveyed service providers in U.S. Army Family Centers and
found frequent collaboration between military and civilian providers. Military family
support professionals indicated that collaboration enhanced their awareness of services,
increased access to services for family members, and enhanced continuity of care, which
is critical given the frequent mobility of this population. Service providers also indicated
collaboration could be expanded through outreach between civilian and military providers
in addition to reorganizing support services to lower barriers among branches of the military.
Since the family system within the military is continually experiencing change, professional
intervention should be systems oriented and multilayered (Huebner et al., 2007). Complete
Activity 11.1 to enhance your knowledge of community resources for referrals.
Investigate the clinical mental health, rehabilitative, reli-
gious/spiritual, and medical resources available for mili-
tary members and family members in your community
to develop your understanding of community resources
for potential referrals.
ACTIVITY 11.1

-- 406 of 545 --

378 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
An additional intervention is to develop programs that integrate education and
training for families of injured service members who are being followed throughout
the military medical services or Veterans Affairs hospitals. Acting in collaboration with
military medical services and Veterans Affairs hospitals, having specific community
mental health specialists with training and expertise in treating children and families of
military personnel is important. A counselor is uniquely positioned to be a critical asset
to military service members and families by addressing healthy adaptation, resilience,
and additional issues when they arise.
The Spiritual and Religious Needs of Deployed
Military Service Members
An area receiving even less attention in the literature has been how spiritual and religious
practices may affect mental health during pre-deployment, deployment, and reintegration.
In a study conducted with approximately 300 deployed military service members in Iraq,
Sterner and Jackson-Cherry (2015) found religious and spiritual practices to be reflective of the
general population and a strong support for many military service members while deployed.
In fact, many of those who were surveyed stressed the importance of their practices to work
through many of the existential and relationship struggles they encountered
while deployed. In taking a preventive approach, it would seem essential to
evaluate effective and positive coping mechanisms that have been helpful in
noncombat situations and make those strategies available while in combat.
The wellness approach proposes that a “well” person is one who has
balanced essential dimensions, such as intellectual, emotional, physical,
social, occupational, and spiritual components. Prayer, meaning, and positive
faith have been linked to reduced symptoms of posttraumatic stress in those
service members directly and indirectly exposed to the trauma. Gerber et al.
(2011) found positive religious coping practices were directly related to
posttraumatic growth and inversely related to posttraumatic stress.
In a study of deployed military personnel, Harris et al. (2011) found
that individuals who perceived their spirituality as a source of validation and
acceptance were more likely to find healthy meaning in their deployment and
recover from trauma. Sterner and Jackson-Cherry (2015) found that having
a sense of purpose, maintaining healthy relationships or supports during
deployment, and integrating religious and/or spiritual practices can be
essential to decreasing symptoms of anxiety and depression while deployed.
Read Voices from the Field 11.1 and 11.2 to gain further insights about
military service members. Table 11.1 provides additional resources for
working with military personnel and veterans.
• What makes you feel at peace?
“After praying and talking to my younger children and
seeing them happy and innocent brings peace.”
“Knowing that in my mind God or a higher
power is there with me and he will only give me what
I can handle.”
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 11.1
Anonymous Responses from Deployed Military in Combat
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 11.1
This video offers viewers
first-hand accounts of military
service members and crisis
workers. The video describes
various stressors among mili-
tary service members, military
peer programs, VA hotline
crisis call centers, programs to
decrease suicide, and question
tree assessments. What are the
common stressors experienced
by military service members
and the programs available to
use as referrals? What essential
skills are needed to work with
this population?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=9sOWnRHv5HU
Watch from 00:00 to 15:25

-- 407 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	379
Online Resources
Military OneSource: https://www.militaryonesource.mil/confidential-help/non-medical-counseling/
military-onesource/how-to-choose-a-counselor-or-therapist/
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Suicide Prevention: https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/suicide_
prevention/
Veterans Crisis Line: https://www.veteranscrisisline.net
Veterans Self-Check Quiz: https://www.vetselfcheck.org/welcome.cfm
Articles and Reports
Hurley, E. C. (2018). Effective treatment of veterans with PTSD: Comparison between intensive
daily and weekly EMDR approaches. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1458. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2018.01458
Kehle-Forbes, S. M., Meis, L. A., Spoont, M. R., & Polusny, M. A. (2015). Treatment initiation and
dropout from prolonged exposure and cognitive processing therapy in a VA outpatient clinic.
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 8(1), 107–114. https://doi.org/
10.1037/tra0000065
TABLE 11.1 Resources on Counseling Military Personnel and Veterans
• What events tested your faith/spirituality?
“When I knew soldiers who were killed in combat, and
some of them were Christians and others were not.
It’s just conflicting for me personally when thinking
about someone I know who was a good person and
a good soldier and wondering whether or not he’s in
heaven.”
“Death of soldiers, close call with husband,
marriage issues all had me questioning ‘why,’ but it
wasn’t for long that I got my answer from His word
[the bible].”
“When the bridge was blown up, it made me
thank God as soon as we got a second to stop and
think.”
Tracy Roberts
Working as a rehabilitation counselor with a U.S.
Marine Corps veteran of Iraq recently provided me with
the opportunity to hear about his combat experience
and blast injuries and learn about what it is like for
him to live with mTBI, PTSD, chronic pain, and vision
loss. Our work together came to focus on identifying
goals for postinjury civilian life and creating strategies
together, ultimately implementing them while integrat-
ing recommendations from our entire team of treating
medical professionals and discipline-specific specialists,
such as occupational, physical, and speech therapists.
Reentering civilian life as a food ministry volunteer
worker was one of his goals. To accomplish this, we
implemented systematic desensitization as one treat-
ment for PTSD, first driving by the facility, next visiting
it while it was empty, then again for a short period
of time when operational, and ultimately returning
weekly to volunteer on a regular basis. We identified
and used cognitive interventions for mTBI like written
instructions, pain management tools such as a special
portable stool, and visual aids such as specially filtered
sunglasses for photosensitivity. All the while, my client
and I processed his grief over significant loss and his
awareness of the challenges and rewards specific to
finding the strength, courage, and spirit to continue to
engage life as fully as possible.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 11.2
A Warrior’s Story
(continued)

-- 408 of 545 --

380 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SPECIAL RISKS FIRST RESPONDERS FACE
Learning Objective 11.5 Describe the special risks that first responders face.
Some jobs involve facing dangerous and life-threatening situations on a regular basis;
two prime examples are military combat service members and first responders. Indeed,
retired or inactive military often choose second careers as civilian first responders.
First responders consist primarily of the following professions: law enforcement
officers, emergency medical services professionals, and firefighters (Public Safety and
Homeland Security Bureau, 2022). By their nature and profession, first responders
are those professionals, either volunteer or paid, who, because of their occupational
responsibilities and sworn duties, are the first to respond to a variety of emergency
calls from citizens and often to potentially life-threatening situations. In the broadest of
definitions, the goal of first responders is to safeguard the health and safety of victims,
all while maintaining their own personal safety.
First responders are deployed into dangerous situations daily. They are the
forgotten professionals who witness horrifying acts of violence, witness the consequences
of criminal and violent acts, observe deaths, and intervene with victims of every age.
First responders are among the most scrutinized of all professions, are often the least
respected, receive little recognition for their actions, have work schedules that conflict
with normal family and personal functioning, are underpaid, and experience assaults on
their own lives by the citizens they are sworn to protect (Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2018) First responders are exposed to
traumatic experiences, making them vulnerable to a variety of mental health issues;
however, first responders are often among the least inclined to seek mental health
services. Complete Think About It 11.3.
Think about what it must be like to be a first responder
to the scene of a crisis or disaster. Before reading the
information that follows on stressors experienced by
first responders, list the types of common calls experi-
enced by first responders and the types of trauma to
which they are exposed.
THINK ABOUT IT 11.3
Polusny, M. A., Erbes, C. R., Thuras, P., Moran, A., Lamberty, G. J., Collins, R. C., et al. (2015).
Mindfulness-based stress reduction for posttraumatic stress disorder among veterans:
A randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 314(5), 456–465.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.8361
Resick, P. A., Wachen, J. S., Mintz, J., Young-McCaughan, S., Roache, J. D., Borah, A. M., et al.
(2015). A randomized clinical trial of group cognitive processing therapy compared with group
present-centered therapy for PTSD among active duty military personnel. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 83(6), 1058–1068. https://doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000016
Veterans Health Administration, U.S. Department of Defense. (2017). VA/DoD clinical practice
guideline for management of post-traumatic stress. https://www.healthquality.va.gov/
guidelines/MH/ptsd/
TABLE 11.1 Resources on Counseling Military Personnel and Veterans (continued)

-- 409 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	381
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
Learning Objective 11.6 Describe the culture of law enforcement officers and their
unique stressors.
According to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund (2022), there are
more than 800,000 sworn law enforcement officers (LEOs) in the United States. LEOs
include state and local police officers, sheriff’s deputies, federal law enforcement agents,
and correctional officers. LEOs are employed in local communities; local, state, and
national parks; college campuses; airports; transit systems; natural resource areas (such
as waterways, hunting and gaming areas); drug and alcohol enforcement agencies; and
correctional facilities.
LEOs are most often the first responders on the scene. It is a misconception that
the main task of LEOs is to fight crime; most emergency calls for law enforcement
intervention tend to focus on maintaining peace and solving problems caused by
citizens (Olivia et al., 2010). The general public tends to contact law enforcement when
all options and personal resources have failed, after a crime has been committed, or with
the expectation that police will solve problems even if a crime has not been committed.
The public perceives law enforcement to be available 24/7, although often police
are contacted to respond to situations that are not within the scope of law enforcement.
Subsequently, citizens become frustrated when no action is taken regarding their call.
Family issues (excluding those calls that meet the threshold for legal intervention,
such as domestic violence), mental illness (excluding risk issues), substance use, and
parenting issues are just a few examples of matters in which law enforcement may be
called to intervene but which are outside the scope of law enforcement concern. Calls
must include some potential infraction of a law for a police officer to follow through
with any action.
Crisis counselors should be aware of the roles of LEOs and the factors that affect
their decisions when called to intervene in a situation. Law enforcement interven-
tions are controlled by the policies and procedures of a department and the law. The
underlying priority is to protect the community and the officers. For example, during
an involuntary hospitalization for a minor, LEOs who provide transportation to the
hospital will follow common protocol and handcuff the patient placed in the back seat.
This protocol is followed in many departments for safety purposes. It is important to
inform the patient and loved ones that the protocol is standard so that the patient and
loved ones do not think the patient did something wrong. Counselors may view this
protocol as inappropriate since we view the patient as someone who is in emotional
pain. However, a person in pain may react in various ways, such as fight or flight.
While officers are transporting a patient, the safety of both the patient and officers
must be secured.
According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (Discover Policing, 2016), the median
duration of basic officer recruit training is 18 weeks, which is in addition to the field
training component following academy training. Across the majority of training topics
in the United States, the following components are integrated into the basic training
curriculum and are listed from least to greatest attention during training: firearms skills,
basic first aid/cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), emergency vehicle operations,
self-defense, criminal law, domestic violence, ethics and integrity, investigations, patrol
procedures/techniques, juvenile law and procedures, constitutional law, cultural

-- 410 of 545 --

382 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
diversity, health and fitness, officer civil/criminal liability, human relations, use of
nonlethal weapons, community policing, stress prevention/management, hate crimes/
bias crimes, mediation skills/conflict management, domestic preparedness, problem
solving, computers/information, and basic foreign language (e.g., survival Spanish).
Stressors of Law Enforcement Officers
Many of the same stressors that affect other first responders also impact the LEO
community. Shift work, missing family functions, disrupted sleep patterns, poor eating
habits leading to health issues, relationship issues, and exposure to traumatic situations
that could increase PTSD symptoms and depression are consistent across many first
responder professionals. The U.S. Marshals Service Behavioral Analysis Unit (2022)
reported the following proportional exposures to trauma from a survey of over 6,000
LEOs:
• Accidental death caused by another citizen or family member (79%)
• Serious assault and severe human suffering caused by another family member or
citizen (79%)
• Suicide (77%)
• Nonaccidental death by citizen or family member (70%)
• Mass civil disorder (68%)
• Severe human suffering caused by substance use or natural causes (68%)
• Sexual assault or unwanted sexual experiences (53%)
• Kidnapping or hostage situation (45%)
• Serious injury resulting from personal actions (20%)
• Military combat (15%)
• Death resulting from personal action even when justified (12%)
The following sections describe some common stressors experienced by LEOs.
DEATHS AND ASSAULTS ON LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 	The amount of trauma
experienced by LEOs is often unrecognized by community members. Yet the reality is
that many witness or experience trauma on a daily basis. Their deployments are daily
and across their entire careers, often resulting in 25 or more years of exposure to
traumatic events.
Most concerning for most officers is the potential for personal injury or death,
resulting in leaving behind loved ones. This safety concern is also extended to their
coworkers. Limited attention by the media has focused on line-of-duty deaths and
sustained felonious injuries of LEOs. More than 25,700 LEOs have been killed in the
line of duty in the United States, with 2,427 LEOs killed in the line of duty during
the past 10 years and 1,635 LEOs killed in the last 5 years (Officer Down Memorial
Page, 2022).
Although the average of 1 death every 60 hours, or 146 line-of-duty deaths per
year, was consistently reported for many years, line-of-duty deaths and assaults have
increased over recent years. Data compiled by the Officers Down Memorial Page (2022)
reported 601 LEOs died in the line of duty in 2021, with 89 of those deaths listed as
intentional homicides (gunfire, assaults, stabbings, vehicular assaults), a 13% increase in
intentional deaths from 2020. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI; 2021) reported

-- 411 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	383
a 51% increase in line-of-duty deaths from January 1, 2021, to September 30, 2021, com-
pared to the time frame from the previous year.
Line-of-duty deaths receive more attention than other LEO work-related injuries,
but the additional number of assaults and injuries on officers is alarming. In 2019, there
were 58,170 assaults against LEOs that resulted in 17,560 injuries (FBI, 2021). This data
includes physical injuries sustained and does not account for emotional or mental
traumas experienced by LEOs. Injuries can lead to early separation, retirement, and
loss of police-assigned duties—all of which can affect an individual’s sense of purpose
and meaning, loss of economic stability, and loss of a support culture. Unfortunately,
LEOs often receive little assistance in transitions to other careers when law enforcement
separations occur.
SUICIDE AND SUICIDE IDEATION 	Larned (2010) compared common factors that
contribute to suicide between the general population and the law enforcement
community. In the general population, common factors leading individuals to attempt
suicide include loss of a spouse or child through divorce or death, legal issues, loneliness,
sexual accusations, loss of employment, and retirement. Although LEOs are influenced
by many of the same factors that influence the general population, they are also affected
by occupational factors unique to the law enforcement community that may increase
suicidal behaviors through increased stress.
Violanti et al. (2013b) reported that LEOs are four times more likely than the general
population to display suicide ideation, suicidal behaviors, and PTSD symptoms due to
increased exposure to trauma. They also suggested that due to the increased exposure
to trauma, LEOs are four times more likely to engage in substance use. However, this
information is based on the general population and does not consider officer resilience,
training, internal debriefing, their call to the profession, and their understanding of these
risks. Chronic exposure to trauma does not automatically equate with the development
of PTSD symptoms or increased suicide behaviors.
O’Hara et al. (2013) reported that suicide is not discussed in law enforcement
communities or among officers because LEO suicide is viewed as a dishonorable act that
is stigmatizing to the profession. However, other research on PTSD linked an increase
of suicidal behavior of LEOs to an increased level of PTSD (Chae & Boyle, 2013). O’Hara
et al. reviewed rates of LEO suicide for 2008 (141 suicides), 2009 (143 suicides), and 2012
(126 suicides). Their study discovered common indicators based on the LEO profiles that
allowed the investigators to develop a suicide prevention program. The study’s data on
police suicide indicated the following:
• Officers who had an average of 16 years of service had a higher rate of suicide.
• Male officers committed the majority of suicides (91%).
• The age group most at risk for suicide was 40- to 44-year-olds.
• 63% were single.
• 11% were military veterans.
• Firearms were used in 91.5% of suicide deaths.
• Personal problems were prevalent prior to the suicide in 83% of the suicides.
• 11% had legal problems pending.
Officers who experienced burnout were at a 117% greater risk of reported suicidal
thoughts than those who did not report burnout (Bishopp & Boots, 2014). The U.S.

-- 412 of 545 --

384 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Marshals Service Behavioral Analysis Unit (2022) reported from their survey of over
6,000 LEOs who were administered the Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale that 6%
experienced thoughts of passive suicidal ideation (i.e., thought of suicide but no plans
to carry it out) and 3% experienced active suicidal ideation (i.e., thoughts and a plan to
carry it out).
The rates of suicide among LEOs continue to increase, but until recently there was
no formal data bank to track those LEOs who die by suicide. Blue HELP started tracking
law enforcement suicides in 2016, but the data relies on voluntary reporting by family
members. Blue HELP (2022) reported that from 2017 to April 2022, 1,026 LEOs took their
own lives. From their data, the average service as an LEO was 16 years. Racially, 84%
were White followed by 8% Hispanic, 6% Black, and 1% Asian.
The Law Enforcement Suicide Data Collection Act was enacted on June 16, 2020,
by the U.S. Congress to learn more about the issues related to law enforcement deaths
by suicide. It is the intent that the information will be used to assist in the development
of LEO suicide prevention programs and additional potential resources to LEOs,
departments, and families.
The following are common warning signs an LEO may be contemplating suicide
(Chae & Boyle, 2013):
• Talking about suicide or death and even glorifying death
• Direct verbal cues such as “I wish I were dead” and “I am going to end it all”
• Less direct verbal cues, such as “What’s the point of living?” or “Soon you won’t
have to worry about me,” or “Who cares if I’m dead, anyway?”
• Change from involvement to self-isolating
• Expressions that life is meaningless or hopeless
• Giving away possessions
• Sudden improvement in mood after being depressed. This is a critical warning sign
indicating one has come to terms with death and may be relieved.
• Increased annoyance that others are going to ruin one’s reputation or career
• Change to neglecting and not caring about appearance and hygiene
• Expressions of feeling out of control
• Changes in behaviors that include hostility, blaming, and being argumentative and
insubordinate or a change in behavior to passive, defeated, and hopeless
• Expressed interest in suicide or homicide
• Expression of being overwhelmed and unable to develop solutions to problems
• Requesting another officer to keep weapons
• Displaying weapon unnecessarily or in an unsafe manner
• Being more reckless or increasing risks taken on the job
• Deteriorating job performance
• Increased issues with alcohol and/or drugs
Understanding the warning signs and including a common profile of those at higher
risk can allow departments to develop suicide prevention programs for LEOs (Chae &
Boyle, 2013).
OCCUPATIONAL STRESSORS 	LEOs experience constant occupational stress that permeates
all aspects of the job and can affect their families. LEOs are constantly scrutinized by the
community, more than any other first responders due to the “us versus them” mentality.

-- 413 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	385
Lawsuits and complaints to internal affairs by citizens are common. LEOs
are exposed to homicide, sexual crimes, personal endangerment, threats to
self or family members, inconsistent work hours, outward disrespect by the
community, inconsistent shift work that affects family life, disruptive sleep
patterns, lack of social interactions due to schedules, increased personal
safety issues, and recent intentional harm to and assaults on law
enforcement.
LEOs are expected to make life-changing decisions within seconds and
may not have time to process and weigh the consequences. There are usually
no second chances. Rarely do LEOs intervene with individuals displaying
positive behaviors. Even with victims, the potential for vicarious trauma and
job dissatisfaction increases without closure, not knowing if their intervention
made a difference, and constant exposure to the negative behaviors within
society. These stressors bleed into family life and can increase isolation and
substance use. The U.S. Marshals Service Behavioral Analysis Unit (2022)
found the following law enforcement experiences in the past year regarding
stressors related to occupation issues:
• Negative media attention about the profession (84%)
• Concerns of COVID-19 exposure (75%)
• Negative attitudes for the public about the profession (71%)
• Impact of government officials and their decisions that impact ability
to do the job (61%)
• Low morale (51%)
• Safety threats toward self or coworkers (46%)
• Being overworked (30%)
Now complete Activity 11.2 to better understand how LEOs are perceived
in the media.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 11.2
This video offers a first-hand
account of Detective Rob Davis,
a police officer who lives with
trauma and PTSD, and his
journey toward healing with
appropriate mental health
interventions. The video also
shows the importance of peer
resiliency programs needed for
first responders. What stressors
were discussed by Det. Davis
and what obstacles did he
encounter in seeking mental
health services? How can you
use this information to assist
with this population?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jOUziW6SwT4
Watch from 00:00 to 04:31
Over the next week, observe the media’s portrayals of
LEOs. Are the portrayals positive or negative? How do
you think these reactions and the “us versus them”
mentality affect first responders? Visit the Officer Down
Memorial Page (https://www.odmp.org) and read
about line-of-duty deaths. Read the comments from
the community and first responders to increase your
understanding of how the deaths affect the police and
community.
ACTIVITY 11.2
MENTAL HEALTH CONCERNS: DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND SUBSTANCE USE 	SAMHSA’s
(2018) studies on LEOs after September 11, 2001, showed a depression prevalence of
approximately 25% and depression and anxiety prevalence of 49%. The U.S. Marshals
Service Behavioral Analysis Unit (2022) reported from their survey of over 6,000
LEOs administered the Public Health Questionnaire–9 and General Anxiety
Disorder–7 that 36% indicated some degree of depression (21% assessed as mild) and
38% indicated some degree of anxiety (22% assessed as mild). Using the CAGE (a
substance use screening tool), 18% of respondents displayed potential problems with
alcohol use.

-- 414 of 545 --

386 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SECONDARY TRAUMATIC STRESS AND POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER 	With
constant exposures to traumatic events, it would not be unexpected for LEOs to also
experience secondary traumatic stress, vicarious trauma, and/or posttraumatic stress/
PTSD. The U.S. Marshals Service Behavioral Analysis Unit (2022) report used the
Secondary Traumatic Stress Scale and found 72% of LEOs thought about work situations
when not working, 56% reported being easily annoyed, and 49% reported being
discouraged about the future. In addition, when reporting the PTSD Checklist–5 score
results, 11% scored with clinical significance, 48% reported a stressful work situation
that impacted them within the past month, 40% reported disturbing memories of a
stressful experience, 34% reported feelings of being upset over the stressful event, and
34% reported trouble sleeping due to the stressful event.
SEPARATION AND RETIREMENT 	There are conflicting data on separation and retirement
connected to suicide within the LEO community. Violanti et al. (2011) discovered
suicide rates were 8.4 times higher in working LEOs compared with those who were
separated from the police force or retired. However, officers whose retirements were
the result of a disability that occurred in the line of duty displayed increased suicide
rates. Lack of a sense of purpose and meaning may be one factor leading to increased
suicidal behaviors, as well as no longer having the social support of fellow officers.
The information provided in the previous section on military and separation
may also be important to review and assess for LEOs. Severing supports with the law
enforcement community, having limited supports to turn to, having little access to
mental health intervention, and a humiliating separation may increase depression and
suicidal behaviors. Read Voices from the Field 11.3 for some stories from an LEO.
Stephen R. Band
The following are some “true stories” that took place
over the course of my law enforcement career as a
director of the FBI Behavioral Science Unit and an LEO.
Tempting as it was for me to turn the townhouse
doorknob and enter to determine whether the reportedly
suicidal occupant was incapacitated, I stepped back. My
inner voice resonated, “Just because the hair stands up
on the back of your neck doesn’t mean that nothing is
wrong . . . something is wrong (or not right).” Hours
later it was determined the “suicidal and homicidal”
man sat on the stairs behind the door with a shotgun.
He decided to “cut in half” whoever dared to enter. Was
it the phenomenon of intuition or an inner voice that
guided my emotions and actions to live another day?
It was a day like any other on patrol many years
ago. The cruiser was moving through the center of
the city—a shopping district where folks shopped on
the streets of our city and primarily moved about with
public transportation. There at the bus stop stood a
4-year-old girl holding her mom’s hand waiting for the
bus to arrive. As the bus pulled up, her hand broke away
from her mom’s. She then stumbled from the high curb
to the street just as the bus pulled up; she fell under the
huge bus tires and was instantly crushed to death. The
horror and screaming were immense as I stepped from
the cruiser. My thoughts raced: “Who knew something
like this could ever happen?” (I did; I’ve been exposed
to real-life horror before); “Who cares?” (I did and do,
but not to the extent I would ever freeze like a deer in
the headlights); “No problem” (I’ve got this, my inner
voice affirmed). After all, who was I going to call, the
police? I was the police. A familiar cognitive process
constructively detached my perspective into objectivity
and the actions that followed.
I had always found autopsies to be quite
disturbing compared with actual law enforcement
assignments. Remaining objective seemed to be the
key to overcoming the sights, sounds, and smells. One
day, a medical examiner asked jokingly if I was going
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 11.3
Stories from a Career in Law Enforcement

-- 415 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	387
MENTAL HEALTH ACCESS 	Access to mental health is available to LEOs within their
departments and communities. The prevalence of using mental health resources is
limited among most first responder populations for various reasons. The U.S. Marshals
Service Behavioral Analysis Unit (2022) found the following reasons were reported by
LEOs reluctant to access mental health resources:
• Fear it would impact their career, future employment, or a security clearance
• Concerns about confidentiality of information
• Desire to work through the situation independently
• Stigma in receiving help from mental health and perception of being weak
• Personal perception of not asking for help
• Stigma of receiving a mental health diagnosis or being perceived as “crazy”
LEOs who did seek out assistance used the following resources: psychologist or
nondoctoral-level counselor within the department (16%) and outside the department
(10%); psychiatrist within the department (4%) or outside the department (5%); peer
support team member within the department (16%); chaplain, clergy, or spiritual services
within the department (6%) or outside the department (8%); or primary care physician
(10%).
FAMILY MEMBERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 	Due to the exposure to various
traumatic calls, law enforcement families may have increased levels of chronic fear of
safety for self and their family member(s). Family members do not witness the atrocities
committed in society, nor are they personally involved with traumatic accident scenes,
suicides, homicides, abuse to vulnerable populations, or the consequences of violent
acts. Families do not personally hear or witness the constant traumatic stories of victims
that are often ingrained into the memories of LEOs. However, many officers come home
to share their experiences and stories with their family members. The repetition of
stories and themes can create fear, anxiety, and depression among family members.
Children may be at a higher risk of distress due to their developmental levels when
processing the information.
Vicarious trauma and vicarious stress have been studied in detail in mental health
workers, crisis workers, and even court workers who hear stories of those experiencing
trauma. If vicarious trauma and vicarious stress can result from repeated exposure to
traumatic experiences or hearing the firsthand trauma experiences of another (Famili
et al., 2014), it is not a big stretch to believe that vicarious trauma or vicarious stress can
to be okay during the procedure. I informed him that
it was not my favorite duty. He was about to enhance
my repertoire of coping strategies. Intellectualization
is the key, he informed me; do not personalize the
experience. Instead, be scientifically objective—be
focused and amazed regarding the science of the
human body and how it will reveal secrets and you
won’t be otherwise sickened by the experience. He
was so right, and I have used “intellectualization” to
adjust thoughts that would only serve as an impasse to
potentially incapacitating emotions.
Our inner voice or cognitive process can serve
us well in the face of many challenges or take us to
places we’d prefer not to be. People, circumstances,
and things cannot upset you. Rather, you upset yourself
by the belief they can upset you. Thoughts are, in fact,
a creation of the mind, not facts. Is the “roller-coaster
ride” scary or exciting? Understand this illusion and you
will do well on the journey to your preferred future;
perhaps a preferred future in responding professionally
to critical incidents.

-- 416 of 545 --

388 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
also be experienced by law enforcement family members. A crisis counselor should be
aware of the effects on families and know signs of vicarious stress or vicarious trauma,
such as preoccupation with the LEO family member being injured or killed in the line
of duty. Additionally, hearing only stories of crimes committed may increase stress and
preoccupation with becoming victimized, may impact the ability of family members to
build trust in others, or increase family members’ level of suspicion.
In addition, selected media attention on negative LEO behaviors can also create
an “us versus them” mentality, placing family members in a situation where they will
most often be loyal to their LEO family and potentially decrease other social supports.
Read Voices from the Field 11.4 for family member perspectives on living with a LEO.
When I was little, I always loved when people asked
me what my father did because I would get to tell
them that he was a police officer. I was proud to be his
daughter, and he was like a superhero to me. I remem-
ber looking out my window when he would drive away
for his midnight shift, the shift he was on most of my
life. I called him every night while he was at work, and
then I would cry because I was worried he might not
come back. We knew some police officers did not come
home to their families. It was the worst feeling I ever
experienced. Even now, I find myself constantly check-
ing my surroundings and being less trusting of people
I do not know. I am a more cautious person now
because of the stories I would hear from him, which
gave me a glimpse into a very scary world that most
people could not imagine. I am saddened at how
the media portrays police officers and the nega-
tive comments I hear from others about the police.
—Gabrielle Cherry (written at age 18, now age 25)
As a child, when I was asked “What does your
dad do?”, I was eager to tell people he was a police
officer. Now at 19 years old, I often hesitate with peo-
ple I do not know because today many people view
them in a negative manner. I knew it was bad for my
dad when he told me “Never become a cop because no
one likes you.” In my young age I was always worried
for him to go to work but now it is different—almost
like he is being targeted. I am not worried anymore;
I am scared. It terrifies me when he does not answer the
phone. Being in college now, I am far away from home,
which adds to the overwhelming feelings that I experi-
ence. I have constant nightmares about him dying and
me not being able to get home in time to see him one
last time. I am very proud of my father’s selflessness
and care for others and the community. I love to say my
father is a police officer, but sadly I know it will make
my family and I feel much safer to say he is retired.
—Alexandra Cherry
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 11.4
Daily Fears and Stress Experienced by Children of Law Enforcement Officers
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PROFESSIONALS
Learning Objective 11.7 Summarize the unique stressors of emergency medical
services professionals.
According to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH; 2022),
there were 1,030,760 paid and volunteer licensed emergency medical services (EMS)
professionals in the United States in 2020. EMS professionals vary in training and skills
and are permitted to offer medical services according to their provider level:
• Emergency medical responders (EMRs) provide basic emergency skills for critical
patients. They can perform medical interventions while awaiting additional
medical providers. EMRs may serve on a transport team but most likely will not
be the primary EMS provider.

-- 417 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	389
• Emergency medical technicians (EMTs) provide basic, noninvasive interventions to
reduce the mortality of acute emergency responses; they can perform all of the
duties of EMRs and have additional skills for patient transport. EMTs provide the
majority of emergency care and, in some locales, are the highest level of patient
care and transport available.
• Advanced EMTs (AEMTs) are trained to perform all the duties of the EMR and EMT
and can also conduct limited advanced and pharmacological interventions.
• Paramedics are allied health professionals who are trained in advanced assessment
to formulate a field impression and provide invasive and pharmacological
interventions. Paramedics have advanced training and skills and may perform a
broad range of interventions for critical and emergency patients.
Stressors of Emergency Medical Services Professionals
Although the skills and training among the various EMS professionals may be different,
they share similar stressors and witness the same emergency situations. Additionally,
the stressors of EMS professionals appear to be consistent across many studied cultures
(Erich, 2014; Minnie et al., 2015). For example, a Toronto study reported that 87% of
EMS professionals questioned 24 hours following an emergency call reported some form
of stress related to the emergency call (Ward et al., 2006). It is estimated that 16–24%
of Canada’s EMS professionals will be diagnosed with PTSD; 16% of South African
paramedic trainees meet the criteria for PTSD; and 22% of EMS professionals in the
United Kingdom have developed symptoms of PTSD. According to Help for Our Heroes
(2019), 34% of all EMS professionals in the United States reported posttraumatic stress
symptoms, 10 times greater than the 3.6% U.S. national average for the general public.
A core risk is the nature of the calls and pace of work. Due to constant back-to-
back calls, the ability to work through issues related to one call is difficult when EMS
professionals encounter constant calls in a shift with no rest. SAMHSA (2018) suggested
that rapid calls and no rest do not allow enough time to recover from traumatic events.
As a result, depression, posttraumatic stress symptoms, and suicidal ideation are high
among EMS professionals.
According to EMS professionals, the calls that cause the most stress are those that
involve children, the serious injury or death of a colleague, and the death of a patient
while in the EMS professional’s care. Calls involving violent crime victims, burn patients,
multiple casualties, suicides, and road traffic accidents are also traumatic. Any of these
calls should warrant attention from a crisis counselor; however, at the very least, a
significant death, injury to a vulnerable person such as a child, and a line-of-duty death
or injury should involve some intervention or screening process after an occurrence.
In addition, injury rates at work are high for EMS professionals. Of all EMS
professionals, 25% reported a line-of-duty injury, usually due to transport (Heick et al.,
2009). In 2020, there were an estimated 16,900 injuries and illnesses among EMS workers
that were treated in U.S. hospital emergency departments (NIOSH, 2022). Among the
most frequent types of injuries: over 6,000 injuries were due to excessive motion or
transports; over 6,000 injuries were related to exposures to harmful substances (e.g.,
needles, medical waste, illegal substances, blood, or respiratory secretions); over 4,000
injuries were related to slips and falls; over 2,000 injuries were due to motor vehicle
accidents; and over 2,00 reports of injuries were sustained from assaults and violence.

-- 418 of 545 --

390 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Vigil et al. (2018) reported a disproportionate number of deaths attributed to
suicide among EMTs: 5.2% (63 of 1,205 total deaths) compared to 2.2% of non-EMTs.
Barber et al. (2015) found a variety of factors that may increase suicide ideation among
EMS professionals: sleep deprivation, feeling underappreciated, poor nutrition, limited
exercise, long shifts, high call volume, and low pay. American Addictions Centers
(2020) confirmed the existence of the above stressors and adds the following: lack of
administrative support; competitiveness of the profession; and an overall 30% increase
in nonemergency calls leading to stress, burnout, high rates of depression, and PTSD.
Even less severe injuries can contribute to anxiety, poor health, family problems,
problematic use of alcohol and drugs, withdrawal, depression, and burnout. Guilt is
frequently experienced by EMS providers, and not knowing the outcome of a patient’s
treatment can exacerbate the inability to gain closure and know whether actions taken
actually saved a person’s life. Read Voices from the Field 11.5 for a reflection from a
paramedic.
Jason Stubbs
As paramedics, we are trained to handle calls of all natures
and illnesses. We transport patients with symptoms of
minor pain, serious traumatic injuries, and death. I have
been an EMS provider for more than 25 years and have
encountered calls of all types. You hope, when your
shift starts, that the day will be uneventful. Not for your
sake but for the citizens you are serving. One Monday
afternoon in September, my partner and I were finishing
up our reports from an earlier call when the alarm
sounded. “Medical Box 6-1, Paramedic 600 respond for
a fall. You are responding to a 16-month-old suffering
from a fall. There is a language barrier and limited
information.” In my experience, most “fall” injuries are
minor in nature, and 16-month-olds tend to fall often.
This would just be another “run of the mill” call.
As we arrived on the scene, my partner decided
that he would go in the house and begin assessing
the patient while I parked the vehicle and prepared
equipment. As I finished backing in the driveway and
put the ambulance in park, I looked in the mirror to
see my partner running out of the house with a limp,
lifeless child in his arms. This was no “fall” after all. We
immediately began working on the child. The family was
Hispanic and spoke little to no English, and we were
unable to determine what events led to the child going
into cardiac arrest, as there were no signs of injury that
would lead us to suspect a fall or any other traumatic
injury. The child was pulseless and apneic. We began
CPR and I placed the child on the cardiac monitor,
which revealed no cardiac activity. I intubated the child
and we worked vigorously to revive this child as the
local hospital was 15 minutes away. Upon arrival in the
emergency department, we worked with physicians for
over an hour to try to revive him, but to no avail.
As we were cleaning up our unit and the adrenalin
was subsiding, I began to reflect on this call. Then it
hit me that my daughter is the same age as this child.
This could have been my child lying on that hospital
bed. I started personal questioning: Did I do everything
that I could have to save this child? Did I do every-
thing that I would have done to save my child? There
were still 14 hours left to go on my shift before I could
hold my child again. On the way back to the station,
I called home to talk to my daughter. Hearing her voice
hit me hard. All I could think about was the parents of
the child I had just tried to save, but I could only watch
them as they stood by the bed and mourned their loss.
We are taught that we cannot save every patient.
We learn how to distance ourselves from our patients
and always be ready for the next one. There have been
many calls over the years, and even though we try to
compartmentalize them, they have long-term effects on
us. We occasionally compare our calls to our everyday
lives. I have seen several outstanding paramedic careers
end due to PTSD. Without our Critical Incident Stress
Management Team, our providers’ careers would not
last very long.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 11.5
A Paramedic Responds to a Call Involving a Child Who Has Fallen

-- 419 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	391
FIREFIGHTERS
Learning Objective 11.8 Summarize the unique stressors of firefighters.
The National Fire Protection Association (Fahy et al., 2021) estimates 1,080,800 career and
volunteer firefighters resided in the United States in 2019, 358,000 (33%) career firefighters
and 722,800 (67%) volunteer firefighters. Approximately 45.5% of all fire departments in
the United States also provide EMS, and 15.5% provide EMS and advanced life-support
services. In 2014, there were 64 firefighter deaths, with 22 of those deaths occurring at
the scene of the call. As was consistent from previous years among firefighters, most
line-of-duty deaths were attributed to sudden cardiac death (36 deaths, or 56%).
Like LEOs, firefighters are vulnerable to injuries but are less vulnerable to assault
than LEOs. In 2013, there were 65,880 line-of-duty firefighter injuries. Due to the unique
nature of the profession, many firefighters are also certified and have dual roles as EMS
professionals. Therefore, it is important to refer to the section on EMS professionals
because many who serve in this dual profession may experience multiplicative stressors.
Stressors of Firefighters
Research on the unique stressors of firefighters is limited compared with that for
other first responder professional groups. However, it is suspected that many of the
stressors that affect EMS professionals and LEOs extend to firefighters and may also
lead firefighters to experience burnout and increased stress. Like other first responders,
firefighters often respond to calls that involve life-threatening and emergency situations
and then are expected to return to work for another call (Cacciatore et al., 2011). This
expectation and the fact that firefighters often face public scrutiny can lead to compassion
fatigue and job dissatisfaction. Baylor University (2019) reported that compared with the
general population, firefighters encountered higher rates of suicide, alcohol and tobacco
use, PTSD, depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders and were resistant to mental health
support.
Suicide rates for firefighters are unknown, and no nationally accepted agency
collects such statistics on firefighters (Wilmoth, 2014). Death certificates do not always
include career data, which makes the collection of the suicide rates for firefighters
difficult. Also, because most firefighters are volunteers (69%), affiliation with a fire
department would not likely be mentioned on a death certificate. Similarly, the death
certificate for a retired firefighter does not necessarily include occupation information.
The most recognized credible resource for the suicide rates of firefighters is Jeff Dill,
a firefighter and licensed counselor who specializes in behavioral mental health issues
in relation to firefighters. He gathers information from suicide reports on the website of
the Firefighter Behavioral Health Alliance (FFBHA), a nonprofit organization he founded
in 2011. He reports that 360 confirmed firefighter suicides occurred between 2000 and
2013, with the highest rates being 57 in each of 2012 and 2013. A study by the National
Volunteer Fire Council (2014) included 800 firefighters to determine levels of suicidal
behaviors. Results indicated that one in four professional firefighters and one in five
volunteer firefighters considered suicide during their firefighter career.
Fire departments around the country have increased their attention on behavioral
health problems, specifically alcohol and drug use, depression, and PTSD. Although
empirical studies and data on behavioral health are as limited as those on suicide rates,

-- 420 of 545 --

392 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
it is estimated that PTSD symptoms may be experienced by as many as 37% of firefight-
ers (Wilmoth, 2014). As with other first responders, requests for assistance to address
mental health concerns continue to be perceived negatively by commanding officers.
CRISIS INTERVENTION WITH FIRST RESPONDERS
Learning Objective 11.9 Outline crisis intervention as it applies to first responders.
Exposure to traumatic calls does not mean that first responders will necessarily develop
PTSD, depression, anxiety, or other mental health issues. It is plausible to assume that
the majority of first responders, like military service members, chose their career because
they can adapt to trauma, handle trauma better than others in the community due to
personality and resilience, apply training to deter the effects of any trauma, distance
themselves from trauma, and enjoy aspects of the job that counter the trauma. Moreover,
they were likely drawn to their career due to the unpredictability and dangers of crisis
calls. As well, they typically have strong support systems and coping skills.
Most first responders can handle the effects of traumatic calls without significant
issues that affect their functioning and ability to deliver services. However, any action
to decrease or limit the chances of a call turning into a traumatic event or to combat the
high level of suicide ideation and completion is imperative and should be understood
by crisis counselors.
Although there are some unique stressors among LEOs, EMRs, and firefighters, first
responders share many similar stressors. Common interventions that have been used
with first responders include psychological first aid (PFA) and critical incident stress
management (CISM). PFA and CISM are explained in detail in Chapter 12 in relation
to working with victims of disaster situations. This section focuses on these and other
interventions with first responders. Although the stages and phases may be similar, the
goals may differ from disaster victim to first responder. Complete Think About It 11.4.
Think about your personal perceptions of first
responders. Are there stereotypes you have developed
or continue to believe about this population? If
assigned to work with first responders, how might any
of your perceptions interfere with your interventions? If
you have no perceptions that would impact your work,
how could perceptions affect other crisis counselors?
What would you need to keep in mind when working
with first responders due to their unique stressors and
situations?
THINK ABOUT IT 11.4
Psychological First Aid
PFA has been endorsed as a practice model by the Institute of Medicine and is viewed
as emotional first aid for first responders (Brucia et al., 2020). The goals of PFA, when
applied to first responders, are to (1) provide education and information, (2) provide
comfort and enable peer support, (3) increase recovery, (4) promote positive mental health
and resilience, and (5) provide access to continued care, if needed. PFA was adapted
from other emergency situations and initially formally applied to LEOs working during
the terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001, and again following

-- 421 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	393
Hurricane Katrina. PFA has become a best-practice model, since the intervention
provided during these large-scale emergency responses was found to be effective.
PFA identifies five imperative phases to be integrated with first responders:
1. The assessment phase was designed to provide immediate access to mental health
services for those first responders at high risk for emotional reactions due to the
crisis event. Directly after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, mental
health tents were placed directly at recovery and rescue areas for immediate care.
The tents were staffed 24/7 with peers and clinical staff trained to work with
first responders during disaster incidents. Most first responders, like military
personnel, were dedicated to completing their mission and staying with other first
responders. Removing a first responder from the disaster site could cause more
traumatic experiences and mental health issues as well as increased guilt in relation
to leaving coworkers. It was essential for the assessment phase to take place in
a visible location so that first responders could be assessed, receive any needed
assistance, and then continue their mission.
2. The stabilization phase includes three main priorities: (a) mandatory medical check-ups
every 12 hours; (b) visible spiritual leadership to sustain morale; and (c) information
from media outlets, which, during the September 11 aftermath, included access to
televisions for updated information from outside the disaster zones.
3. During the triage phase, performance is assessed hourly and opportunities are
provided for regrouping and peer stress intervention. The group cohesion of this
phase promotes resilience and a supportive environment.
4. The goal of the communication phase is to provide information and education on
perceived stressors and anticipated stressors, as well as information on critical
incident stress referrals.
5. The hotline phase includes intense follow-up with first responders to maintain
contact and provide assessments and referrals, if needed. In relation to 9/11,
the hotline phase provided services for family members for several years after
the event.
Critical Incident Stress Management
Many LEOs, EMRs, and firefighter departments continue to use critical incident stress
debriefing (CISD), which is a component of CISM and is the most common intervention
used to provide psychological debriefings to decrease the level of stress resulting from
emergency calls. Recently, PFA has been the preferred crisis intervention approach in
many mental health agencies. Most researchers do not believe the CISM model to be
flawed. However, they do believe that CISM groups should be conducted by mental
health providers instead of untrained first responder peers. Wee et al. (1999) found that
EMS professionals who received CISD from mental health providers within 3 months
following a civil disturbance (e.g., riots, protests) showed fewer stress-related concerns
and decreased symptoms of depression and anxiety.
Although the original core elements of CISM were developed by Everly and Mitchell
(2003), various other organizations have created and enacted variations of CISM/CISD in
their disaster relief efforts (e.g., American Red Cross, National Organization for Victims
Assistance, the Salvation Army).

-- 422 of 545 --

394 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
An alternative intervention to CISM/CISD is MANERS psychological first
aid, developed by an Australian health agency. MANERS comprises the following
components: minimize exposure; acknowledge the event; normalize the experience;
educate as required; restore or refer to professional help; and self-care. With the high
rate of mental health concerns resulting from witnessing emergency critical incidences
and subsequent inaction related to self-referral for mental health services due to stigmas,
CISM and MANERS programs should be facilitated by trained mental health providers
and not peers.
Case Study 11.2 considers interventions for first responders at the scene of a hostage
taking.
CASE STUDY 11.2
Responding to a Hostage Situation
Once a recent 14-hour hostage standoff finally ended, a mother and young child were
killed by the hostage taker (the estranged father), one LEO was killed in the gunfire
exchange, and two other LEOs sustained non–life-threatening gunshot injuries. One
officer, who was shot in the back, is expected to be paralyzed. EMS professionals were
on the scene since the beginning of the police intervention, anticipating transport of
any injured persons to the hospital. As part of the CISM team connected with the police
department, describe your action plan for intervening in this situation.
Discussion Questions
1. What groups would you assess as being a priority and how would you proceed?
2. If the time frame for the standoff lasted longer than expected, how would the inter-
vention change and how would you implement PFA, CISM, or MANERS during
the standoff?
3. What unique stressors would the injured officers or family members of the officers
experience that may need to be addressed? What resources would you think are
important to have available for them?
4. What intervention would you integrate if, during a debriefing, a first responder
terminated prior to you getting a comprehensive assessment?
Other Crisis Interventions
Most of the literature on first responders focuses on the professional training and crisis
intervention provided by them to the community. Other research emphasizes stressors
and trauma experienced by first responders. With all the reported stressors, limited
research exists on other counseling interventions to address stressors, outside of PFA
and CISM. The support first responders find in one another and in the first responder
community should not be underemphasized because it is an important part of effective
crisis intervention. First responders often believe they will be criticized by their peers
for seeking mental health services, although they are often the first to provide needed
intervention resources to victims. Many first responders believe their career will be nega-
tively affected if they reach out for mental health services.

-- 423 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	395
FIRST RESPONSE RESILIENCY PROGRAM 	Debriefing with peers continues to
be the most common form of intervention used to decrease burnout and the
stress of the job. Due to the high rate of peer debriefing, a former paramedic
and a firefighter developed an extensive resilience-based program that was
first implemented to assist in the management of stress and facilitate
academic success for military members deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan
who were transitioning to civilian life and entering college. The program
was successful, and the developers were asked to adapt the program for
emergency personnel, which resulted in the First Response Resiliency
Program (FRP). The FRP focuses on increasing resilience skills and building
a strong social support system to decrease or prevent mental health issues
(Gunderson et al., 2014). The FRP includes a curriculum of 12 resiliency
skills: setting goals; optimizing nutrition; exercising; getting adequate sleep;
engaging in relaxation techniques; identifying ABCs (i.e., activating events,
beliefs, and consequences); reviewing perspectives; managing self-defeating
thoughts; enhancing empathy; weighing wins and losses; reaching out; and
developing social support.
PSYCHOEDUCATION PROGRAMS 	Due to the common stressors among first
responders, stress reduction programs should include psychoeducation
programs on healthy ways to combat stress: exercise, healthy eating habits,
developing social groups within and outside the department, and talking to
family members about stress. Providing information to family members
early on can assist the family in understanding expectations and how to find supports.
As noted in the stressors among firefighters, cardiac-related line-of-duty fatalities are
high for firefighters. In response to this specific issue, improvements in medical
screenings and adoption of fitness and wellness programs for firefighters are essential.
SUPPORT FROM ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP 	Organizational supervisors should
monitor workload and high-risk assignments. The severity of vicarious traumatization
was connected to increased time spent with traumatized clients, large caseloads, and
long work hours. Research by Cornille and Meyers (1999) also showed that having a
more diverse caseload is linked with decreased vicarious traumatization. High-risk
assignments such as child homicides and abuse cases that involve torture or cases of
incest should be distributed among investigators who possess the necessary skills to
deal with their personal emotions. Allowing first responders to attend workshops and
training in other areas can help them learn different topics and take a break from their
stressful cases.
INTERVENTION WITH FAMILIES OF FIRST RESPONDERS 	Intervention and psychoeducation
with children of LEOs can help normalize the unique issues only they encounter as
children of LEOs. Concerns of Police Officers (COPS) is an organization that assists
family members of LEOs who died in the line of duty. Concerns of Police Officers-Kids
(COPS-Kids) is a component of COPS that focuses directly on the needs of children and
stepchildren of LEOs who died in the line of duty. Various camps are available year-
round as well as group counseling during National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial
Week every year in May, allowing children to connect with others in similar situations.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 11.3
This video trailer segment of
a documentary (available on
http://www.thecode9film.
com/) explores the experiences
of first responders and their
families who experience mental
health stressors related to their
careers. Code 9 was developed
to assist first responders and
family members experiencing
stressors and mental health
situations through peer mentor
and resiliency programs. What
mental health stressors are
mentioned in the video? What
are some programs and inter-
ventions that may be helpful to
this population?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=VkqFjvoa6iQ
Watch from 00:00 to 08:08

-- 424 of 545 --

396 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Similar counseling groups and camps are also available for parents, spouses, siblings,
in-laws, and other individuals connected to LEOs. Crisis counselors and school
counselors should be aware of the unique issues children of LEOs may encounter that
may complicate grief over another death.
RETIREMENT PROGRAMS 	Retired officers can be a great asset in training activities that
are beneficial to the retiree and new recruits. Retirement for the general population can
affect a person’s sense of meaning and purpose. Additionally, retirees encounter a
multitude of mental health and medical issues. Violanti et al. (2013a) found an increased
risk of disease and death connected to retirement of LEOs, mainly liver and colon
conditions. They report the average life expectancy for male LEOs to be 66 years of age
and predict that the average male LEO will live 10.6 years after retirement. By comparison,
the average age of death for males in the general population is 76 years of age.
This negative aspect of retirement can be amplified with first responders when
their identity is connected to their career and the “us versus them” social support has
diminished upon retirement. This group of retired LEOs needs an intervention program
in any department, including psychoeducation and support groups. Individuals who
experience a disability-related retirement have additional stressors, risks, and potential
mental health and medical concerns that require special focus.
Table 11.2 provides some resources for working with first responders.
Blue H.E.L.P. Honoring the Service of Law Enforcement Officers Who Died by Suicide:
https://bluehelp.org
The CODE 9 Project: https://thecode9project.org
Concerns of Police Survivors (C.O.P.S.): https://www.below100.org/c-o-p-s-training-traumas-of-
law-enforcement/
Firefighter Behavioral Health Alliance, Workshop designed by First Responders for First
Responders: https://www.ffbha.org
TABLE 11.2 Resources for First Responders
SUMMARY
Serving the needs of military personnel and
their families presents unique challenges for
counselors working in a variety of settings. The
chance of providing counseling to a military
member who has been deployed or working with
family members during deployment continues to
rise. Many military members take advantage of
services provided in their military communities.
More seek counseling with civilian counselors
because over two-thirds of service members
live in civilian neighborhoods. More reservists,
who make up a large segment of the individuals
deployed, also seek counseling. Since 2001, the
number of female service members exposed to
trauma in the military who are being seen for
mental health concerns has risen. These mental
health concerns may be consistent with those
of their male counterparts; however, the root of
the mental health diagnosis may be different.
An overwhelming number of women report
experiencing sexual assault while in the military.
Understanding military cultural norms and
expectations is essential to treating the whole
person. Deployments offer a unique experience
not known to civilians never deployed or exposed
to deployments. Many deployed military service

-- 425 of 545 --

Chapter 11 • Military and First Responder Populations 	397
members may encounter physical or mental health
issues requiring collaboration and services from
counselors. Families left behind during deployment
also may experience mental health concerns
requiring professional counseling services. Pre-
deployment, deployment, and postdeployment
each bring about changes and require adjustments.
Most service members and their families adjust
and do not encounter individual or family crises.
Others may require some additional assistance
to deal with the deployment or reintegration
back into the family and culture. In taking a
preventive approach, counselors who work with
military prior to deployment may find it helpful
to the service member to treat the whole person
and explore all the aspects on the wellness wheel
(Myers et al., 2000), including spirituality and
religious practices.
In addition to military combat service
members, first responders, who mainly comprise
LEOs, EMS professionals, and firefighters, are the
first to respond to a variety of emergency calls
from the community. First responders, as a group,
are exposed to a multitude of traumatic situations
and experiences daily. They witness violence,
horrendous deaths, victims, and criminal acts by
citizens of the community. An alarming number
of first responders report depression, anxiety,
and PTSD symptoms and present with a higher
rate of suicide ideation and behaviors than the
general population. The stress associated with
the occupation, shift work, poor eating habits,
disrupted sleep patterns, and missing family
functions due to work often permeate into family
life and other relationships. LEOs have additional
stressors of more line-of-duty deaths, assaults
by citizens, and line-of-duty injuries than other
first responders. Retirement and separation from
the first responder community appear to have a
negative impact on the health and well-being of
most first responders.
Although mental health services are
accessible to first responders, most hesitate
to access mental health services due to the
perceived effect on their career. The support
first responders provide to one another should
not be overlooked. It appears to be an effective
coping mechanism for many first responders.
PFA and CISM approaches appear to be the
most predominant formal interventions with
first responders. Crisis counselors should be
aware of the unique issues experienced by first
responders and their family members when
intervening with this population.

-- 426 of 545 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 427 of 545 --

399
PREVIEW
This chapter reviews emergency preparedness and effective responses by crisis
counselors. Given the emphasis that the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and
Related Educational Programs (CACREP; 2024) has placed on training counselors to
work with crises, traumas, disasters, and emergencies, this chapter focuses on crisis
intervention models and the clinical implications of natural disasters, terrorism, riots,
and hostage situations, as well as the role of the counselor in relation to the community
and workplace. The content of this chapter infuses and synthesizes information from
previous chapters.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
12.1 Describe the leadership roles in working with multidisciplinary teams in
emergency preparedness situations.
12.2 Outline types of natural disasters, common reactions, and emergency
responses.
12.3 Differentiate between types of terrorism and responses to terrorism.
12.4 Describe various types of riots, their impact on a community, and effective
interventions.
12.5 Explain the stages of hostage situations and effective points of intervention.
LEADERSHIP ROLES IN A MULTIDISCIPLINARY CRISIS RESPONSE
TEAM
Learning Objective 12.1 Describe the leadership roles in working with
multidisciplinary teams in emergency preparedness situations.
Given the recent pandemic, terrorist attacks, insurgency, natural disasters, and crisis
situations, the notion of crisis intervention and emergency response has become ingrained
in counselor training standards. The most recent CACREP curriculum standards (2024)
12 Emergency Preparedness and
Response in the Community and
Workplace
Jason M. McGlothlin
C H A P T E R

-- 428 of 545 --

400 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
place a heavy emphasis on the training of counselors in crisis intervention, trauma-
informed practices, and emergency response. For example, all master’s-level counselor
training must include curriculum on emergency response management, the “effects of
crises, disasters, chronic stress, and trauma across the lifespan.” CACREP also requires
curriculum on “suicide prevention models and strategies,” “procedures for assessing risk
of aggression, danger to self or others, clients’ experience of trauma,” and “procedures
for identifying and reporting signs of abuse.” Most specifically related to this chapter,
the CACREP standards require that all master’s-level counseling students are exposed
to information on “crisis intervention, trauma-informed, community-based, and disaster
mental health strategies.”
As society and the counseling profession evolves, so do CACREP curriculum
standards. In the 2001 CACREP standards, crisis and suicide were barely mentioned.
In 2009 and then 2016, more and more curricular standards were required regarding
crisis, suicide, trauma-informed care, and disaster mental health. The latest CACREP
standards require more emphasis on crisis, trauma, suicide, and disaster counseling than
ever before, and such trends are expected to increase in the future.
Multidisciplinary crisis response teams (MCRTs) have various names, including first
responder teams, primary and emergency health care teams, school response teams, and
community emergency response teams (CERTs). The hallmark of MCRTs is that they
comprise multiple individuals from different professions, each serving a specific function,
who collaborate to provide different perspectives on the crisis or disaster. A similar
concept that counselors are familiar with is a multidisciplinary treatment team, in which
counselors, social workers, vocational workers, psychiatrists, and nurses work to treat a
client, couple, or family. In the case of MCRTs, the client is in crisis. Members of an MCRT
work jointly with individuals, families, and groups in a variety of roles not only to help
individuals but also to help reduce the impact of the crisis or disaster on the community.
The role of leadership is essential in managing a crisis or disaster. A variety of
leadership roles may be involved, depending on the nature of the event, to respond
effectively and to mitigate the effects of the crisis or disaster. If the crisis or disaster
is large in scale, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Red Cross
may play a significant role in the leadership of managing the situation. They may
even coordinate all or at least most efforts. Police, firefighters, and Special
Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) members provide leadership in instilling safety
and rescue. Medical personnel (e.g., physicians, nurses, emergency medical
technicians [EMTs]) lead the effort to treat physical trauma. Mental health
clinicians (e.g., counselors, social workers, psychiatrists, psychologists)
provide crisis intervention and emotional support to victims of disasters or
first responders. Counselors on an MCRT may also be designated to fulfill
any of the following leadership roles:
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 12.1
This video shows an example
of how communities can utilize
a crisis response team and how
a team functions in partnership
with hospitals and law enforce-
ment. Does your community
have a crisis response team?
How do crisis teams work with
other community agencies?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=WlJ5CcpREv0
Watch from 00:00 to 05:42
• Media liaison: A team member who effectively communicates with the
media and other inquiring bodies (e.g., the government, FEMA, families,
loved ones).
• Mortality liaison: In some crises or disasters, the loss of life is so great or
impactful that a member of the MCRT must be designated to accurately
convey loss of life to families (see Chapter 5 for information on death
notification procedures).

-- 429 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	401
• The MCRT leader: In every MCRT, a leader is designated to oversee how the team
responds to the crisis or disaster, delegate who is responsible for what, and evaluate
the effectiveness of the response.
Read Voices from the Field 12.1 to hear one person’s perspective on being a member of
an MCRT.
Scott Baker
During my time as a crisis counselor on an MCRT, it
was not unusual to encounter workplace emergencies.
In a large city in the Southwest, the mobile crisis
counseling teams had been specially trained by the local
fire department to assist with disaster situations. One
afternoon, we were called on by the fire department to
assist with such a scenario.
Upon arrival, we were informed that a young
man had jumped from a high-rise building. Despite
the fire department’s best efforts, there was no way
to hide the gruesome scene. Our first intervention was
for ourselves, taking deep breaths and focusing on the
job at hand, reminding ourselves of our training and
creating a mental checklist of the steps that we would
follow. The first step was to coordinate with other
responding teams to identify clients and responsibilities.
The person in charge of the crisis response
informed us that our job was to assist the employees
who had been working in the high-rise. Those employees
had evacuated the building when the young man
accessed the roof, setting off the fire alarms throughout
the building. Thinking the alarm was a test or the result
of some minor incident, the employees were certainly
not prepared for what they witnessed as they evacuated
the building. The young man was falling and screaming,
“Get out of the way!” He hit the ground, surrounded
by those who had been working inside.
As is common in workplace crises, the situation
was more complicated than it seemed. In this case, the
employees working inside the building were managers
of the large company that owned the building. There
had been a labor dispute, and the regular workers were
striking. In response, the company had sent managers
to staff the building. This added to the horror of the
employees, as a rumor quickly spread that the suicidal
man was a displaced worker, causing many to feel
extreme guilt. It became very important to stop the
spread of this rumor and, once the information became
available, to inform the employees that the suicide was
unrelated to the labor dispute.
Each crisis team was assigned to conduct a
group intervention with 8–10 employees. While one
team member encouraged the employees to discuss
what they had experienced, the other monitored for
individual needs. My role was the latter, and I quickly
identified my client, a large, middle-aged man who
looked very pale but otherwise unaffected. I spoke with
him individually. He proceeded to explain that he was
one of the first people outside, and he described, in
horrific detail and with very little emotion, what he had
seen. After purging his traumatic memory, he looked
directly at me and matter-of-factly said, “Well, I guess
I’d better get back to work.” He started to stand up, but
he seemed unsteady on his feet and about to fall over.
I directed him to sit down, explained that he
would not be returning to work, and attended to his
basic needs. I alerted an EMT, who monitored my
client’s shock response. We made a list of the things
he had to do for the rest of the day, including taking
his medication, eating dinner, and avoiding use of
alcohol. We made a second list of what symptoms
he might expect, how he might cope with each, and
what he should do if coping was not working. We
identified who would take him home, who would help
him through the evening, and where he would go for
continued assistance.
When the response was over and all immediate
needs met, we returned to the office. Though our shift
was over, we stayed and engaged in critical incident
stress debriefing. Even with careful attention to this
postcrisis intervention, it was several weeks before
I stopped driving past that high-rise on my way home
from work.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 12.1
Crises in the Workplace

-- 430 of 545 --

402 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Although natural disasters, terrorism, riots, and hostage situations are all crisis
events, a victim’s response to a particular event often varies depending on the event
and the perception of it by the victim. Crisis counselors should be aware of the unique
responses by victims to an event to intervene effectively.
NATURAL DISASTERS
Learning Objective 12.2 Outline types of natural disasters, common reactions, and
emergency responses.
Broadly defined, natural disasters are events caused by forces of nature. The consequences
of natural disasters come in many forms, ranging from power outages resulting from
high winds to mass casualties and staggering death tolls resulting from a tsunami,
earthquake, or hurricane. In a natural disaster, people may blame God or a higher power
or rationalize why it would occur. However, if it appears that human negligence was
associated with the natural disaster, placing blame on human error is a common reaction
by those who experienced the disaster. For example, Hurricane Katrina was a natural
disaster, but the destruction was more catastrophic due to human error: the levee failure
and delayed action by local government due to poor crisis planning and response.
Many crisis intervention strategies such as psychological first aid, critical incident
stress management, and a crisis counseling program can be used to intervene with
humans involved in crisis events. However, when responding to a natural disaster,
counselors must be aware of the dynamics of the specific disaster to be better prepared
for what to expect from their clients and the environment in the aftermath of the disaster.
Chapter 2 focused on safety concerns and precautions for crisis counselors in
crisis situations. Safety and self-care are especially critical when responding to a natural
disaster. In a natural disaster, counselors who are at the disaster site may see death and
dismemberment, experience remarkable emotional reactions to the crisis, and be exposed
to harmful situations. Chapter 2 discussed proactive approaches that a counselor could
take when working with clients in crisis. When reading the remainder of this section,
reflect on Chapter 2 and relate what you learned to natural disasters.
Types of Natural Disasters
The following list presents considerations counselors should keep in mind in relation to
specific natural disasters:
• Winter storms: When counselors work in such conditions, they should be mindful
of taking care of their own needs to stay warm and hydrated. They should not stay
outdoors for long periods of time; when outdoors, they should make sure all body
parts are covered, especially the neck and wrist areas; and they should eat and
drink on a regular basis to conserve energy and warmth. Crisis counselors should
also be aware of the local resources to counter the effects of a winter storm.
• Earthquakes: Counselors need to be mindful not only of the environment during
an earthquake situation but also of their clients and themselves. They need to
make sure that steps are taken to protect themselves and their clients from future
aftershocks, check for injuries, and inquire with clients about the location of family
members who may be trapped or removed due to the earthquake.

-- 431 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	403
• Floods: When responding to victims of flooding, counselors need to be prepared
for additional flash floods. If flash floods occur, get to higher ground, never
walk or drive through floodwaters, and stay away from flood-prone areas such
as ditches, storm drains, and low-lying areas. The most distinguishing aspect of
floods is the psychological effect it has on victims. In the wake of fires, earthquakes,
tornados, and other disasters, many of the victim’s belongings are destroyed and
disintegrated—gone—and any that remain are not intact. Victims of these natural
disasters may have a sense of finality or closure with the notion that “my things
are gone and I need to get new things.” However, the psychological toll is different
for flood victims in that they can see their belongings and how they have been
damaged by the flood. Their belongings are not disintegrated and gone, although
they are destroyed. Counselors need to pay close attention to how flood victims
respond emotionally to revisiting their homes and rebuilding their lives.
• Hurricanes: Crisis counselors may be called on to respond to large-scale hurricane
sites. It is important for counselors to follow up with their clients and connect them
with long-standing mental health treatment. Crisis counselors also need to know
that, because of the intense damage that hurricanes create, dangerous situations can
persist after the initial impact of the hurricane. Therefore, to stay safe, work only
in areas that officials have declared safe, do not approach or be around downed
power lines, and stay around others.
• Tornados: Crisis counselors must be cautious of working near a site at which a
tornado touched down because it can be a dangerous environment. Broken glass,
rubble, sharp objects, jagged metal, and unstable structures could be present. When
working with a client who has suffered loss due to a tornado, uncertainty about the
future and physical health are the issues of most concern. However, those living in
tornado-prone areas (typically known as “tornado alleys”) could have existential
concerns about when a tornado is going to happen again and why this destruction
is happening to them.
• Wildfires: Counselors need to keep safe by staying abreast of how the fire is pro-
gressing. Some fires move very quickly, and crisis counselors need to make sure
they stay away from the fire’s path. Crisis counselors need to be aware of a client’s
perception of actual and perceived loss. In other words, some clients might know
that their home or community was destroyed by the fire (actual loss). Other clients
may have been evacuated before the fire came to their community, so they may not
know whether their home is gone but they anticipate its loss (perceived loss). This
actual or perceived loss includes not only material possessions but also loved ones,
pets, and the like. For more information on loss, refer to Chapter 5.
Responses to Natural Disasters
With any natural disaster, there are periods of transition, displacement, relocation, and
rebuilding. Typically, societal change is affected after a natural disaster such as job loss,
transportation difficulties, struggling businesses, and poverty. According to Lee (2020),
there is a direct correlation with natural disasters and increased poverty rates. Lee also
found that natural disasters affect low-income neighborhoods most. This is a critical
point to consider when thinking about the mental health of natural disaster survivors.
For neighborhoods already struggling with poverty, unemployment, high crime rates,

-- 432 of 545 --

404 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
and few resources, once a natural disaster hits, the emotional and societal struggles
are amplified. Counselors need to consider the emotional, physical, multicultural, and
societal underpinnings that were in place prior to the disaster and then hypothesize
that any difficulties are now magnified. Prior to the disaster, the concern was “How will
I pay my bills?” Post disaster, it is “Where will I live?” Once it was “My job doesn’t pay
me enough” and now it is “My job is gone.” A critical task for counselors is to work with
clients to become aware of available resources, prioritize what is important, and help
clients triage short-term necessities from long-term wants.
Besides natural disasters, counselors may be called on to respond to disastrous events
that are the result of human factors (e.g., house or structural fires, chemical spills, nuclear
disasters or meltdowns, contagion, and natural gas explosions). As with natural disasters,
counselors need to ensure their own safety while they attend to the needs of clients in
crisis. James and Gilliland (2017) provided a timeline of responses and interventions for
natural disasters, as illustrated in Table 12.1. Voices from the Field 12.2 describes one
person’s work as a volunteer disaster mental health counselor for the Red Cross.
Time 	Possible Response 	Intervention Needed
Initial disaster
strikes
• Shock
• Fear/panic
• Self-preservation
• Family preservation
• Helplessness/hopelessness
• Denial/disbelief
• Confusion/disorientation
• Evidence of resources available
• Evidence of chaos reduction
Hours after
disaster
• Same as above
• Anger
• Grief
• Energy/emotion
• Action without efficiency
• Rumination of disaster
• Evidence of resources available
• Evidence of chaos reduction
• Organization/control
• Ventilation
• Problem solving
• Connection with loved ones
Days after
disaster
• Fear
• Denial/disbelief
• Anger
• Emotion
• Rumination of disaster
• Cohesion of community
• Optimism
• Thoughts of predisaster life
• That which does not kill me makes me
stronger!
• Gathering information about loved ones,
neighborhoods, etc.
• Crisis intervention therapies
• Financial/government support
First month
after disaster
• Stopping talking about disaster
• Rumination of disaster
• Resilience
• Possible setbacks
• Prevention of acute stress disorder and
possibly posttraumatic stress disorder
• Promotion of wellness model
• Life viewed as different but goes on
TABLE 12.1 Timeline for Intervening in a Disaster

-- 433 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	405
Jason M. McGlothlin
I have been a volunteer disaster mental health
counselor for the Red Cross for more than two
decades. This has been one of the most personally
and professionally rewarding experiences in my career.
I have been exposed to disasters that helped me
grow and expand my skills, gained experience that
allows me to contextualize my teaching and work
with clients, and become a more insightful counselor.
I highly recommend that all counselors go through the
Red Cross disaster mental health counselor training! It
provides you with experiences that you would not get
otherwise. (See https://www.redcross.org/take-a-class/
disaster-training.)
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 12.2
Volunteering as a Disaster Mental Health Counselor
Initially, when a disaster strikes, people experience feelings of shock, fear, panic,
confusion, and, possibly, disorientation. Statements such as “I can’t believe this is
happening” and “This can’t be happening” are typical. Almost immediately after the
disaster occurs, people transition into preservation mode. Thoughts quickly enter the
mind regarding the safety of self and family. During this initial time of the disaster,
people need to know or be assured that basic survival resources (e.g., safety, food, water)
are available. People also need to know that the chaos created by the disaster (e.g.,
physical or material destruction, community-wide or group-wide panic) will subside.
At this point in the disaster, first responders must be visible to increase a sense of hope
and reduce feelings of helplessness.
Hours after a disaster strikes, the same emotions and reactions that occurred at the
onset of the disaster may continue, although these reactions would likely be decreased,
even if the decrease is minimal. Feelings of anger and grief may continue, and people
may experience an inability to stop thinking about the disaster. Powerful emotions
typically prevent victims from organizing an effective response. Likewise, if the crisis
turns to chaos, people may not be able to either provide or receive help.
Time 	Possible Response 	Intervention Needed
Months after
disaster
• Disappointment
• Physical and emotional fatigue
• Possible onset of panic disorder, anxiety
disorder, suicide, depression, etc.
• Moving on!
• Psychotherapy
• Resources
• Continual support from loved ones
One year after
disaster
• Significance of anniversary
• Family disputes if family members are not
on the same level of recovery from disaster
• Move on!
• “Life will go on” focus of counseling
• Family therapy
Reflection of
disaster
• Move on!
• Literally move and rebuild?
• Grow and build life
• Support
• Validation of safety
Source: Compiled from James and Gilliland (2017).
TABLE 12.1 Timeline for Intervening in a Disaster (continued)

-- 434 of 545 --

406 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Hours after the disaster, first responders should help people regain a sense of safety
in their lives. First responders can be of substantial help by providing basic problem-
solving strategies. Individuals may not be able to solve large or complex problems until
personal safety needs have been met. Providing resources is crucial, such as connecting
people with family members and providing them with resources to meet basic needs
such as shelter and safety.
After a few days, people may still experience thoughts of fear, denial, disbelief,
anger, heightened emotions, and continual rumination over the disaster. However,
some people may begin to see optimism in getting past the disaster and moving on with
life. Community-wide efforts may start to emerge to address disaster-related issues.
Community efforts instill hope in moving past the disaster and even getting back to
a predisaster life (e.g., going back to work, buying groceries). First responders should
continue to help people gather information about loved ones, neighbors, pets, and others
that victims are concerned about. At this point, first responders can use specific crisis
intervention counseling strategies with a focus on rebuilding life to a predisaster state.
Also, financial and government support is needed by victims within days after the disaster.
Months after the disaster, people may stop talking about it as life begins to mirror
how life was before it occurred. Resilience is a positive sign of healthy adjustment.
However, some people continue to ruminate over the disaster. Rumination can be a
precursor to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or acute stress disorder. Setbacks to
resilience can occur because some factors are still out of the control of many people (e.g.,
government assistance does not occur in a timely fashion).
Helping people a month after a disaster requires transition from the role of a first
responder to that of a crisis counselor or other mental health clinician. Clinicians at this
point should assess for and intervene to address acute stress disorder and prevent PTSD.
Clinicians should promote a wellness philosophy that helps people reestablish physical,
emotional, and spiritual health and reinforce the perspective that life can continue,
although somewhat differently since the disaster.
The months that follow a disaster represent a time when people can either thrive or
become stagnant. People who thrive are those who learned from the events surrounding
the disaster and feel as if they are stronger because they survived. These individuals
do not perceive the disaster as uncontrollable, often possess effective coping skills, and
have a good support system. People who become stagnant at this point can experience
physical, emotional, and spiritual exhaustion. If this exhaustion persists, it can lead to
thoughts of suicide or to symptoms of depression or intense anxiety, especially if life has
not returned to a predisaster state.
Whether people are thriving or stagnating several months after the disaster,
it is critical that family and other loved ones show continual support for those who
experienced the disaster and that resources are available to help them move on with
their lives. Also at this point, people may need to begin formal individual or group
psychotherapy to prevent or manage symptoms of PTSD, suicide, depression, panic
disorder, anxiety disorder, or other feelings that may impair their functioning.
At the 1-year anniversary of the disaster, some victims may have moved on with
their lives. However, family disputes may occur when a family member continues to
focus on the disaster and continually talks about the events surrounding it, while other
family members have moved on with their lives. Because such conflicts can create distance
between some family members, family counseling or individual counseling that focuses
on wellness, symptom reduction, and the finding of meaning in life may be warranted.

-- 435 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	407
One year after the disaster, most individuals will have moved on with life. However,
those who were significantly devastated by the disaster may need to relocate residences
to either distance themselves from the daily reminder of the disaster or rebuild their
lives. With these individuals, counselors need to focus on support, validation of safety
issues, and possibly continued care connections to counselors in the area where these
individuals may relocate.
Overall, the results of a disaster can have short- and long-term consequences for
people that may be perfectly normal. In classic works, Everly and Mitchell (2003), along
with Alexander (2005), summarized the typical responses to disaster:
• Cognitive reactions: Blaming, uncertainty, poor troubleshooting abilities, poor
concentration, disorientation, lessened self-esteem, intrusive thoughts of or rumi-
nation on the disaster, hypersensitivity, confusion, nightmares, blaming others,
and difficulty with memory
• Physical reactions: Increased heart rate, tremors, dizziness, weakness, chills, fainting,
reduced libido, headaches, vomiting, shock, fatigue, sweating, and rapid breathing
• Emotional reactions: Apathy, feelings of being overwhelmed, depression, irrita-
bility, anxiety, agitation, panic, helplessness, hopelessness, anger, grief, fear, guilt,
loss of emotional control, and denial
• Behavioral reactions: Difficulty eating and/or sleeping, restlessness, conflicts with
others, withdrawal from others, lack of interest in social activities, and increased
drug/alcohol use
Those who work with people who have experienced a disaster need to be able to
recognize when “normal reactions” to disaster become substantially debilitating. To
prevent this, an immediate response to those exposed to a disaster is critical. The goal of
such a response is also to reduce panic and chaos.
Everly and Mitchell (2003) proposed that three essential elements need to take place
to prevent panic and chaos immediately following a disaster. First, a command post needs
to be established to help people find and recognize one centralized location of
leadership and organization in a time of chaos and disarray. Second, people
exposed to the disaster must be connected with needed resources. Third, it
is essential to communicate with those in need and create an atmosphere in
which feelings of helplessness are extinguished.
The previous information is purposely intended to be general in nature.
However, counselors need to consider that everyone experiences natural
disasters differently. For example, individuals with some physical disabilities
may experience increased frustration due to their difficulty with mobility
and lack of transportation after a natural disaster. Children may experience
differing levels of age-appropriate fear and thoughts of losing their parents.
Older adults may experience heightened physical problems. Individuals from
different cultural or spiritual backgrounds may experience increased safety
concerns if their cultural or spiritual group is seen as being responsible for
acts of terrorism.
The basic concept that counselors must remember is that even in times
of crisis, an individual’s multicultural background and the demographic
variables that make the person unique play an integral part in how that
individual experiences, perceives, reacts to, and recovers from the crisis.
Case Studies 12.1 and 12.2 focus on real-life community crisis situations.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 12.2
This documentary of the ter-
rorists attacks of September
11, 2001, and the evacuation
of Manhattan by boats tells a
story of response and resilience.
The elements outlined by Everly
and Mitchell (2003) required to
not induce panic are integrated
in this response. What were the
examples of the (1) command
post, (2) communication, and
(3) connections shown in the
video? (Note, this video does
show a scene of the towers
falling.)
http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=MDOrzF7B2Kg
Watch from 00:00 to 11:56

-- 436 of 545 --

408 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
CASE STUDY 12.1
Dealing with a Flood
Phoenix is 50 years old and has lived in rural Missouri alone for the past 30 years, work-
ing from home as a graphic designer. Phoenix does not have any family left and rarely
talks to anyone except clients. Two years ago, Phoenix’s hearing began to diminish, and
now Phoenix has no hearing in their left ear and only 15% of normal hearing capacity in
their right ear.
For the past 6 days, torrential rains have plagued Phoenix’s town. The local news
and emergency broadcast system warned of flooding and urged residents to evacuate.
Rather than evacuate, Phoenix began to place sandbags around their home to keep the
water out. Unfortunately, the water rose too quickly and spilled over the sandbags. Now
Phoenix’s home and home office are 7 feet under water. Phoenix was rescued by the local
fire and rescue unit yesterday evening.
As a crisis counselor, you are meeting Phoenix for the first time, just 22 hours after
the rescue. You are meeting Phoenix in a school gymnasium that has been converted
into a shelter for flood victims.
Discussion Questions
1. As a crisis counselor, what would be your priorities with Phoenix?
2. What might be Phoenix’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors?
3. With what resources do you think Phoenix needs to be connected?
4. What might be some multicultural considerations for Phoenix, located in rural
Missouri?
5. What might be some long-term effects of this flood on Phoenix’s professional and
personal life?
6. What might be some barriers to Phoenix’s recovery?
7. What would be some key counseling skills to use with this client? See Chapter 4
for information on crisis intervention skills.
8. Referring to Chapter 6, assess this client’s potential suicidality. Could Phoenix
be suicidal? If so, at what level of lethality do you think Phoenix might present?
Discuss various ways to assess Phoenix for suicide and think of follow-up strategies
to keep Phoenix safe.
9. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model of crisis assessment and
intervention presented in Table 1.1 in Chapter 1.
CASE STUDY 12.2
Dealing with a Residential Fire
The Zhang family—Kane, the 32-year-old father; Miya, the 28-year-old mother; Asa, the
7-year-old daughter; and Kenji, the 3-month-old son—lives on the sixth floor of a nine-
story apartment building in a major metropolitan area. Last week there was an electrical
fire in their neighbor’s apartment. As a result, their entire floor caught fire, as did parts
of the floors above and below them. Most of the building experienced significant smoke

-- 437 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	409
In Case Studies 12.1 and 12.2, no one died, but there was a tremendous amount of
loss. What might be some emotions related to loss and grief in each of the case studies?
Even though there was no loss of life, could the individuals in the case studies progress
through different stages of grief and loss? Complete Activities 12.1 and 12.2.
damage. The Zhang family was awakened at 2:30 a.m. by fire alarms and the smell
of smoke. They barely escaped the fire; Kane and Asa both got second-degree burns
and Miya got third-degree burns on 10% of her body. All four family members also
experienced significant smoke inhalation. After the fire was extinguished, the tenants
were taken to the hospital and treated. The building was declared to be unsafe, and the
Zhang family and the rest of the tenants were told that they could not move back into
the building.
As a crisis counselor, you are meeting with the entire Zhang family for the first time
3 weeks after the fire. They are living with family nearly 40 miles away from their previ-
ous home and did not recover any of their belongings from the fire. Shortly after the fire,
Kane started to drink heavily (a minimum of eight beers a day and a maximum of a fifth
of bourbon a day). You are meeting them in a group room in a local mental health clinic.
Discussion Questions
1. As a crisis counselor, what would be your priority with the Zhang family?
2. What might be some of their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors?
3. Consider the appropriateness of individual, group, or family counseling for this
family. How might each be conducted if found to be appropriate?
4. How might you facilitate growth in this family?
5. What might be some developmental concerns for each of the family members?
6. What might be some multicultural considerations for the family?
7. What physical concerns might you have for each of the family members?
8. Consider the reaction and consequence of Kane’s recent drinking.
9. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model of crisis assessment and
intervention presented in Table 1.1.
Research your city and state emergency management plan. Make note of how this plan would
directly affect you and your family. Also, make note of how it would affect you as a counselor.
ACTIVITY 12.1
With a peer, role-play two counseling scenarios
immediately after a tornado. In the first role play,
peer A is the counselor and peer B is the client who
experienced the tornado. This role play is to be face-to-
face. In the second role play, switch roles where peer A
is the client and peer B is the counselor. This role play
is to be conducted on the phone. After both role plays
are completed, discuss the differences between face-
to-face and telehealth counseling.
ACTIVITY 12.2

-- 438 of 545 --

410 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Natural Disaster Counseling Using Telehealth
As with many areas of crisis counseling, telehealth has become a viable means of
service delivery for those who have experienced natural disasters. In the aftermath of a
natural disaster, physically seeing clients face-to-face may be difficult due to the sheer
devastation of the environment, interruption of transportation by car or plane, and so on.
The infrastructure of the area may have so few resources that safe spaces for seeing clients
face-to-face may not be available. In addition, given the magnitude of the natural disaster,
having safe spaces for the appropriate amount of out-of-town help may not be possible.
Telehealth has been shown to be an alternative to face-to-face mental health services.
Environmental devastation, travel difficulties, safe office spaces, and lack of resources,
among others, are all issues that can be solved by conducting telehealth services (Augusterfer
et al., 2018). However, it is important to note that telehealth cannot be a fix in every natural
disaster. Cell phone towers and hardwired Internet connections may be destroyed in the
disaster, making telehealth services difficult to accomplish on a widespread basis.
While there are certainly potential difficulties, telehealth in the aftermath of a
disaster has been effective. Stasiak et al. (2018) studied the use of cognitive-behavioral
therapy using Internet-based telehealth with 42 child earthquake victims. They found that
after 6 months, 55% of the sample studied no longer met criteria for an anxiety disorder.
They concluded that Internet-based cognitive-behavioral telehealth with children after
an earthquake significantly improved anxiety and mood symptomology. Stasiak et al.
further found the parents of the children in their study were accepting and appreciative of
the telehealth services because other face-to-face services were scarce after the earthquake.
TERRORISM
Learning Objective 12.3 Differentiate between types of terrorism and responses to
terrorism.
Broadly defined, terrorism involves acts or threats of violence intended to create terror.
However, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2022) distinguishes between two types
of terrorism: international terrorism and domestic terrorism.
International terrorism activities have the following three characteristics:
1. They involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that violate federal or
state law.
2. They appear intended to (a) intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (b) influence
the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (c) affect the conduct of
a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping.
3. They occur primarily outside the territorial jurisdiction of the United States or tran-
scend national boundaries in terms of how they are accomplished, the persons they
appear intended to intimidate or coerce, or the locale in which their perpetrators
operate or seek asylum.
Domestic terrorism activities have the following three characteristics:
1. They involve acts dangerous to human life that violate federal or state law.
2. They appear to be intended (a) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (b) to
influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (c) to affect
the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping.
3. They occur primarily within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.

-- 439 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	411
More specifically, Post et al. (2014) suggest that it is not one’s psychological
makeup or issues of psychopathology that differentiates a terrorist from an average
civilian. What makes a person become a terrorist is one’s identification with a group and
the group dynamics of that group. For example, groups like the Weather Underground
and the Red Army Faction in Germany perpetrate terrorist acts because they believe
they are rebelling against their parents’ loyalties to a specific government group. By
contrast, groups like the Irish Republican Army (i.e., nationalist-separatist groups)
are continuing in their parents’ footsteps in a resistance to a governmental group.
Additionally, fundamentalist groups (i.e., Al-Qaeda or Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
[ISIS]) primarily have a religious “group think” in which they believe they are carrying
out the will of God or a higher power.
While most terrorists are what Post et al. (2014) describe as abiding to a groupthink
mentality, over the past several years, the notion of the lone-wolf (and lone-homegrown)
terrorist has emerged. The lone-wolf terrorist dispenses acts of terror separate from
others and, in many situations, in a response to the philosophy of a larger terrorist
organization. The lone wolf may or may not be part of a larger terrorist network or cell
and is typically seen as seeking recognition or glory alone and has a clear vision of what
the world should be like.
The September 11, 2001, attacks are certainly considered acts of terrorism,
specifically domestic terrorism. The atrocities committed by ISIS throughout the world
are examples of international terrorism. However, the broad definition of terrorism could
also include a coworker entering the workplace with a weapon, threatening to kill people.
While any example of terrorism is tragic and may fit into the above broad definitions, each
act can be very different and have different results on human victims and communities.
Clearly, 9/11 fits under the schema of terrorism, but many would consider the example
of a coworker with a weapon more an act of violence than terrorism.
An elevated level of stress is a natural response to a crisis, whether it is a natural
disaster, an act of terrorism, or mass destruction. In fact, most of the psychological
reactions to natural disasters are the same as the psychological reactions to acts of
terrorism. The key difference between natural disasters and terrorism is that with acts
of terrorism, there is someone to blame. Pure acts of terrorism create feelings of actual
blame toward a person or group of people.
Reactions to a natural disaster, riots, or terrorism create two distinct forms of
trauma. Individual trauma affects a person’s mental and emotional states and requires
the person to react to the event in some compensatory manner. On the other hand,
collective trauma occurs on a community-wide level whereby communities either join
and prevail or fragment and possibly create isolation and further conflict. With this
information as context, complete Think About It 12.1.
Think about a disaster you have experienced personally
or vicariously. Reflect on the information presented in
Table 12.1, especially the “Possible Response” column.
Think about your own responses to the disaster at
the different time intervals presented in the table (the
morning of the disaster, later that evening, a few days
later, a month later, a few months later, a year later, and
now). How did your emotions, thoughts, and behaviors
change? Would your responses differ with a human-
made or natural disaster? If yes, how? What plan would
you put into place to gain some control over a similar
situation that is not under your control? Explain.
THINK ABOUT IT 12.1

-- 440 of 545 --

412 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Interventions After a Disaster or Act of Terrorism
Little literature exists on the types of therapeutic strategies that are most effective when
working with victims of a disaster. Regardless of the modality of intervention, the
essential crisis intervention microskills (presented in Chapter 4) are critical to building
a therapeutic foundation with clients in crisis. Some argue that cognitive-behavioral
therapy can be highly effective due to the positive outcomes for adult clients with
PTSD (Lonergran, 2014). Sories et al. (2015) state that play therapy is the most beneficial
approach with children because it allows them to express the trauma. In contrast, one
could contend that meeting a child’s basic human needs should be the main concern.
Perhaps the most appropriate intervention could be developmental, such as responding
initially with a Rogerian approach to allow the client to feel accepted and heard, followed
by an existential approach to help the client establish or redefine personal meaning in life.
No matter what type of intervention is implemented, most agree that early interventions
increase personal recovery from a disaster (Lopes et al., 2014).
Fortunately, the literature does provide insight into some models for intervening
in times of disaster. Psychological first aid, critical incident stress management, and
the crisis counseling program have appeared in the literature as models successfully
implemented in disasters such as the terrorist attacks on September 11 and Hurricane
Katrina. A discussion of these models follows.
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID 	As noted in Chapter 11, psychological first aid (PFA) is
grounded in evidenced-based research and provides mental health clinicians with tools
to help reduce the beginning stress and trauma caused by a crisis or disaster. The
underpinnings of PFA are rooted in the notion that individuals are resilient to some
degree and that severe trauma does not necessarily develop into long-term mental
health problems. PFA is a practical approach that emphasizes the treatment of
individuals experiencing a variety of emotional, psychological, behavioral, spiritual,
and physical reactions to a crisis or disaster. PFA has been shown to work with
individuals of all ages as well as in group settings.
According to the National Child Traumatic Stress Network (2012), the basic
guidelines of PFA include:
• Be compassionate and provide emotional comfort.
• Connect with individuals in a nonintrusive and nonthreatening manner.
• Recognize that the relationship between the individual and the clinician is
important.
• Empower individuals to believe in the notion that they are safe and that they will
continue to be safe.
• Encourage individuals to be specific.
• Focus on heightened emotional states with individuals and attempt to reduce
feelings of being overwhelmed and hopeless.
• Help individuals reduce feelings of isolation by connecting them to their family
and friends as soon as possible.
• Be aware of cultural and spiritual differences, as they may play a large role in
reaction to and coping with trauma.
• Provide individuals with realistic resources and the practicalities of such resources
(i.e., when and where they are available).

-- 441 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	413
When delivering PFA, begin by observing the situation; do not approach individuals
until you observe how they are behaving in the moment. Once that is accomplished and
you believe that your presence would not be too intrusive, ask the person in crisis how
you could be helpful and about their immediate needs (e.g., something to eat, medical
attention).
At this point, individuals in crisis will run the gamut of responses from acting shy
and avoiding you to bombarding you with information. Remain calm with the client and
speak slowly. Be empathetic and take your time. If individuals want to talk, then simply
listen and try to pick up on the subtle resources they might need.
At this early point in the conversation, you want to focus on the positive
accomplishments that have kept them alive and safe. Because PFA focuses on immediacy,
try to keep the conversation on what the individual wants to accomplish in the moment
and in the immediate future (i.e., the next hour or day). Although it may be easy to get
the individual to recount the events of the trauma and it is okay for some of this dialogue
to occur, PFA would stress that you focus less on the traumatic event and more on
recovery. The goal of this interaction is to reduce stress, provide resources, empower
with hope, and promote positive functioning.
To provide an overview of PFA, Everly and Flynn (2005) reported that PFA begins
with helping those in need to meet their basic physical needs (e.g., safety, food, water,
shelter). After those physical needs are met, or are about to be met, a crisis counselor
practicing PFA attempts to help meet the client’s psychological needs (e.g., emotional
and behavioral support, empathy, consolation). Next, connecting the client with friends,
family, and other loved ones must take place. In addition, measures to decrease a victim’s
isolation must occur. Lastly, clinicians practicing PFA should provide avenues for
follow-up care. The above steps were successfully used by direct responders after the
September 11th terrorist attack in New York City.
PFA has developed into the hallmark of crisis response. Compared with other
types of crisis response, PFA is a gentler approach that allows for open communication,
immediate support, focus on the positive, and empowerment. While some other
approaches of debriefing are seen as intrusive or dictating that individuals need help,
PFA is offered to people inquiring how help can be provided.
According to Ruzek et al. (2007), PFA is
a systematic set of helping actions aimed at reducing initial post-trauma dis-
tress and supporting short- and long-term adaptive functioning. Designed
as an initial component of a comprehensive disaster/trauma response, PFA
is constructed around eight core actions: contact and engagement, safety and
comfort, stabilization, information gathering, practical assistance, connec-
tion with social supports, information on coping support, and linkage with
collaborative services. (p. 17)
PFA has been employed in the field of counseling and mental health for over 60 years, and
various elements of PFA have been around even longer (Eifling & Moy, 2015). However,
insufficient scholarly research and literature exists to show the true effectiveness of PFA
and to create specific guidelines and competencies of practice (Dieltjens et al., 2014).
McCabe et al. (2014) suggested that this insufficient research is largely because PFA
training varies so much that many advanced skills are not standardized. McCabe et al.

-- 442 of 545 --

414 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
established a consensus on what PFA training should include. The following six
competencies are a result of their work:
• Competency 1—Initial contact, rapport building, and stabilization. It requires
knowledge and skill in active listening, empathy, and establishing rapport.
• Competency 2—Brief assessment and triage. It requires knowledge and skill in
helping to screen, assess, and identify functional and dysfunctional behaviors.
• Competency 3—Intervention. It requires knowledge and skill in the techniques
used to decrease distress and increase coping.
• Competency 4—Triage. It requires knowledge and skill in how to triage people
who need immediate help versus delayed help.
• Competency 5—Referral, liaison, and advocacy. It requires knowledge and skill
in “demonstrating timeliness and persistence in referring persons requiring more
intensive care to appropriate postevent care providers and programs” (p. 623).
• Competency 6—Self-awareness and self-care. It requires knowledge and skill in
identifying and addressing signs of burnout, stress, and vicarious trauma.
PFA is an evolving intervention effective in the mental health treatment of disaster
survivors and even those who provide PFA. Asoka et al. (2021) conducted a longitudinal
study of 398 health care workers assessing their psychological distress before the COVID-
19 pandemic started in 2020 and again in November 2020. Asoka et al. divided the
nearly 400 participants into two groups: those with PFA experience and those without
PFA experience. The results of the study showed that those with PFA experience had
significantly lower psychological distress during the pandemic.
CRITICAL INCIDENT STRESS MANAGEMENT 	The fundamental components of critical incident
stress management (CISM) are set out in the foundational work of Everly and Mitchell (2003).
This model begins with choosing potentiating pairings—specific crisis interventions (e.g.,
venting, debriefing) to best meet the needs of each client. Once such interventions are
identified, the crisis counselor specifically chooses catalytic sequences—the order in which to
use the potentiating pairings. Lastly, the polythetic nature of the situation emerges—how
one implements the potentiating pairings and the catalytic sequences based on the individual
needs of each situation or disaster. Essentially, CISM is an eclectic approach to
crisis intervention that takes into consideration the client’s individual needs, the
interventions available, and the nature of the situation.
As noted in Chapter 11, the hallmark of CISM is the critical incident
stress debriefing (CISD) model, which is the primary crisis intervention tool
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 12.3
This video, produced by
Southern Law Enforcement
Foundation, shows an
actual debriefing with those
involved in a fatal shooting.
This segment focuses on the
Introduction and Facts phases
of a debriefing. What aspects
of each phase were effective
to the group?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=d7CDybw3rwQ
Watch from 00:00 to 09:45
used within CISM (Pack, 2013). The purpose of CISD is to reduce the initial
stressors and distressful emotions and behaviors along with attempting
to prevent further onset of more severe mental and emotional responses
(i.e., PTSD symptoms). CISD is not therapy; it is a strategy to process an
immediate event and to assess the impact of the situation on the individual.
According to Everly and Mitchell (2003), CISD is structured in its delivery
and has the following seven phases:
1. Introduction phase: The counselor sets the rules and tone of the discussion.
2. Facts phase: Clients discuss what happened during the crisis from each
person’s perspective.

-- 443 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	415
3. Thoughts phase: Clients discuss the main emotion and cognition expe-
rienced while going through the crisis.
4. Reactions phase: Clients discuss the worst part of the crisis.
5. Symptoms phase: Clients describe their symptoms of distress during
and after the crisis.
6. Teaching phase: The counselor teaches ways to reduce stressors and
the impact of stress.
7. Reentry phase: The counselor answers questions and summarizes
comments.
Furthermore, it helps to triage those who might need more or more
intensive help and to assist people to anticipate possible problematic events in
the future. The ultimate goal of CISM (and CISD) is to help clients normalize
their reactions to the crisis by allowing them to vent, obtain feedback in
a supportive setting, and process emotions. According to Castellano and
Plionis (2006), CISM was successfully implemented during the September
11 aftermath to augment established individual counseling through the
following six components:
• Component 1—Acute crisis counseling provided by peer counselors.
Crisis counselors and law enforcement officers with crisis intervention
skills provided crisis intervention to law enforcement officers who
initially responded to the September 11 terrorist attack in New
York. Component 1 lasted 3 months after the attack and consisted of
traditional crisis intervention techniques.
• Component 2—Executive leadership program. Because so many
senior/superior police officers saw their lower-ranked colleagues die
or become devastated by the 9/11 attack, specific crisis intervention
services and educational seminars were developed and delivered to
this population.
• Component 3—The multidisciplinary team. A multidisciplinary team
delivered trainings around the clock for everyone working at the
9/11 site. Crisis intervention seminars and counseling sessions were
called “trainings” at the time because they would be better received
and attended by those who may have stereotypes about mental health
services.
• Component 4—Acute traumatic stress group training sessions.
For the large number of those in need of crisis intervention, 2-day
psychoeducational group sessions helped to decrease isolation,
normalize emotions and reactions to the attack, decrease guilt, and
increase coping mechanisms.
• Component 5—Hotline. Telephone crisis hotlines were highly
emphasized and used to help those who responded to the 9/11 attack.
Hotlines are seen as a 24/7 resource that can provide support and
information in times when others may not be available. Hotlines are
necessary in many crisis intervention plans.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 12.6
This video, produced by South-
ern Law Enforcement Founda-
tion, shows the continuation of
an actual debriefing with those
involved in a fatal shooting.
This segment focuses on the
Reentry phase of a debriefing.
What aspects of this phase may
be effective to the group?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=TDReCDRWIg0
Watch from 00:00 to 01:55
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 12.4
This video, produced by Southern
Law Enforcement Foundation,
shows the continuation of an
actual debriefing with those
involved in a fatal shooting. This
segment focuses on the Thoughts
and Reactions phases of a debrief-
ing. What aspects of each phase
were effective to the group?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=qUd830tngv8
Watch from 00:00 to 06:00
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 12.5
This video, produced by South-
ern Law Enforcement Founda-
tion, shows the continuation of
an actual debriefing with those
involved in a fatal shooting.
This segment focuses on the
Symptoms and Teaching phases
of a debriefing. What aspects
of each phase were effective to
the group? Picture yourself as a
mental health counselor in this
group. What psychoeducational
elements would be helpful to
this population?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=hY_GMrW0TmQ
Watch from 00:00 to 08:55

-- 444 of 545 --

416 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Component 6—Reentry program. September 11 attack responders who directly
witnessed death, carnage, and destruction were deemed to be at high risk and
identified as individuals who would have difficulty going back to their jobs and
families. The reentry program focused on such high-risk responders to help them
get back to their “normal” life.
CRISIS COUNSELING PROGRAM 	According to Castellano and Plionis (2006), the crisis
counseling program (CCP) is frequently used for responses to natural disasters. The
CCP model consists of the following components:
• Assess strengths. The crisis counselor must identify not only what the problems
are (e.g., stranded people, postdisaster crime) but also what human and material
resources are available.
• Restore predisaster functioning. The key to restoring life to what it was before
the disaster (especially emotional status) is to attempt to reduce the chaos of the
disaster.
• Accept the face value. Crisis counselors must help clients reorganize life to accom-
modate for the impact of the disaster (e.g., “Your home was completely destroyed
by the hurricane; now how can you move on?”).
• Provide validation. The provision of unconditional positive regard, acceptance,
and validation is critical to the growth of disaster victims.
• Provide a psychoeducational focus. The provision of psychoeducation (on both
a group and individual level) regarding the normal (and abnormal) reactions
to disaster can play a central role in helping disaster victims monitor their own
recovery.
RIOTS
Learning Objective 12.4 Describe various types of riots, their impact on a
community, and effective interventions.
Riots have taken place on numerous occasions in the United States and across the world.
A riot is defined as a “disturbance of the peace by at least several persons, assembled and
acting with a common intent in executing a lawful or unlawful enterprise in a violent
and turbulent manner” (thefreedictionary.com, 2016).
In the United States, race riots occurred during the 1960s, the Kent State University
riots and shootings happened in 1970, riots took place in Los Angeles in 1992, and they
also occurred in Ferguson, Missouri, and Baltimore, Maryland, in 2015. Most recently,
mass crowds of people rioted the United States Capitol building in an attempt to overturn
the 2020 presential election. Also, civil rights riots continue to occur (e.g., in Minneapolis
after the George Floyd shooting and other police shootings).
Why do people riot? The answer is complex. To simplify matters, consider that
there are primarily two different forms of riots: sporting or celebratory riots and riots as
a reaction to a perceived wrongdoing.
Sporting or celebratory riots occasionally occur after a sports team wins a
significant game (e.g., the World Series, NBA Championship, World Cup). Sporting
or celebratory riots are sometimes difficult to comprehend because they happen after
something apparently good has occurred. But consider that you have seen people yell

-- 445 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	417
at referees, cheer loudly, and even scream in celebration at sporting events. Now add
alcohol consumption and a crowd celebration that gets out of control, and the result
is a groupthink occurrence in which all are cheering for their team, primal urges and
adrenaline flare, and a mob forms and acts aggressively.
Contrary to sporting or celebratory riots, riots that occur because of a perceived
wrongdoing are fundamentally different. Little is known in the mental health scholarly
literature about exactly why people riot because of a perceived wrongdoing. However,
one could speculate that people feel disrespected, have little power in society, and are
frequently seen as “less than” by society. Riots give them power and show the media
and society that they can make a statement that is impactful.
It is important to draw a clear distinction here between a peaceful protest and a riot.
During a riot, authorities attempt to provide security and safety to the public. Three levels
of police action could take place. The first and least responsive would be to provide a local
police presence to deal with crowd control, minor disorderly issues, and so on. Second,
additional local police and special police units (e.g., SWAT) can be used to handle larger-
scale crowd control, acts of vandalism, and acts of aggression to the community. Third,
the National Guard could provide the highest level of support during a riot.
National Guard personnel, aircraft, vehicles, and other equipment can be dispatched
in times of natural disasters (i.e., earthquakes, floods) and human-made emergencies
such as riots, civil unrest, and terrorist attacks. In such times, the state’s governor can
enact the National Guard and the “mission” of the National Guard is determined by the
governor and the adjutant general. Recently, the National Guard has been tasked with
providing homeland security measures during a riot by using aerial drone surveillance
(Lowenberg, 2016).
During a riot, there are many players: (1) the people who riot; (2) the police, fire
department, and other first responders who try to protect others from the riot; and
(3) the victims of the riot who either are hurt physically or financially (e.g., a business
owner whose business is vandalized). In a broader sense, riots also influence and are
influenced by the surrounding community, the media, and society at large.
Researchers concur that the closer one is to a riot (either physically or emotionally),
the more likely PTSD symptoms will occur (Stiles et al., 2015). Other symptoms that can
arise include a reduced sense of safety manifesting in anxiety and somatic reactions,
helplessness, hopelessness, a sense that life is overwhelming, and difficulties performing
daily tasks.
Certainly, each riot has different circumstances and players. However, Bowenkamp
(1995), writing about civil unrest in Los Angeles, California, in the 1990s, observed that
those who directly experienced a riot go through the following phases: (1) the victims
work together to recover; (2) the victims feel supported as governmental and private
agencies help with recovery; (3) the victims become angry, frustrated, and generally
confused by the systemic red tape of agencies and delays in recovery; and (4) the victims
eventually enter the official “recovery phase,” which is distinguished by a coordinated
effort by the community to rebuild.
Beyond treating and helping clients adjust to these phases, counselors need to pay
specific attention to how children perceive and are affected by riots. Stiles et al. (2015) studied
children after the Ferguson, Missouri, riots in 2015 and found that they best “recover”
from a riot if school personnel (e.g., teachers, school counselors), families, caregivers, and
community members use the riot as an age-appropriate learning opportunity to discuss

-- 446 of 545 --

418 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
related issues (e.g., feeling safe, appropriate ways to express feelings, community building,
and racism [in the specific case of the riots in Ferguson, Missouri]).
The key to working with children and adults during the aftermath of a riot is to
instill hope for the future and that the community will rebuild. As stated above, the final
phase of working with a postriot community is the recovery phase, which emphasizes
the rebuilding of the community. It is important to keep in mind that instilling hope for
the future and that a sense of community will return should not take place in the final
recovery phase only. From the first interaction, counselors must empathize with clients
and emphasize these core ideas to help facilitate the therapeutic relationship. While
doing so, counselors should highlight that the community will work together to rebuild
what was once known, a sense of safety, the vitality of the community, and the overall
sense of community. Complete Think About It 12.2.
Think about how you would respond during a riot.
Imagine that a riot broke out in your town because of
a person not being sentenced for murder when most
people in your town believed that the person was guilty.
The media has been present for the past 2 months,
covering the trial. The riot began yesterday, after the
verdict was read. Businesses have been looted, fires have
been started, and mobs of people are threatening to
march in the streets and become violent. What emotions
would you feel? What safety concerns would you have?
How would you protect yourself? Would you join the
rioting group? Which people in your life would you be
most concerned about? What do you think the media
should do? Who are the groups of victims needing
intervention? Could you work with a group in need of
intervention even if your views differed from theirs?
THINK ABOUT IT 12.2
HOSTAGE SITUATIONS
Learning Objective 12.5 Explain the stages of hostage situations and effective
points of intervention.
Hostage situations are rare in the United States; however, there are specific ramifications
of such situations that mental health practitioners need to consider, given that a
substantial portion of hostage takers have a mental or emotional disorder (Grubb,
2010). Literature on hostage negotiation is vast, and a thorough discussion of specific
negotiation strategies is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, a brief discussion of
hostage situations may allow crisis counselors and other mental health practitioners to
gain some insight into the experiences of hostages and hostage takers and better prepare
counselors to work with victims and perpetrators of these crisis circumstances.
According to Strentz (2018), there are essentially five stages of a hostage situation:
(1) alarm, (2) crisis, (3) uncertainty, (4) accommodation, and (5) resolution, as shown in
Table 12.2. The alarm stage occurs at the onset of the hostage situation and is typically the
most volatile and dangerous period. Hostage takers believe that terror must be instilled
in the hostages to keep them under control, and any hint of panic by hostages creates
extreme overreactions by hostage takers. During this stage, hostage takers are highly
emotional, aggressive, irrational, and abusive.
During the alarm stage (Strentz, 2018), hostages are confused by the sudden turn of
events and feel victimized. They suddenly feel like there is no escape from the situation
and become paralyzed not only due to threats of physical harm but also due to the severe
shock resulting from aggressive actions by the hostage takers. Like the experiences of

-- 447 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	419
disaster victims, hostages during this stage express denials such as “I can’t believe this
is happening.” As a result of the events that take place during the alarm stage, survivors
of hostage situations share similar characteristics with abused children, abused women,
and concentration camp survivors.
As the alarm stage ends, the crisis stage begins. During this time, hostage takers
begin to realize the magnitude of the situation and continue to be highly dangerous
and volatile but also realize that they must secure their surroundings from authorities
and attempts by hostages to escape. The crisis stage also begins the hostage takers’
interactions with the authorities, with the hostage takers frequently making grandiose
or ridiculous demands with the expectation that the authorities will meet such demands.
Hostage takers during this stage need attention, which they use to show that they are
in power. Typically, this showing of power begins with yelling at or verbal abuse of the
hostages but can quickly escalate to violence.
Stage 	Characteristics of Hostage Takers 	Characteristics of Hostages
Alarm 	• Volatile
• Dangerous
• Highly emotional
• Highly aggressive
• Highly irrational
• Abusive to others
• Signs of panic create overreactions
• Most traumatized
• Confused
• Victimized
• Shock
• Helpless/defenseless
• Denial
• Paralyzed
Crisis 	• Initial reason
• Volatility
• Danger
• Grandiose/ridiculous demands
• Rants
• Securing the area and hostages
• Fear of authorities/paranoia
• Need for attention
• Verbal abuse followed by violence
• Relationship with hostage taker is central to
outcome
• Denial
• Increased fear if hostage taker is unpredictable
• Fugue episodes
• Claustrophobia
• Reliance on hostage takers
• Hopelessness
Uncertainty 	• Ambiguity of outcome
• Confusion
• Fight or flight
• Ambiguity of outcome
• Confusion
• Fight or flight
Accommodation 	• Long-lasting time period
• Fatigue
• Increased control of hostages
• Time stands still
• Boredom
• Brief feelings of terror
• Fatigue
• Passivity
• Possible Stockholm syndrome
Resolution 	• Fatigue
• Realization of lost expectations
• Contemplation of outcome
• Suicide becomes possible outcome
• Fatigue
• Seeing closure
TABLE 12.2 Stages of Typical Hostage Situations

-- 448 of 545 --

420 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
During the crisis stage, hostages begin to develop a relationship with the hostage
takers. They rely on them for everything—from food and water to permission to use
the restroom. Hostages soon learn that the more cooperative they are, the less violent
the hostage takers will be toward them. If a hostage shows panic or contradicts a
hostage taker, then violence may occur. Hostages still experience hopelessness, denial,
and fear, although fear drastically increases if hostage takers are unpredictable or
appear disorganized. Occasionally, hostages will experience a significant loss of time
or go into a fugue state as a defense mechanism to cope with the trauma. They may
also experience a sense of claustrophobia and may feel the need to get out of their
situation even though they know there could be dangerous consequences if they do
take such action.
The third stage (uncertainty) has parallel characteristics among the hostage takers, the
hostages themselves, and even the hostage negotiators (Van den Heuvel & Alison, 2014).
During this stage, the crisis stage has either escalated or deescalated, but the situation
is not yet under control. Thoughts of hopelessness (as evident in the crisis stage) are
subsiding, but no one knows the outcome of the situation.
The fourth stage of a hostage situation is the accommodation stage, which is marked
by time standing still and fatigue for both the hostages and the hostage takers. Overall,
this stage is somewhat peaceful because dominance over the hostages is established
and acts of violence may not be deemed necessary by the hostage takers. Hostages
become passive and bored. They may even experience Stockholm syndrome, a situation
in which they develop positive feelings for the hostage takers and negative feelings for
the authorities, while hostage takers gain concern and positive feelings for the hostages.
Crisis counselors need to assess for injuries to any of the hostages during this time,
or any of the stages, by the hostage taker. In these cases, when a person may have
experienced Stockholm syndrome and another person is harmed, guilt or self-blame
may be experienced by the hostage. Everyone is emotionally and physically exhausted.
Typically, this is the longest of the five stages of a hostage situation.
The resolution stage is the last stage in a hostage situation. Hostage takers and
hostages alike are weary and see that a resolution (whether good or bad) is nearing.
Both realize that this situation will not last forever. Hostage takers begin to realize
that their demands, or their initial expectations, are not going to be met. The hostage
takers contemplate suicide, killing the hostages and themselves, or ending the situation
peacefully. No matter what the outcome, the hostage takers and the hostages typically
know that the situation is ending.
Once the hostage situation is over, significant deescalation, ventilation, and self-
preservation issues need to be addressed through crisis intervention strategies provided
to the hostages and possibly to the hostage takers. Long-term individual and group
counseling may need to be implemented to provide preventative measures for PTSD to
the hostages.
While hostage negotiation and crisis negotiation may seem complex and possibly
overwhelming, Johnson et al. (2018) identified the basic skills, behaviors, and qualities
needed in such negotiations. In a study of 188 local, national, and international hostage
negotiators, active listening, empathic statements, clear and open communication, and
remaining calm formed the basis of all negotiations. In contrast, arguing, being loud, being
confrontational, and interrupting were not productive or effective. Basically, leaning on
the foundational microskills, staying calm, and listening are at the core of crisis negation.

-- 449 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	421
CASE STUDY 12.3
A Commercial Hostage Situation
In a small convenience store located in an Appalachian town, two men wearing masks
attempt to rob the store. Both men have guns. Besides the two gunmen, the people in
the store are the owner, who is behind the checkout counter, and six customers, located
in different aisles in the store. The gunmen ask for money from the cash register, but the
owner denies their request. While the gunmen and the owner argue, one of the custom-
ers calls the police from a cell phone, and within 4 minutes, a police car pulls up in front
of the store. One of the gunmen locks the store’s front door, and the robbery has quickly
turned into a hostage situation. The hostage situation lasts for 7 hours. Given the infor-
mation presented earlier, imagine what goes on during those 7 hours.
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss how the hostage takers and the hostages think, feel, and act during the
different stages of the situation.
2. What would be some follow-up resources for the hostages?
3. What might be some multicultural considerations for the hostages?
4. What would be some key counseling skills to use with the hostages? See Chapter 4
for information on such skills.
CASE STUDY 12.4
A Family Hostage Situation
Martin is a 38-year-old construction worker who has been married four times and has
four children. He has one child (Pat, age 20 years) with his first wife, and three boys (Ben,
age 10 years; Todd, 6 years; and Sig, 4 years) with his current wife, Michelle. Within the
past 3 weeks, Martin broke his wrist while working, he lost his job because of his anger
outbursts and his pushing one of his coworkers after an argument, and he was notified
that he needs to pay $22,000 in back taxes to the Internal Revenue Service. Earlier today,
Michelle told him that she was leaving him and taking the children with her. During
this conversation, the police were called because neighbors were concerned about the
yelling they heard. When the police arrived, Martin did not answer the door and told
the police that he had a gun and “no one is coming out unless they are in a body bag.”
Martin kept Michelle and their three children at gunpoint for 3½ hours. During
this time, he yelled, ranted, cried uncontrollably, put his gun to Michelle’s head and
threatened to pull the trigger, and slapped Michelle and Ben in the face. After talking to
a police negotiator on and off for over 2 hours, Martin shot himself in the head in front
of Michelle and their children.
Case Studies 12.3 and 12.4 provide additional insights into the dynamics of hostage
situations and the resulting treatment needs of hostages. Then complete Activity 12.3 to
find out more about crisis procedures on your campus or nearby K–12 school.

-- 450 of 545 --

422 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Many colleges/universities and K–12 schools have lock-
down procedures in case there is an active shooter on
campus or a hostage situation. Locate the crisis, lock-
down, and active-shooter procedures on your campus
or nearby K–12 school. Reflect on what you need to do
in these situations. If you cannot find the information
you are looking for, what does that mean?
ACTIVITY 12.3
When the police and the hostage negotiator entered the house, they found Michelle
holding her husband’s hand while he lay dead on the floor. Two of her children were
sitting on the couch, still afraid to move, while Ben ran out the door into the hands of
the police. Michelle and her children spent the next 4 hours debriefing with the hostage
negotiator and other support staff. Later, Michelle saw a counselor twice a week for 8
months, then once a week for 4 months, and then once a month thereafter.
Discussion Questions
1. Overall, what do you think Michelle experienced during this situation? What about
her children?
2. What do you think Michelle and the children experienced during each stage of the
hostage situation as described above?
3. What emotions, behaviors, and thoughts may this family immediately have after
the hostage situation ended?
4. How should Martin’s son Pat (from his first marriage) be informed of this situation?
What should be said?
5. What would be the crisis counselor’s initial treatment goals with Michelle and her
children?
6. How might treatment differ for Michelle, Ben, and the other two children taken
hostage?
7. What do you think was the reason Michelle was able to decrease treatment over
time?
8. With a peer, role-play implementation of the task model of crisis assessment and
intervention presented in Table 1.1.
Resources for Additional Study and Training on Community and
Workplace Crises
This chapter discussed the importance of crisis intervention during the training of
counselors; how multidisciplinary crisis responses work; different aspects of natural
disasters, terrorism, riots, and hostage situations; and different models of crisis
intervention. Two critical concepts need to be considered when contextualizing all this
material. First, it is critical that counselors keep their clients safe. In all the devastating
crisis situations discussed in this chapter, counselors need to take measures to protect
their clients not only from immediate threats of danger or emotional strife but also
from potential physical, emotional, and cognitive difficulties. While the care of clients
is critical, counselors need to pay close attention to their own safety and the potential
for burnout and vicarious trauma. Think about what steps you can take on a continual
basis to take care of yourself!

-- 451 of 545 --

Chapter 12 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in the Community and Workplace 	423
American Red Cross: https://www.redcross.org
Disaster Assistance.gov—Access to Disaster Help and Resources: https://www.disasterassistance.
gov
Federal Emergency Management Agency: https://www.fema.gov
National Child Traumatic Stress Network: https://www.nctsn.org
TABLE 12.3 Resources on Coping and Intervening in Community and Workplace Crises
SUMMARY
This chapter began by discussing the necessity
to train counselors in emergency preparedness,
trauma counseling, and a multitude of crises
and that this training has become a mainstay in
counselor education standards. As a result, this
chapter focused on critical areas that counselors
who may work in a variety of crisis situations
should know about. MCRTs were described,
and the function and utility of these teams were
presented. Most importantly, the notion of the
interdisciplinary and collegial nature of these
teams was highlighted.
A significant portion of this chapter helped
to provide a knowledge base on different types
of situations in which emergency preparedness
would be required. For example, differing
types of natural disasters were presented (i.e.,
winter storms, earthquakes, floods, hurricanes,
tornados, and wildfires). It is important to note
that a major difference between natural disasters
and other, human-made, disasters is that with
natural disasters, clients could easily blame God
or a higher power rather than a specific person
or group. To help provide insight into how
blame plays a role in the aftermath of a natural
disaster, a timeline was provided that shows
the possible responses of survivors of a natural
disaster along with the interventions needed
Second, this chapter did not present much information on diagnoses and other
mental health concerns. Think about the unique symptoms of the different mental health
diagnoses that would contribute to the process and progress people make during a
disaster. How might someone with a mood disorder, schizophrenia, substance use issues,
or suicidality experience a crisis? How might the crisis intervention models presented
in this chapter and in Chapter 1 need to be altered? It is important to understand that
individuals who go through an extreme crisis do not always develop PTSD or another
mental or emotional disorder. It is important to remember this point because you do not
want to pathologize individuals who go through situational crises.
For licensed mental health professionals who hold a master’s degree or higher,
one of the most comprehensive trainings on disaster mental health outreach is provided
by the American Red Cross. Online and in-person trainings are provided to become a
Red Cross Disaster Mental Health volunteer on a frequent basis. For more information,
visit https://www.redcross.org/about-us/our-work/disaster-relief/disaster-mental-health.html.
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides
a wealth of knowledge, resources, and tips for mental health providers on natural
disasters, the response to natural disasters, provider newsletters, self-care strategies
for first responders, and so on (see https://www.samhsa.gov/dtac/disaster-behavioral-health-
resources). There are also free online trainings to help build awareness of the relationship
between mental health and disasters. These trainings are located at https://www.samhsa.
gov/dtac/education-training. Finally, Table 12.3 provides additional resources for further
exploration of how to cope with and intervene in community and workplace crises.

-- 452 of 545 --

424 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
to help such survivors, starting at the point
immediately after the disaster happens and
continuing to years after the disaster occurred.
Ending the discussion of natural disasters, the
typical cognitive, physical, emotional, and
behavioral reactions to disasters were presented.
The notion of terrorism was then discussed.
Terrorism and different types of terrorism were
defined and some reasons why an individual
might become a terrorist were given. Acts of
terrorism create unique challenges for counselors
because there are individuals (or groups of
individuals) to blame. Strategies to work with
communities to help regain a sense of safety
were presented.
Various models of crisis intervention were
discussed in this chapter, including PFA, CISM,
and CCP. All these interventions have merit,
and the common thread that runs through these
models is the idea that the key to treating those
who have experienced a crisis (all forms) is early
intervention. The sooner crisis counselors respond,
reduce panic or chaos, create a sense of hope and
support, and establish connections between those
in need and appropriate resources, the better.
Riots and types of riots were defined and
key reasons why riots occur were discussed. An
emphasis was placed on how counselors need
to establish a sense of hope for the future and
that the community that experienced the riot will
rebuild.
The final topic presented in this chapter
was hostage situations. This chapter highlighted
the stages of a typical hostage situation along
with some common characteristics of hostages
and hostage takers. As with disasters, there
are many systematic factors and evolutionary
components of a hostage situation. Although
hostage situations are relatively rare, those
providing mental health services should be
aware of the unique characteristics of those who
have experienced a hostage situation because it
could influence the approach to treatment.
All 	crises 	evolve 	through 	different
stages—and then end. Those who experience
crisis, disaster, or trauma also evolve in that
they, hopefully, resolve or at least experience
a lessened impact of the situation. Crises affect
lives in systemic ways; every aspect of a person’s
life can be affected by a crisis.

-- 453 of 545 --

425
PREVIEW
Emergency preparedness and effective responses by counselors and other personnel in
schools and universities are essential. This chapter discusses mitigation and prevention,
crisis preparedness and advance planning, response, recovery, and debriefing procedures.
Although academic settings have unique cultures and administrative structures, the
information in this chapter applies to both K–12 schools and university settings. Finally,
several case studies are provided to help prepare counselors-in-training for potential
crisis situations encountered in academic environments. As in Chapter 12, the content
of this chapter infuses information found in previous chapters to allow readers to
synthesize what they have previously read.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
13.1 Describe characteristics of school and university crises.
13.2 Describe strategies for the mitigation and prevention of school and university
crises.
13.3 Describe strategies for planning and preparing for school and university crises.
13.4 Describe strategies for responding to school and university crises.
13.5 Describe strategies for recovery after a school or university crisis.
13.6 Describe appropriate responses to crises in university settings, including shelter-
in-place procedures and threat assessment teams.
CHARACTERISTICS OF SCHOOL AND UNIVERSITY CRISES
Learning Objective 13.1 Describe characteristics of school and university crises.
Kerr and King (2018) define a school crisis as a “temporary event or condition that affects
a school, causing individuals to experience fear, helplessness, shock, and/or horror [and]
requires extraordinary actions to restore a sense of psychological and physical security”
(p. 9). This definition also applies to the university campus. Crises do not need to occur
on school or university property to have a devastating effect on the academic community.
13 Emergency Preparedness
and Response in Schools
and Universities
Bradley T. Erford and Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry
C H A P T E R

-- 454 of 545 --

426 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
A school or university crisis brings chaos that affects perceptions of safety and
stability for an entire academic community. It exposes students and staff to loss and
undermines personal security and safety routines. School is a place where students,
families, and school staff expect stability and safety. When a crisis occurs, it is understood
that personnel will react in a professional manner to make certain that information,
support, and counseling services are provided. Everyone in the school community needs
to feel informed, supported, and safe. Personnel play a vital role in managing crises and
providing coping strategies to restore a stable and safe environment. The approach must
be organized and sensitive to the needs of diverse students, teachers, parents/guardians,
staff, administrators, and other community members.
Crises affecting schools and universities can happen on a continuum with a wide
range—from the individual level to national and international levels. On the individual
level, for example, one in seven youths in the United States seriously consider suicide
each year. Of all deaths occurring in the 15- to 24-year-old age bracket, about 14% were
suicides (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b). Furthermore, one youth
dies of suicide every 2 hours, and six youths survive a suicide attempt every 2 hours.
These statistics highlight the ever-increasing need for suicide risk assessment and ongoing
threat assessment in K–12 and university settings. (See Chapter 6 for a comprehensive
discussion of suicide risk and threat assessment.) Counselors must therefore address the
unique considerations of suicide and postvention services in the school environment.
To a much greater extent than cities, states, and countries, schools are usually
embedded in a tight-knit community with shared values and pride in the mission
of the school, whether at the elementary, middle, or high school level. Likewise, a
crisis at one level often involves students, parents/guardians, and staff at multiple
levels because families usually have children attending those multiple levels. Thus, a
tragedy at a middle school will often influence students, staff, and families in the feeder
elementary schools and the receiving high school(s) because of these community roots
and associations. Thus, counselors in affiliated schools must immediately consider the
broader implications of a school crisis.
Whether a crisis occurs at the national level (e.g., terrorist attack, natural disaster)
or the local level (e.g., the death of a student or teacher), it will certainly have an impact
on the school or university community. The response must be planned, organized,
and coordinated effectively in order to provide the necessary support and services.
A secondary goal is to prevent additional crises stemming from the initial crisis. For
example, if there has been a suicide, personnel need to address the immediate impact of
the suicide, but they must also attempt to reduce the possibility of any related suicide
attempts.
A couple of precautions are important to consider at this point. First, professional
counselors should always act with safety protocols in mind and be sensitive to the
possibility of secondary trauma. In addition, professional counselors should not
interfere at places of work unless they are invited to do so. For example, a university
or school shooting is a tragic event, but administrative protocols must be followed and
coordinated. Help from counselors, faculty, and students may very well be welcomed
but should be coordinated by the on-site crisis team in conjunction with emergency
first responders.
The Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools in the U.S. Department of Education
(2017) identified four phases of a comprehensive school crisis plan: (1) mitigation and

-- 455 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	427
prevention, which addresses what schools can do to reduce or eliminate risk to life
and property; (2) preparedness, which refers to the process of planning for a crisis; (3)
response, which refers to the actions taken during a crisis; and (4) recovery, which refers
to restoring the school environment after a crisis and includes debriefing strategies.
This chapter addresses each of these phases in turn. This process is applicable to public
and private K–12 schools, community colleges, and public and private colleges and
universities.
MITIGATION AND PREVENTION
Learning Objective 13.2 Describe strategies for the mitigation and prevention of
school and university crises.
Mitigation is any sustained action taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to life and
property from a hazard event. Mitigation encourages long-term reduction of hazard
vulnerability (Federal Emergency Management Agency [FEMA], 2013). Mitigation and
prevention involve assessing the dangers in a school and community and identifying
strategies to prevent and reduce injury and property damage.
Both the school and community must work together to prevent crises. FEMA has
done extensive work to help communities with their mitigation planning. Mitigation
procedures strive to decrease the need for subsequent responses rather than simply
increasing response capability. FEMA has outlined five action steps for mitigation and
prevention in schools and universities:
1. Know the school building. Regular safety audits of the physical plant must
be carried out along with an assessment of any potential hazards on campus.
Parking lots, playgrounds, driveways, outside structures, and fencing should be
examined. The information collected is then used for mitigation and prevention
planning.
2. Know the community. It is necessary to work with local emergency management
officials to assess hazards in the community. The probability of natural disasters
(e.g., hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, floods) and industrial and chemical
accidents (e.g., fuel spills, water contamination) must be considered. Potential
hazards related to terrorism should also be carefully assessed (e.g., geographic
location, government buildings).
3. Bring together regional, local, and school leaders. Schools and universities must
work collaboratively with state and local governments to ensure support of their
mitigation efforts.
4. Make regular school and university safety and security efforts part of the
mitigation/prevention practices. Schools and universities must conduct needs
assessments regularly to identify common types of incidents and continually refine
the safety plan.
5. Establish clear lines of communication. Communication among stakeholders is
critical as agencies and schools work together. It is necessary for families and the
community to understand that schools, universities, and local governments are
working together to ensure the safety of the academic community and the larger
community. Schools and universities must keep students and families informed
about the safety measures being developed.

-- 456 of 545 --

428 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Preventive efforts begin with an awareness of all activities occurring in the school
or university environment, as well as the emotional climate. Personnel must be aware
of what is occurring in the hallways, restrooms, cafeteria, and so on in order to assess
any risks that may be present (e.g., bullying, gang activity, talk of intended violence or
harm). Steps should be taken to secure the building from outside intruders—for example,
by employing public safety or school resource officers, implementing a buzz-in/sign-in
procedure for visitors, ensuring supervision takes place in all parts of the building
(including the playground and playing fields), installing surveillance cameras, keeping
entrances to the building locked, and in some instances installing metal detectors. Schools
and universities should work in conjunction with local law enforcement agencies to
consult on additional ways to maintain safety and security.
All prevention efforts must also include education for everyone in the academic
community. Training of faculty and staff to develop appropriate crisis prevention
knowledge, attitudes, and skills is an effective component of any crisis intervention
program. Prevention programs on the topics of bullying, substance use, suicide, drinking
and driving, depression, intimate partner violence, stress management, and conflict
resolution should be carried out for students at a developmentally appropriate level.
School counselors are instrumental in delivering classroom guidance presentations
and small-group counseling sessions on these topics. Character education programs
also are in place in most schools and help to foster a positive school climate. Active-
shooter response and other emergency drills have become a necessity in both schools
and universities, and administrators should ensure students are prepared to follow
institutional guidelines for emergency evacuation or shelter-in-place.
Attention to building a positive school climate is critical in prevention efforts. The
University of South Florida (USF; 2012) proposed that school climate refers to the physical,
aesthetic, and psychological qualities within a school or university community. Personnel
can help foster a positive school climate by facilitating connectedness, participation,
academic success, and safety as well as through training, policies, and positive concern
for all participants in the educational process. Schools and universities should provide
extracurricular activities (e.g., clubs, activities, organizations), involve students in
school decisions, promote safety and cleanliness of the facilities, promote high academic
standards, reduce bullying, and equivalently enforce disciplinary standards. In other
words, a positive climate aimed at preventing crises is respectful, caring, and supportive
of all stakeholders in the academic community.
Training programs for all personnel (including coaches, bus drivers, cafeteria
workers, and janitors) must be implemented to make all employees aware of warning
signs and symptoms (risk factors) and appropriate methods for intervention. Prevention-
based curricula generally promote awareness but should also train gatekeepers (all
faculty and staff) on the signs of suicide or threat, as well as how to screen those students
who present as high risk. While much has been written about risk factors contributing
to suicide and other threats, from a strengths-based perspective it is important to
consider and promote protective factors, including family cohesion, support from adults,
connectedness to the school, stable living environment, responsibilities for others (e.g.,
siblings, pets), participation in sports and other extracurricular activities, and positive
peer and adult relationships (USF, 2012).

-- 457 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	429
Mitigation and prevention should also involve vulnerability assessment and
crime prevention through environmental design. Vulnerability assessment is a process of
defining, identifying, and prioritizing vulnerabilities in safety systems. Systematically
assessing system vulnerabilities identifies potential problems and threats and provides
organizations with the knowledge to understand and react to potential threats. For
example, a back door at a high school that is perpetually left ajar to allow individuals
to pass without a key could just as easily become an entry point for a school shooter.
Local police personnel can help schools and universities to perform vulnerability
assessments.
Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) is based on a theory of crime
prevention that focuses on the design and use of built space to both reduce crime and
the fear of crime. CPTED is proactive and preventive rather than reactive and designs
space and environments for use by legitimate users, thereby reducing the opportunity
for crime to occur or for people to fear that a crime will occur. Five principles comprise
CPTED: surveillance (i.e., observation of the surrounding environment, illumination),
physical security (i.e., design features that withstand intrusion), control of movement
(i.e., restricting access to prevent entry and egress of intruders), defensible space
(i.e., space should be clearly designated as private, restricted, or open access), and
maintenance/management (i.e., areas must be well maintained and orderly). CPTED
is a crime prevention strategy that uses system design and maintenance to create safer
communities. Again, local police personnel can become partners in the design and
maintenance of safe spaces in schools and universities.
CRISIS PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS
Learning Objective 13.3 Describe strategies for planning and preparing
for school and university crises.
Crisis planning and preparedness have a positive impact on crisis response.
When planning for a crisis, it is important to consider both policies and
procedures. Kerr and King (2018) define a policy as a “brief written expression
of guiding ideas, derived from regulations, mandates, or an organization’s
philosophy” (p. 17). A crisis policy provides guidance to those responding
to the crisis and authorizes a course of action. In contrast, procedures provide
detailed implementation protocols or step-by-step crisis plans.
Every school or university should have a crisis plan in place that is
shared with all faculty, administrators, and staff prior to any crisis event,
implemented quickly in a crisis, reviewed annually and after a crisis event,
and updated as needed. National data from the School Survey on Crime and
Safety (U.S. Department of Education, 2020a) indicates that nearly all schools
have written crisis plans. Many times, schools and universities are faced with
responding to crises as they are unfolding (e.g., an intruder in the school
building, a terrorist attack, a natural disaster). During the planning phase, it
is important to predict and describe the types of crises the plan will address
in the school or university based on needs and vulnerabilities. Specific crisis
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 13.1
This short, animated video
can be used as an example of
a pre-crisis planning protocol
explaining to parents and
caregivers the procedures
to follow when there is an
emergency in their child’s
school. It shows the importance
of having a plan and protocol
before an emergency situation
occurs. If you work in a
school or are an intern in a
school counseling setting, do
you know the protocol for
the school? Are there other
elements that are essential and
unique to include from your
school district?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=L-SngkjEyzU
Watch from 00:00 to 04:29

-- 458 of 545 --

430 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
plans should be developed for a variety of crisis situations, as each crisis may require
different responses. Plans should be developed for the following, at a minimum:
• Natural disasters (weather)
• Intruder in the building
• Emergency in neighborhood
• Facilities issues (electrical outage, heating, plumbing)
• Individual accidents and illnesses
• Hostage situations
• Death of a student, faculty member, or other personnel
• Terrorist attack
• Suicide
• Bomb threat
• Events outside the school that affect the school community (students/staff witness-
ing an accident, crime, etc.)
The PREPaRE model (Brock et al., 2016) is among the most comprehensive models
of crisis planning, preparedness, and response developed specifically for schools. The
PREPaRE model suggests that crisis teams respond in five crisis domains: (1) prevention,
(2) protection, (3) mitigation, (4) response, and (5) recovery. PREPaRE stands for:
(P) Prevent and prepare, (R) Reaffirm safety and security, (E) Evaluate risk of trauma,
(P) Provide interventions, (a)—and (R) Respond to mental health needs and (E) Examine
effectiveness. These elements form the core of any school crisis plan.
Crises can occur on organizational, community, and individual levels. How a
school crisis team responds to a student suicide differs from the death of a teacher or
destruction from a tornado. With this in mind, let us consider a number of issues critical
to preparedness: establishing a crisis team; taking steps to prepare for a crisis; developing
a written crisis plan; and establishing lockdown, evacuation, and other communication
protocols.
Establishing a Crisis Team
The first step in crisis planning is to establish a crisis team. This team should include a
team leader (usually the principal in K–12 schools or a vice president in universities),
professional counselors, faculty, and other mental health support personnel (e.g.,
school social worker, school psychologist, security officer, nurse, custodian or building
manager, staff members, and communications coordinator). The team should also
include individuals who have specialized training in crisis intervention and grief/
loss counseling as well as professional counselors, social workers, psychologists, and
psychiatrists from the community.
Kerr and King (2018) suggested that responsibilities be shared among the following
team members whether in schools or universities:
1. Crisis team leader: usually the principal or another administrator
2. Crisis team leader designee: a person who takes over if the team leader is absent
3. Off-site manager: a senior staff member without direct student responsibilities who
can prepare in-shelter facilities in the event of an evacuation
4. Security coordinator: a school resource officer, security guard, or other staff mem-
ber who can work with others to secure the school until law enforcement arrives

-- 459 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	431
5. Medical responder: usually the school nurse or a staff member with medical training
6. Communications coordinator: someone who manages the communications until
the designated spokesperson takes over; this person may need to work with addi-
tional individuals who can translate information to be relayed into all languages
represented in the school community
7. Mental health specialist: a school counselor, psychologist, or social worker who is
responsible for providing counseling support and services
8. Facilities manager: a custodian or building manager who can address utility needs,
direct traffic, and provide floor plans to public safety responders
9. Other staff members, including teachers (pp. 36–37)
Crisis response plans should exist both on a district level and on an individual
school or university level. Professional counselors may be members of the district
critical response teams or solely members of the school-level university response team.
In either case, the professional counselor takes a leadership role in the prevention,
intervention, and postincident support of critical responses (American School
Counselor Association [ASCA], 2020). If there is no established crisis team, professional
counselors should facilitate convening and training one using available community
resources.
The crisis team should receive extensive training on an ongoing basis. The crisis
team should meet at the beginning of each academic year to review procedures and
receive training. In addition, it should meet several times during the academic year
to receive additional training and discuss case scenarios and appropriate responses.
Contact information should be updated at these training sessions so that team
members can be reached quickly and easily in the event of a crisis. These training
sessions provide an opportunity for team members to become acquainted and share
strategies to be implemented if a crisis occurs. These sessions are also a time to
assign specific responsibilities to each team member and to reassign responsibilities,
if necessary. For success, it is critical that the crisis team have the full support of the
administration.
Taking Steps to Prepare for a Crisis
The Center for Mental Health in Schools at UCLA (2018) recommends the
following steps that could be taken in preparation for a crisis:
• Post on the wall of each classroom an outline of emergency procedures
and crisis team information.
• At the beginning of each academic year, distribute updated information
to all personnel explaining the crisis plan and responsibilities of the
crisis team.
• Provide in-service training for all staff at the beginning and midpoint
of the school year.
• Perform disaster/crisis drills (e.g., lockdown, shelter-in-place,
evacuation, hurricane, tornado, intruder on campus).
When preparing for drills, it is important to contact representatives
from local school systems or universities, law enforcement, and emergency
response agencies. Inquire about kinds of crisis situations that have happened
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 13.2
Keeping schools safe takes
the planning of the entire
community. This video
discusses who should be
involved in establishing a
general framework for a
comprehensive response to
various school emergencies.
Why is it important to
include so many parts of the
community?
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=uBumxUyc1pE
Watch from 00:00 to 03:58

-- 460 of 545 --

432 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
or are likely to happen in your area so that you may consider them as you are developing
your drill. It would be extremely important for the crisis team to present in-service
training to all personnel, including bus drivers, administrative assistants, custodians,
food services staff, and anyone employed by the school or university. Professionals from
the local community who have expertise in crisis counseling should also be invited to
participate in the training.
TABLETOP EXERCISE 	While full-scale disaster drills may be difficult to carry out, a
practical method and alternative to a full-scale drill is the tabletop exercise, which is
designed so that crisis teams, first responders, and other community partners come to
the table to evaluate whether written plans would work in an actual emergency. In this
exercise, a hypothetical scenario is discussed to assess how school and community
partners would respond to the situation. Based on the results of the tabletop exercise,
revisions to the crisis plan may be made (Roud et al., 2021).
CONTINGENCY PLANNING 	Contingency planning helps anticipate and prepare for
potential future emergencies that are not necessarily expected to occur but could, thus
allowing that a plan is already in place to deal with the crisis circumstance. It is
important to consider a range of scenarios and prepare for their realization. Any
oversight in contingency planning may leave an organization poorly prepared should
the crisis occur.
CREATING TRAUMA-SENSITIVE SCHOOLS 	Part of planning should be connected to
creating trauma-sensitive schools. The Trauma and Learning Policy Initiative (2016)
provides a systemic model for change, the Trauma Lens and the Flexible Framework, to
make academic environments more sensitive to individuals and families coping with
trauma. A focus of the framework is to identify local priorities and develop sensitive
solutions embedded in the educational context. This initiative, which is a collaboration
of Massachusetts Advocates for Children and Harvard Law School, also works for
legislative changes that integrate often discordant child advocacy programs and lead to
proactive changes. The following publications are free for download at the initiative’s
website: Helping Traumatized Children Learn, Volumes 1 and 2 (see traumasensitiveschools.
org/tlpi-publications/).
Developing a Written Crisis Plan
Crisis plans need to be put in place before a crisis occurs. James and Gilliland (2017)
recommended the following minimum requirements for a crisis plan:
• Physical requirements: Identify locations for temporary counseling offices. An
operations/communications center should be identified where crisis intervention
procedures are monitored, needs are assessed, and information for the media is
disseminated. Other suggestions include a break room, a first-aid room, and an
information center designed to handle media personnel and to facilitate parent
communication.
• Logistics: Address specific areas that need consideration as an intervention plan
is implemented. For example, attention needs to be given to the manner in which

-- 461 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	433
on-site and off-site communication will take place. Other logistics that need atten-
tion include providing (1) procedural checklists to ensure that the intervention plan
is being followed, (2) building plans for emergency personnel, and (3) providing
food and drink for crisis personnel.
• Crisis response: Prepare a sequential plan for crisis response that includes gather-
ing and verifying the facts, assessing the impact of the crisis to determine what
assistance is needed, providing triage assessment to determine who is most in need
of immediate attention, providing psychological first aid as a first-order response,
having a model in place, providing crisis intervention, and following through by
briefing, debriefing, and demobilizing.
Although most school districts will have a general crisis response plan, as
mentioned earlier, each school would need to adapt the plan to its needs. Often, schools
and universities are called on to respond to crises as they are unfolding (e.g., intruder
on campus, violent event in the building, natural disaster, terrorist attack). Each school
or university should have a plan for responding to such situations, and each faculty
member should know how to implement the plan.
The crisis response plan should be shared with everyone in the academic community
so that they are aware of response procedures. This information must be translated
into all languages represented in the academic community. Parents/guardians must be
informed of the plan prior to any crisis. A letter or pamphlet (written in all languages
spoken by families) should be developed and sent to parents/guardians explaining
this plan so everyone will understand what will occur during a crisis situation (e.g.,
lockdown, shelter-in-place, evacuation). While the letter or pamphlet should not describe
specific actions or locations in detail in case a parent/guardian might be the intruder, it
should provide a general overview so that parents/guardians understand that the school
or university has planned for crises and to reassure them that a plan exists to keep all
students safe.
If there is no written crisis plan, counselors should facilitate the development of
a written plan. Ordinarily, there are two things that can put a professional counselor
and school or university at risk for legal action: (1) not having a written plan for dealing
with crises and (2) not following an existing written plan. It is essential for professional
counselors to be familiar with their district, school, or university crisis response plans.
If no such plan is in place, counselors should work with administrators and other
personnel to create and implement a plan to respond to crises. They should also work
collaboratively with administration to develop a policy and procedure manual; many
school districts, private schools, and universities have written plans and are very
willing to share them. Documenting what has been done to develop a written plan and
train a crisis team is the best way to prepare professionals for community crisis events
and protect professionals and systems from adverse legal ramifications. Professional
counselors can be instrumental in leading workshops in the academic community to
communicate the plan to others. One helpful resource that provides information and
guidance for crisis planning is School Crisis Guide: Help and Healing in a Time of Crisis,
produced by the National Education Association (2018).
See Figure 13.1 for a sample crisis plan from the Los Angeles Unified School
District. Then, complete Think About It 13.1 to consider steps in an optimal crisis plan.

-- 462 of 545 --

434 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
FIGURE 13.1 	A Sample Crisis Plan Developed by the Los Angeles Unified School District.
I. ASSESSMENT
___A. Identify the problem and determine degree of impact on school.
___B. Take steps to ensure the safety and security of the site as needed.
___C. Make incident report to district administrator.
___D. Determine if additional support is needed.
___1. Call school police and/or city police.
___2. Call Cluster Crisis Team.
___3. Call other district crisis personnel.
___E. Alter daily/weekly schedule as needed.
II. INTERVENTION: COMMUNICATION
___A. Set up a Command Center.
___B. Establish sign-in procedures at ALL campus entry sites.*
___C. Administrator/designee/crisis manager should:
___1. Review facts/determine what information should be shared.
___2. Consider police investigation parameters.
___3. Notify family with sensitivity and dispatch. (Consider a personal family contact.)
___D. Develop and disseminate a bilingual fact sheet (written bulletin).
___1. Faculty
___2. Students
___3. Parents/community
___E. Begin media interactions.
___1. Identify a media spokesperson. (Office of Communications may be utilized.)
___2. Designate a location for media representatives.*
___F. Contact neighboring schools.
___G. Contact schools of affected students’ siblings.
___H. Organize other communication activities.
___1. Classroom presentations/discussions
___2. Parent/community meetings
___3. School staff meeting
___I. Provide for rumor control.
___1. Keep a TV or radio tuned to a news station.
___2. Verify ALL facts heard.
___3. Update fact sheet as needed.
___4. Utilize student leaders
(a) as sources knowledgeable of rumors among students
(b) as peer leaders to convey factual information
(c) as runners (written bulletins should be sealed when necessary)
III. INTERVENTION: FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY RELEASE PLAN
___A. Initiate First Aid Team procedures.
___B. Designate Emergency Health Office location.*
___C. Initiate Emergency Release Plan procedures.
___D. Designate student check-out location*
IV. INTERVENTION: PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID/COUNSELING
___A. Logistics: Designate rooms/locations/areas**
___1. Individual counseling—location: ___________________________**
___2. Group counseling—location: ___________________________**

-- 463 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	435
Establishing Lockdown Protocols
Lockdowns are procedures for protecting students and employees from harm when
threats occur, such as an active shooter or unauthorized intruders. These threats could
occur at a campus, workplace, public space, or nearby. Depending on the severity and
distance of a nearby threat, a soft lockdown or a hard lockdown may be triggered.
Think about how a crisis team could develop and implement an optimal crisis plan. What steps
would they take?
THINK ABOUT IT 13.1
___3. Parents—location: ___________________________**
___4. Staff (certificated and classified)—location: ___________________________**
___5. Sign-in for support services—location: ___________________________
___B. Initiate the referral process, including procedures for self-referral.
___1. Identify a crisis team member to staff all locations.**
___2. Provide bilingual services as needed.
___3. Distribute appropriate forms for student counseling referrals to staff.
___4. Disseminate student referral information to teachers and other staff.
___C. Identify and contact high-risk students.
___D. Identify and contact other affected students, staff, and personnel.
___E. Initiate appropriate interventions:
___1. Individual counseling
___2. Group counseling
___3. Parent/community meetings
___4. Staff meetings (ALL staff)
___5. Classroom activities, presentations
___6. Referrals to community agencies
V. INTERVENTION: DISSEMINATE APPROPRIATE HANDOUTS TO STAFF/PARENTS
VI. INTERVENTION: DEBRIEFING
___A. Offer daily and mandatory debriefing.
___B. Organize crisis intervention activities.
___1. Review the actions of the day.
___2. Identify weaknesses and strengths of crisis interventions.
___3. Review status of referred students.
___4. Prioritize needs/personnel needed the next day.
___5. Plan follow-up actions.
___C. Allow time for emotional debriefing.
* Logistics/room designations/space allocations
** Support personnel needed for these locations
Source: Center for Mental Health in Schools at UCLA (2018).
FIGURE 13.1 (continued)

-- 464 of 545 --

436 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
A soft lockdown is ordinarily ordered when a threat occurs nearby or outside of the
school, such as when law enforcement is responding to a nearby emergency, a particular
student needs to be located, or there is a disturbance in the community near the building.
Thus, the threat is not an impending risk but additional caution is warranted. During
soft lockdowns, people are encouraged to stay inside of rooms and out of hallways
and classes and activities may continue. While movement may be allowed within the
building, no one should leave the building.
A hard lockdown is ordered when threat of a more direct danger occurs. As such,
people should remain inside locked rooms, avoid windows and doors, and wait for
an all-clear signal to indicate that the danger has passed. A hard lockdown may occur
during an active-shooter situation. While procedures may vary, the following are some
best-practice suggestions:
• Immediately close and lock all doors and windows or block doors that cannot be
locked. Heavy items should be used to block doors (e.g., file cabinets, bookcases).
Keep doors and windows closed until an all-clear signal has been issued.
• Close all blinds, turn off all lights, and cover all glass in the door to keep people
from looking into the room.
• Account for all people in the room. Missing or extra students or employees should
be reported to administration. This includes extra people in the hallways seeking
a safe space. Assist people with disabilities.
• Stay near the floor and away from all doors and windows.
• Keep quiet; silence all phones and other devices.
• A prearranged all-clear signal should be received or an administrator or law
enforcement official should appear to end the lockdown. Confirm the identity of
anyone who appears to end the lockdown.
Electronic alerts are an important part of communication before, during, and after a
potential lockdown situation. These alerts may take the form of campus-wide e-mails or
text messages, phone message alerts, TV or radio services, campus hotlines, emergency
tones or interruption, and so on. These communication services must be set up ahead of
time for maximum effectiveness.
Establishing Evacuation Protocols
Schools, university buildings, and workplaces may need to be evacuated for a variety of
situations such as fire, bomb threats, explosions, or chemical spills. The near universal
signal for such emergencies in any facility is the continuous flashing of emergency
lighting and sounding of emergency alarms. When the alarm begins, everyone should
evacuate the building as quickly, quietly, and safely as possible. While procedures may
vary, the following are some best-practice suggestions for evacuations:
• Immediately stop all nonessential activities. Take a roll-call device or list (e.g.,
grade book, electronic list) if you are responsible for a class or group.
• Address the special needs of any person so all can safely evacuate the building.
Evacuation plans for persons with disabilities must be part of institutional planning.
• Follow EXIT signs. Use stairs, not elevators. Stay to the right side of the stairwell
to allow emergency personnel access on the left side.
• Avoid any hazardous routes, such as blocked and smoke- or flame-filled hallways.

-- 465 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	437
• Move at least 150 feet away from the building to a prearranged assembly area.
Ensure that all people you are responsible for are present and accounted for.
• Do not return into a building until the all-clear signal has sounded.
The evacuation plan should include backup buildings to serve as emergency
shelters (e.g., religious institutions, community centers, businesses, or other schools).
Agreements for using these spaces should be confirmed prior to the beginning of each
school year. Evacuation plans should also include contingencies for weather conditions
as well as transportation methods for students.
REVERSE EVACUATION PROTOCOLS 	In some circumstances it may be necessary to con-
duct a reverse evacuation. A reverse evacuation is the rapid and safe movement of people
inside a building to prevent the dangers that might exist outside the building. For
example, a perpetrator might pull a fire alarm or call in a bomb threat to induce an
evacuation, then attempt to shoot the evacuees. Also, groups of people may be at an
outside event (e.g., a sporting event) and need to take refuge in a building. Often a
reverse evacuation is coupled with a soft or hard lockdown, depending on the degree of
danger. While procedures may vary, the following are some best-practice suggestions
for reverse evacuations:
• Administration should signal the alarm for a reverse evacuation and establish a
messaging system for those people who are too far from the building to accurately
hear the alarm.
• Move all people inside as quickly and safely as possible. Help individuals with
disabilities as needed.
• Ensure that all people you are responsible for are present and accounted for and
notify administration of missing or additional people under your responsibility.
• Update all those affected by the reverse evacuation. Wait for further instructions.
• Wait for an all-clear announcement to resume normal activity.
Establishing Communication and Other Protocols
In the event of a crisis, communication is critical. Emergency responders need to know
exact locations of everything in a school. Site maps should include information about
classrooms, hallways, and stairwells; location of utility shutoffs; and potential staging
sites. Emergency responders should have copies of this information in advance. In
addition to maps, it is essential to designate locations for emergency responders to
organize, for medical personnel to treat the injured, for the public information officer to
brief the media, and for families to be reunited with students.
A key consideration in any crisis intervention plan is the method for
communicating with students, staff, families, and the media. FEMA (2021) recommends
that one of the first steps in planning for communication is to develop a mechanism
to notify students and staff that an incident is occurring and to instruct them on what
to do. This communication should cover the methods available to reunite students
with their families as quickly as possible and to provide factual information for
the academic community. The crisis plan should indicate what information will be
shared and who is responsible for conveying the information (U.S. Department of
Education, 2017).

-- 466 of 545 --

438 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Because crisis team members and staff will need to have several means of
communication (e.g., walkie-talkies, cell phones, intercom), it is important to obtain
necessary equipment and supplies ahead of time. Staff must also be given the necessary
equipment to respond during a crisis, such as an emergency response guide, phones,
radios, contact information for families, student rosters, first-aid supplies, food, and
water. Universities should have updated contact information for students, in particular
commuter students, in case of emergencies.
When sharing information, it is necessary to consider and provide for language
and cultural differences. Information should be shared in all languages represented at
the school. In addition, there should be individuals available who speak these languages
to respond to questions. Information may be shared by activating emergency response
messages to phones via text, voice message, e-mail, website, telephone tree, or letter. In
addition, a crisis plan should address how to do the following:
• Return the academic environment to its normal routines.
• Provide physical and emotional support to all those affected by the crisis.
• Identify and refer those at risk for unhealthy behaviors and reactions.
• Provide care for the crisis team. One strategy to help prevent burnout would be to
assign crisis team members on a rotating basis (Knox & Roberts, 2005).
• Evaluate responses to refine and improve future responses.
It is also important to support the community on important dates and anniversaries
of a crisis. It is not unusual for additional grief and loss to occur on these dates, and crisis
teams are well advised to predict and support communities at these times. It is also wise
to include other community agencies in these plans so that a concerted supportive effort
is implemented.
RESPONSE
Learning Objective 13.4 Describe strategies for responding to school and
university crises.
According to FEMA (2013), in the event of an emergency, personnel should take the
following steps:
• Assess the situation and choose the appropriate response.
• Notify the appropriate emergency responders and then the crisis team and
administration.
• Decide whether to evacuate or lock down the school or specific campus buildings.
• Provide emergency first aid to those in need.
• Keep supplies needed to aid in crisis management and support nearby and
organized at all times.
• Trust leadership of the crisis team and emergency responders. This trust will help
to minimize the chaos that occurs during a crisis.
• Communicate accurate and appropriate information to stakeholders and the media.
• Activate the student release system.
• Allow for flexibility in implementing the crisis plan.
• Document steps taken. Write down every action taken during the response to pro-
vide a record of appropriate implementation of the crisis plan.

-- 467 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	439
At times, a crisis affects a large number of students and personnel and a systematic
response from the school or university is required (ASCA, 2020). Examples of crises that
may dictate a systemic response include a student homicide or suicide, an unexpected
death, and a natural disaster.
In response to a crisis, team members should first strive to ensure student safety
and simultaneously send for help from support personnel (inside or outside of the school
as appropriate). Crisis counselors should listen actively, be direct and honest, know their
limits, help keep the students informed at each intervention step, and inform parents as
soon as possible. They should not panic, rush, or lose patience with students; act shocked;
judge; underreact; or preach (USF, 2012). Counselors are expected to provide counseling
for students, coordinate all counseling activities, communicate with faculty and parents,
seek support from the crisis team, and contact neighboring schools. Counselors are also
expected to serve students and personnel during times of crisis by providing individual and
group interventions; to consult with administrators, faculty, families, and professionals;
and to coordinate services with the school and the community (ASCA, 2020).
When law enforcement officers arrive on the scene, they are in control until the
safety of all is secured. Crisis team members should coordinate with law enforcement
officers, and it is good practice to have a law enforcement liaison on the crisis team.
Total cooperation with law enforcement is crucial to return the environment to normal
as quickly as possible.
In response to a crisis that the University of South Florida faced (in this instance,
the death by suicide of a student on campus), the following steps, which can be modified
for other types of crises, were suggested:
1. An administrator should contact the police or medical examiner in order to verify
the death and get the facts surrounding the death.
2. Inform the university president or superintendent of the school district of the death.
3. Prepare and activate procedures for responding to the media.
4. Notify and activate the crisis response team.
5. Contact the family of the deceased.
6. Schedule a time and place to notify faculty members and all other staff.
7. Contact community support services.
8. Arrange a meeting for parents/caregivers.
9. Meet with all students in small groups.
10. Provide additional survivor support services, such as suicide bereavement support
groups.
11. Members of the crisis team should have knowledge of the victim’s classes to gauge
which students and teachers may need intervention.
12. Establish support stations or counseling rooms.
13. Debrief staff.
14. Reschedule any immediate stressful academic exercises.
15. In the case of a suicide, avoid flying the school flag at half-mast in order to avoid
glamorizing the death.
16. During any memorialization, focus on prevention, education, and living.
17. Collaborate with students to utilize social media effectively to disseminate
information and promote suicide prevention efforts.
18. Inform local crisis telephone lines and local mental health agencies about the death.

-- 468 of 545 --

440 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
19. Provide information about visiting hours and funeral arrangements to staff, stu-
dents, parents, and community members.
20. Encourage the family of the deceased to schedule the funeral after school hours.
21. Arrange for students, faculty, and staff to be excused from school to attend the
funeral.
22. Follow up with students who are identified as at risk (USF, 2012).
The University of South Florida also provides sound suggestions for how to respond
to and work with the media during crises. Next, read Voices from the Field 13.1, which
discusses responding to the sudden death of a student.
Tricia Uppercue
It is Sunday evening, and I’m relaxing before the start of
a new week when the phone rings. It is the supervisor
of school counseling, who informs me that a high
school student in the county died over the weekend.
He drowned in a local swimming area, surrounded by
friends who tried to save him. She asks me to report on
Monday morning to the high school that the student
attended to provide counseling to the students, staff,
and faculty as part of the county crisis team.
On Monday morning, I arrive at the school. The
mood is somber, and I see many students crying in the
hallways. All of the appropriate personnel are assembled
in the library, the designated area for students and staff
to report to if they are upset and need support. Chairs
are arranged in groups in the main library and in a small
room next to the library to accommodate students who
need one-on-one counseling as well as those who may
want to be in a group setting with others.
Many students make their way to the library.
Most are friends of the victim, some were at the scene
where he died; others are students who knew of the
victim, some may not have known the victim but the
tragedy of his death reminds them of a personal trauma
they have experienced. They are shaken and saddened
by the loss of their classmate. I become part of a group
of students who are concerned about their friends who
were at the scene of the drowning. Feelings of anger,
sorrow, and guilt are evident as they discuss the details
of the drowning, death of loved ones, and memories
of their deceased friend.
Everyone grieves differently, and members of the
crisis team are prepared to deal with individual needs.
Some students stay home to be with family members,
and others come to school to be surrounded by friends.
Being with loved ones is a necessary part of the grieving
process. Others may want to be involved in an activity,
such as making cards for the victim’s loved ones. Most,
I found, may need time with a counselor, either individually
or in a group, to process their thoughts and feelings.
As a counselor, being a part of the crisis team
is an important role. I am able to provide support and
allow students to work through the grieving process
and express their thoughts and feelings. I have learned
that whether I am involved in a crisis within the school
in which I work or if I am called to another school
where the students may not know me, many students
just need someone to listen to and support them and
they are grateful to have that opportunity within the
school setting.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 13.1
On Call
RECOVERY
Learning Objective 13.5 Describe strategies for recovery after a school or
university crisis.
The goal of recovery is to return to a stable, precrisis environment and return students
to learning as quickly as possible. However, FEMA (2021) cautions that healing and
recovery may take months or even years, depending on the traumatic event. Personnel
need to understand that healing is a process that will take time.

-- 469 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	441
Note that it is necessary to plan for recovery during the preparedness phase so
that roles and responsibilities of everyone who will participate in the recovery process
are defined. There are different models for implementing services and support during
the recovery process. Many school systems will have a system-wide crisis intervention
team that will go to the school where the crisis has occurred and provide counseling and
support for days or weeks following the crisis. Other schools or universities may have
the crisis team provide counseling and services for the academic community.
During the recovery phase, personnel need to keep students, families, and the
media informed. It is imperative to clearly state what steps have been implemented
to provide for student safety. In addition, families and community members need to
be informed about services being provided for students and families at school and in
the community. Cultural differences should be considered when composing letters or
announcements to students and parents. It may be necessary to translate letters and other
forms of communication into the representative languages.
Helping Students
Students will need to talk about what they have experienced during the crisis, and
it is important to offer a variety of counseling services for students so that they feel
supported and receive needed help. Individual counseling and small-group counseling
give students an opportunity to express their feelings and receive support. Classroom
guidance lessons and class meetings may also be extremely helpful and can provide a
forum for students to express emotions, obtain accurate information, and ask questions
in both K–12 and university settings. These sessions should focus on providing facts
and dispelling rumors, sharing stories, sharing reactions, empowering students, and
providing closure. Younger children may not be able to articulate their feelings but
will benefit from opportunities to draw, paint, or participate in other creative activities.
Adolescents and young adults should be encouraged to talk about their feelings in
small-group discussions or through writing about their experiences. It is also essential
to consider how substance use intersects with crisis issues in schools and universities (see
Chapter 7).
When people feel safe, they are better learners, contributors, and performers.
Threats to safety create mistrust, damage health, and lower productivity. Leaders create
safer environments by creating a space for safe discussions and creating communities
within various identity groups. Thus, it is important to create a space where people
across various backgrounds feel valued, heard, and seen. Authentic sharing of concerns
and challenges model honesty and transparency while cultivating trust and empathy.
Safe spaces are created by setting aside time for people to raise concerns and challenges,
engage in meaningful conversations, and process anxieties and uncertainties in structured
ways.
It is especially important to share strategies helpful in resilience building and an
understanding that sharing can be uncomfortable. Creating communication among
various community identity groups allows people to process challenges unique to their
group. This is especially important among groups that experience racism and oppression.
To intentionally build structural support, ask people from different communities what
support they need, create resource groups (e.g., Black, Latino, and LGBTQ+ participant
groups), and create discussion spaces for allies to act in solidarity with these groups.

-- 470 of 545 --

442 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Integration of services is critical not only in the aftermath of a crisis but for
longer-term follow-up weeks and months later. Thus, links between the crisis team
and community agencies, college counseling centers, and student services are essential.
Importantly, these links should be established during the planning phase of crisis team
activities so that seamless integration can occur.
Many crises occur miles away from our schools and universities or even in other
states or countries (e.g., hurricanes, earthquakes, terrorist attacks, school shootings, war).
However, such crises may have a tremendous impact on our students throughout the
nation. Personnel must always respond in a way that reassures students, faculty, staff,
and parents/guardians. It is important that they follow these guidelines:
• Present accurate information in developmentally appropriate ways.
• Give students opportunities to express feelings and ask questions.
• Provide information for teachers and parents/guardians so that they can help
students.
• Organize service activities so that students and all members of the school commu-
nity can aid victims (e.g., collect money/clothing for victims, organize fundraisers,
correspond with children who were affected).
The National Association of School Psychologists (2015) offers the following
additional guidelines to help faculty, parents, and other caregivers support students
who have experienced loss:
• Give students the opportunity to tell their story and be a good listener.
• Recognize that all students are different and their views of the world are unique
and shaped by different experiences.
• Understand that grieving is a process, not an event. Allow adequate time for each
student to grieve in whatever way chosen. Also, remember that encouraging stu-
dents to resume normal activities without the opportunity to deal with their emo-
tional pain may cause negative reactions.
• Provide honest information about the tragic event in developmentally appropriate
ways.
• Encourage students to ask questions about loss and death.
Helping Parents/Guardians
When there is a crisis, parents/guardians must receive accurate information along
with appropriate suggestions for assisting students. It is very helpful to send a letter
to parents/guardians that includes accurate information, symptoms, common and
uncommon reactions they might observe in their children, and suggestions to help those
who are experiencing distress as a result of the crisis. Figure 13.2 presents a sample
letter to parents/guardians related to the death of a student. These letters should be
developed before a crisis so that, when a crisis occurs, they can be quickly adapted to
the uniqueness of the existing crisis and then copied and distributed. These letters can
be sent home and put on the school or university website; however, the website should
never be the only means of communication, since there are many families without this
technological resource. The letters should be written in all languages that are represented
in the academic community.

-- 471 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	443
FIGURE 13.2 A Sample Letter to Parents/Guardians.
Dear Parents/Guardians:
I regret to inform you of the death of one of our students. Laurie Jones, a fifth-grader,
died on January 15 of leukemia. I know that you join me in my concern and sympathy for the
family.
The students were told of Laurie’s death today by their classroom teachers. Crisis
counselors visited each class and provided an opportunity for students to talk, ask questions,
and share their feelings. Those children who were most upset met privately with counselors for
additional counseling and support. Counseling services will continue to be made available to
students this week and in the future as needed.
Notes and cards may be sent to the family at the following address: Mr. and Mrs. Jackson
Jones, XXX Elm Street, Arlington, VA 222XX. A memorial service will be held at St. John’s
Church on Monday, January 19 at 9:00 a.m. The church is located at 1500 Main Street,
Arlington, VA 22207. In lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made to the
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.
Your children may experience a wide range of emotions as a result of Laurie’s death. The
following suggestions may be useful as you help your children cope with their grief:
• Encourage your children to talk about their feelings or to draw pictures to express their emotions.
• Offer support and let your children know that you are available to talk with them and
answer questions.
• Allow your children to be sad and to cry.
• Reassure your children that they are healthy and discuss fears they may have about their
own death or the death of a family member.
• Explain the ritual of funerals and memorial services. If children express a desire to attend the
memorial service, it is recommended that you accompany them.
• Monitor your child’s emotional state and behavior. If you notice prolonged sadness,
withdrawal from social contact, changes in eating or sleeping habits, or other behavior
unusual for your child, please contact Sam Brown, our professional school counselor, who
will be available to offer support and resources to you and your child. She can be reached at
XXX-555-3607 or Sam.Brown@xxx.k-12.
If you have questions or concerns, please don’t hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Helena Gonzalez, Principal
XXX-555-2438, Helena.Gonzalez@xxx.k-12
Depending on the nature of the crisis, it may be necessary to invite parents/
guardians to a group meeting at school so that they can receive accurate information, share
feelings and questions, and learn ways to support their children during and following
the crisis. The goals of the family/community meeting are to impart information and to
assist the family and community members in processing their reactions to the crisis. At
this meeting, the crisis team can offer support and suggestions while also passing along
information about services that are available in the community (ASCA, 2020). Regarding
universities, protocols for contacting parents may vary from e-mail to text alerts. The
important thing is for universities and schools to have a contact strategy before a crisis
occurs. This will allow immediate notification of parents to reduce undue worrying and
later complaints of non-notice or misinformation.

-- 472 of 545 --

444 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Finally, while in the recovery phase, remember to focus on the building as well
as the people. There may be damage to the building that needs to be repaired. FEMA
(2013) recommends conducting safety audits to assess the building and develop plans
for repairs.
Table 13.1 provides a listing of resources and websites with additional helpful
information on dealing with crises on school and university campuses. Case Studies 13.1
through 13.3 apply the skills learned thus far in the chapter. Also read Voices from the
Field 13.2, which discusses one person’s experience dealing with a school crisis.
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, Suicide Prevention Resource Center. (2018). After
a suicide: A toolkit for schools (2nd ed.). https://sprc.org/sites/default/files/resource-program/
AfteraSuicideToolkitforSchools.pdf
American Hospice Foundation—Information and activities for children and adolescents coping
with loss/disaster/crisis: https://americanhospice.org
American Red Cross: https://www.redcross.org
American School Counselor Association—Resource section offers articles/activities that can be
used to assist schools in responding to crises and the needs of the school community:
https://www.schoolcounselor.org
Brock, S. E., Nickerson, A. B., Louvar Reeves, M. A., Conolly, C. N., Jimerson, S. R., Pesce, R. C.,
& Lazzaro, B.R. (2016). School crisis prevention and intervention: The PREPaRE model
(2nd ed.). National Association of School Psychologists.
Center for Mental Health Services—Tips for talking about disaster: https://www.mentalhealth.org/
talk/educators
Emergency Response and Crisis Management (ERCM) Technical Assistance Center: https://www.
ercm.org
FEMA for Kids: FEMA website for children to help them understand and prepare for disaster:
https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/individuals-communities/children
National Association of School Psychologists—Information on helping children, youth,
parents, teachers, and schools cope with crisis: https://www.nasponline.org/
resources-and-publications/resources-and-podcasts/school-safety-and-crisis
National Education Association—NEA Health Information Network: https://www.idealist.org/en/
nonprofit/a0c4a7c95f974202bb22ae47a1356b12-national-education-association-health-
information-network-washington
Responding to Crisis at a School: UCLA Resource Aid Packet: http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/
crisis/crisis.pdf
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (SAMHSA). (2012). Preventing
suicide: A toolkit for high schools. https://store.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/SAMHSA_
Digital_Download/sma12-4669.pdf
UCLA Center for Mental Health in Schools—Basic information on responding to crisis in schools:
http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu
U.S. Department of Education. (2013, June). Guide for developing high-quality school emergency
operations plans. https://rems.ed.gov/docs/School_Guide_508C.pdf
TABLE 13.1 Resources on Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and
Universities

-- 473 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	445
U.S. Department of Education. (2019). The role of districts in developing high-quality school
emergency operations plans. https://rems.ed.gov/docs/District_Guide_508C.pdf
U.S. Department of Education—Tips for Helping Students Recover from Traumatic Events:
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED488995.pdf
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools—Information on
crisis planning to create drug-free schools: https://www2.ed.gov/admins/lead/safety/
crisisplanning.html
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools—Practical Information on
Crisis Planning: A Guide for Schools and Communities: https://www2.ed.gov/admins/lead/
safety/emergencyplan/crisisplanning.pdf
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2008, December). National incident management
system. http://www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nims/NIMS_core.pdf
TABLE 13.1 Resources on Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and
Universities (continued)
CASE STUDY 13.1
A Student with a Terminal Illness
Laurie was a fifth-grade student diagnosed with leukemia within the past year. During
this time, she was absent from school while receiving chemotherapy treatment for her
cancer and had lost her hair. The students were aware of Laurie’s condition. Her par-
ents just called the school and reported that Laurie had died. The principal asks you to
call a meeting of the crisis team, teachers, and appropriate staff to discuss how to best
approach the other students about her death. As the leader of this team, consider the
following questions.
Discussion Questions
1. Who needs to be contacted before offering any news? What do you need to know?
2. How do you decide what groups are the priority to receive intervention?
3. Who are some typical groups?
4. What questions would you expect to have from students?
CASE STUDY 13.2
School Shooting
A young person enters the dining area, takes out a gun, and begins shooting at students
seated at tables. Eight students are hit before the shooter runs out of the building. You
are a crisis team member and come into the dining area just after the shooting has
occurred.

-- 474 of 545 --

446 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
CASE STUDY 13.3
Death of a Teacher
It is 8:00 a.m. and the administrator calls you to the office to say that a faculty member
died suddenly last evening.
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss how you might react to this situation.
2. What steps should be taken to inform the faculty, staff, students, and parents/
guardians?
3. Discuss how the crisis team would be involved and how the crisis plan would be
implemented.
4. How should the school/university intervene with students, faculty, staff, and
parents/guardians?
Tori Stone
It was the last day of school. I was wrapped up in
last-day thoughts: saying goodbye to my eighth-
grade students, the adaptation of A Midsummer
Night’s Dream the students presented, and the faculty
luncheon that afternoon. I remember sending the girls
who would take the class passes to the main office, but
they returned because they wanted me to give them
stickers. That stands out in my mind: the innocence of
the girls returning for the stickers. I was handing them
the stickers when the principal came running through,
yelling “Lock it down, lock it down, lock it down!” I can
still remember the sound of his voice. It was clear that
something was very wrong.
I pushed the girls into my office, closed the door,
and turned off the lights. I had the girls crawl under
my desk and hide themselves in the corner farthest
from the door. I pulled the phone onto the floor and
called my guidance director to find out what was going
on. She told me there was a student with several rifles
and ammunition in the office. I remember thinking to
myself, “I can’t call these parents and tell them that
their children are dead. If someone has to die, it will
have to be me.” This sounds heroic, but it wasn’t. I was
more scared than I had ever been in my life. It occurred
to me that I didn’t want to die; that I might want to
have children; that wooden doors are not bulletproof.
When one of the girls started to panic, I talked to
her calmly about other things. I gave her tissues and
patted her back. I told the girls I would protect them.
This statement still has the weight of a lie in my head.
I knew there was little I could do to protect them.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 13.2
My Last Day
Discussion Questions
1. What immediate steps should be taken to ensure the safety of everyone on campus?
2. Discuss how the crisis team would be involved and how the crisis plan would be
implemented.
3. How should the team intervene with students, faculty, staff, parents/guardians,
and the community?
4. With a peer as a student in this situation, role-play implementation of the task
model of crisis assessment and intervention presented in Table 1.1 in Chapter 1.

-- 475 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	447
Notifying Students of a Death, Accident, or Event
The following steps should be followed for situations where students are notified of a
death, accident, or event.
• Gather the crisis team members for a planning meeting. The team members should
obtain and verify the facts of the incident and designate the person who will continue
to gather factual information. At this time, the team should decide on the format for
conveying the information to faculty, students, staff, parents/guardians (e.g., large-
group meetings, classroom meetings, emergency alert/texts/e-mails/letters to parents).
• Conduct a meeting for faculty and staff before the academic day begins to inform
them of the situation and to give them information about how the crisis plan will
be implemented.
• Form teams that can announce the crisis event via individual classroom sessions,
meetings of smaller groups of students, general assemblies, or announcements to
larger groups. Keep in mind that meeting with smaller groups and holding general
assemblies are the preferred methods for passing along the information. The public
address system should be used only if absolutely necessary.
• Have the leader of the crisis team determine the assignments for crisis team
members, considering team member strengths and comfort levels. Possible roles
for team members include direct contact with groups of students, individual
counseling sessions, and administrative tasks. Crisis intervention should never
Time passed, but I’m still not sure how long
exactly. Finally, someone pounded on the door and
yelled, “SWAT police, come out with your hands up!”
The girls cried; I was scared as well. When we opened
the door there were SWAT team members in riot gear
surrounding my office. They pointed guns at our heads
and yelled at us to run. I was afraid, the girls were
crying, and I felt angry. I yelled at the SWAT team to
stop yelling at the children. They did not stop yelling.
They told us to “Shut up and run!” We ran. There
were kids in costumes because of the play. I remember
seeing little girls dressed like fairies with bare feet.
The juxtaposition of SWAT members pointing guns at
children in tutus will stay with me forever.
Things I learned: stay calm; follow procedure;
act like you are okay in front of the students, even if
you are not. Schools should conduct lockdown drills
more than once per school year. It should be second
nature to staff members to secure their classrooms.
Once a building is evacuated for a gunman incident,
the building is a crime scene. You cannot reenter. We
had 1,100 children outside for more than 4 hours on a
95-degree day; we had no water and very little shelter
from the sun. Some children were overcome by fear,
others by the heat. If you work in a small district, ask
questions about where students will be moved to in the
event of an emergency. Getting to another large venue
where kids can have access to water and restrooms,
and where parents can pick them up, is essential.
The next day we returned to school and everything
was eerily just as we left it. The stickers were still on
my desk, balls stood in place on the gymnasium floor,
there were shoes in the hallways because kids literally
ran out of their shoes. Initially, parents were kind and
supportive, but eventually, in search of a reason that
could resurrect their sense of security, they wanted to
place blame. As a staff we faced many questions—from
“Why are there no metal detectors?” to “Why wasn’t
there water and sunscreen buried someplace on the
campus in case of this kind of event?” Parents were
scared, and their fear turned quickly to anger—anger
that an incident such as this could happen and because
we could not promise that it would not happen again.
I think back to myself as young and naive, and never
expected the anger and the blame, so I wasn’t prepared
for it. The truth is, a barricaded hostage event, or worse,
a school shooting, could happen at any time, at any
school in the country. As counselors, we are trained to
handle critical incidents, and that training is invaluable,
but it does not make us impenetrable to random acts
of violence. That may very well be the most valuable
lesson I learned from this event.

-- 476 of 545 --

448 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
be done alone. Team members should always work in pairs. Two crisis team
members should observe the class and look for high-risk students. Having two
team members working together allows one team member to escort a distressed
child out of the room for private counseling, while the other team member
continues working with the group. Team members who are experiencing the same
intervention are able to debrief each other and can monitor each other’s stress
levels and react accordingly.
• Introduce crisis team members to the students. Even if students know the staff,
faculty, counselors, and administrators from other interactions, students must be
made aware that these people are also crisis team members and be apprised of the
team members’ roles during the crisis event.
• Ask students if any of them have heard about the event. Allow students to tell what
they know or have heard. This will not only allow the sharing of information but
will also allow any rumors to be discussed in the group so the team can verify or
deny them publicly.
• Deliver the facts of the event in developmentally appropriate terms and clarify any
rumors or incorrect information. Allow enough time for students to ask questions.
• When appropriate, allow children to tell their stories about this experience or simi-
lar ones. List all the feelings voiced on the blackboard and spend some time talking
about the normalcy of these feelings.
• In crises that may involve another student, allow students to talk about memories
each has of the absent student.
• If the event involves a student who may be able to return to classes, discuss what
they may encounter when the student returns and how they can help the student.
• When the event involves the death of a student, keep in mind the additional issues
to address—for example, what to do with the empty desk. Often, the desk will be
left vacant for a period of time; however, a time limit should be established and
shared with the other students so they understand that the desk eventually will be
removed. It is crucial to involve the students in this process.
• If developmentally appropriate, share information regarding the funeral, including
the type of funeral and cultural rituals.
• Provide information regarding the resources that are available at the school or
university and in the community and provide additional handout materials that
can be helpful to the students in working through the crisis.
Differences in strategies may exist between and among K–12 schools and university
settings because of embedded cultures or uniqueness of communities or settings. What
is essential is that crisis teams have a priori strategies for dissemination of information
to parents, residents, commuters, and graduate students. Now complete Activity 13.1,
which asks you how you would feel and react in a crisis situation. Also, complete
Think About It 13.2.
In your own imagination, put yourself in a crisis situation
of your choosing. If you were the counselor, discuss
how you would feel and react. What steps would you
take to ensure the safety of the academic community?
Discuss how the crisis team would be involved and how
the crisis plan would be implemented.
ACTIVITY 13.1

-- 477 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	449
Debriefing
Debriefing is a time for the crisis team members to gather and share their unique
experiences of the crisis in a private and safe environment. It is extremely important
to allow some time for the crisis team members to share their thoughts and feelings.
Team members may have been the faculty, counselors, staff, and mentors of the victims.
Or the event may have triggered some other unresolved crisis in their lives. Hence,
support for the crisis team is critical. It is important for the team leader to invite team
members to share what happened, what the experience was like, what memory stands
out in their mind that is hard to erase, and what each can do to take care of themselves
during and after the crisis. Turner (2010) offered the following suggestions for self-care
after a crisis:
• Debrief with partner, team members, or supervisor.
• Attend regular support meetings.
• Find ways to relax such as music, exercise, meditation, hobbies, reading, or sports.
• Maintain a healthy balance in life and separate work from leisure time.
• Acknowledge personal feelings.
• Spend quality time with family and friends who are not connected with your crisis
work.
• Visit a place that is peaceful such as a church, synagogue, park, or art gallery.
• Write in a journal.
See Chapter 14 for additional counselor self-care strategies and suggestions.
Evaluation of the crisis response and recovery efforts is a necessary part of
the crisis plan. FEMA (2013) suggests conducting interviews with the crisis team,
emergency responders, families, faculty, students, and staff to determine what efforts
were successful along with changes that are necessary. The following are examples of
questions to ask:
• Which classroom-based interventions proved most successful and why?
• Which assessment and referral strategies were most successful and why?
• What were the most positive aspects of staff debriefings and why?
• Which recovery strategies would you change and why?
• Do other professionals need to be tapped to help with future crises?
• What additional training is necessary to enable the school and the community at
large to prepare for future crises?
• What additional equipment is needed to support recovery efforts?
• What other planning actions will facilitate future recovery efforts? (FEMA, 2013,
pp. 5–6)
Now read Voices from the Field 13.3, which discusses dealing with the death of a
student by suicide.
Think about and describe the best ways to intervene
with the students, faculty, staff, parents/guardians, and
community in schools or universities with whom/which
you have been associated.
THINK ABOUT IT 13.2

-- 478 of 545 --

450 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SPECIFIC GUIDANCE RELATED TO RESPONDING TO CRISES IN
UNIVERSITY SETTINGS
Learning Objective 13.6 Describe appropriate responses to crises in university
settings, including shelter-in-place procedures and threat assessment teams.
Colleges and universities strive to keep campuses safe so that students may grow
intellectually and personally. However, this is a constant challenge because the structures
of universities can be complex. Everything presented up to this point in the chapter
applies to K–12 schools and universities. However, the purpose of this section is to
provide more specific guidance on methods and procedures for counselors working in
higher education. All higher education settings must prepare for crises and have plans
in place to ensure the safety and well-being of all students, faculty, and staff.
The four phases identified by the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Safe
and Drug-Free Schools (2017) also serve as a model for crisis planning at the college/
Nicole Adamson
As part of a class assignment during my first semester as
a school counseling master’s student, I enthusiastically
decided to shadow the high school counselor in my
hometown. My connections with the members of my
rural community run deep, and many of the students
at the school were younger siblings of my high school
friends. Many Friday nights were spent caring for these
students when their parents went out to celebrate their
anniversaries or birthdays. Needless to say, I was truly
excited to return to the high school and experience the
culture from a different vantage point.
As I walked into the building, I immediately
sensed something was wrong; the tension was palpable.
I approached the school counselor’s office only to find
several sobbing students. When the school counselor
saw that I had come to shadow her, she met with me
privately and informed me that she was dealing with a
crisis situation. A male student had died the previous
evening as a result of suicide.
To further complicate the situation, I knew the
student personally, as his family lived next door to one
of my closest friends. This news greatly affected me,
and I was torn between a desire to mourn and a desire
to help the young students who knew and loved this
student. The minimal training I’d had at that point had
not prepared me to handle a situation such as this. I did
not know how to integrate my personal reactions with
my emerging professional role.
The school counselor handled the situation
with confidence. First, she called a local agency to
assist in meeting with students who needed individual
assistance. She then continued to meet with students
until the external agency’s counselors arrived. When
these counselors came and met individually with
students, I had an opportunity to learn from these
observations.
Later that day, as I processed these events,
I gained an awareness of the complexities of a school
counselor’s job. I had previously understood the
classroom guidance, student planning, and system
support aspects of the school counselor’s responsibilities,
but on that day I gained an understanding of school
counselors’ important role in managing responsive
services. I learned that my own emotions were natural
and could help me empathize with the thoughts and
feelings of students in a crisis. I also learned that
counselors must sometimes set aside their own needs
in order to best help others.
Although that day was filled with pain and
struggle, it informed and colored my experience as an
emerging counselor. I gained an acute understanding
of the complexities of the school counseling profession,
and I learned the value of crisis response preparedness.
I also learned from an excellent school counselor how
to identify and use resources in order to respond
appropriately and effectively to a crisis.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 13.3
Dealing with the Death of a Student by Suicide

-- 479 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	451
university level. Discussed earlier in this chapter, they include mitigation/prevention,
preparedness, response, and recovery. Indeed, most of the information presented in
this chapter and throughout this book can be applied to university campuses with
appropriate modifications. But additional attention is given to universities here
because of widespread variations in size, number of students, location expanse, and
administrative complexity.
Colleges and universities must be prepared to respond to the death of any member
of the campus community (student or faculty); decompensation of a student as a result
of a prior mental health diagnosis; natural disasters; terrorist attacks and other acts of
violence; bomb threats; and fire. A response for each of these events and more should
be developed and a crisis plan should be prepared and practiced. Everyone who is a
member of the campus community (including parents) should be aware of emergency
procedures and crisis plans. These procedures and plans should be described on the
website and should be discussed with students, faculty, and staff. All campuses should
have an alert system (e.g., text, e-mail, website, phone message notification) in place
whereby the students, faculty, staff, and parents/guardians can be alerted to potential
emergencies on campus.
Shelter-in-Place
Shelter-in-place means selecting a “small, interior room, with no or few windows, and
taking refuge there” (National Terror Alert Response Center, 2017). In schools and
universities, typically students shelter-in-place because of active-shooter or weather-
related events. The following applies to K–12 schools, university buildings, and other
workplaces.
ACTIVE SHOOTER SHELTER-IN-PLACE 	FEMA (2013) provides excellent advice on
responding to an active-shooter situation in its Guide for Developing High-Quality School
Emergency Operations Plans. The following applies to K–12 schools, university buildings,
and other workplaces and are similar to the hard lockdown procedures discussed
earlier:
• Train staff to overcome denial and to respond immediately, including fulfilling
their responsibilities toward individuals in their charge. For example, train staff to
recognize the sounds of danger, act, and forcefully communicate the danger and
necessary action (e.g., “Gun! Get out!”) to those in their charge. In addition, those
closest to the public address or other communications system, or otherwise able to
alert others, should communicate the danger and necessary action.
• Upon recognizing the danger, as soon as it is safe to do so, staff or others must
alert first responders by contacting 911 with as clear and accurate information as
possible.
• Run: If it is safe to do so for yourself and those in your care, the first course of action
that should be taken is to run out of the building and far away until you are in a
safe location. Students and staff should be trained to
• Leave personal belongings behind.
• Visualize possible escape routes, including physically accessible routes for
students and staff with disabilities as well as persons with access and functional
needs.

-- 480 of 545 --

452 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
• Avoid escalators and elevators.
• Take others with them but not to stay behind because others will not go.
• Call 911 when safe to do so.
• Let a responsible adult know where they are.
• Hide: If running is not a safe option, hide in as safe a place as possible. Students
and staff should be trained to hide in a location where the walls might be thicker
and have fewer windows. In addition:
• Lock the doors.
• Barricade the doors with heavy furniture or other objects.
• Close and lock windows and close blinds or cover windows.
• Turn off lights.
• Silence all electronic devices.
• Remain silent.
• Hide along the wall closest to the exit but out of view from the hallway (allowing
for an ambush of the shooter and for possible escape if the shooter enters the
room).
• Use strategies to silently communicate with first responders, if possible, for
example, in rooms with exterior windows make signs to silently signal law
enforcement officers and emergency responders to indicate the status of the
room’s occupants.
• Remain in place until given an all-clear by identifiable law enforcement officers.
• Fight: If neither running nor hiding is a safe option, as a last resort when confronted
by the shooter, adults in immediate danger should consider trying to disrupt or
incapacitate the shooter by using aggressive force and items in their environment,
such as fire extinguishers and chairs. (pp. 64–65)
According to FEMA, “In a study of 41 active shooter events that ended before law
enforcement officers arrived, the potential victims stopped the attacker themselves in 16
instances. In 13 of those cases they physically subdued the attacker” (2013, p. 66).
STORM SHELTER-IN-PLACE 	FEMA (2011) published Storm Safe: Sheltering in Place, which
provides the following helpful tips for a number of storm-related crises:
• Heat wave
• Stay indoors as much as possible and limit exposure to the sun.
• Stay on the lowest floor out of the sunshine if air conditioning is not available.
• Thunderstorm and lightning
• Stand or sit away from doors and windows that lead outside.
• Stand away from concrete walls and avoid lying on concrete floors.
• Close doors and windows to the outside to prevent wind damage and injuries.
• Hurricane
• Listen to local watches and warnings about evacuating.
• If you live in a high-rise building, hurricane winds are stronger at higher
elevations or floors.
• If you are unable to evacuate, go to a wind-safe room.
• If you don’t have a wind-safe room, take refuge in a small interior room, closet,
or hallway on the lowest level.
• Lie on the floor under a table or another sturdy object.

-- 481 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	453
• Tornado
• Go to a predesignated shelter area such as a safe room, basement, storm cellar,
or the lowest building level.
• If there is no basement, go to the center of an interior room on the lowest level
(closet, interior hallway) away from corners, windows, doors, and outside walls.
• Put as many walls as possible between you and the outside. Get under a sturdy
table and use pillows, blankets, or other “cushions” to protect your head and
neck. As a last resort, use your arms to protect your head and neck.
• Winter storm
• Select a location where heat can best be conserved, such as the side of the house
that receives the most sunlight and is away from cold winds.
• Interior rooms are probably the best option.
• A basement may be a good location.
• If necessary, seal off rooms that are not being used by shutting doors, closing
window coverings, etc.
Threat Assessment Teams
In an effort to prevent acts of violence, many institutions of higher education have
created threat assessment teams. These teams are usually composed of representatives
from various departments, including academic affairs, student affairs, legal counsel,
mental health services, and public safety. Threat assessment teams evaluate persons
of concern who may pose a potential risk of violence. Drysdale et al. (2010) defined a
three-step process in threat assessment: (1) identify individuals whose behavior causes
concern or disruption on or off campus affecting students, faculty, or staff; (2) assess
whether the identified individual possesses the intent and ability to carry out an attack
against the community and if the individual has taken steps to prepare for the attack; and
(3) manage the threat posed by the individual, to include disrupting potential plans of
attack, mitigating the risk, and implementing strategies to facilitate long-term resolution.
Campus Assessment Response and Evaluation and Other University
Crisis Response Teams
Campus assessment response and evaluation (CARE) and other university crisis response
teams have members who are trained to recognize the factors influencing crisis, grief,
and stress to help people better cope. People who can effectively diffuse stress live
healthier, longer lives. Response teams focus on intervention and postintervention.
Intervention means managing stress during the event, including the effects of the crisis
on learning, personal responses to stress, and psychiatric responses (e.g., acute stress
disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, other trauma). The response team implements
crisis response plans, communicates with emergency responders, and works to help
students, faculty, staff, and parents. Postintervention involves identification and
provision of follow-up services needed to help restore the environment to precrisis
levels. Finally, response team members and counselors should be aware of and address
vicarious trauma if it occurs.
On the prevention of crisis front, many universities have also established student
care teams to address students of concern as soon as challenging events occur. Such
events may include a death in the family, a friend or fellow student experiencing a

-- 482 of 545 --

454 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
crisis, a serious or prolonged illness, all the way up to concerns over suicidal or homicidal
ideation. A reporting and triage system is in place to confidentially inform instructors
and others of the referral and guide the student to available resources at the university
and within the broader community. A leave of absence may be extended to the student
to help them focus on the crisis situation until they can return to normal levels of
functioning and resume an academic schedule. Such programs aim to address concerns
before they reach critical crisis levels.
It is essential to remember that crises may subject generally normal-functioning
people to extreme circumstances that outstrip their abilities to cope. Therefore, it
is important for counselors to not pathologize normal reactions to crisis situations.
Diagnostic considerations during crises must be given the special consideration due.
Likewise, it is important to consider the intersection of alcohol or drug use on school or
university campuses and how these behaviors may contribute to or occur in response
to crisis situations. Chapter 7 provided more information on the interplay of substance
use and crises.
Finally, professional counselors employed by schools and universities have special
responsibilities for the safety of the students and to engage in substantial self-care
activities to optimize their availability to these populations of vulnerable students. The
next and final chapter (Chapter 14) provides an expanded discussion of counselor
self-care. Now apply the skills and knowledge you have learned in this chapter to
university-specific Case Studies 13.4 and 13.5. Also read Voices from the Field 13.4 and
then complete Activity 13.2, which asks you to bring together the information you have
learned in this chapter.
CASE STUDY 13.4
Shooting of Students in a Dormitory
The Dean of Students at a large university has just been informed that two students have
been shot in a dormitory and have been taken to the hospital. The shooter has not been
identified or captured.
Discussion Questions
1. If you were the Dean of Students, how would you feel and react?
2. What steps should be taken to ensure the safety of everyone on campus?
3. What steps should the university take to inform and protect students, faculty, staff,
and other campus employees?
4. How should parents/guardians be informed?
5. What should occur in the hours and weeks after the event has occurred?
CASE STUDY 13.5
A Flood on Campus
Recent storms have caused local rivers to overflow, and the entire town (including a
college campus) is experiencing extreme flooding. Students are unable to leave their
dormitories, libraries, or classrooms.

-- 483 of 545 --

Chapter 13 • Emergency Preparedness and Response in Schools and Universities 	455
Discussion Questions
1. What steps should the university take to ensure the safety of everyone on campus?
2. What steps should the university take to inform and protect students, faculty, staff,
and other campus employees?
3. How should parents/guardians be informed?
4. What should occur in the hours and weeks after the event has occurred?
Kyoung Mi Choi
Because most of the students had returned home for
Thanksgiving break, the campus seemed very quiet. Just
as I finished my Thanksgiving dinner with friends and was
ready to relax, I received a phone call from my supervisor
at the Center for International Student Services. With
some trepidation, I answered the phone: “Hi, there’s been
a really bad car accident, and four international students
were involved. I’m not sure of the exact situation yet,
but would you be able to accompany the Department
of Public Safety (DPS) officers to the hospital? They need
someone who can speak Korean and communicate with
the survivors and their families in Korea. I’ll update you
with more detailed information later.” My heart stopped;
I knew something was seriously wrong.
Instead of DPS officers, the Vice President of
Student Affairs came to my apartment gate. I briefly
greeted him and followed him to the car. As we arrived
at the hospital, we were directed to the emergency
area. There were two students lying on beds in two
small separate rooms. I was wondering what happened
to the other two students.
Shortly after, I found out that the driver and
one of the passengers were the only survivors and the
other students were killed in the car accident. One
survivor could not even say a word; tears were rolling
down her cheeks. These two students were there—by
themselves—wondering about their friends’ safety.
Because of the traumatic incident, the students
had difficulty communicating in English, a non-native
language for them. I tried to comfort them in Korean
while simultaneously translating between the students
and the DPS officers, Victim Protective Services, and
the hospital staff. What was even more difficult was
that I also had to call the students’ parents in Korea;
delivering this information to parents who were halfway
around the world from their children was difficult.
As a counselor on a college campus, I have
worked with international students as a peer mentor,
consultant, and educator. Working with international
students requires much collaboration and relationship
building within all of the functional areas in Student
Affairs. Especially when a crisis happens, the first person
contacted is often not the student’s parents but college
staff, oftentimes counselors.
At last, the four students’ parents were
contacted, flights were arranged, and the families
arrived on campus. The community, especially
churches and organizations, were actively involved
in the funeral preparations and services. The Korean
Student Association also set up meetings to support
the survivors and the deceased students’ families. The
campus counseling services provided the survivors
and other students who were affected by this incident
with individual and group counseling sessions.
The Residence Life staff also assisted the deceased
students’ parents in collecting their children’s
belongings. The whole campus worked together to
support the survivors, mourn the losses, and educate
students about safety.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 13.4
Collaboration in the Midst of a Campus Crisis
In small groups, construct a scenario of a crisis situation
in an academic setting. What immediate steps should
be taken to ensure the safety of everyone in the area?
Discuss how the crisis team would be involved and how
the crisis plan would be implemented. How should the
crisis team intervene with students, teachers, staff,
parents, and the community?
ACTIVITY 13.2

-- 484 of 545 --

456 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUMMARY
This chapter provided a detailed overview of
crises in schools and universities and how to
respond to such crises. An emphasis was placed
on how to create a network of support because
educational systems have so many stakeholders
to address (e.g., students, parents/guardians,
faculty, staff, administrators). The components of
a comprehensive crisis plan include determining
the composition of the crisis team, gathering the
crisis team members for a planning meeting,
deciding how to announce the event and discuss
or review classroom activities, and holding a
team debriefing. The four phases of a crisis plan
are mitigation and prevention; preparedness;
response; 	and 	recovery, 	which 	includes
debriefing strategies. Numerous case studies
were provided to allow counselors to apply
knowledge and skills gained. All crises evolve
through different stages—and then end. Those
who experience crisis, disaster, or trauma also
evolve in that they, hopefully, resolve or at least
experience a lessened impact of the situation.
Crises affect lives in systemic ways; every aspect
of one’s life can be affected by a crisis.

-- 485 of 545 --

457
PREVIEW
This culminating chapter explores the importance of self-care for professional
counselors providing crisis- and trauma-related services and identifies strategies by
which counselors might incorporate self-care as an intentional element of counselor
professional practice.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, readers will be able to:
14.1 Apply counselor self-care assessment and monitor countertransference,
burnout, compassion fatigue, and vicarious trauma.
14.2 Describe effective self-care strategies.
14.3 Build resources available for self-care.
COUNSELOR SELF-CARE IS ESSENTIAL
Learning Objective 14.1 Apply counselor self-care assessment and monitor
countertransference, burnout, compassion fatigue, and vicarious trauma.
Self-care is recognized as an essential aspect of the professional functioning of counselors
(Corey & Corey, 2021; Erford, 2023). Counselor self-care is a potential protective factor
against the development of counselor deficits in internal resources that negatively
impact personal and professional functioning through pathways such as burnout
(Coaston, 2017), impairment (Posluns & Gall, 2020), and compassion fatigue (Hyatt, 2020;
Rivera-Kloeppel & Mendenhall, 2021). Additionally, multiple benefits of self-care exist
for students in counselor training programs (Brown, 2022; Dye et al., 2020). Research
concerning self-care for counseling students suggested benefits for the promotion of
counselor professional development, such as enhanced empathy skills and improved
client treatment outcomes.
The importance of counselor self-care was further underscored by the inclusion
of self-care and related terms such as wellness, impairment, and effectiveness in the ethical
codes of the American Counseling Association (ACA; 2014), American Mental Health
Counselors Association (2020), and the American School Counselor Association (2016),
14 Counselor Self-Care in Crisis
Situations
James Jackson, Lisa R. Jackson-Cherry, and Bradley T. Erford*
C H A P T E R
*We thank Latofia Parker and Judith Harrington for outstanding contributions to previous editions of this chapter.

-- 486 of 545 --

458 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
best-practices guidelines of the Association for Counselor Education and Supervision
(2011), and standards of the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related
Educational Programs (2024). Thus, a growing body of counseling research, training
standards, and ethical codes identify self-care as an important component of professional
functioning. Likewise, counselor educators and supervisors are encouraged to
incorporate self-care as an intentional component of the counselor development process.
Ongoing Self-Assessment for Counselors
A major component of ethical practice is the ability of counselors to monitor
their own personal mental health and engage in self-care. Welfel (2016)
pointed out that counselors face emotional challenges both in the workplace
and at home. Counselors have lives, family responsibilities, community
obligations, stressors, and sometimes crises that affect their personal
functioning. In addition, counselors are not immune from mental disorders,
substance use, previous traumatic experiences, and painful narratives. To
provide ethical best practice, counselors must nurture self-awareness and
actively engage in self-care, and this is particularly important for counselors
working in crisis situations.
Self-assessment is the process by which counselors self-monitor
and maintain self-awareness of their reactions, behaviors, feelings, and
thoughts, thereby recognizing how these internal processes affect their
sense of self and functioning as helping professionals. Self-assessment is
crucial to providing effective crisis intervention services, particularly when
counselors are called upon to engage in long-term responses to disaster-
related destruction while also juggling the work demands associated with
responding to the needs of others. A counselor who is unable to attend to
internal states is unlikely to be of much help to a client in a crisis; thus, self-awareness
and self-care are fundamentally important to best practice.
In addition to inner awareness when serving in a disaster context, it is important
that counselors also monitor their own crisis-related needs. For example, while providing
disaster care to crisis victims, counselors should be mindful to also attend to their own
basic needs of food, water, safe shelter, and provisions for their own families. In essence,
crisis counselors should have a plan in place for their personal well-being. Read Voices
from the Field 14.1, which provides a personal reflection on the power of counselor
supervision in self-care.
James Jackson
The weekly counseling supervision group members
were just settling into their seats as one of the members
who had missed the previous group session said, “Sorry
I wasn’t able to be here for supervision last week.
I was helping my family deal with a crisis; my nephew
was kidnapped, and I had to help get him back.”
The concerned expressions and supportive statements
from the other group members were accompanied by
heads nodding knowingly; this was not the first time
the life of a group member had been impacted by the
kidnapping of a loved one. Indeed, war-related violence
had touched each member of the group to the point
that many had seemingly grown accustomed to living in
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 14. 1
Counselors Living and Working in Dangerous Settings
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 14. 1
In this video, the counselor in
training discusses some of the
difficulties of being in recovery
and encountering a client at a
mutual recovery meeting. The
senior counselor addresses
the need for personal self-
care. What options does the
counselor in training have to
make sure her recovery and
self-care is a priority?

-- 487 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	459
Self-Assessment of the Counselor during Crises
Self-assessment and intentional self-care, while important for all counselors, are of
particular importance to counselors who work with crisis-affected and traumatized
clients. Crises can take emotional, cognitive, physical, and spiritual tolls on counselors.
Counselors should debrief with colleagues and supervisors and periodically do self-
check-ins to monitor for indications of reduced functioning and job dissatisfaction, which
can lead to burnout and have a negative effect on clients.
Since a lack of well-being on the part of counselors can hardly foster wellness
in clients, counselors have a responsibility to monitor their own mental health and
seek supervision, counseling, and other resources when needed. This is especially
critical during crisis intervention circumstances when emotions are running high,
the environment is charged with anxiety, basic goods and services may be curtailed
or limited, and clients are suffering and in distress. In such contexts, commitment to
assessment and maintenance of a healthy mind, body, and spirit are essential in the
preservation of wellness and best practice.
In our culturally diverse society, it is important to remember that self-assessment
also includes regular evaluation of counselor values, which affect the care counselors
provide. Counselors are obligated to learn and consistently assess how their own cultural
and racial-ethnic identities affect their values and beliefs about the work they do and the
ways they conceptualize their role as helpers. The way in which counselors perceive
themselves and their own cultural context, as well as the cultural context of the clients
they serve, can also affect their maintenance of a healthy mind and spirit.
Additionally, the wear and tear of repeated exposure to the traumatic narratives
from which clients seek relief can alter a counselor’s assumptive beliefs about the world
and can dysregulate multicultural competencies that are expected of clinicians. For
example, a mental health professional who works with women victimized by male
batterers may find assumptive beliefs about the goodness of all men altered, which
would be a threat to the standards that the field expects of counselors.
The importance of self-care for practitioners working with clients in crisis is
emphasized by Lambert and Lawson (2013), who studied the professional resilience
and posttraumatic growth of counselors who had worked with survivors of hurricanes
Katrina and Rita. These authors examined how providing trauma services affected
the shadow of the threat of injury or death. I was aware
of the ongoing violence and that nearby buildings as
well as vehicles in surrounding parking lots had twice
been struck by gunfire in recent months while sounds
of heavy-weapon fire thundered in the distance. I was
aware, too, that many in the supervision group had
personal experiences of violence to share, although
the details provided were often limited out of concern
for sharing information that might increase the risk of
danger for those sharing as well as others in the group.
As the supervision group continued, it became
a kind of holding vessel as the member processed the
experience, including the relief at the safe return of a
family member. The other group members supported
the group member first through careful listening and
acknowledging the experience, then by sharing from
the gifts of their own experiences. As they continued,
the members soon began providing examples of their
own practical self-care and safety strategies they had
developed for minimizing risk. I was struck by how
these counselors met such daily threats and injustices
with amazing faith, resilience, and courage and by how
the powerful support the supervision group members
provided for one another was a resource for their
effective, ongoing therapeutic work with clients living
with many of these same dangers.

-- 488 of 545 --

460 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
counselors who were survivor volunteers (themselves survivors of these events) as well
as counselors who were responder volunteers (those serving as volunteers from outside
of the affected area). Posttraumatic growth, as measured in the areas of personal
strength, relating to others, appreciation of life, spiritual change, and new possibilities,
was significantly greater among survivor volunteers than among responder volunteers.
Additionally, counselors who engaged in self-care practices indicated higher levels
of compassion satisfaction and lower levels of burnout. Lambert and Lawson found
that “the level of self-care following exposure to vicarious trauma affects whether
counselors will have positive or negative outcomes in their personal and professional
lives” (p. 267).
Self-care is often framed as an essential professional responsibility due to the
protective factors it provides for preventing burnout, vicarious traumatization, and so
on. Another consideration for the importance of maintaining self-care strategies is the
positive benefits for practitioners. For example, Wise and Barnett (2016) examined self-
care through the lens of positive psychology to identify the role of consistent self-care
in promoting good outcomes. Their work focused on self-care as a resource for thriving
versus surviving and advocated for the natural integration of self-care practice into
daily life. This emphasis on prevention may invite counselors to integrate consistent,
intentional, non-negotiable, protected self-care time into their daily routines, resulting
in improved overall professional and personal well-being. Now complete Activity 14.1
and Think About It 14.1.
Complete, interpret, and apply the Posttraumatic Growth Inventory located at https://results.wa.gov/sites/
default/files/WendyFraser_Oct28_HANDOUT.pdf.
ACTIVITY 14.1
How do you view your current engagement with self-
care practices? What do you believe is most important
to consider when identifying self-care motivation, a
focus on amelioration of symptoms of burnout/stress
or focusing on the prevention and balance benefits of
self-care?
THINK ABOUT IT 14.1
Welfel (2016) highlights specific recommendations regarding self-awareness
for best practice. Counselors should be mindful of the risks associated with practice
and celebrate the rewards associated with helping others; should set clear limits and
not overextend themselves; should engage in self-care; should recognize when they
are emotionally exhausted and seek support, including counseling; and should avoid
emotional isolation. In short, all counselors have an ethical obligation to be mindful
of their own health and well-being and to engage in restorative practices. Failure
to self-assess and attend to restoration can lead to countertransference, burnout,
compassion fatigue, and vicarious trauma—and, ultimately, to counselor impairment.
The circumstances that lead to countertransference, burnout, compassion fatigue, and
vicarious trauma are further discussed in the following sections. The concept of vicarious
resiliency is also discussed.

-- 489 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	461
Countertransference
Countertransference occurs when counselors ascribe characteristics of significant people
and events in their past to their clients. Client emotions, behaviors, and issues may stir up
unresolved or buried emotions within a counselor, who might then identify too closely
with the client and use the counseling relationship to fulfill unmet needs. Dealing with
one’s own “stuff” is a vital aspect of good practice and healthy self-assessment. Exploring
personal issues and increasing self-awareness underpin healthy practice and should
be an ongoing part of counselor self-care and work. It is important for counselors to
examine their internal reactions to clients.
In cases that evoke unresolved issues, counselors should seek consultation,
supervision, and personal counseling. A self-aware counselor will be cognizant of times
when a client’s issues strike close to home and interfere with the counselor’s ability to
be objective. Welfel (2016) recommends that counselors check in with their professional
support system to examine each counselor’s interpretations of a case and to determine
when a case that strongly triggers a counselor’s issues should be referred. In cases of
referrals, counselors should seek supervision and possibly personal counseling. See
Case Study 14.1, which examines one counselor’s experience of countertransference.
CASE STUDY 14.1
A Counselor’s Countertransference Experience
Rachel is a licensed professional counselor in private practice. She went through a messy
divorce 3 years ago and feels she has healed from that experience. Today she has a new
couple coming in to see her. They are seeking counseling and state that they want to try
to save their marriage. During the intake session, Rachel is struck by how similar the
husband is to her former husband. His angry tone of voice and some of the emotionally
charged statements he makes to his wife remind Rachel of difficult encounters in her
own marriage. Rachel feels herself wanting to protect the wife. She thoroughly dislikes
the husband.
Discussion Questions
1. Should Rachel continue to see the couple? Explain.
2. If Rachel decides to continue, what can she do to ensure best practice?
3. If Rachel decides not to continue, what should she do regarding her own self-care?
Burnout
Leiter and Maslach (2009) define burnout as “a psychological syndrome that involves a
prolonged response to chronic interpersonal stressors on the job” (p. 332). Some elements
of job satisfaction include but may not be limited to satisfaction with compensation
and the types of work duties performed and satisfaction as reflected through steady
attendance at work, punctuality, devotion to the job, morale, and productivity. Maslach
(2003) identified three dimensions of burnout—cynicism, a sense of inefficacy, and
exhaustion—and noted that the strain of burnout results from a lack of fit between the

-- 490 of 545 --

462 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
person and the job. Working conditions associated with burnout include social conflict,
work overload, and a lack of time and other necessary resources. Lawson and Myers
(2011) noted that the demands associated with such a lack of resources can ultimately
result in counselors becoming ineffective practitioners.
Burnout occurs when counselors become exhausted both physically and
emotionally through overwork, lack of support or overdemands from the agency, and
an inability to engage in self-care strategies. Burnout can result in a sense of emotional
numbness and detachment from clients. Obviously, counselors who experience burnout
face lowered job satisfaction and increased absenteeism. Health problems can develop,
thus complicating the possibility for a return to functioning. Counselors and other mental
health professionals who provide crisis services are at increased risk for burnout due to
the emotionally intense nature of their jobs. Burnout is a cumulative process; over time,
emotional exhaustion builds and may result in a sense of detachment and cynicism that
leads to a diminished capacity to provide effective services (Newell & MacNeil, 2010).
Therapists experiencing the effects of burnout may have a decrease in the ability
to experience and express empathy. This depletion of empathy reserves may be
accompanied by a sense of apathy and cynicism toward clients that can compromise the
helping relationship (Newell, 2017). Just as with any other kind of impairment, counselors
experiencing professional burnout violate the code of ethics (ACA, 2014) through
their diminished capacity for providing effective services for clients. Now complete
Activity 14.2 and Think About It 14.2.
Complete, interpret, and apply either of the following
burnout assessments:
Maslach Burnout Inventory: https://www
.psychosomatik.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/
Maslach-burnout-inventory-english.pdf
Counselor Burnout Inventory: https://txicfw.
socialwork.utexas.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/
Lee-et-al-2007.pdf
ACTIVITY 14.2
What do you believe about self-care as an ethical responsibility? At what point does neglecting self-care activities
become an ethical violation?
THINK ABOUT IT 14.2
Empathy, the quality that lies at the core of counselor efficacy, can also be the
very factor that leads to counselor burnout (Clark, 2014). Through empathy, a counselor
comprehends a client’s circumstances and emotional responses. Empathic counselors
communicate understanding and create a therapeutic environment for client healing.
Most counselors enter the profession because they naturally possess empathic qualities
and care about others; however, daily exposure to client trauma and pain can overwhelm
a counselor and lead to burnout. Sadly, burnout ultimately damages a counselor’s
capacity to experience empathy and function as a helper.
Lee et al. (2010) used the Counselor Burnout Inventory (CBI) to examine counselor
burnout. The CBI scales are Exhaustion, Incompetence, Negative Work Environment,

-- 491 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	463
Devaluing Client, and Deterioration in Personal Life. The study identified three types
of counselors facing burnout: (1) well-adjusted counselors, who indicated the highest
levels of job satisfaction and positive self-esteem; (2) persevering counselors, who, while
having burnout symptoms such as exhaustion, were able to respond appropriately to
client needs and had positive self-esteem; and (3) disconnected counselors, who had
high levels of client devaluation (which can be connected to compassion fatigue) and
low self-esteem. The study also found that persevering counselors had higher incomes
than well-adjusted counselors, with disconnected counselors having the lowest income.
Job satisfaction and self-esteem seemed to be the differentiating elements between the
burnout types. The use of burnout assessments such as the CBI could foster more targeted
intervention and support, thereby addressing burnout more effectively. Additionally,
the Professional Quality of Life (ProQOL) scale is a measure of compassion satisfaction
and fatigue developed by Stamm (2009) that provides the counselor with a score for
compassion satisfaction, burnout, and secondary traumatic stress. Persons interested in
using this measure, which is available in many languages, can do so for free while giving
credit to Stamm. The scale is available at www.proqol.org.
In addition to measures assessing counselor reaction to stress and levels of impact,
it is important to also consider measures of counselor self-care. One such measure is
the Self-Care Assessment for Psychologists (SCAP; Dorociak et al., 2017), a 21-item
instrument that measures relevant self-care aspects across five domains including
professional support, professional development, life balance, cognitive awareness, and
daily balance. Research using this instrument (Rupert & Dorociak, 2019) found that
clinicians who regularly engage in self-care activities are more likely to experience
balance in both professional and personal life.
Compassion Fatigue
Counselor exposure to client pain and suffering can lead to a sense of being overwhelmed
by client stories; this goes beyond burnout to a condition called compassion fatigue. Erford
(2023) notes that compassion fatigue differs from burnout in that burnout is a state of
exhaustion caused by the emotional nature of the counseling profession and overwork,
whereas compassion fatigue is a preoccupation with traumatic client cases and personal
identification with this trauma. Overidentification with trauma creates symptoms within
the counselor that are comparable to the symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Fortunately, self-care can be used to combat the exhaustion of mental and physical
resources, the generalized stress of burnout, and the emotional exhaustion of compassion
fatigue. Conversely, the concept of compassion satisfaction describes the satisfaction of
helping others and being an effectual mental health professional (Lawson & Myers, 2011).
Wellness and self-care are factors in fostering compassion satisfaction for counselors.
Related to compassion fatigue is the concept of secondary traumatic stress. Although
these terms are often used interchangeably (Newell & MacNeil, 2010), secondary traumatic
stress refers specifically to behaviors and emotions resulting from exposure to traumatic
stories. Essentially, the empathic exposure to another person’s trauma experience affects
a counselor’s behavior and reactions. For example, a counselor experiencing secondary
traumatic stress might become more irritable or hypervigilant. Being aware of these
signs can help counselors recognize their need to access support. Activity 14.3 assesses
compassion fatigue.

-- 492 of 545 --

464 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Vicarious Trauma
Counselors who work with traumatized clients may experience vicarious trauma, which
differs from burnout, compassion fatigue, and secondary traumatic stress. While all
are similar constructs and all generate secondary trauma reactions, vicarious trauma
additionally affects a counselor’s worldview and sense of self (Trippany et al., 2004).
Vicarious trauma reactions result from indirect exposure to trauma, such as through
extreme or repeated exposure to details of traumatic events. Examples of vicarious
experiences that meet the fifth edition, text revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2022) criteria
include (1) witnessing the event in person; (2) learning of a traumatic, fatal (or potentially
fatal) event that happened to a close family member or friend; and (3) repeated firsthand
or extreme exposure to event details that are aversive in nature, including work-related
exposure through pictures, movies, television, or other media.
The inclusion of recurring trauma exposure as a new diagnostic criterion in the
DSM-5-TR is a step forward in recognizing and destigmatizing the treatment needs
among first responders experiencing posttraumatic stress due to vicarious trauma (Royle
et al., 2009) and emphasizes the importance of self-care for counseling professionals with
whom clients share their personal stories of trauma.
It stands to reason, then, that counselors who work with trauma clients are at a higher
risk for vicarious trauma than are counselors working in other settings. While burnout is
a response to occupational stress, vicarious trauma involves a personal cognitive reaction
within the counselor to a client’s experience (Erford, 2023). Essentially, exposure to the
trauma stories of the client can trigger pervasive alterations in a counselor’s cognitive
schema, resulting in disruptions to the counselor’s sense of safety, trust, esteem, control,
and intimacy. In effect, the boundary between the client’s trauma experience and the
counselor’s worldview is blurred, as the counselor’s beliefs and thinking begin to shift
in response to exposure to client trauma (Newell & MacNeil, 2010).
An awareness of the impact of vicarious trauma on clinicians has led to the
development of prevention strategies that can be implemented at the organizational
level (Sansbury et al., 2015). Trippany et al. (2004) developed the following guidelines
for vicarious trauma prevention: (1) case management specifically limiting the number
of trauma clients per week as much as possible; (2) peer supervision, which provides an
avenue for debriefing and consultation; (3) agencies assuming responsibility to provide
supervision, consultation, staffing, continuing education, and employee benefits,
including personal counseling; (4) training and education on trauma work; (5) personal
coping mechanisms, which include leisure activities and creative endeavors; and (6)
spirituality to facilitate connection and meaning.
Sansbury et al. (2015) identify similar prevention strategies that address vicarious
traumatization: ensuring clinicians have appropriate training in providing trauma
services; focusing on trauma recovery concepts such as empowerment, collaboration,
Complete, interpret, and apply the Compassion Fatigue/Satisfaction Self-Test (CFS) at https://
nwdrugtaskforce.ie/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Compassion-Fatigue-Handout-6.pdf.
ACTIVITY 14.3

-- 493 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	465
and trust; educating staff on concepts such as burnout, vicarious trauma, and
compassion fatigue and regular engagement in self-assessments concerning these
concepts; managing clinician caseloads; and providing mindfulness, awareness, and
stress-reduction training to clinicians. While all counselors must be alert to signs of
vicarious trauma, it is particularly important for counselors working with trauma
clients to be intentional about self-care and self-awareness in their professional and
personal lives.
For counselors working with survivors of trauma, self-care is acknowledged as a
critical professional responsibility due to increased exposure to work-related stressors.
Counselors in such settings often experience reactions that include anxiety, shock, and
feelings of destabilization (Skovholt & Trotter-Mathison, 2014). The demands of these
settings have potential to influence counselor–client boundaries. For example, working
to assist distressed clients with urgent stabilization needs can place a heavy emotional
load on counselors with a corresponding sense of investment. Counselors who feel this
increased sense of responsibility may seek to respond to client needs inappropriately
such as with resources outside the scope of therapeutic practice, resulting in client
confusion regarding appropriate therapeutic boundaries. Such reactions on the part of
counselors illustrate the impact on treatment boundaries and serve to emphasize the
importance of addressing counselor wellness needs.
The culture of settings in which clients receive services also informs the
maintenance of professional boundaries via the frequency and form of contact with
providers. Therapeutic settings that require frequent interpersonal interactions outside
of therapy may erode professional boundaries. For example, counselors who provide
treatment in shelters and inpatient facilities may experience role dissonance because
of competing demands of agency and client needs. Counselors may respond to this
dissonance by adjusting therapeutic limits based on their own needs for emotional
protection versus client therapeutic needs. Amid these increased demands for empathy
from clients who have experienced trauma, counselors are tasked with maintaining a
core therapeutic relationship essential for meaningful work (Corey et al., 2019). At the
same time, empathically attuned counselors are impacted by the narratives clients bring
to the process (Skovholt & Trotter-Mathison, 2014). Now complete Activity 14.4 and
Think About It 14.3.
Complete, interpret, and apply one or more of the
following self-care assessments, including childhood
trauma, stress, burnout and secondary (vicarious) trau-
matization, compassion satisfaction, and aspects of
personality: https://socialwork.buffalo.edu/resources/
self-care-starter-kit/self-care-assessments-exercises/
checklists-and-measures.html.
ACTIVITY 14.4
Imagine you are working at an inpatient facility where
you interact with clients both during and outside
of scheduled sessions. What challenges might you
experience about maintaining a therapeutic relation-
ship? What self-care strategies might you employ with
the intention of addressing these specific challenges?
THINK ABOUT IT 14.3

-- 494 of 545 --

466 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Vicarious Resiliency
An emerging concept in mental health is vicarious resiliency (Edelkott et al., 2016;
Hernandez-Wolf, 2018; Ling et al., 2014). While counselors can be affected adversely
by trauma work, they can also experience affirmative thoughts, feelings, and beliefs
through hearing their clients’ stories of resiliency—adaptation to difficulties in a positive
and empowered manner. According to Hernandez-Wolf (2018), working with trauma
survivors may help counselors more effectively reframe negative events and develop
better coping skills. The capability of clients to deal with trauma and restore their lives
was found to be empowering to counselors. Vicarious resiliency can lead to increased
hope in one’s ability to cope with problems as well as an increased belief in human
empowerment. Hernandez-Wolf stated that vicarious trauma and vicarious resiliency
often co-occur.
Ling et al. (2014) studied the qualitative experiences of counselors engaged in
trauma work and identified themes of resiliency these counselors experienced toward
mitigating the potential impact of vicarious trauma. Counselors who thrived in trauma
work were those who had a sense of purpose and perceived empowerment. These
counselors described a process of “navigating the empathic journey” (p. 303), which
involved developing and implementing proactive strategies for managing reactions
to indirect trauma exposure. Awareness of personal reactions to traumatic stories and
maintaining boundaries were expressed in terms of empathic stamina and self-reflexivity
leading to personal and professional balance and well-being. Finally, counselors
successful in sustaining interest and commitment to trauma work valued professional
development, career path flexibility, and a work environment that promoted a sense of
support, value, and autonomy. Activity 14.5 assesses your resilience. Then read Case
Study 14.2 to deepen your understanding of vicarious resiliency.
Complete, interpret, and apply at least one of the following
resilience assessments: Conor-Davidson Resilience
Scale; Resilience Scale for Adults; Brief Resilience Scale;
Resilience Scale; Scale of Protective Factors; Predictive
6-factor Resilience Scale; Ego Resilience Scale; and
Academic Resilience Scale. All can be located at “How
to Measure Resilience with These 8 Resilience Scales” at
https://positivepsychology.com/3-resilience-scales/.
ACTIVITY 14.5
CASE STUDY 14.2
Vicarious Resiliency after a House Fire
Two years ago, Arden and Ryder lost their house in a fire. They were able to escape with
their two children and the family dog without harm, but the family lost everything in the
fire. Arden worked through this crisis with Ann, a counselor, until 6 months ago, when
Arden moved into a new home in another city. Arden has come back in to see Ann for
a follow-up appointment.
Ann: 	It’s so good to see you, Arden. I appreciated you e-mailing me
the pictures of your lovely new house. It’s been a long journey.

-- 495 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	467
Arden: 	Yes, I appreciate you being there for me through this. So
much of what we worked on has helped me cope. I see things
differently now.
Ann: 	How so?
Arden: 	Well . . . life, life is what really matters. I mean, at first I was in
shock and I couldn’t believe it. I questioned God. I had so many
mixed emotions.
Ann: 	Yes, I remember how difficult it was for you to accept and cope
with this tragedy at first. But I also remember your courage in
seeing things through, not only in the nuts-and-bolts details of
insurance and moving but also in your resolve to face feelings
and place this event into your life story as a challenge met and
an opportunity to learn and grow.
Arden: 	I guess that’s what I want to focus on today with you. I’m
different because of the fire. Of course, I wish it hadn’t
happened, but I believe I’m a better person because of it and
I wouldn’t want to trade that growth and knowledge about
what I can accomplish and about what really matters.
Ann: 	The fire helped you discover the resiliency you had within you
all along.
Arden: 	Yes, I appreciate my partner and children more. I know that
life, relationships, and loved ones are what really matter.
I don’t care about material things anymore. I no longer
mourn the possessions I lost in the fire because I know the
emotions connected to them were because of the people they
reminded me of. A fire can never take away my memories
of my grandmother and mother. The memories are real. The
antiques were things that can be replaced, but I haven’t lost my
memories. I feel very free and joyful. I appreciate every day and
every person in my life.
Ann: 	You’re living life with more awareness of love and
relationships. How wonderful to fully realize the depth and
importance of the people in your life.
Arden: 	I think back to how I was before the fire; I was so distracted and
busy and I often took my family for granted. Now I’m thankful
every day for life and the people I love.
Discussion Questions
1. What has Arden learned through her crisis event?
2. What might the counselor learn from Arden’s story?
3. How do stories like Arden’s foster vicarious resiliency?

-- 496 of 545 --

468 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SELF-CARE STRATEGIES
Learning Objective 14.2 Describe effective self-care strategies.
It is imperative for mental health professionals providing crisis services to engage in
restorative activities to regroup, revitalize, and prevent the effects of burnout, compassion
fatigue, and vicarious trauma. Counselor well-being depends on making the choice to
intentionally manage time, nurture personal and professional relationships, and grow
as a professional. Erford (2023) proposed that leisure activities, social support through
connection with friends and family, spirituality, and time in nature were important
elements that served to counterbalance the effects of burnout in the mental health field.
The following sections explore the importance of integrating self-care into counseling
training curricula and into counseling supervision, especially during moments of crisis.
Voices from the Field 14.2 presents a personal reflection on self-care.
Charlotte Daughhetee
Since I have been writing about self-care, I decided
to do a completely unscientific survey. I asked my
friends how they relax and rejuvenate. Here are
some of the answers I got: riding a bike 100 miles,
reading a book, fishing, gardening, yoga, attending
NASCAR races, lying in a hammock taking a nap,
having a beer with friends, cooking, watching NCAA
basketball, walking the dog, quilting, fencing, and
playing a harp.
As you can see, relaxation comes in many forms.
A meaningful authentic self-care plan should be tailor-
made for the individual. All mental health professionals
need to be intentional about integrating personalized
enjoyable activities into unique self-care plans that
come from personal experiences. Ask yourself, “When
did I feel relaxed and renewed, and what was I doing?”
Take what you were doing and do more of it! Follow a
solution-focused approach to self-care.
Clients can also benefit from exploring
their own distinctive methods of revitalization and
restoration. Instead of recommending standard stress-
relief activities, encourage clients to create their own
program, something that truly reflects the activities
they love, by having them explore the life-enhancing
activities that have worked for them in the past. Once
clients have identified their self-care activities, have
them plan those activities into their week.
So, as I head into a new week, what activities
are included in my self-care plan? Walking, lunch with
friends, a movie with my partner, reading a new book
about Tudor England, and birdwatching in the state
park. How about you? What will you do this week to
refresh yourself and enhance your wellness?
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 14.2
A Personal Reflection on Self-Care
Emphasizing Self-Care in Counselor Training Programs
Students enrolled in graduate counselor preparation programs can attest that considerable
demands are placed on students in terms of both personal and professional development.
Developmental experiences, assignments, and course experiences frequently invite
students to examine personal values in the context of the role of the professional
counselor as they work toward developing a cohesive counselor identity. For example,
the ethical mandate in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) against making a professional
referral based on a counselor’s personal values implies that the counselor has, at some
point, developed an awareness of personal values. With such an expectation, counselor
training programs might conceivably engage counseling students in course experiences
that include an element of an examination of personal values; such an examination might

-- 497 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	469
well involve feelings of discomfort for the student. Counselor education programs might
appropriately encourage student self-care by providing referral resources for students to
access to assist with both personal and professional concerns that arise as a by-product
of engaging in course experiences.
Indeed, self-care strategies implemented as part of the graduate training of
counselors have shown significant benefits for participants. Shapiro et al. (2007) examined
the impact of an 8-week mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) intervention
on the mental health and capacity for mindfulness among therapists in training. The
MBSR intervention included 2-hour weekly sessions during which students practiced
sitting meditation, body scanning, yoga, guided meditation, and informal strategies for
incorporating mindfulness into daily life. This study found that participants in MBSR
reported significant decreases in stress, anxiety, negative affect, and rumination and
significant increases in both positive affect and self-compassion.
While focusing on individual student needs regarding self-care might appear the
most direct path to addressing self-care, Wolf et al. (2012) noted that systemic barriers
to wellness often exist within counselor education programs. Awareness of contextual
factors impacting student wellness efforts suggests the use of a systemic approach
grounded in the values of the counseling profession and infused throughout the
curriculum.
One potentially useful framework counselor training programs might consider as
a context for addressing the systemic self-care needs of students is the wheel of wellness
model (Myers et al., 2000). This holistic model of wellness is grounded in Adlerian
theory and focuses on the five life tasks of spirituality, friendship, love, self-direction,
and work and leisure. Wolf et al. (2012) suggested holistic strategies stemming from
this model that counseling programs might implement to promote student wellness.
These holistic strategies might include faculty modeling self-care by engaging in self-care
practices; providing opportunities for student participation in support groups; including
wellness activities in course requirements for students; and encouraging students to
develop and implement their own unique self-care plans. Such an expectation on the
part of counselor training programs that all counselor trainees engage in self-care might
effectively address the tendency for counselors to overlook self-care needs in favor of
helping others (Skovholt & Trotter-Mathison, 2014).
Counselor education programs have a gatekeeping responsibility to promote
wellness within their programs. In the same manner that informed consent is an ongoing
process in the counseling relationship, wellness should be an ongoing theme throughout
a student’s training program. From the moment that students enter counseling training
programs until the time they exit, promotion of wellness should be ingrained into their
overall professional identity.
One way counselor education programs might promote wellness is through
advocating that students receive counseling during their graduate training program.
Whether students should be required by counselor education programs to have counseling
is a controversial topic in the literature (Roberts & Franzo, 2013). Many students maintain
some form of employment while in graduate school, and the additional demands might
be managed more effectively when students are actively engaged in supportive therapy.
Additionally, the personal nature of the topics that are addressed in counselor
education programs may touch on the personal concerns of students and being involved
in counseling might assist with exploring and processing significant personal concerns.

-- 498 of 545 --

470 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
Even for programs that stop short of requiring students to engage in personal counseling
as a mandatory requirement, providing students with a referral list of approved providers
might encourage students to avail themselves of counseling services to support their
counselor development process. Now complete Think About It 14.4 to explore the need
for personal counseling for counselors.
What are your beliefs about graduate counseling pro-
grams requiring students to be involved in personal
therapy during the program? What are your thoughts
about the rationale for this requirement (or lack thereof)
of the counselor education program in which you are
currently enrolled?
THINK ABOUT IT 14.4
Roach and Young (2007) suggest that it is advantageous for counselor education
programs to develop comprehensive plans that help students address all components
of personal development. They suggest that helping students develop a greater sense of
wellness has both short-term and long-term benefits. By incorporating wellness into their
lifestyles, counseling students have the potential to improve their personal awareness,
experience more satisfaction, and consequently become more competent to meet the
demands of graduate training and future work roles by dealing more effectively with
stress and anxiety, therefore reducing impairment and burnout.
Similar research has indicated that supervised experiences in counseling training
programs that include self-care have potential benefits that extend beyond promoting
personal wellness and protective factors against impairment. For example, in a summary
of qualitative research conducted over 9 years, Christopher and Maris (2010) described
the positive outcomes of a graduate course in mindfulness on the counseling students
enrolled in the course. The course, titled “Mind-Body Medicine and the Art of Self-Care,”
was a 15-week class that met for 2½ hours, twice per week. The dual goals of the class
were to instruct students in self-care strategies to implement in graduate school and
beyond and to teach students how mindfulness practices were being used in counseling
and behavioral medicine. Course objectives addressed both personal and professional
growth and were intended to (1) provide students with self-care skills and techniques;
(2) promote understanding of Eastern and Western traditions of contemplative practice;
(3) increase awareness of contemporary efforts to apply contemplative interventions
to health care; (4) instruct students concerning the effectiveness of contemplative
applications in behavioral medicine; (5) increase awareness of ethical considerations
related to the mind/body interventions; and (6) promote awareness of how culture and
cultural perspectives on wellness impact the therapeutic process. A significant course
requirement was a reflective journal in which students described and processed personal
reactions to course content and experiential activities.
The qualitative themes that emerged from the data indicated that students
received personal and professional benefits from participating in the course. Personal
benefits described included (1) increased awareness, relaxation, and ability to focus;
(2) enhanced mental, emotional, and physical health; and (3) increased self-acceptance
and improved interpersonal relationships. Significantly, students described
additional benefits that affected their professional work with clients, including more
attention to the process of counseling and increased comfort with silence; increased

-- 499 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	471
awareness and acceptance of clients and self-identity as a counselor; and a positive
impact on the therapeutic relationship, the development of theoretical orientation,
and case conceptualization.
Similarly, in a study of the impact of personal meditation on the treatment efficacy
of counselors-in-training, Grepmair et al. (2007) found that clients of meditating
psychotherapy trainees reported significantly higher global functioning, decreased
symptoms, and more security about socializing. These clients further reported decreased
symptom problems in the areas of obsessiveness, anxiety, anger, and phobias and
indicated better understanding of the process of counseling and developmental goals as
well as more optimism about their own progress. Such research suggests that counseling
students and supervisees who attend to their self-care needs may ultimately benefit not
only personally but also professionally through increased capacity for effectiveness with
clients. Now complete Activities 14.6 and 14.7.
Complete, interpret, and apply the Five Factor Wellness Inventory at https://five-factor-wellness-inventory.
pdffiller.com.
ACTIVITY 14.6
Complete, interpret, and apply one of the following
quality-of-life inventories.
Center for Victims of Torture (CVT). (2021).
Professional Quality of Life: Health Worker, Version 1.
ProQOL: https://proqol.org/proqol-measure
ProQOL Health: https://proqol.org/proqol-health-
measure
Hudnall Stamm, B. (2009). Professional Quality
of Life: Compassion Satisfaction and Fatigue Version 5
(ProQOL). www.proqol.org
ACTIVITY 14.7
Supervision and Self-Care
Counselors working with crisis situations require ongoing supervision to help them
process the complexity of crisis clinical situations. The inability to receive supervisory
support and oversight has the potential of having a deleterious impact on crisis counselors’
personal and professional development (Dupre et al., 2014). Crisis supervision has been
described as a tool for enhancing both the counselor’s crisis management skills and
overall professional development. In Dupre et al.’s (2014) study evaluating counselors’
perceptions of crisis supervision, participants reported that supervision was absolutely
important for successful resolution of the crisis and stated that effective supervision
includes “immediate and specific feedback, clear guidance for navigating the crisis,
opportunities for timely debriefing, and focused discussion on countertransference
reactions” (p. 90).
Counselors working in crisis situations, especially those in the postlicensure stage
of professional development, share a desire for ongoing supervision (Dupre et al., 2014).
These counselors, who often work in isolation, depend on clinical supervision and peer
support to help them balance countertransference reactions with the need to maintain a
level of empathic distance. The clinical supervisor in a crisis situation has the potential

-- 500 of 545 --

472 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
to facilitate posttraumatic growth of supervisees by ensuring that supervisees have the
space needed to make meaning out of the crisis situation. Participants in the Dupre
et al. study suggested that effective supervisors believe in counseling, believe in the
sacredness of supervision time, protect supervisees, are willing to hold supervisees’ stuff,
help supervisees regulate powerful emotions, and are committed to helping supervisees
grow through the crisis.
Savic-Jabrow (2010) found that sole practitioners identified supervision as their
primary form of support and self-care. Trainees and beginning counselors are supervised
as part of their professional evolution, but it is important for counselors to seek out
peer support through supervision and consultation throughout their careers. This type
of ongoing support is an essential part of continuing competency and best practice
(Daughhetee et al., 2010).
Self-care is a critical component of the supervision of all counselors, and supervisors
should prepare to assist supervisees in addressing their unique self-care needs in relation
to the challenges of providing services to specific populations. For example, Chassman
et al. (2010) noted that counselors who provide services related to sexual concerns
are required to be immersed in their clients’ internal sexual worlds. While working
with either victims of sexual abuse or sexual perpetrators, counselors are “exposed
to sexual information and often to vivid images of deviant sexual behavior” (p. 269).
Self-monitoring and self-care are necessities for counselors who work with adolescents
with sexual behavior problems; supervision is a resource that helps counselors normalize
feelings, maintain personal and professional boundaries, and separate work from
personal experiences. Chassman et al. noted the difficulties that supervisees often face
in exploring their personal reactions to their work, which can make supervisees reluctant
to access supervision as a self-care resource.
Considering the vast benefits associated with receiving ongoing supervision, it is
unfortunate when supervisees experience reluctance in seeking help from supervisors
for fear of appearing less “expert” or perhaps even professionally impaired. Figley
(2002) noted the isomorphism of the “conspiracy of silence” (p. 1440) surrounding the
topic of compassion fatigue and suggested one primary step counselors might take is to
model an open discussion of struggles concerning compassion fatigue and compassion
stress. Supervisors might promote such transparency through modeling and openly
discussing self-care strategies with supervisees. Sixbey and Daniels (2008) developed
a crisis-oriented approach for clinical supervision that mirrors the Stoltenberg model
of counselor development. Their work evolved in the aftermath of the year when their
region was impacted by multiple hurricanes in a narrow time frame, and counselors,
supervisors, and crisis workers were called to serve while also managing the devastation
to their own personal lives and property. Erford (2023) advocated for providing
counselors with opportunities for increasing awareness of levels of personal wellness
by completing wellness assessments.
Supervisors have a variety of strategies available to assist supervisees in developing
and maintaining personalized self-care. Examples of such strategies are as follows:
• Supervision orientation. Including development of self-care strategies as a com-
ponent of an initial orientation to the supervision relationship communicates to
supervisees that self-care is a valued aspect of professional counselor development
and that the well-being of supervisees is important.

-- 501 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	473
• SMART goals . Self-care plans that demonstrate intentionality and accountability
in the form of measurable goals are more likely to be implemented. Self-care strate-
gies in the context of the SMART framework might be developed into goals that
are S pecific, M easurable, A ttainable, R ealistic, and T imely.
• Portfolios . Supervisors might require students and licensure-seeking counselors
to develop and maintain a professional development portfolio to include self-care
strategies.
• Success stories. Supervision activities that include an accountability piece are
more likely to invite supervisee compliance. Self-care activities might be regularly
included as required supervision assignments, and students might share their
success stories as a means of demonstrating accountability in the supervision
process.
• Bibliotherapy. O’Halloran and Linton (2000) identified several domain-specific
book titles as potential self-care resources for counseling practitioners. For example,
a potential resource identified for addressing self-care in the emotional domain is
Counseling as an Art: The Creative Arts in Counseling by Samuel Gladding (2021).
Supervisors might include such resources as assigned reading in formal supervi-
sion contracts. The addition of a reflective component to the assignment might
increase the impact of the content, serve to personalize the material for the super-
visee, introduce a measure of accountability, and further increase the likelihood
that supervisees will follow through with self-care strategies.
• Ongoing training. One method for preventing burnout and secondary traumatic
stress can be the “work smarter” strategy. Continuing education may be a more
serious self-care approach than leisure-type self-care strategies; conventional wis-
dom would suggest that learning, staying abreast of the field and its evolving best
practices, and having one’s knowledge and skills sharpened continually can be a
powerful prevention tool mitigating the depletion of energy when undertrained.
Covey’s (2013) motivational and performance-improving models included that
of “sharpening the saw.” This habit (number seven) engendered
all things self-care related. Working smart with ample training and
practicing within one’s scope of competence while assisting clients
in crisis can be an efficiency-enhancing strategy.
Counselors have a personal and professional responsibility to engage
in self-care. Newell and MacNeil (2010) emphasize the need for self-care as
a best practice and stress the need for burnout assessment, peer support,
continuing education, training on early warning signs, and self-care
practices. Monitoring one’s own mental, physical, and spiritual health;
managing time; nurturing relationships; and fostering professional growth
are vital elements of self-care and best practice.
No matter where you are in your process of counselor professional
development, you can resolve to start—or continue—to make self-care
a priority. Now complete Think About It 14.5 and then read Voices
from the Field 14.3 through 14.5, which provide personal reflections on
the importance of counselor self-care. Also see Case Study 14.3, which
challenges you to consider essential supervision issues related to counselor
wellness and self-care.
Pearson eTextbook
Video Example 14. 2
In this video, an experienced
counselor consults with a
colleague about troublesome
clients who bring up issues
that hit close to home. They
discuss burnout and self-care
strategies. What self-care
strategies do you need to start
to think about integrating into
your life before experiencing
burnout?

-- 502 of 545 --

474 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
How important is it to you that your supervisor pro-
mote ongoing self-care as part of your supervision
process? What strategies from your supervisor will be
most helpful to support your integration of self-care
into professional practice?
THINK ABOUT IT 14.5
Hayden Belisle
I vividly remember my professors and internship supervi-
sors explaining the importance of self-care and the value
of supervision throughout graduate school. I also recall
thinking that I would get around to that “one day.” On
particularly difficult days during my internship and during
the first couple of years that I was practicing as a school
counselor, I sought solace in “retail therapy.” I could be
overwhelmed by a very troubling case, and it was amazing
how much better I would feel after a good trip to the mall.
Well, as you might imagine, the relief from the stress was
fleeting . . . and not covered by insurance! I share that, not
to make light of a very important issue, but to be honest
about the fact that I didn’t take caring for myself as seri-
ously as I should have at the very beginning of my career.
By my second or third year as a school counselor,
I was beginning to feel somewhat burned out.
I questioned whether I had made the right career choice. I
know that feeling burned out when your career has barely
even started seems crazy, but it happens. I had extremely
challenging cases and many students and situations that
absolutely broke my heart. All of this was very difficult
for me to deal with, and although I have an incredible
support system outside of work, I was not participating
in peer consultation or supervision of any type.
Believing that my calling in life is to be a coun-
selor, I knew that I had to make some changes, not only
for myself but also for the children and families I was
working with. I began seeking opportunities to con-
sult with other counselors and tried to be intentional
about taking better care of myself. This helped tremen-
dously. Knowing that I had a network of colleagues
who were just a phone call away if I needed help on
a case or simply someone to listen to and support me
was a great relief. After putting it off for several years,
I finally began the process to become an LPC. Although
it may sound dramatic, after my first session of supervi-
sion, it felt as though a huge boulder had been lifted
from my shoulders. Having the opportunity to discuss
cases and get feedback from someone I highly respect
and trust as a professional has been invaluable. I have
found that it has greatly enhanced my confidence as
a professional and it has challenged me to continue
growing and improving. I can honestly say that I have
felt far less overwhelmed and emotionally drained since
I started meeting with my supervisor. My only regret is
that I did not start sooner!
I would encourage anyone entering the coun-
seling profession to develop a strong support system
which includes other counselors and a plan for self-
care. It is extremely easy to get burned out when you
are not intentional about taking good care of yourself.
When we do not care for ourselves, we cannot give our
clients the care they deserve.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 14.3
Taking Care of Myself
Maegan Vick
Worn out? Tired? Typing papers while attempting
to watch your favorite show? Working late to help
clients who have long left your office? These are all
the signs of an overworked individual. They are also
signs of a passionate and dedicated counselor. It is
hard sometimes to put that book down, turn off the
computer, or even allow your mind to temporarily
forget one of the many clients and coworkers you are
dedicated to helping. But you have to draw that line
somewhere. Otherwise, you face counselor burnout
and a decline in your own happiness and effectiveness.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 14.4
Figuring Out What Works for You

-- 503 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	475
Self-care must be placed at the forefront for counselors.
If you are not good to yourself, you cannot possibly be
any good to others. It took some tears, sleepless nights,
and pure fatigue for me to understand this point clearly.
Everyone must figure out what works for them.
What works for me includes truly looking at the
children I work with and stopping for a few moments to
enjoy them, rather than worrying over how to fix their
situations. It is me driving to that old barn and watching
the horses graze in the sunset. It is me pulling off the
side of the road to buy some pumpkins from children
selling them for Halloween and me picking wildflowers
in a nearby field. It is me spending time with my family
and friends. It is also me saying “no” to people and
knowing that doesn’t mean I don’t care to help them. It
simply means I care enough to take care of me. It is also
scheduling that appointment with my counselor when
I see the need. It is me listening to my body, soul, and
mind and knowing when boundaries need to be set,
knowing when I need “me time.”
In the world of counseling, it is very easy to get
stuck in that rut of giving away your time to everyone
else and leaving none for yourself. New and veteran
counselors, a word to the wise: Do not get stuck in
that rut. Ongoing supervision and effective self-care
strategies are important for crisis counselors. It is
essential for counselors to include self-reflection as part
of self-care questions such as the following:
1. Do you listen to yourself and realize you need to
set boundaries and schedule some “me time”?
What signs tell you that you need self-care?
2. What activities, people, etc., in your life help you
refuel? How could you integrate these into your
life more consistently?
Rachel M. Hoffman
I clearly remember my first experience working with a
suicidal client. I was working in an inpatient setting and,
although I had expected to encounter suicidal clients,
I wasn’t quite prepared to encounter suicidal clients
who did not appear, at least initially, to want to change.
Working with someone with a complete disregard for
their own life challenged my personal belief system
and, although I had been prepared as a counselor,
I still found myself wanting to fall back on convincing
the client of reasons to live. Thankfully, with the
support and guidance of a strong clinical supervisor,
I was able to bracket my own feelings related to death
to be helpful to the client.
It is important to have realistic expectations for
change and to recognize that the process of suicidality
is not one that is quickly resolved. Understanding the
function of assessment, intervention, and follow-up
is important for working successfully with suicidal
clients. I believe that it is important for counselors to
understand that part of being helpful with suicidal
clients is understanding that change may be a slow
process. However, it is necessary for counselors to
remember that clients are not only capable of change
but also possess the skills to make those changes.
I believe that self-care is of the utmost importance
when working in crisis situations, especially those
dealing with suicidal clients. Debriefing with a supervisor
or peer can be helpful in the immediate aftermath of a
suicidal crisis. Making time daily to engage in self-care
is an essential consideration for counselors who work in
stressful situations. Personally, I have found that taking
a “5-minute mindfulness break” each day can help me
reconnect and regroup in a healthy way.
VOICES FROM THE FIELD 14.5
Self-Care and Working with Suicidal Clients
CASE STUDY 14.3
Supervision in Crisis Counseling
Parker, a recent graduate of a counseling program, has a job in an agency that provides
services to low-income individuals, couples, and families. State budget cuts and an
economic downturn have increased the client load beyond capacity. Parker is pursuing
LPC credentials and receives supervision from an approved counselor outside the agency.

-- 504 of 545 --

476 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
OVERVIEW OF THE ELEMENTS OF CRISIS INTERVENTION RELATED TO
SELF-CARE
Learning Objective 14.3 Build resources available for self-care.
Self-care is recognized as an essential aspect of professional functioning in counseling
ethical codes and training standards and by professional counseling associations. While
counselors who provide crisis intervention services are particularly at risk for secondary
trauma, potential long-term effects such as compassion fatigue, impairment, burnout,
and secondary traumatic stress may be mitigated or avoided by regularly engaging in
appropriate self-care strategies.
This arrangement has proven to be a good thing because the director of the agency
is too stressed and overwhelmed to provide supervision. Everyone at the agency is
overwhelmed.
Parker is thankful for all the client contact hours but is beginning to wonder how
the current pace can be maintained. Parker keeps up with case notes but has noticed
that some of the other counselors put off doing case notes and paperwork and that
they seem cynical about their clients. Parker feels like the job is very hard—too hard!
Parker’s LPC supervisor has expressed concern about Parker’s caseload and the effect
it might have on providing appropriate care, but Parker has assured the supervisor that
it is manageable.
A major stressor at the agency has been the behavior of the director. While at times
the director is jovial and supportive, the director sometimes flies off the handle for no
reason and becomes enraged. Parker has not been on the receiving end of these rages
yet, but everyone on the staff seems to walk on eggshells and dreads that they will be the
next target. They are all thankful for those days when the director is in a good mood, but
as time passes the staff is beginning to sense that the director is becoming increasingly
stressed, and they dread the inevitable outbursts of rage.
Parker has not addressed the director’s behavior with the LPC supervisor. Parker
doesn’t want the supervisor to think poorly of the director, and also wonders if maybe
it’s not as bad as it seems. One day the director is in a particularly bad mood, and the staff
is tense and nervous. Parker hears the director screaming at the receptionist in front of a
waiting room full of clients. That evening, Parker comes clean with the supervisor about
how bad things are at the agency. Parker’s supervisor says, “What you’re describing is
the cycle of abuse.” Parker is stunned and realizes that the entire staff at the agency has
been caught up in an abuse cycle.
Discussion Questions
1. Why do you think Parker has avoided telling his supervisor the truth about his
workplace?
2. Do you believe the director is impaired? Is client care at risk?
3. What effect does the director’s behavior have on staff? On clients?
4. What, if anything, should the supervisor do with this information?
5. What should Parker do?

-- 505 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	477
Developing self-awareness is an important part of maintaining counselor wellness.
Counselors who are committed to self-assessment and maintenance of a healthy mind,
body, and spirit are better prepared for the stressors associated with crisis work.
Furthermore, ethical best practice requires counselors to engage in self-monitoring and
to appropriately seek supervision and personal counseling, as needed.
Counselor training programs and counseling supervisors can promote professional
resilience by emphasizing the importance of counselor self-care as an aspect of professional
functioning. Counselor educators can foster a culture of wellness through modeling self-
care, providing program and course opportunities for students to experience self-care
activities, and inviting students to take the initiative in developing and implementing
their own self-care plans.
Counseling supervisors can also promote a trusting supervisory relationship in
which supervisees feel supported in sharing their countertransference and other personal
reactions in providing crisis and trauma services and are able to ask for help without
fearing the supervisor’s judgment. Students and supervisees who regularly engage in
self-care benefit from increased effectiveness in their personal lives as well as in their
professional work with clients. Activity 14.8 asks you to search for additional self-care
resources while Table 14.1 provides many online and print resources on counselor
self-care.
ProQol self-care resources are funded by the U.S.
government and can be located at https://proqol.org/
self-care-tools-1. These self-care resources are available
in various languages and address burnout, compassion
fatigue, compassion satisfaction, moral distress,
perceived support, secondary traumatic stress, better
sleep, boundaries, breathing, intentional avoidance
and focus, grounding techniques, intrusive thoughts
and flashbacks, mindfulness, nightmares, progressive
muscle relaxation, stretching, and visualization.
ACTIVITY 14.8
Online Resources
ACA Traumatology Interest Network: https://www.counseling.org/aca-community/aca-connect/
interest-networks#Traumatology
Clinician Survivor Task Force—Clinicians as Survivors: After a Suicide Loss: https://cinnamon-
begonia-rsxy.squarespace.com
Disaster Mental Health Graduate Certificate (University of South Dakota): catalog.usd.edu/
preview_program.php?catoid=20&poid=3012
Gift from Within—PTSD Resources for Survivors and Caregivers: https://www.theannainstitute.org/
American%20Indians%20and%20Alaska%20Natives/Trauma%20in%20American%20
Indian%20Communities.pdf
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: https://www.samhsa.gov
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration—self-care for homeless service
providers: www.samhsa.gov/homelessness-programs-resources/hpr-resources/self-care
The Trauma Stewardship Institute: https://traumastewardship.com
TABLE 14.1 Resources on Counselor Self-Care
(continued)

-- 506 of 545 --

478 	Part II • Special Issues in Crisis Intervention
SUMMARY
Counselor self-assessment and self-care are
critical for maintaining optimal professional
functioning, particularly for counselors who
provide services for clients experiencing
crisis and trauma. The unique demands of
crisis and trauma work can take a substantial
toll on the personal and professional well-
being of counselors, who may experience
countertransference, burnout, compassion
fatigue, and vicarious trauma. Failure to
recognize the emerging signs of these conditions
can lead to compromising both counselor
personal wellness and professional effectiveness.
Burnout, compassion fatigue, and vicarious
trauma are common terms describing reactions to
job-related stress including mental and physical
exhaustion, cynicism, feelings of ineffectiveness,
detachment from clients, and emotional
numbness. Counselors who experience work
overload, lack of resources (including time),
social conflict, and a lack of fit with their job
are at risk for developing symptoms of burnout
that, if not addressed through self-care, can
negatively impact client treatment outcomes.
Intentionally allocating and protecting time
for self-care strategies, staying involved with
social support systems, attending to spiritual
needs, and maintaining connection with nature
are strategies counselors can use to promote
personal and professional development while
counterbalancing the potential for burnout.
While burnout has long been recognized
as a potential risk for counseling practitioners
engaged in crisis work, an emerging awareness
of the potential for personal and professional
growth is captured through the concept of
vicarious resiliency. Clients’ stories of resiliency
can empower counselors in ways that enhance
coping skills, promote positive beliefs, increase
hopefulness, and instill confidence in clients’
abilities to restore their lives. Counselors are
better positioned to promote and sustain their
own resiliency when they are aware of common
reactions associated with engaging in work with
clients who have experienced trauma, remain
vigilant regarding appropriate professional
boundaries, engage in professional development
opportunities, and balance their awareness of
the risks of burnout with recognition of signs of
posttraumatic growth.
The importance of self-care for maintaining
ethical practice is recognized in professional
counseling ethical codes, such as the ACA Code
of Ethics (2014), which requires that counselors
Print Resources
Altman, D. (2011). One-minute mindfulness: Fifty simple ways to find peace, clarity, and new
possibilities in a stressed-out world. New World Library.
Bush, A. D. (2015). Restorative practices to weave through your workday. Norton.
Corey, G., Muratori, M., Austin, J. T. II, & Austin, J. A. (2018). Counselor self-care. American
Counseling Association.
Kottler, J. A. (2011). The therapist’s workbook: Self-assessment, self-care, and self-improvement
exercises for mental health professionals (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Louden, J. (2012). The woman’s retreat book: A guide to restoring, rediscovering, and
reawakening your true self in a moment, an hour, a day, or a weekend. HarperOne.
Narain, N., & Phillips, K. N. (2017). Self-care for the real world: Practical self-care advice for
everyday life. Hutchinson.
Skovholt, T. M., & Trotter-Mathison, M. J. (2010). The resilient practitioner: Burnout prevention
and self-care strategies for counselors, therapists, teachers, and health professionals (2nd ed.).
Routledge.
Teater, M., & Ludgate, J. (2014). Overcoming compassion fatigue. PESI.
TABLE 14.1 Resources on Counselor Self-Care (continued)

-- 507 of 545 --

Chapter 14 • Counselor Self-Care in Crisis Situations 	479
regularly monitor their personal mental health
and engage in ongoing self-care. Such continuous
self-assessment involves maintaining awareness
of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors as indicators
of professional functioning. Awareness of
internal reactions to client work, such as
countertransference reactions, is an important
aspect of self-care because the work clients do
in session can evoke in counselors unrecognized
or unresolved issues that might interfere with
the therapy. Counselors who fail to identify
their own reactions to client experiences might
unintentionally use the counseling relationship
to address personal needs.
Ongoing supervision is important for
maintaining counselor awareness. Supportive
supervisors and colleagues are invaluable
resources to assist in monitoring for signs of
decreased effectiveness and potential burnout.
The support provided through supervision can
foster a sense of community for practitioners who
would otherwise feel professionally isolated and
serves as a collaborative context for exploring and
processing reactions to crisis work. Counselors
who have the benefit of supportive supervision
are better positioned to create meaningful
narratives that foster posttraumatic growth.
Counselor education programs routinely
require students to engage in curricular activities
that promote personal development as an aspect
of professional training. Course activities that
invite personal reflection, examination of values,
and consideration of interpersonal and family
dynamics place unique demands on students; thus,
counselor training programs have a responsibility
to balance these requirements through integrating
self-care and wellness strategies into the
curriculum. Such an integrated approach might
reasonably involve promoting self-care among
both counseling faculty and students, providing
access to resources such as counseling services, and
designing curricular experiences targeting student
wellness. The potential benefits for students
who engage in curricular experiences that focus
specifically on self-care include increased mental
focus and relaxation, self-acceptance, improved
overall health, and enhanced development of
clinical skills. Counselors should keep in mind
the following key practices regarding counselor
self-care:
• In addition to aligning with ethical
practice, counselors who regularly monitor
their personal mental health and engage in
ongoing self-care are potentially enhancing
their effectiveness.
• Counselors should understand concepts
such as countertransference, burnout,
compassion fatigue, and vicarious trauma
and be aware of emerging signs of these
conditions.
• Counselors should also be aware of
vicarious resiliency and compassion
satisfaction as positive aspects of working
with crisis and trauma clients.
• Consultation and supportive supervision
are necessary components of effective crisis
intervention work.
• Organizations should support clinical staff
through mindfulness training, limiting
caseloads, and providing an environment
that supports clinician engagement in
ongoing self-care.
• Counselor 	education 	programs 	and
counseling supervisors should promote
self-care as a component of counselor
professional 	identity 	by 	supporting
student and supervisee development and
the implementation of self-care plans.
Intentionally attending to these key practices at
the start of the training process and establishing
them as non-negotiable components of one’s
professional counselor identity can help
counselors maintain professional and ethical
boundaries, best practices, and life–work balance
throughout their careers.

-- 508 of 545 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 509 of 545 --

481
Aaron, M. (2012). The pathways of problematic sexual behavior:
A literature review of factors affecting adult sexual behavior
in survivors of childhood sexual abuse. Sexual Addiction &
Compulsivity, 19(3), 199–218. https://doi.org/10.1080/10720
162.2012.690678
Adams, R. E., Hu, Y., Figley, C. R., Urosevich, T. G., Hoffman,
S. N., Kirchner, H. L., . . . Boscarino, J. A. (2021). Risk and
protective factors associated with mental health among
female military veterans: Results from the veterans’ health
study. BMC Women’s Health, 21, 55. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12905-021-01181-z
Administration for Children and Families. (2020). Child maltreat-
ment 2020. https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/data-research/
child-maltreatment
Ahrens, C. E., Abeling, S., Ahmad, S., & Hinman, J. (2010). Spir-
ituality and well-being: The relationship between religious
coping and recovery from sexual assault. Journal of Interper-
sonal Violence, 25(7), 1242–1263. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0886260509340533
Alexander, D. A. (2005). Early mental health intervention after
disasters. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 11(1), 12–18.
https://doi.org/10.1192/apt.11.1.12
Allen, B., Timmer, S. G., & Urquiza, A. J. (2016). Parent–child
interaction therapy for sexual concerns of maltreated chil-
dren: A preliminary investigation. Child Abuse & Neglect, 56,
80–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2016.04.008
Almond, L., & Budden, M. (2012). The use of text messages
within a crisis negotiation: Help or hindrance? Journal of
Police Crisis Negotiations, 12(1), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1080
/15332586.2011.593343
Alotaby, I. Y., Alkandari, B. A., Alshamali, K. A., Kamel, M. I., &
El-Shazly, M. K. (2013) Barriers for domestic violence screening
in primary health care centers. Alexandria Journal of Medicine,
49(2), 175–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajme.2012.07.005
Amado, B. G., Arce, R., & Herraiz, A. (2015). Psychological
injury in victims of child sexual abuse: A meta-analytic
review. Psychosocial Intervention, 24(1), 49–62. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.psi.2015.03.002
American Addictions Centers. (2020). EMS responders: The stress
is killing us. https://americanaddictioncenters.org/blog/
ems-responders-the-stress-is-killing-us
American Association of Suicidology (AAS). (2021). Facts and
statistics. http://www.suicidology.org/Portals/14/docs/
Resources/FactSheets/USA2012.pdf
American Counseling Association (ACA). (2014). ACA code of
ethics. https://www.counseling.org/docs/default-source/
ethics/2014-code-of-ethics.pdf?sfvrsn=2d58522c_4
American Mental Health Counselors Association (AMHCA).
(2020). AMHCA code of ethics. https://www.amhca.org/
HigherLogic/System/DownloadDocumentFile.ashx?
DocumentFileKey=24a27502-196e-b763-ff57-490a12f7edb1
American Pet Products Association. (2021). 2020–2021 APPA
national pet owners survey. http://www.americanpetproducts.
org/press_industrytrends.asp
American Psychiatric Association. (2022). Diagnostic and statisti-
cal manual of mental disorders (5th ed., text revision). Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2023). What is psychiatry?
http://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/what-is-
psychiatry
American Red Cross. (2022). Disaster health and mental health vol-
unteers. https://www.redcross.org/volunteer/volunteer-
opportunities/disaster-health-mental-health-volunteer.html
American School Counselor Association (ASCA). (2016). Ethical
standards for school counselors. https://www.schoolcounselor.
org/getmedia/f041cbd0-7004-47a5-ba01-3a5d657c6743/
Ethical-Standards.pdf
American School Counselor Association (ASCA). (2019).
The ASCA national model: A framework for school counseling
programs (4th ed.). Author.
American School Counselor Association (ASCA). (2020). Position
statement: The school counselor and safe schools and crisis
response. https://www.schoolcounselor.org/Standards-
Positions/Position-Statements/ASCA-Position-Statements/
The-School-Counselor-and-Safe-Schools-and-Crisis-
R#:~:text=School%20counselors%20are%20leaders%20
in,and%20responding%20to%20crisis%20situations
American School Counselor Association (ASCA). (2022).
The role of the professional school counselor. https://www
.schoolcounselor.org/getmedia/ee8b2e1b-d021-4575-982c-
c84402cb2cd2/Role-Statement.pdf
American Society for Addiction Medicine. (2013). The ASAM
criteria: Treatment criteria for addictive, substance-related, and
co-occurring conditions (3rd ed.). Author.
Andrews, D. A., Bonta, J., & Wormith, S. J. (2004). The Level of
Service/Case Management Inventory (LS/CMI). Multi-Health
Systems.
Asberg, K., & Renk, K. (2013). Comparing incarcerated and col-
lege student women with histories of childhood sexual
abuse: The roles of abuse severity, support, and substance
use. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and
Policy, 5(2), 167–175. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027162
Asoka, H., Koido, Y., Kawashima, Y., Kawashima, Y., Ikeda, M.,
Miyamoto, Y., & Nishi, D. (2021). Longitudinal change of
psychological distress among healthcare professionals with
and without psychological first aid training experience dur-
ing the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal of Environ-
mental Research and Public Health, 18(23), 12474. https://doi.
org/10.33.90/ijerph182312474
Association for Counselor Education and Supervision (ACES).
(2011). Best practices in clinical supervision ACES task force
report. https://acesonline.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/
11/ACES-Best-Practices-in-Clinical-Supervision-2011.pdf
Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and Religious Values in Coun-
seling. (2016). Competencies for addressing spiritual and religious
issues in counseling. https://www.counseling.org/docs/
default-source/competencies/competencies-for-addressing-
spiritual-and-religious-issues-in-counseling.pdf?sfvrsn=
aad7c2c_10
REFERENCES

-- 510 of 545 --

482 	References
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development
(ASCD). (2019). School safety starts from within. https://www
.ascd.org/el/articles/school-safety-starts-from-within
Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (ATSA). (2006).
Report of the task force on children with sexual behavior problems.
https://www.atsa.com/pdfs/Report-TFCSBP.pdf
Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (ATSA). (2012).
Sex offender risk assessment. https://www.atsa.com/pdfs/
SexOffenderRiskAssessmentBriefWithBibliography2012.pdf
Augusterfer, E. F., Mollica, R. F., & Lavelle, J. (2018). Leveraging
technology in post-disaster settings: The role of digital
health/telemental health. Current Psychiatry Reports, 20(10),
88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-018-0953-4
Augustyn, M. B., & Willyard, K. C. (2022). The contextual influ-
ences of police and social service providers on formal help-
seeking after incidents of intimate partner violence. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 37(1–2), NP1077–NP1104. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0886260520915551
Babor, T. F., Higgins-Biddle, J. C., Saunders, J. B., & Monteiro, M. G.
(2001). AUDIT The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test:
Guidelines for use in primary care (2nd ed.). World Health
Organization.
Bagalman, E. (2013). Traumatic brain injuries among veterans
(Report No. R40941). Congressional Research Service.
https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20130104_R40941_
287145552cf7a7753f50e1d03d5c47c41341a95a.pdf
Banducci, A. N., Hoffman, E. M., Lejuez, C. W., & Koenen, K. C.
(2014). The impact of childhood abuse on inpatient substance
users: Specific links with risky sex, aggression, and emotion
dysregulation. Child Abuse & Neglect, 38(5), 928–938. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2013.12.007
Barber, E., Newland, C., Young, A., & Rose, M. (2015). Survey
reveals alarming rates of EMS provider stress and thoughts of sui-
cide. https://www.jems.com/special-topics/survey-reveals-
alarming-rates-of-ems-provider-stress-and-thoughts-of-
suicide/
Bartlett, M. L., & Forbes, L. L. (2015). Legal and ethical consid-
erations when treating suicidal clients. The South Carolina
Counseling Forum, 1(1), 26–45.
Bates, E. A. (2019). “I am still afraid of her”: Men’s experiences
of post-separation abuse. Partner Abuse, 10(3), 336–358.
https://doi.org/10.1891/1946-6560.10.3.336
Baylor University. (2019). Firefighters can ease one another’s job
stress, but loving spouses may increase it: Fire fighting
adage is to “leave it at the firehouse,” but prevention of
spillover stress in personal life may bring its own tension.
Science Daily. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/11/
191113153017.htm
Becker, P., & Bachman, R. (2020). Intimate partner violence in
the military: An investigation of reporting crimes to law
enforcement officials. Journal of Family Violence, 35(4),
315–324. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10896-019-00091-x
Bedera, N., & Nordmeyer, K. (2015). “Never go out alone”:
An analysis of college rape prevention tips. Sexuality &
Culture, 19, 533–542. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12119-015-
9274-5
Behar, R., Arancibia, M. E., Sepúlveda, E., & Muga, A. (2016).
Child sexual abuse as a risk factor in eating disorders. In
N. Morton (Ed.), Eating disorders: Prevalence, risk factors and
treatment options (pp. 251–283). Nova Science.
Bennett, N., & O’Donohue, W. (2014). The construct of grooming
in child sexual abuse: Conceptual and measurement issues.
Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 23(8), 957–976. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10538712.2014.960632
Bennice, J. A., & Resick, P. A. (2003). Marital rape history,
research, and practice. Trauma Violence Abuse, 4(3), 228–246.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838003004003003
Benuto, L. T., & O’Donohue, W. (2015). Treatment of the sexu-
ally abused child: Review and synthesis of recent meta-
analyses. Children and Youth Services Review, 56, 52–60.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2015.06.009
Berghuis, D. J., & Klott, J. (2015). The suicide and homicide risk
assessment and prevention treatment planner, with DSM-5
update. Wiley.
Berzoff, J. N., & Silverman, P. R. (Eds.). (2004). Living with dying:
A handbook for end-of-life healthcare practitioners. Columbia
University Press.
Bishopp, S. A., & Boots, D. P. (2014). General strain theory, expo-
sure to violence, and suicide ideation among police officers.
A gendered approach. Journal of Criminal Justice, 42(6),
538–548. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2014.09.007
Bisson, J. I., Roberts, N. P., Andrew, M., Cooper, R., & Lewis, C.
(2013). Psychological therapies for chronic post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) in adults [Review]. Cochrane Database
System Review, 12, CD003388. https://doi.org/10.1002/
14651858.CD003388.pub4
Blaustein, M., & Kinniburgh, K. (2010). Treating traumatic stress
in children and adolescents: How to foster resilience through
attachment, self-regulation, and competency. Guilford Press.
Blue HELP (2022). National law enforcement suicide awareness day.
https://bluehelp.org/
Bogaers, R., Geuze, E., van Weeghel, J., Leijten, F., van de
Mheen, D., Varis, P., . . . Brouwers, E. (2020). Barriers and
facilitators for treatment-seeking for mental health condi-
tions and substance misuse: Multi-perspective focus group
study within the military. BJPsych Open, 6(6). https://doi.
org/10.1192/bjo.2020.136
Bond, T., & Mitchels, B. (2014). Confidentiality & record keeping in
counselling & psychotherapy (2nd ed.). Sage.
Borduin, C., Schaeffer, C., & Heiblum, N. (2009). A randomized
clinical trial of multisystemic therapy with juvenile sexual
offenders: Effects on youth social ecology and criminal activ-
ity. Consult Clinical Psychology, 77(1), 26–37. https://doi.org/
10.1037/a0013035
Borneman, T., Ferrell, B., & Pulchaski, C. M. (2010). Evaluation
of the FICA tool for spiritual assessment. Journal of Pain and
Symptom Management, 40(2), 163–173. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2009.12.019
Boss, P. G. (2006). Loss, trauma, and resilience: Therapeutic work
with ambiguous loss. Norton.
Boss, P. G. (2016). The context and process of theory develop-
ment: The story of ambiguous loss. Journal of Family Theory &
Review, 8, 269–286. https://doi.org/10.1111/jftr.12152
Boss, P. G., Bryant, C. M., & Mancini, J. A. (2017). Family stress
management: A contextual approach (3rd ed.). Sage.
Bowenkamp, C. (1995). The Los Angeles civil unrest: Implica-
tions for future mental health counseling interventions.
Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 17(3), 301–311.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Loss, sadness and depression
(Vol. III). Basic Books.

-- 511 of 545 --

References 	483
Bowlby, J. (1983). Attachment and loss: Attachment (Vol. I). Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1985). Attachment and loss: Separation, anxiety, and
anger (Vol. II). Penguin Books.
Breiding, M. J., & Armour, B. S. (2015). The association between
disability and intimate partner violence in the United States.
Annals of Epidemiology, 25(6), 455–457. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.annepidem.2015.03.017
Breiding, M. J., Smith, S. G., Basile, K. C., Walters, M. L., Chen,
J., & Merrick, M. T. (2014). Prevalence and characteristics of
sexual violence, stalking, and intimate partner violence vic-
timization—National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence
Survey, United States, 2011. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 63, 1–18. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/ss6308a1.htm?s_cid=ss6308a1_e
Brock, S. E. (2013). Preparing for the school crisis response. In
J. Sandoval (Ed.), Crisis counseling, intervention and prevention
in the schools (3rd ed., pp. 19–30). Routledge.
Brock, S. E., Nickerson, A. B., Louvar Reeves, M. A., Conolly, C. N.,
Jimerson, S. R., Pesce, R. C., & Lazzaro, B. R. (2016). School cri-
sis prevention and intervention: The PREPaRE model (2nd ed.).
National Association of School Psychologists.
Brown, A., Ashford, R., Heller, A. T., Whitney, J., & Kimball, T.
(2018). Collegiate recovery students and programs: Litera-
ture review from 1988–2017. Journal of Recovery Science.
https://doi.org/10.31886/JORS.11.2018.8
Brown, W. C. (2022). Literature review: Foundations of self-care
practice utilizing expressive arts for counselors in training.
Expressive Therapies Capstone Theses No. 633. https://
digitalcommons.lesley.edu/expressive_theses/633.
Brucia, E. F., Cordova, M. J., Finestone, A., & Ruzek, J. I. (2020).
Application and integration of psychological first aid in first
responder organizations. In C. A. Bowers, D. C. Beidel, &
M. R. Marks (Eds.), Mental health intervention and treatment of
first responders and emergency workers (pp. 129–153). Medical
Information Science Reference/IGI Global. https://doi.org/
10.4018/978-1-5225-9803-9.ch008
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). (2017). National Crime Victimiza-
tion Survey. https://bjs.ojp.gov/data-collection/ncvs
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). (2019). Data collection: National Crime
Victimization Study. https://bjs.ojp.gov/data-collection/ncvs
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). (2021). Criminal victimization,
2020. https://bjs.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh236/files/
media/document/cv20.pdf
Brymer, M., Jacobs, A., Layne, C., Pynoos, R., Ruzek, J., Steinberg,
A., . . . Watson, P. (2006). Psychological first aid: Field operations
guide. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/treat/type/
psych_firstaid_manual.asp
Burgess, A. W. (Ed.). (1991). Rape and sexual assault: A research
handbook. Garland.
Burgess, A. W., & Holmstrom, L. L. (1974). Rape trauma syn-
drome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 131(9), 981–986.
https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.131.9.981
Burke, C. (2018). Students at risk: Addressing mental health
issues and their legal implications in health professions stu-
dents. Journal of Physician Assistance Education, 29(1), 49–51.
https://doi.org/10.1097/JPA.0000000000000186
Burnam, M., Meredith, L., Tanielian, T., & Jaycox, L. (2009).
Mental health care for Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans.
Health Affairs, 28(3), 771–782. https://doi.org/10.1377/
hlthaff.28.3.771
Burrows, C. J. (2013). Acceptance and commitment therapy with
survivors of adult sexual assault. Clinical Case Studies, 12(3),
246–259. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534650113479652
Bush, K. R., & Price, C. A. (2020). Families and change: Coping with
stressful events and transitions (6th ed.). Sage.
Bushatz, A. (2020). Divorce rate among active-duty troops remains
stable. https://www.military.com/daily-news/2020/09/
23/divorce-rate-among-active-duty-troops-remains-
stable.html
Butler, R. N. (1963). The life review: An interpretation of reminis-
cence in the aged. Psychiatry, 26(1), 65–76. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00332747.1963.11023339
Byock, I. (1998). Dying well: Peace and possibilities at the end of life.
Riverhead Books.
Cacciatore, J., Carlson, B., Michaelis, E., Klimek, B., & Staffan, S.
(2011). Crisis intervention by social workers in fire depart-
ments: An innovative role for social workers. Social Work,
56(1), 81–88. https://doi.org/10.1093/sw/56.1.81
Cameron, E. E., Joyce, K. M., Delaquis, C. P., Reynolds, K.,
Protudjer, J. L., & Roos, L. E. (2020). Maternal psychological
distress & mental health service use during the COVID-19
pandemic. Journal of Affective Disorders, 276, 765–774.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2020.07.081
Cannon, C. E., Ferreira, R., Buttell, F., & First, J. (2021). Covid-19,
intimate partner violence, and communication ecologies.
American Behavioral Scientist, 65(7), 992–1013. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0002764221992826
Caplan, G. (1964). Principles of preventive psychiatry. Basic Books.
Capuzzi, D., & Stauffer, M. D. (Eds.). (2020). Foundations of addic-
tion counseling (4th ed.). Pearson.
Carr, J. L., & Ward, R. L. (2006). American College Health Associa-
tion campus violence white paper. American College Health
Association.
Carroll, A., Lyall, M., & Forrester, A. (2004). Clinical hopes and
public fears in forensic mental health. Journal of Forensic
Psychiatry and Psychology, 15(3), 407–425. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14789940410001703282
Cashwell, C., & Young, J. (2020). Integrating spirituality and religion
into counseling: A guide to competent practice (3rd ed.). Wiley.
Castellano, C., & Plionis, E. (2006). Comparative analysis of
three crisis intervention models applied to law enforcement
first responders during 9/11 and Hurricane Katrina. Brief
Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 6(4), 326–336. https://doi.
org/10.1093/brief-treatment/mhl008
Cavaiola, A. A., & Colford, J. E. (2018). Crisis intervention: A prac-
tical guide. Sage.
Center for Mental Health in Schools at UCLA. (2018). Responding
to a crisis at a school. http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/
crisis/crisis.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2010).
National intimate partner and sexual violence survey: An over-
view of 2010 findings on victimization by sexual orientation.
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/nisvs_
sofindings.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2014). Sex-
ual violence surveillance: Uniform definitions and recommended
data elements. Author.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2019). Safety
and children with disabilities: Self-injury. https://www.cdc.
gov/ncbddd/disabilityandsafety/self-injury.html

-- 512 of 545 --

484 	References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2020b).
10 leading causes of death by age group, United States—2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-
death.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2020c).
Violence prevention: Pregnancy resulting from rape. https://
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/sexualviolence/
understanding-RRP-inUS.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2021a).
Occupational violence: Fast facts. https://www.cdc.gov/
niosh/topics/violence/fastfacts.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2021b). Pre-
venting adverse childhood experiences. https://www.cdc.gov/
violenceprevention/aces/fastfact.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2021c). What is
teen dating violence. https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/
intimatepartnerviolence/teendatingviolence/fastfact.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022a).
Traumatic brain injury & concussion: Get the facts. https://
www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/get_the_facts.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022b). Vital
statistics online. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/
vitalstatsonline.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023a).
Fast facts: What is youth violence. https://www.cdc.gov/
violenceprevention/youthviolence/fastfact.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023b).
Mortality data. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/
deaths.htm
Cerel, J., McIntosh, J. L., Neimeyer, R. A., Maple, M., & Marshall, D.
(2014). The continuum of “survivorship:” Definitional issues in
the aftermath of suicide. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior,
44(6), 591–600. https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12093
Chae, M. H., & Boyle, D. J. (2013). Police suicide: Prevalence,
risk, and protective factors. Policing, 36(1), 91–118. https://
doi.org/10.1108/13639511311302498
Chaffin, M., Berliner, L., Block, R., Johnson, T. C., Friedrich, W.,
Louis, D., . . . Silovsky, J. F. (2008). Report of the ATSA Task
Force on Children with Sexual Behavior Problems. Child
Maltreatment, 13(2), 199–218. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1077559507306718
Chan, V. (2018). Understanding campus mental health services
and the campus system of care. In A. Martel, J. Derenne,
P. Leebens (Eds.). Promoting safe and effective transitions to col-
lege for youth with mental health conditions (pp. 37–42). Springer.
Chan, V., Rasminsky, S., & Viesselman, J. O. (2015). A primer for
working in campus mental health: A system of care. Academic
Psychiatry, 39(5), 533–540. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40596-
015-0318-9
Chandra, A., Lara-Cinisomo, S., Jaycox, L. H., Tanielian, T.,
Han, B., Burns, R. M., & Ruder, T. (2011). Views from the
homefront: The experiences of youth and spouses from military
families. RAND Corporation.
Chassman, L., Kottler, J., & Madison, J. (2010). An exploration of
counselor experiences of adolescents with sexual behavior
problems. Journal of Counseling & Development, 88(3), 269–276.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00022.x
Chen, J., Chen, T., Vertinsky, I., Yumagulov, L., & Park, C.
(2013). Public-private partnerships for the development of
disaster resilient communities. Journal of Contingencies and
Crisis Management, 21(3), 130–143. https://doi.org/10.1111/
1468-5973.12021
Chen, Y., Hung, K., Tsai, J., Chu, H., Chung, M., Chen, S., . . .
Chao, L. (2014). Efficacy of eye-movement desensitization
and reprocessing for patients with posttraumatic stress
disorder: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Plos ONE, 9(8), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0103676
Cheung, M. (2012). Child Sexual Abuse Interview Protocol (CSAIP)
Version 2012-IV. https://www.uh.edu/socialwork/_docs/
cwep/csaip2012-IV.pdf
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5101 et seq.
(2010).
Christopher, J. C., & Maris, J. A. (2010). Integrating mindfulness
as self-care into counselling and psychotherapy training.
Counselling & Psychotherapy Research, 10(2), 114–125. https://
doi.org/10.1080/14733141003750285
Clark, A. J. (2014). Empathy in counseling and psychotherapy: Per-
spectives and practices. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/
9781315785202
Clark, C. J., Renner, L. M., & Logeais, M. E. (2020). Intimate
partner violence screening and referral practices in an outpa-
tient care setting. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 35(23–24),
5877–5888. https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260517724253
Coaston, S. C. (2017). Self-care through self-compassion: A balm
for burnout. The Professional Counselor: Research and Practice,
7(3), 285–290.
Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., & Deblinger, E. (2017). Treating
trauma and traumatic grief in children and adolescents (2nd ed.).
Guilford Press.
Collin-Vézina, D., Daigneault, I., & Hébert, M. (2013). Lessons
learned from child sexual abuse research: Prevalence, out-
comes, and preventive strategies. Child & Adolescent Psychia-
try & Mental Health, 7(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1753-2000-7-22
Collins, B. G., & Collins, T. M. (2005). Crisis and trauma developmental-
ecological intervention. Houghton Mifflin/Lahaska Press.
Collins, R. C., & Kennedy, M. C. (2008). Serving families who
have served: Providing family therapy and support in inter-
disciplinary polytrauma rehabilitation. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology: In Session, 64(8), 993–1003. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jclp.20515
Connors, G. J., DiClemente, C. C., Velasquez, M. M., & Donovan,
D. M. (2015). Substance abuse treatment and the stages of change:
Selecting and planning interventions (2nd ed.). Guilford Press.
Cooley, M. E., Veldorale-Griffin, A., Petren, R. E., & Mullis, A. K.
(2014). Parent–child interaction therapy: A meta-analysis of
child behavior outcomes and parent stress. Journal of Family
Social Work, 17(3), 191–208. https://doi.org/10.1080/10522158.
2014.888696
Coombs, D., Harrington, J. A., & Talbott, L. L. (2010). Youth sui-
cides in Alabama: A focus on gun safety. Alabama State Asso-
ciation for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance
Journal, 31(1), 31–35.
Corey, G., Corey, M., & Corey, C. (2019). Issues and ethics in the
helping professions (10th ed.). Cengage.
Corey, M., & Corey, G. (2021). Becoming a helper (8th ed.).
Cengage Learning.
Cornille, T., & Meyers, T. (1999). Secondary traumatic stress
among child protective service workers: Prevalence, severity,

-- 513 of 545 --

References 	485
and predictive factors. Traumatology, 5(1), 15–31. https://doi.
org/10.1177/153476569900500105
Corr, C. A., & Balk, D. E. (2011). Children’s encounters with death,
bereavement, and coping. Springer.
Corr, C. A., Corr, D. M., & Doka, K. J. (2019). Death and dying:
Life and living (8th ed.). Cengage.
Cortoni, F., & Gannon, T. A. (2013). What works with female
sexual offenders. In L. A. Craig, L. Dixon, & T. A. Gannon
(Eds.), What works in offender rehabilitation: An evidence-based
approach to assessment and treatment (pp. 271–284). Wiley
Blackwell.
Costello, E. J., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold, A. (2004). Dis-
tant trauma: A prospective study of the effects of September
11th on young adults in North Carolina. Applied Developmen-
tal Science, 8(4), 211–220. https://doi.org/10.1207/
s1532480xads0804_4
Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educa-
tional Programs (CACREP). (2024). 2024 CACREP standards.
Author.
Covey, S. R. (2013). The 7 habits of highly effective people: Powerful
lessons in personal change. Simon & Schuster.
Creamer, M., Wade, D., Fletcher, S., & Forbes, D. (2011). PTSD
among military personnel. International Review of Psychiatry,
23(2), 160–165. https://doi.org/10.3109/09540261.2011.559456
Currier, J. M., Holland, J. M., & Neimeyer, R. A. (2006). Sense-
making, grief and the experience of violent loss: Toward a
meditational model. Death Studies, 30(5), 403–428. https://
doi.org/10.1080/07481180600614351
Daigre, C., Rodrigues-Cintas, L., Tarifa, N., Rodriguez-Martos, L.,
Grau-Lopez, L., Berenguer, M., . . . Roncero, C. (2015). History
of sexual emotional or physical abuse and psychiatric comor-
bidity in substance-dependent patients. Psychiatry Research,
229(3), 743–749. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.
08.008
Darke, S. (2009). Substance use and violent death: A case for the
“too hard” basket. Society of the Study of Addiction, 104(7),
1063–1064. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.2009.02562.x
Darkness to Light. (2016). Child sexual abuse prevention programs.
https://www.d2l.org/education/the-training/
Daughhetee, C., Puleo, S., & Thrower, E. (2010). Scaffolding of
continuing competency as an essential element of profes-
sionalism. Alabama Counseling Association Journal, 36(1),
15–22.
Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumacher, J., Rosenkranz, M.,
Muller, D., Santorelli, S. F., . . . Sheridan, J. F. (2003). Altera-
tions in brain and immune function produced by mindful-
ness meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65(4), 564–570.
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PSY.0000077505.67574.E3
Dawgert, S. (2009). Substance use and sexual violence. Building pre-
vention and intervention responses: A guide for counselors and
advocates. http://www.pcar.org/sites/default/files/pages-
pdf/substance_use_and_sexual_violence.pdf
de Tychey, C., Laurent, M., Lighezzolo-Alnot, J., Garnier, S., &
Vandelet, E. (2015). Prevalence of sexual abuse in childhood:
Some critical methodological reflections. Journal of Child
Sexual Abuse: Research, Treatment, & Program Innovations for
Victims, Survivors, & Offenders, 24(4), 401–411. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10538712.2015.1029105
Decker, S., & Naugle, A. (2009). Immediate intervention for
sexual assault: A review with recommendations and impli-
cations for practitioners. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment,
and Trauma, 18(4), 419–441. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10926770902901485
Deering, R., & Mellor, D. (2011). An exploratory qualitative
study of the self-reported impact of female-perpetrated
childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 20(1),
58–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2011.539964
Dennis, M. L., Foss, M. A., & Scott, C. K. (2007). An eight-year
perspective on the relationship between the duration of
abstinence and other aspects of recovery, Evaluation Review,
31(6), 585–612. https://doi.org/10.1177/0193841X07307771
Di Napoli, I., Procentese, F., Carnevale, S., Esposito, C., &
Arcidiacono, C. (2019). Ending intimate partner violence
(IPV) and locating men at stake: An ecological approach.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 16, 1652. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16091652
Dieltjens, T., Moonens, I., Van Praet, K., De Buck, E., &
Vanderkerckhove, P. (2014). A systematic literature search
on psychological first aid: Lack of evidence to develop
guidelines. PLoS ONE, 9(12), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0114714
DiMaggio, C., Galea, S., & Li, G. (2009). Substance use and mis-
use in the aftermath of terrorism. A Bayesian meta-analysis.
Addiction, 104(6), 894–904. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1360-0443.2009.02526.x
Discover Policing. (2016). Training and academy life. https://
www.discoverpolicing.org/about-policing/training-
academy-life/
Doka, K. J. (2005, May). New perspectives on grief. Counseling
Today, pp. 56–57.
Domestic Abuse Intervention Programs. (2013). Creating a process
of change for men who batter: The Duluth Curriculum. Author.
D’Orazio, D. M. (2014). Lessons learned from history and experi-
ence: Five simple ways to improve the efficacy of sexual
offender treatment. International Journal of Behavioral Consul-
tation and Therapy, 8(3–4), 2–7. https://doi.org/10.1037/
h0100975
Dorociak, K. E., Rupert, P. A., Bryant, F. B., & Zahniser, E.
(2017). Development of a self-care assessment for psycholo-
gists. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 64(3), 325–334. http://
doi.org/10.1037/cou0000206
Doucette, M. S., Crifas, C., & Frattaroli, S. (2019). Right-to-carry
laws and firearm workplace homicides: A longitudinal anal-
ysis (1992–2017). American Journal of Public Health, 109(12),
1747–1753. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2019.305307
Douglas, E. M., Hines, D. A., & McCarthy, S. C. (2012). Men who
sustain female-to-male partner violence: Factors associated
with where they seek help and how they rate those
resources. Violence and Victims, 27(6), 871–894. https://doi.
org/10.1891/0886-6708.27.6.871
Doyle, K., & Magor-Blatch, L. E. (2017). “Even adults need to
play”: Sandplay therapy with an adult survivor of childhood
abuse. International Journal of Play Therapy, 26(1), 12–22.
https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000042
Dragisic, T., Dickov, A., Dickov, V., & Milatovic, V. (2015).
Drug addiction as risk for suicide attempts. Materia Socio-
medica, 27(3), 188–191. https://doi.org/10.5455/msm.2015.
27.188-191
Drake, R. E., Mueser, K. T., Brunette, M. F., & McHugo, G. J.
(2004). A review of treatments for people with severe mental

-- 514 of 545 --

486 	References
illnesses and co-occurring substance use disorders. Psychiatric
Rehabilitation Journal, 27(4), 360–374. https://doi.org/10.2975/
27.2004.360.374
Drapeau, C. W., & McIntosh, J. L. (2020). U.S.A. suicide: 2019 offi-
cial final data. https://suicidology.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/01/2019datapgsv2b.pdf
Driessen, M., Schulte, S., Luedecke, C., Schaefer, I., Sutmann, F.,
Ohlmeier, M., . . . Havemann-Reinicke, U. (2008). Trauma
and PTSD in patients with alcohol, drug, or dual depend-
ence: A multi-center study. Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimen-
tal Research, 32(3), 481–488. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
0277.2007.00591.x
Drug Enforcement Administration. (2020). Drug fact sheet: Rohy-
phol. https://www.dea.gov/sites/default/files/2020-06/
Rohypnol-2020_0.pdf
Drysdale, D., Modzeleski, W., & Simons, A. (2010). Campus
attacks: Targeted violence affecting institutions of higher educa-
tion. https://www2.ed.gov/admins/lead/safety/campus-
attacks.pdf
Duplechain, R., & Morris, R. (2014). School violence: Reported
school shootings and making schools safer. Education, 135(2),
145–150.
Dupre, M., Echterling, L. G., Meixner, C., Anderson, R., &
Kielty, M. (2014). Supervision experiences of professional
counselors providing crisis counseling. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 53(2), 82–96. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2014.00050.x
Dutton, J., Langhorne, A., & Kelly, M. (2015). Coordinated public
health initiatives to address violence against women and
adolescents. Journal of Women’s Health, 24(1), 80–85. https://
doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2014.4884
Dye, L., Burke, M. G., & Wolf, C. (2020). Teaching mindfulness
for the self-care and well-being of counselors-in-training.
Journal of Creativity in Mental Health, 15(2), 140–153.
Edelkott, N., Engstrom, D. W., Hernandez-Wolfe, P., & Gangsei,
D. (2016). Vicarious resilience: Complexities and variations.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 86(6), 713–724. https://
doi.org/10.1037/ort0000180
Edwards, K. M., Murphy, M. J., Tansill, E. C., Myrick, C., Probst,
D. R., Corsa, R., & Gidycz, C. A. (2012). A qualitative analy-
sis of college women’s leaving processes in abusive relation-
ships. Journal of American College Health, 60(3), 204–210.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.2011.586387
Edwards, T. (2018). I would like to request your academic
records: FERPA protections and the Washington public
records act. Washington Law Review, 93(2), 1057–1088.
Egan, G., & Reese, R. J. (2019). The skilled helper: A problem-
management and opportunity-development approach to helping
(11th ed.). Cengage.
Eifling, K., & Moy, P. (2015). Evidenced-based EMS: Psychological
first aid during disaster response. What’s the best we can do
for those who are suffering mentally? EMS World, 44(7), 32–34.
Eisenberg, D., Hunt, J., & Spear, N. (2015). Help-seeking for
mental health on college campuses: Review of evidence and
next steps for research and practice. Harvard Review of Psychi-
atric Practice, 20(4), 222–232. https://doi.org/10.3109/106732
29.2012.712839
Elhai, J. D., Layne, C. M., Steinberg, A. S., Brymer, M. J., Briggs,
E. C., Ostrowski, S. A., & Pynoos, R. S. (2013). Psychometric
properties of the UCLA PTSD Reaction Index. Part II: Inves-
tigating factor structure findings in a national clinic-referred
youth sample. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26(1), 10–18.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jts.21755
Elliott, T. L., Fatemi, D., & Wasan, S. (2014). Student privacy
rights: History, Owasso, and FERPA. Journal of Higher Educa-
tion Theory and Practice, 14(4). http://www.na-businesspress.
com/JHETP/ElliotTL_Web14_4_.pdf
Empathos. (2015). Empowering suicide profession through education.
http://www.empathosresources.com
Erbes, C. R., Polusny, M. A., MacDermid, S., & Compton, J. A.
(2008). Couple therapy with combat veterans and their part-
ners. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 64(8), 972–983.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20521
Erford, B. T. (Ed.). (2017). A lifespan odyssey for counseling profes-
sionals. Cengage.
Erford, B. T. (2020). 45 techniques every counselor should know
(3rd ed.). Pearson Merrill.
Erford, B. T. (2021). Assessment for counselors. Pearson.
Erford, B. T. (Ed.). (2023). Orientation to the counseling profession
(3rd ed.). Pearson Merrill.
Erford, B. T., Lee, V. V., & Rock, E. (2019). Systematic approaches
to counseling students experiencing complex and specialized
problems. In B. T. Erford (Ed.), Transforming the school coun-
seling profession (5th ed., pp. 288–313). Pearson.
Erich, J. (2014). Earlier than too late: Stopping stress and suicide
among emergency personnel. http://www.emsworld.com/
article/12009260/suicide-stress-and-ptsd-among-
emergency-personnel
Erikson, E. H., & Erikson, J. M. (1998). The life cycle completed.
Norton.
Eronen, M., Angermeyer, M. C., & Schulze, B. (1998). The psy-
chiatric epidemiology of violent behaviour. Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 33(1), S13–S23. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s001270050205
Evans, D. R., Hearn, M. T., Uhlemann, M. R., & Ivey, A. E.
(2017). Essential interviewing: A programmed approach to effec-
tive communication (9th ed.). Cengage.
Everly, G. S., & Flynn, B. W. (2005). Principles and practices of
acute psychological first aid after disasters. In G. S. Everly &
C. L. Parker (Eds.), Mental health aspects of disasters: Public
health preparedness and response (Rev. ed., pp. 79–89). Johns
Hopkins Center for Public Health Preparedness.
Everly, G. S., & Mitchell, J. (2003). Critical incident stress manage-
ment (3rd ed.). ICISF.
Ewing v. Goldstein, 120 Cal. App. 4th 807 (2004).
Ewing, J. A. (1984). Detecting alcoholism: The CAGE question-
naire. Journal of the American Medical Association, 252(14),
1905–1907. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1984.0335014
0051025
Fahy, R., Evarts, B., Haynes, H., & Stein, G. (2021). U.S. fire
department profile 2021. www.nfpa.org/news-and-research/
fire-statistics-and-reports/fire-statistics/the-fire-service/
administration/us-fire-department-profile
Fallot, R. D., & Heckman, J. P. (2005). Religious/spiritual coping
among women trauma survivors with mental health and
substance use disorders. Journal of Behavioral Health Services
and Research, 32(2), 215–226. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02287268

-- 515 of 545 --

References 	487
Famili, A., Kirschner, M., & Gamez, A. (2014). Vicarious traumati-
zation: A guide for managing the silent stressor. https://www
.policechiefmagazine.org/vicarious-traumatization-a-guide-
for-managing-the-silent-stressor/
Farmer, T. W., Farmer, E. M. Z., Estell, D. B., & Hutchins, B. C.
(2007). The developmental dynamics of aggression and the
prevention of school violence. Journal of Emotional & Behavio-
ral Disorders, 15(4), 197–208. https://doi.org/10.1177/106342
66070150040201
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). (2019). 2019 crime in the
United States. https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2019/
crime-in-the-u.s.-2019/topic-pages/expanded-homicide
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). (2021). Unified crime report.
Law enforcement officers killed and assaulted (LEOKA). https://
www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr/leoka
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). (2022). Terrorism defini-
tions. https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/terrorism
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (2011). Storm
safe: Sheltering in place. https://www.parsonspd.com/
plugins/show_image.php?id=5
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (2013). Guide for
developing high quality school emergency operations plans. https://
www.fbi.gov/about-us/office-of-partner-engagement/active-
shooter-incidents/emergency-plans-for-schools
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (2021).
National preparedness guidelines. https://www.fema.gov/
emergency-managers/national-preparedness
Ferrer-Perez, V. A., & Bosch-Fiol, E. (2018). Batterer intervention
programs in Spain: An analysis of their effectiveness.
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 62(4), 885–897. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0306624X16672455
Ferguson, C., & Malouff, J. (2016). Assessing police classifica-
tions of sexual assault reports: A meta-analysis of false
reporting rates. Archives of Sexual Behaviors, 45(5), 1185–1193
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-015-0666-2
Figley, C. R. (2002). Compassion fatigue: Psychotherapists’
chronic lack of self-care. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58(11),
1433–1441. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.10090
Findlaw’s Team. (2019). Statutory rape. https://www.findlaw.
com/criminal/criminal-charges/statutory-rape.html
Finkelhor, D. (1981). Sexually victimized children. Free Press.
Finn, J. (2020). Psychological abuse and learned helplessness: A sys-
tematic literature review. Master’s paper, The Pennsylvania
State University.
Fiorillo, A., & Gorwood, P. (2020). The consequences of the
COVID-19 pandemic on mental health and implications for
clinical practice. European Psychiatry, 63(1), e32. https://doi.
org/10.1192/j.eurpsy.2020.35
Flannery, R. B. (2015). Psychiatric patient assaults on healthcare
staff: A worldwide perspective. http://americanmentalhealth
foundation.org/2015/01/psychiatric-patient-assaults-on-
healthcare-staff-a-worldwide-perspective/
Flannery, R. B., LeVitre, V., Rego, S., & Walker, A. (2011). Character-
istics of staff victims of psychiatric patient assaults: 20-year anal-
ysis of the Assaulted Staff Action Program. Psychiatry Quarterly,
82(1), 11–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126-010-9153-z
Fleming, M. F. (2003). Screening for at-risk, problem, and
dependent alcohol use. In R. K. Hester & W. R. Miller (Eds.),
Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches: Effective alterna-
tives (3rd ed., pp. 64–77). Allyn & Bacon.
Foa, E. B., McLean, C. P., Capaldi, S., & Rosenfield, D. (2013).
Prolonged exposure vs supportive counseling for sexual
abuse–related PTSD in adolescent girls. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 310(24), 2650. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2013.282829
Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2001). Treating the trauma of rape:
Cognitive behavioral therapy for PTSD. Guilford Press.
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., White, T., & Messer, M. A. (2016).
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE): User’s guide (2nd
ed.). Psychological Assessment Resources.
Forbes, D., Creamer, M., Phelps, A., Bryant, R., McFarlane, A.,
Devilly, G., . . . Newton, S. (2007). Australian guidelines for the
treatment of adults with acute stress disorder and post-traumatic
stress disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
41(8), 637–648. https://doi.org/10.1080/00048670701449161
Forbes, D., Lloyd, D., Nixon, R. D. V., Elliott, P., Varker, T.,
Perry, D., Bryant, R. A. &. Creamer, M. (2012). A multisite
randomized controlled effectiveness trial of cognitive
processing therapy for military-related posttraumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26(3), 442–452. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2012.01.006
Forester-Miller, H., & Davis, T. E. (2016). Practitioner’s guide to eth-
ical decision making (Rev. ed.). http://www.counseling.org/
docs/default-source/ethics/practioner’s-guide-toethical-
decision-making.pdf
Fowler, J. W. (1995). Stages of faith: The psychology of human devel-
opment and the quest for meaning. HarperOne.
Fox, K. R., Franklin, J. C., Ribeiro, J. D., Kleiman, E. M., Bentley,
K. H., & Nock, M. K. (2015). Meta-analysis of risk factors
for nonsuicidal self-injury. Clinical Psychology Review, 42,
156–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2015.09.002.
Frankl, V. (2006). Man’s search for meaning. Beacon Press.
Freedenthal, S. (2017). Helping the suicidal individual tips and tech-
niques for professionals. Routledge.
Freeman, J., & Sugai, G. (2013). Recent changes in state policies and
legislation regarding restraint or seclusion. Exceptional Children,
79(4), 427–438. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440291307900403
Freud, S., & Breuer, J. (2004) Studies in hysteria (N. Luckhurst,
Trans.). Penguin Books.
Furber, G., Jones, G. M., Healey, D., & Bidargaddi, N. (2014).
A comparison between phone-based psychotherapy with
and without text messaging support in between sessions for
crisis patients. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 16(10).
https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.3096
Furukawa, M. F. (2011). Electronic medical records and the effi-
ciency of hospital emergency departments. Medical Care
Research and Review, 68(1), 75–95. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1077558710372108
Futures Without Violence. (2022). Mandatory reporting of domestic
violence to law enforcement by health care providers: A guide for
advocates working to respond to or amend reporting laws related
to domestic violence. https://www.futureswithoutviolence.
org/userfiles/Mandatory_Reporting_of_DV_to_Law%20
Enforcement_by_HCP.pdf
Gary, J. M. (2010). A mouse click away: Internet resources
for students in crisis in geographically isolated or self-
sequestered communities. Journal of School Counseling, 8(1).

-- 516 of 545 --

488 	References
Gerber, M. M., Boals, A., & Schuettler, D. (2011). The unique
contributions of positive and negative religious coping to
posttraumatic growth and posttraumatic stress disorder.
Psychology of Religion and Spirituality, 3(4), 298–307. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0023016
Ghandour, R., Campbell, J., & Lloyd, J. (2015). Screening and
counseling for intimate partner violence: A vision for the
future. Journal of Women’s Health, 24(1), 57–61. https://doi.
org/10.1089/jwh.2014.4885
Gibbs, D. A., Walters, J. L. H., Lutnick, A., Miller, S., &
Kluckman, M. (2015). Services to domestic minor victims of
sex trafficking: Opportunities for engagement and support.
Children and Youth Services Review, 54, 1–7. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2015.04.003
Gidycz, C. A., Loh, C., Lobo, T., Rich, C., Lynn, S. J., & Pashdag,
J. (2007). Reciprocal relationships among alcohol use, risk
perceptions, and sexual victimization: A prospective analy-
sis. Journal of American College Health, 56(1), 5–14. https://
doi.org/10.3200/jach.56.1.5-14
Gladding, S. T. (2017). The counseling dictionary (4th ed.). Wiley.
Gladding, S. T. (2021). Creative arts in counseling (6th ed.). Wiley.
Glasgow, R. E., Kaplan, R. M., Ockene, J. K., Fisher, E. B., &
Emmons, K. M. (2012). Patient-reported measures of psycho-
social issues and health behavior should be added to elec-
tronic health records. Health Affairs, 31(3), 497–504. https://
doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.1295
Goodson, J., Helstrom, A., Halpern, J. M., Ferenschak, M. P.,
Gillihan, S. J., & Powers, M. B. (2011). Treatment of posttrau-
matic stress disorder in US combat veterans: A meta-analytic
review. Psychological Reports, 109(2), 573–599. https://doi.
org/10.2466/02.09.15.16.PR0.109.5.573-599
Goodwin, A. (2016). Mental health and students at risk. New
Directions for Student Services, 2016(156), 65–75. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ss.20192
Granello, D. H., & Granello, P. F. (2007). Suicide assessment:
Strategies for determining risk. Counselling, Psychotherapy,
and Health, 3(1), 42–51.
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2006). Emotion in psycho-
therapy: A practice-friendly research review. Journal of Clini-
cal Psychology: In Session, 62(5), 611–630. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jclp.20252
Greenstone, J. L., & Leviton, S. C. (2011). Elements of crisis inter-
vention: crises and how to respond to them (3rd ed.). Cengage
Learning.
Grepmair, L., Mitterlehner, F., Loew, T., Bachler, E., Rother, W.,
& Nickel, M. (2007). Promoting mindfulness in psychothera-
pists in training influences the treatment results of their
patients: A randomized, double-blind, controlled study. Psy-
chotherapy and Psychosomatics, 76(6), 332–338. https://doi.
org/10.1159/000107560
Groth, A. N. (2001). Men and rape: The psychology of the offender.
Basic Books.
Grubb, A. (2010). Modern day hostage (crisis) negotiation: The
evolution of an art form within the policing arena. Aggression
& Violent Behavior, 15(5), 341–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
avb.2010.06.002
Gunderson, J., Grill, M., Callahan, P., & Marks, M. (2014,
March). Evidence-based program improves and sustains
first-responder behavioral health. Journal of Emergency Medi-
cal Services. https://www.jems.com/operations/an-
evidence-based-program-for-improving-and-sustaining-
first-responder-behavioral-health/
Halifax, J. (2011). Being with dying: Cultivating compassion and
fearlessness in the presence of death. Shambhala.
Hamel, J., Ferreira, R. J., & Buttell, F. (2015). Gender and bat-
terer intervention: Implications of a program evaluation for
policy and treatment. Research on Social Work Practice, 27(4),
405–412. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049731515577451
Hammersly, R. (2014). Constraint theory: A cognitive, motiva-
tional theory of dependence. Addiction Research and Theory,
22(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3109/16066359.2013.779678
Hanson, R. K., Lloyd, C. D., Helmus, L., & Thornton, D. (2012).
Developing non-arbitrary metrics for risk communication:
Percentile ranks for the Static-99/R and Static-2002/R sexual
offender risk tools. International Journal of Forensic Mental Health,
11(1), 9–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/14999013.2012.667511
Hanson, R. K., & Yates, P. M. (2013). Psychological treatment of
sex offenders. Current Psychiatry Reports, 15(3), 1–8. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11920-012-0348-x
Hard, P. F. (2020, October). In the eye of recovery: Intersectionality,
disaster interventions, and considerations with sexual & gender
minorities. Paper presented at the SAIGE Fourth Biennial
Conference.
Harricharnd, J. S., Litam, S. D., & Ausloos, C. (2021). Infusing
self-care and wellness into CACREP curricula: Pedagogical
recommendations for counselor educators and counselors
during COVID –19. International Journal for the Advancement
of Counselling, 43(3), 372–385. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10447-021-09423-3
Harrington, J. A. (2011, September). Safety plan design with notes
for mental health professionals. Suicide training session with
Gateway Family Services, Birmingham, AL.
Harris, J. I., Erbes, C. R., Engdahl, B. E., Thuras, P., Murray-
Swank, N., Grace, D., . . . Le, T. V. (2011). The effectiveness of
a trauma-focused spiritually integrated intervention for vet-
erans exposed to trauma. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 67(4),
425–438. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20777
Hart, S. D., & Boer, D. P. (2021). Structured professional judg-
ment guidelines for sexual violence risk assessment: The
Sexual Violence Risk-20 (SVR-20) Versions 1 and 2 and Risk
for Sexual Violence Protocol (RSVP). In Douglas, K. S. &
Otto, R. K. (Eds.), Handbook of violence risk assessment
(pp. 322–358). Routledge.
Hart, S. D., Kropp, P. R., Laws, D. R., Klaver, J., Logan, C., &
Watt, K. A. (2003). The risk for sexual violence protocol (RSVP).
Mental Health, Law and Policy Institute of Simon Fraser
University, Pacific Psychological Assessment Corporation,
and British Columbia Institute Against Family Violence.
Hasin, D. S., O’Brien, C. P., Auriacombe, M., Borges, G.,
Bucholz, K., Budney, A., . . . Grant, B. F. (2013). DSM-5 crite-
ria for substance use disorders: Recommendations and
rationale. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170(8), 834–851.
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.12060782
Hassan, M., Killion, C., Lewin, L., Totten, V., & Gary, F. (2015).
Gender-related sexual abuse experiences reported by chil-
dren who were examined in an emergency department.
Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 29(3), 148–154. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apnu.2015.01.006

-- 517 of 545 --

References 	489
Hayden, S. C. W., Glosoff, H., Lopez-Baez, S., & Green, L. (2017).
Addressing needs of military families during deployment:
Military service providers’ perception of integrating support
services. Military and Government Counseling, 5(3), 190–212.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2011). Acceptance
and commitment therapy: The process and practice of mindful
change (2nd ed.). Guilford Press.
Hays, D. G., & Erford, B. T. (Eds.). (2023). Developing multicul-
tural counseling competence (4th ed.). Pearson.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. 42
U.S.C. § 1320d-9 (2011).
Healthcare Providers Service Organization (HPSO). (2021). Doc-
umentation do’s and dont’s. https://www.hpso.com/
Resources/Documentation/Documentation-Dos-and-Donts
Healthcare Providers Service Organization (HPSO). (2022).
When to disclose confidential information. https://www.hpso.
com/Resources/Legal-and-Ethical-Issues/When-to-
Disclose-Confidential-Information
Heath, C., Sommerfield, A., & von Underern-Sternberg, B. S.
(2020). Resilience strategies to manage psychological distress
among health care workers during the COVID-19 pandemic:
A narrative review. Anaesthesia, 75(10), 1364–1371. https://
doi.org/10.1111/anae.15180
Hebda, T., Hunter, K., & Czar, P. (2019). Handbook of informatics
for nurses & healthcare professionals (6th ed.). Pearson.
Hébert, M., & Amédée, L. M. (2020). Latent class analysis of
post-traumatic stress symptoms and complex PTSD in child
victims of sexual abuse and their response to trauma-focused
cognitive behavioural therapy. European Journal of Psy-
chotraumatology, 11(1), 1807171. https://doi.org/10.1080/200
08198.2020.1807171
Heick, R., Young, T., & Peek-Asa, C. (2009). Occupational inju-
ries among emergency medical service providers in the
United States. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medi-
cine, 51(B), 963–968. https://doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013
e3181af6b76
Help for Our Heroes. (2019). What you need to know about EMS
PTSD. https://helpforourheroes.com/what-you-need-to-
know-about-ems-ptsd/
HelpGuide. (2020). Late stage and end of life care. https://www
.helpguide.org/articles/end-of-life/late-stage-and-end-of-
life-care.htm
Hernandez-Wolfe, P. (2018). Vicarious resilience: A comprehen-
sive review. Revista de Estudios Sociales, 66, 9–17. https://doi.
org/10.7440/res66.2018.02
Hetzel-Riggin, M. D., Brausch, A. M., & Montgomery, B. S.
(2007). A meta-analytic investigation of therapy modality
outcomes for sexually abused children and adolescents: An
exploratory study. Child Abuse & Neglect, 31(2), 125–141.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2006.10.007
Hien, D., & Ruglass, L. (2009). Interpersonal partner violence
and women in the United States: An overview of prevalence
rates, psychiatric correlates and consequences and barriers to
help seeking. International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 32(1),
48–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iljp.2008.11.003
Hill, R. (1949). Families under stress. Greenwood Press.
Hill, R. (1958). Social stresses on the family: Generic features of
families under stress. Social Casework, 39(2–3), 139–150.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1044389458039002-318
Hines, D. A., & Finkelhor, D. (2007). Statutory sex crime rela-
tionships between juveniles and adults: A review of social
scientific research. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 12(3),
300–314. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2006.10.001
Hiraoka, R., Cook, A. J., Bivona, J. M., Meyer, E. C., &
Morissette, S. B. (2016). Acceptance and commitment ther-
apy in the treatment of depression related to military sexual
trauma in a woman veteran: A case study. Clinical Case Stud-
ies, 15(1), 84–97. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534650115594004
Hoogsteder, L. M., ten Thije, L., Schippers, E. E., & Stams, G. J. J.
M. (2022). A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of EMDR and
TF-CBT in reducing trauma symptoms and externalizing
behavior problems in adolescents. International Journal of
Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 66(6–7),
735–757. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306624X211010290
Hope, J. (2022). Develop a process to review, document possible
FERPA violations. The Successful Registrar, 22(1), 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1002/tsr.30942
Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A. C., Fluckiger, C., & Symonds, D.
(2012). Alliance in individual psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contribu-
tions and responsiveness to patients (2nd ed., pp. 37–69). Oxford
University Press.
Hoshmand, L. T., & Hoshmand, A. (2007). Support for military
families and communities. Journal of Community Psychology,
35(2), 171–180. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcop.20141
Houser, R. A., & Thoma, S. (2012). Ethics in counseling and ther-
apy: Developing an ethical identity. Sage.
Houston-Kolnik, J. D., Todd, N. R., & Greeson, M. R. (2019).
Overcoming the “holy hush”: A qualitative examination of
Protestant Christian leaders’ responses to intimate partner
violence. American Journal of Community Psychology, 63(1–2),
135–152. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajcp.12278
Huebner, A. J., Mancini, J. A., Wilcox, R. M., Grass, S. R., &
Grass, G. A. (2007). Parental deployment and youth in mili-
tary families: Exploring uncertainty and ambiguous loss.
Family Relations, 56(2), 112–122. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1741-3729.2007.00445.x
Hughes, A., & Gilmour, N. (2010). Attitudes and perceptions of
work safety among community mental health workers. North
American Journal of Psychology, 12(1), 129–144.
Humphrey, K. M. (2009). Counseling strategies for loss and grief.
American Counseling Association.
Hunter, S. V. (2010). Evolving narratives about childhood sexual
abuse: Challenging the dominance of the victim and survivor
paradigm. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Family Therapy,
31(2), 176–190. https://doi.org/10.1375/anft.31.2.176
Hyatt, L. (2020). From compassion fatigue to vitality: Memoir
with art response for self-care. Art Therapy, 37(1), 46–50.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421656.2019.1677423
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America. (2014). IAVA: A leg-
acy of winning. https://iava.org/timeline/2014-2/
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America. (2020). 10th annual
IAVA member survey: Perceptions and views from Iraq and
Afghanistan combat veterans on the challenges and successes of
the new greatest generation of veterans. https://iava.org/
survey2020/IAVA-2020-Member-Survey.pdf
Ivey, A. E., Ivey, M. B., & Zalaquett, C. P. (2022). Intentional inter-
viewing and counseling (10th ed.). Cengage Learning.

-- 518 of 545 --

490 	References
Jackson-Cherry, L. (2009). The importance of counselor awareness
and training in the death notification process: A new role for pro-
fessional counselors. https://www.counseling.org/resources/
library/ACA%20Digests/ACAPCD-27.pdf
Jackson-Cherry, L. (2018). The task model of crisis assessment and
intervention. Author.
Jacobs, E., Schimmel, C., Masson, R., & Harvill, R. (2015). Group
counseling: Strategies and skills (8th ed.). Cengage Learning.
Jaffe, A. E., Kaysen, D., Smith, B. N., Galovski, T., & Resick, P. A.
(2021). Cognitive processing therapy for substance-involved
sexual assault: Does an account help or hinder recovery?
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 34(4), 864–871. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jts.22674
Jahn, D., & Spencer-Thomas, S. (2014). Continuing bonds
through after-death spiritual experiences in individuals
bereaved by suicide. Journal of Spirituality in Mental Health,
16, 311–324. https://doi.org/10.1080/19349637.2015.957612
James, R., & Gilliland, B. (2017). Crisis intervention strategies
(8th ed.). Cengage.
James, S. (2009). Romeo and Juliet were sex offenders: An analy-
sis of the age of consent and a call for reform. UMKC Law
Review, 1, 241–262.
James, S. E., Herman, J. L., Rankin, S., Keisling, M., Mottet, L.,
& Anafi, M. (2016). The report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender
Survey. https://transequality.org/sites/default/files/docs/
usts/USTS-Full-Report-Dec17.pdf
Jaycox, L., Zoellner, L., & Foa, E. (2002). Cognitive-behavior
therapy for PTSD in rape survivors. Psychotherapy in Practice,
58(8), 891–906. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.10065
Jennings, J. L., & Deming, A. (2013). Effectively utilizing the
“behavioral” in cognitive-behavioral group therapy of sex
offenders. International Journal of Behavioral Consultation and
Therapy, 8(2), 7–13. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0100968
Jennings, W. G., Zgoba, K. M., Maschi, T., & Reingle, J. M.
(2014). An empirical assessment of the overlap between
sexual victimization and sex offending. International Journal
of Offender Therapy & Comparative Criminology, 58(12),
1466–1480. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306624X13496544
Jobes, D. A. (2016). Managing suicidal risk second edition: A collabo-
rative approach (2nd ed.). Guilford Press.
Johnson, K., Thompson, J., Hall, J., & Meyer, C. (2018). Crisis
(hostage) negotiators weigh in: The skills, behaviors, and
qualities that characterize and expert crisis negotiator. Police
Practice & Research, 19(5), 472–489. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15614263.2017.1419131
Johnson, R., Persad, G., & Sisti, D. (2014). The Tarasoff rule: The
implications of interstate variation and gaps in professional
training. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the
Law, 42, 469–477. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.focus.17402
Joiner, T. E. (2007). Why people die by suicide. Harvard University
Press.
Juhnke, G. A., Vacc, N. A., Curtis, R. C., Coll, K. M., & Paredes,
D. M. (2003). Assessment instruments used by addictions
counselors. Journal of Addictions and Offender Counseling,
23(2), 66–72. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-1874.2003.
tb00171.x
Juodis, A., Starzomski, A., & Porter, S. (2014). A comparison of
domestic and non-domestic homicides: Further evidence for
distinct dynamics and heterogeneity of domestic homicide
perpetrators. Journal of Family Violence, 29(3), 299–313.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10896-014-9583-8
Juodis, A., Starzomski, A., Porter, S., & Woodworth, M. (2014).
What can be done about high-risk perpetrators of domestic
violence? Journal of Family Violence, 29(4), 381–390. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10896-014-9597-2
Jussab, F., & Murphy, H. (2015). “I just can’t” “I’m frightened for
my safety. I don’t know how to work with her”: Practition-
ers’ experiences of client violence and recommendations for
future practice. Professional Psychology Research and Practice,
46(4), 287–297. https://doi.org/10.1037/pro0000035
Kabisa, E., Biracyaza, E., Habagusenga, J. d’A., & Umubyeyi, A.
(2021). Determinants and prevalence of relapse among
patients with substance use disorders: Case of Icyizere Psy-
chotherapeutic Centre. Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention,
and Policy, 16(13), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13011-021-
00347-0
Kalafat, J., Gould, J. L. H., & Munfakh, D. C. (2005). Final
progress report: Hotline evaluation and linkage project
category II. Substance Abuse and Mental Health.
Kamphuis, W., Delahaij, R., Duel, J., Geuze, E., & Vermetten, E.
(2021). The relationship between resilience resources and
long-term deployment-related PTSD symptoms: A longitu-
dinal study in Dutch veterans. Military Behavioral Health, 9(3),
267–274. https://doi.org/10.1080/21635781.2020.1864528
Kanable, R. (2010). Death notifications: The toughest job in law
enforcement. Police and Security News, 26(2), 1–4.
Kanan, L. M. (2010). When students make threats. Tech Directions,
70(5), 31–35.
Kanno, N., & Giddings, M. (2017). Hidden trauma victims:
Understanding and preventing traumatic stress in mental
health professionals. Social Work in Mental Health, 15(3),
331–353. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332985.2016.1220442
Kanters, T., Ruud, H. J., Hornsveld, K. L., Nunes, A. J., Zwets,
P. M., & van Marle Hjalmar, J. C. (2017). The Sexual Violence
Risk-20: Factor structure and psychometric properties. Jour-
nal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, 28(3), 368–387.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14789949.2017.1284887
Kaplan, D. M., Tarvydas, V. M., & Gladding, S. T. (2014). 20/20:
A vision for the future of counseling: The new consensus
definition of counseling. Journal of Counseling & Development,
92(3), 366–372. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2014.
00164.x
Kaur, G., Sharma, D., & Kaur, V. (2016). Telemedicine in tran-
sient phase: Emergence of M-health care services. Indian
Journal of Science and Technology, 9(15), 1–6. https://doi.
org/10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i15/90463
Kehle-Forbes, S. M., Meis, L. A., Spoont, M. R., & Polusny, M. A.
(2015). Treatment initiation and dropout from prolonged
exposure and cognitive processing therapy in a VA outpa-
tient clinic. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice,
and Policy, 8(1), 107–114. https://doi.org/10.1037/tra0000065
Kellogg, N. D. (2010). Sexual behaviors in children: Evaluation and
management. American Family Physician, 82(10), 1233–1238.
Kenny, M. C., Helpingstine, C. E., & Weber, M. (2019). Treat-
ment of a commercially sexually abused girl using trauma-
focused cognitive behavioral therapy and legal interventions.
Clinical Case Studies, 18(1), 18–35. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1534650118800809

-- 519 of 545 --

References 	491
Kerr, M. M., & King, G. (2018). School crisis prevention and inter-
vention. Pearson.
Kerst, A., Zielasek, J., & Gaebel, W. (2020). Smartphone applica-
tions for depression: A systematic literature review and a
survey of health care professionals’ attitudes towards their
use in clinical practice. European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience, 270, 139–152. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00406-018-0974-3
Kilpatrick, D. G. (1988). Rape aftermath symptom test. In
M. Hersen & A. S. Bellack (Eds.), Dictionary of behavioral
assessment techniques (pp. 366–367). Pergamon Press.
Kim, K., Trickett, P. K., & Putnam, F. W. (2010). Childhood expe-
riences of sexual abuse and later parenting practices among
non-offending mothers of sexually abused and comparison
girls. Child Abuse & Neglect, 34(8), 610–622. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chiabu.2010.01.007
Kime, P. (2015). Study: No link between combat deployment and sui-
cides. https://www.militarytimes.com/pay-benefits/military-
benefits/health-care/2015/04/01/study-no-link-between-
combat-deployment-and-suicides/
Kinch, M. S., Haynesworth, A., Kinch, S. L., & Hoyer, D. (2014).
An overview of FDA-approved new molecular entities:
1827–2013. Drug Discovery Today, 19(8), 1033–1039. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2014.03.018
Kivisto, A. J., Berman, A., Watson, M., Gruber, D., & Paul, H.
(2015). North American psychologists’ experiences of stalk-
ing, threatening, and harassing behavior. A survey of ABPP
Diplomates. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
46(4), 277–286. https://doi.org/10.1037/pro0000025
Kleespies, P. M. (2000). Emergencies in mental health practice.
Guilford Press.
Klein, A. (2008). Preventing and responding to sexual violence in dis-
asters: A planning guide for prevention and response. https://
www.peacewomen.org/sites/default/files/vaw_disaster_
2008_0.pdf
Knapp, S. J., VandeCreek, L. D., & Fingerhut, R. (2017). Practical
ethics for psychologists: A positive approach (3rd ed.). American
Psychological Association.
Knight, C., & Gitterman, A. (2018). Ambiguous loss and its dis-
enfranchisement: The need for social work intervention.
Families in Society: The Journal of Contemporary Social Services,
100(2), 164–173. https://doi.org/10.1177/1044389418799937
Knox, K. S., & Roberts, A. R. (2005). Crisis intervention and crisis
team models in schools. Children and Schools, 27(2), 93–100.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cs/27.2.93
Kolski, T. D., & Jongsma, A. E. (2014). The crisis counseling and
traumatic events treatment planner (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Kolski, T. D., Jongsma, A. E., & Myer, R. A. (2015). The crisis
counseling and traumatic events treatment planner with DSM-5
updates (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Koss, M. P. (1993). Detecting the scope of rape: A review of
prevalence research methods. Journal of Interpersonal Violence,
8(2), 198–222. https://doi.org/10.1177/088626093008002004
Kruzan, K. P., & Whitlock, J. (2019). Processes of change and
nonsuicidal self-injury: A qualitative interview study with
individuals at various stages of change. Global Qualitative
Nursing Research. 6, 2333393619852935. https://doi.org/
10.1177/2333393619852935
Kübler-Ross, E. (1997a). Death: The final stage of growth. Scribner.
Kübler-Ross, E. (1997b). Questions and answers on death and dying.
Scribner.
Kübler-Ross, E. (2014). On death and dying. Scribner.
Kübler-Ross, E., & Kessler, D. (2014). On grief and grieving. Scribner.
Laajasalo, T., & Hakkanen, H. (2004). Background characteris-
tics of mentally ill homicide offenders: A comparison of five
diagnostic groups. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychol-
ogy, 15(3), 451–474. https://doi.org/10.1080/147899404
2000226750
Lambert, S. F., & Lawson, G. (2013). Resilience of professional
counselors following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 91(3), 261–268. https://doi.org/
10.1002/j.1556-6676.2013.00094.x
Landau, J., & Hissett, J. (2008). Mild traumatic brain injury:
Impact on identity and ambiguous loss in the family. Families,
Systems, and Health, 26(1), 69–85. https://doi.org/10.1037/
1091-7527.26.1.69
Langan, P. A., Schmitt, E. L., & Durose, M. R. (2003). Recidivism of
sex offenders released from prison in 1994. http://www.bjs.gov/
content/pub/pdf/rsorp94.pdf
Langdon, S., Armour, C., & Stringer, M. (2014). Adult experience
of mental health outcomes as a result of intimate partner vio-
lence victimisation: A systematic review. European Journal of
Psychotraumatology, 5, 247–294. doi:10.3402/ejpt.v5.24794
Lanning, K. V. (2010). Child molesters: A behavioral analysis for
professionals investigating the sexual exploitation of children.
https://www.icmec.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/
US-NCMEC-Child-Molesters-A-Behavioral-Analysis-
Lanning-2010.pdf
Large, M. M., Ryan, C. J., Singh, S. P., Paton, M. B., & Nielssen,
O. B. (2011). The predictive value of risk categorization in
schizophrenia. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 19(1), 25–33.
https://doi.org/10.3109/10673229.2011.549770
Largen, M. A. (1985). The anti-rape movement—Past and
present. In A. W. Burgess (Ed.), Rape and sexual assault:
A research handbook (pp. 1–13). Garland.
Larned, J. G. (2010). Understanding police suicide. Forensic
Examiner, 19(3), 64–71, 125.
Laux, J. M. (2002). A primer on suicidology: Implications for coun-
selors. Journal of Counseling & Development, 80(3), 380–384.
Lawson, G., & Myers, J. E. (2011). Wellness, professional quality of
life, and career sustaining behaviors: What keeps us well?
Journal of Counseling & Development, 89, 163–171.
Lawson, G., & Venart, B. (2005). Preventing counselor impair-
ment: Vulnerability, wellness, and resilience. In G. R. Walz &
R. K. Yep (Eds.), VISTAS: Compelling perspectives on coun-
seling 2005 (pp. 243–246). American Counseling Association.
Lazowski, L. E., Kimmell, K. S., & Baker, S. L. (2016). The Adult
Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory-4 (SASSI-4) user
guide & manual. The SASSI Institute, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration.
Lee, S. M., Cho, S. H., Kissinger, D., & Ogle, N. T. (2010). A
typology of burnout in professional counselors. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 88(2), 131–138. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00001.x
Lee, D. (2020). The impact of natural disasters on neighborhood
poverty rate: A neighborhood change perspective. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 40(4), 447-459. https://doi
.org/10.1177/0739456X18769144

-- 520 of 545 --

492 	References
Leiter, M. P., & Maslach, C. (2009). Nurse turnover: The mediat-
ing role of burnout. Journal of Nursing Management, 17(3),
331–339. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2834.2009.01004.x
Letourneau, E. J., & Borduin, C. M. (2008). The effective treat-
ment of juveniles who sexually offend: An ethical impera-
tive. Ethics and Behavior, 18(2–3), 286–306. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10508420802066940
Lewey, J. H., Smith, C. L., Burcham, B., Saunders, N. L., Elfallal,
D., & O’Toole, S. K. (2018). Comparing the effectiveness of
EMDR and TF-CBT for children and adolescents: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Child & Adolescent Trauma, 11(4), 457–472.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40653-018-0212-1
Lewis, J. A., Dana, R. Q., & Blevins, G. A. (2019). Substance abuse
counseling (6th ed.). Cengage.
Lies, M. A., & Simonsen, C. B. (2015). Workplace violence: Put-
ting employers on the horns of a dilemma. Professional Safety,
60(10), 25–27.
Lincoln, A., Swift, E., & Shorteno-Fraser, M. (2008). Psychologi-
cal adjustment and treatment of children and families with
parents deployed in military combat. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology: In Session, 64(8), 984–992. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jclp.20520
Lindemann, E. (1944). Symptomatology and management of
acute grief. American Journal of Psychiatry, 101(2), 141–148.
https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.101.2.141
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline
personality disorder. Guilford Press.
Ling, J., Hunter, S. V., & Maple, M. (2014). Navigating the chal-
lenges of trauma counselling: How counsellors thrive and
sustain their engagement. Australian Social Work, 67(2),
297–310. https://doi.org/10.1080/0312407X.2013.837188
Linley, P., & Joseph, S. (2004). Positive change following trauma
and adversity: A review. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 17(1),
11–21. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JOTS.0000014671.27856.7e
Lipsky, S., Caetano, R., & Roy-Byrne, P. (2009). Racial and ethnic
disparities in police-reported intimate partner violence and
risk of hospitalization among women. Women’s Health Issues,
19(2), 109–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.whi.2008.09.005
Litam, S. D. A. (2020). “Take your kung-flu back to Wuhan”:
Counseling Asians, Asian Americans, and Pacific Islanders
with race-based trauma related to COVID-19. Professional
Counselor, 10(2), 144–156.
Litam, S. D. A., & Hipolitio-Delgato, C. (2021). When being
“essential” illuminates disparities: Counseling clients
affected by COVID-19. Journal of Counseling & Development,
99(1), 3–10. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12349
Litam, S. D. A., & Oh, S. (2020). Effects of COVID-19 racial dis-
crimination on Chinese Americans: Ethnic identity and cop-
ing strategy as moderators. Counseling Outcome Research and
Evaluation, 10, 1814138. https://doi.org/10.1080/21501378.
2020.1814138
Logan, K. V. (1987). The emotional cycle of deployment. U.S.
Naval Institute Proceedings, 113, 43–47.
Lonergan, M. (2014). Cognitive behavioral therapy for PTSD:
The role of complex PTSD on treatment outcome. Journal of
Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma, 23(5), 494–512. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10926771.2014.904467
Lopes, A. P., Macedo, T. F., Coutinho, E., Figueira, I., & Ventura,
P. R. (2014). Systematic review of efficacy of cognitive-
behavior therapy related to treatments for victims of natural
disasters: A worldwide problem. PLoS ONE, 9(10), 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0109013
Lowenberg, T. J. (2016). The role of the national guard in national
defense and homeland security. http://www.ngaus.org/sites/
default/files/pdf/primer%20fin.pdf
Luepker, E. (2012). Record keeping in psychotherapy and counseling:
Protecting confidentiality and the professional relationship
(2nd ed.). Routledge.
Luthar, S. S. (2006). Resilience in development: A synthesis of
research across five decades. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen
(Eds.), Developmental psychopathology: Volume 3. Risk, disorder,
and adaptation (2nd ed., pp. 739–795). Wiley.
Lynch, K. R., Boots, D. P., Jackson, D. B., & Renzetti, C. M.
(2022). Firearm-related abuse and protective order requests
among intimate partner violence victims. Journal of Interper-
sonal Violence, 37(15–16), NP12973–NP12997. https://doi.
org/10.1177/08862605211001474
Maehira, Y., Chowdhury, E. I., Reza, M., Drahozal, R., Gayen, T.
K., Masud, I., . . . Azim, T. (2013). Factors associated with
relapse into drug use among male and female attendees of a
three-month drug detoxification-rehabilitation programme
in Dhaka, Bangladesh: A prospective cohort study. Harm
Reduction Journal, 10(1), Article 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1477-7517-10-14
Malinowsky, A. J. (2014). Self-Care for the mental health practi-
tioner: The theory, research, and practice of preventing and
addressing the occupational hazards of the profession. Jessica
Kingsley.
Mann, J. J., Apter, A., Bertolote, J., Beautrais, A., Currier, D.,
Haas, A., . . . Varnik, A. (2005). Suicide prevention strategies:
A systematic review. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 294(16), 2064–2074. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.294.
16.2064
Marburger, K., & Pickover, S. (2020). A comprehensive perspec-
tive on treating victims of human trafficking. The Professional
Counselor, 10(1), 13–24. https://doi.org/10.15241/km.10.1.13
Marlatt, G. A., Larimer, M. E., & Witkiewitz, K. (Eds.). (2011).
Harm reduction: Pragmatic strategies for managing high-risk
behaviors (2nd ed.). Guilford Press.
Marques, J. K., Wiederanders, M., Day, D. M., Nelson, C., & van
Ommeren, A. (2005). Effects of a relapse prevention program
on sexual recidivism: Final results from California’s Sex
Offender Treatment and Evaluation Project (SOTEP). Sexual
Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment, 17(1), 79–107.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11194-005-1212-x
Martín-Fernández, M., Gracia, E., & Lila, M. (2018). Assessing
victim-blaming attitudes in cases of intimate partner vio-
lence against women: Development and validation of the
VB-IPVAW scale. Intervención Psicosocial, 27(3), 133–143.
https://doi.org/10.5093/pi2018a18
Marshall, W. L., Marshall, L. E., Serran, G. A., & O’Brien, M. D.
(2008). Sexual offender treatment: A positive approach. Psy-
chiatric Clinics of North America, 31(4), 681–696. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.psc.2008.06.001
Maslach, C. (2003). Job burnout: New directions in research and
intervention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12(5),
189–192. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.01258
Mason, J. (2013). Reporting child abuse and neglect in North Caro-
lina (3rd ed.). University of North Carolina School of Gov-
ernment.

-- 521 of 545 --

References 	493
Masten, A. S., & Obradovic, J. (2008). Disaster preparation and
recovery: Lessons from research on resilience in human
development. Ecology and Society, 13(1), 9.
Mathews, R., Matthews, J. K., & Speltz, K. (1989). Female sexual
offenders: An exploratory study. Safer Society Press.
Mavranezouli, I., Megnin-Viggars, O., Daly, C., Dias, S., Stock-
ton, S., Meiser-Stedman, R., . . . Pilling, S. (2020). Research
review: Psychological and psychosocial treatments for chil-
dren and young people with post-traumatic stress disorder:
A network meta-analysis. Journal of Child Psychology and Psy-
chiatry and Allied Disciplines, 61(1), 18–29. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jcpp.13094
Mayo Clinic. (2016). Complicated grief. http://www.mayoclinic.
com/health/complicated-grief/DS01023/DSECTION=2
McCabe, O. L., Everly Jr., G. S., Brown, L. M., Wendelboe, A. M.,
Hamad, N. H. A., Tallchief, V. L., & Links, J. M. (2014). Psy-
chological first aid: A consensus-derived, empirically sup-
ported, competency-based training model. American Journal
of Public Health, 104(4), 621–628. https://doi.org/10.2105/
AJPH.2013.301219
McCubbin, H. I., & Patterson, J. M. (1982). Family adaptation to
crisis. In H. I. McCubbin, A. E. Cauble, & J. M. Patterson
(Eds.), Family stress, coping, and social support (pp. 26–47).
Charles C. Thomas.
McGlothlin, J. (2008). Developing clinical skills in suicide assess-
ment, prevention, and treatment. American Counseling
Association.
McLeod, A. L., Hays, D. G., & Chang, C. Y. (2010). Experiences
of female intimate partner violence survivors: Accessing per-
sonal and community resources. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 88(3), 303–310. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6678.2010.tb00026.x
McLeod, D. (2015). Female offenders in child sexual abuse cases:
A national picture. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 24(1),
97–113. https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2015.978925
Mee-Lee, D. (2013). How to really use the new edition of the
ASAM criteria: What to do and what not to do. Counselor,
14(4), 18–19.
Meichenbaum, D. H. (1996). Stress inoculation training for cop-
ing with stressors. The Clinical Psychologist, 49, 4–7.
Meloy, J. R., Hoffiman, J., Guldimann, M. A., & James, D. (2011).
The role of warning behaviors in threat assessment: An
exploration and suggested typology. Behavioral Sciences and
the Law, 30(3), 256–279. https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.999
Meloy, J. R., & O’Toole, M. E. (2011). The concept of leakage in
threat assessment. Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 29(4),
513–527. https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.986
Merkouris, S. S., Rodda, S. N., & Dowling, N. A. (2022). Affected
other interventions: A systematic review and meta-analysis
across addictions. Addiction, 117(9), 2393–2414. https://doi.
org/10.1111/add.15825
Miller, L. (2020). Remote supervision in primary care during the
COVID-19 pandemic: The “new normal”? Education for Pri-
mary Care, 31(6), 332–336. https://doi.org/10.1080/14739879
.2020.1802353
Miller, T., Clayton, R., Miller, J. M., Bilyeu, J., Hunter, J., & Kraus,
R. F. (2000). Violence in the schools: Clinical issues and case
analysis for high-risk children. Child Psychiatry and Human
Development, 30(4), 255–272. https://doi.org/10.1023/
B:CHUD.0000037153.18246.70
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing:
Helping people change (3rd ed.). Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., Wilbourne, P. L., & Hettema, J. E. (2003). What
works?: A summary of alcohol treatment outcome research.
In R. K. Hester & W. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of alcoholism
treatment approaches: Effective alternatives (3rd ed., pp. 13–63).
Allyn & Bacon.
Miller-Perrin, C. L., & Perrin, R. D. (2012). Child maltreatment: An
introduction (3rd ed.). Sage.
Minnie, L., Goodman, S., & Wallis, Z. (2015). Exposure to daily
trauma: The experiences and coping mechanism of emer-
gency medical personnel. A cross-sectional study. African
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 5(1), 12–18. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.afjem.2014.10.010
Mitra, M., Mouradian, V. E., & McKenna, M. (2013). Dating vio-
lence and associated health risks among high school stu-
dents with disabilities. Maternal and Child Health Journal,
17(6), 1088–1094. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-012-1091-y
Moate, R., Gnilka, P., West, E., & Bruns, K. (2016). Stress and
burnout among counselor educators: Differences between
adaptive, maladaptive, and nonperfectionists. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 94(2), 161–171. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jcad.12073
Mohl, A. (2010). Sexual abuse of the child: A treatment model for
the incestuous family. Journal of Psychohistory, 38(2), 168–181.
Monteith, L. L., Menefee, D. S., Pettit, J. W., Leopoulos, W. L., &
Vincent, J. P. (2013). Examining the interpersonal–psycholog-
ical theory of suicide in an inpatient veteran sample. Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 43(4), 418–428. https://doi.
org/10.1111/sltb.12027
Moradinazar, M., Farnia, V., Alikhani, M., Karyani, A. K.,
Rezaei, S., Rezaeian, S., Matin, B. K., & Najafi, F. (2020).
Factors related to relapse in patients with substance-related
disorders under methadone maintenance therapy: Decision
tree analysis. Oman Medical Journal, 35(1). https://doi.org/
10.5001/omj.2020.07
Morgan, R. E., & Truman, J. L. (2022). Stalking victimization, 2019.
https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/sv19.pdf
Moss, R., & Cook, C. C. H. (2020). Maintenance and relapse pre-
vention. In D. Capuzzi, & M. D. Stauffer (Eds.), Foundations
of addictions counseling (4th ed., pp. 260–277). Pearson.
Mpofu, E., Athanasou, J. A., Rafe, C., & Belshaw, S. H. (2018).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy efficacy for reducing recidi-
vism rates of moderate- and high-risk sexual offenders: A
scoping systematic literature review. International Journal of
Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 62(1), 170–186.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306624X16644501
Mueller, S., & Tschan, F. (2011). Consequences of client-initiated
workplace violence: The role of fear and perceived preven-
tion. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 16(2), 217–229.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021723
Murphy, G. (2010). Following up with individuals at high risk for
suicide: Developing a model for crisis hotline and emergency
department collaboration. https://suicidepreventionlifeline.
org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Lifeline-Crisis-Center-
ED-Paper-1.6.pdf
Myers, J. E., Sweeney, T. J., & Witmer, J. M. (2000). The wheel of
wellness counseling for wellness: A holistic model for treat-
ment planning. Journal of Counseling & Development, 78(3),
251–266. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2000.tb01906.x

-- 522 of 545 --

494 	References
National Alliance of Mental Illness (NAMI). (2017). Dual diagno-
sis and integrated treatment of mental illness and substance abuse
disorder. https://namimn.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/
188/2018/05/DualDiagnosis-And-IntegratedTreatment_
TreatmentOptions_2018.pdf
National Association of Adult Survivors of Child Abuse.
(NAASCA). (2022). What are the statistics of the abused?
http://www.naasca.org/2012-Resources/010812-
StaisticsOfChildAbuse.htm
National Association of School Psychologists (NASP). (2015).
Addressing grief: Brief facts and tips https://www.nasponline.
org/resources-and-publications/resources/school-safety-
and-crisis/addressing-grief
National Association of Social Workers (NASW). (2017). Verbal
de-escalation techniques. https://ppsfba.weebly.com/
uploads/2/5/0/7/25071730/verbal_de-escalation.pdf
National Center for Victims of Crime. (2017). Resource guide. Inti-
mate partner violence fact sheet. https://www.ncjrs.gov/ovc_
archives/ncvrw/2017/images/en_artwork/Fact_Sheets/
2017NCVRW_IPV/DV_508.pdf
National Center on Elder Abuse. (2022). About elder abuse and
prevalence. https://ncler.acl.gov/ElderJustice-Toolkit/Land-
scape-of-Elder-Justice.aspx
National Child Traumatic Stress Network. (2012). TF-CBT
implementation resources. https://tfcbt.org/resources/
implementation/
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2022). Mental health
professionals duty to warn. http://www.ncsl.org/research/
health/mental-health-professionals-duty-to-warn.aspx
National Education Association. (2018). School crisis guide: Help
and healing in a time of crisis. https://www.nea.org/sites/
default/files/2020-07/NEA%20School%20Crisis%20
Guide%202018.pdf
National Human Trafficking Hotline. (2022). Federal law.
https://humantraffickinghotline.org/what-human-
trafficking/federal-law
National Institute of Justice. (2008). Drug-facilitated rape on cam-
pus. http://www.nij.gov/topics/crime/rape-sexual-
violence/campus/pages/drug-facilitated.aspx
National Institute of Justice. (2009). Practical implications of cur-
rent domestic violence research: For law enforcement, prosecutors
and judges. https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/225722.pdf
National Institute of Justice. (2022). Federally backed human traf-
ficking task force model yields progress, and opportunities for con-
tinued growth. https://nij.ojp.gov/topics/articles/federally-
backed-human-trafficking-task-force-model-yields-progress
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).
(2022). Emergency medical services workers. https://www.cdc.
gov/niosh/topics/ems/default.html
National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund. (2022). Key
data about the profession. https://nleomf.org/memorial/facts-
figures/law-enforcement-facts/
National Network to End Domestic Violence. (2022). Violence
against women act. https://nnedv.org/content/violence-
against-women-act/
National Resource Center on Domestic Violence. (2011). Lethality
assessment tools: A critical analysis. https://vawnet.org/sites/
default/files/materials/files/2016-09/AR_Lethality.pdf
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. (2007). NSPL suicide risk
assessment standards. https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Suicide-Risk-Assessment-
Standards-1.pdf
National Terror Alert Response Center. (2017). Shelter in place:
Know where, know how. http://www.nationalterroralert.com/
shelterinplace/
National Volunteer Fire Council. (NVFC). (2014). Suicide in the
fire and emergency services: Adopting a proactive approach to
behavioral health awareness and suicide prevention. https://
www.nvfc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/ff_suicide_
report.pdf
Neimeyer, R. A. (2001). Meaning reconstruction and the experience
of loss. American Psychological Association.
Newell, J. (2017). Cultivating professional resilience in direct
practice: A guide for human service professionals. Columbia
University Press.
Newell, J. M., & MacNeil, G. A. (2010). Professional burnout,
vicarious trauma secondary traumatic stress and compassion
fatigue: A review of theoretical terms, risk factors and pre-
vention methods for clinicians and researchers. Best Practices
in Mental Health, 6(2), 57–68.
Newsome, D. W., & Gladding, S. T. (2017). Clinical mental health
counseling in community and agency settings (5th ed.). Pearson.
Nixon, R. D. V., & Bralo, D. (2019). Using explicit case formula-
tion to improve cognitive processing therapy for PTSD.
Behavior Therapy, 50(1), 155–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
beth.2018.04.003
Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2011). Stages of
change. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 67(2), 143–154. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20758
Nordstrom, A., Dahlgren, L., & Kullgren, G. (2006). Victims’ rela-
tions and factors triggering homicides committed by offenders
with Schizophrenia. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology,
17(2), 192–203. https://doi.org/10.1080/14789940600631522
Nordstrom, K., & Allen, M. H. (2007). Managing the acutely agi-
tated and psychotic patient. CNS Spectrums, 12(S17), 5–11.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900026286
Norris, H., & Rosen, C. S. (2009). Innovations in disaster mental
health services and evaluation: National, state, and local
responses to Hurricane Katrina (Introduction to the special
issue). Administrative Policy Mental Health, 36, 159–164.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10488-009-0218-y
North, C. S. (2010). A tale of two studies of two disasters: Com-
paring psychosocial responses to disaster among Oklahoma
City bombing survivors and Hurricane Katrina evacuees.
Rehabilitation Psychology, 55(3), 241–246. https://doi.org/
10.1037/a0020119
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (2015).
Guidelines for preventing workplace violence for healthcare and
social service workers. https://www.osha.gov/sites/default/
files/publications/osha3148.pdf
Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending,
Registering, and Tracking. (SMART). (2016) Global survey of
sex offender registration and notification systems. https://smart.
ojp.gov/global-survey-2016-final.pdf
Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending,
Registering, and Tracking (SMART). (2017, March).

-- 523 of 545 --

References 	495
Sex Offender Management Assessment and Planning Initiative.
www.smart.gov/SOMAPI/pdfs/SOMAPI_Full%20Report.pdf
Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending,
Registering, and Tracking (SMART). (2022). Summary of pros-
ecution, transfer and registration of juveniles who commit serious
sex offenses. https://smart.ojp.gov/publications-juvenile-reg-
istration
Office for Victims of Crime. (2006). OVC fact sheets: The Justice for
All Act. https://ovc.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh226/files/
media/document/justice-for-all-act-fs000311.pdf
Officer Down Memorial Page. (2022). Officer down memorial page.
https://www.odmp.org/
O’Halloran, T. M., & Linton, J. M. (2000). Stress on the job: Self-
care resources for counsellors. Journal of Mental Health Coun-
seling, 22(4), 354–364.
O’Hara, A. F., Violanti, J. M., Levenson Jr., R. L., & Clark, Sr.,
R. G. (2013). National police suicide estimates: Web surveil-
lance study III. International Journal of Emergency Mental
Health and Human Resilience, 15(1), 31–38.
Okie, S. (2001, October 14). Use of anti-anxiety drugs jumps in
US: Number of new prescriptions increases sharply in Wash-
ington and New York. Washington Post, p. A8.
Oliver, M., Wong, S., & Nicholaichuk, T. P. (2008). Outcome
evaluation of a high-intensity inpatient sex offender treat-
ment program. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 24, 522–536.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260508317196
Olivia, J., Morgan, R., & Compton, M. (2010). A practical view of
de-escalation skills in law enforcement: Helping individuals
in crisis while reducing police liability and injury. Journal of
Police Crisis Negotiations, 10(1–2), 15–29. https://doi.org/
10.1080/15332581003785421
Olver, M. E., Marshall, L. E., Marshall, W. L., & Nicholaichuk,
T. P. (2020). A long-term outcome assessment of the effects
on subsequent reoffense rates of a prison-based CBT/RNR
sex offender treatment program with strength-based ele-
ments. Sexual Abuse, 32(2), 127–153. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1079063218807486
O’Neal, C. W., & Mancini, J. A. (2021). Military families’ stress-
ful reintegration, family climate, and their adolescents’ psy-
chosocial health. Journal of Marriage and Family, 83(2),
375–393. https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12711
Orpinas, P., Choi, Y. J., Kim, C. M., Li, T., & Kim, E. (2022). Pre-
vention of partner violence: Virtual case simulation for reli-
gious leaders of Korean American immigrant communities.
Health Promotion International, 37(1), daab092. https://doi.
org/10.1093/heapro/daab092
O’Toole, M. E. (2000). The school shooter: A threat assessment per-
spective. https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/stats-services-
publications-school-shooter-school-shooter/view
O’Toole, M. E. (2014). The mission-oriented shooter: A new type
of mass killer. Journal of Violence and Gender, 1(1), 9–10.
https://doi.org/10.1089/vio.2013.1502
Pabian, Y. L., Wefel, E., & Beebe, R. S. (2009). Psychologists’
knowledge of their states’ laws pertaining to Tarasoff-type
situations. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 40(1),
8–14. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014784
Pack, M. J. (2013). Critical incident stress management: A review
of the literature with implications for social work.
International Social Work, 56(5), 608–627. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0020872811435371
Page, D. (2008). Death notifications: Breaking the bad news. http://
www.officer.com/article/10249064/death-notification-
breaking-the-bad-news
Parcesepe, A., Martin S., Pollock, M., & Garcia-Moreno, C.
(2015). The effectiveness of mental health interventions for
adult female survivors of sexual assault: A systematic
review. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 25(A), 15–25.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2015.0.004
Park, C. L., Cohen, C. H., & Murch, R. L. (1996). Assessment and
prediction of stress-related growth. Journal of Personality, 64(1),
71–105. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1996.tb00815.x
Parker, S. (2011). Spirituality in counseling: A faith develop-
ment perspective. Journal of Counseling & Development, 89(1),
112–119. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00067.x
Parkes, C. M., & Prigerson, H. G. (2009). Bereavement: Studies of
grief in adult life (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Patra, P., Prakash, J., Patra, B., & Khanna, P. (2018) Intimate
partner violence: Wounds are deeper. Indian Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 60(4), 494–498. https://doi.org/10.4103/psychiatry.
IndianJPsychiatry_74_17
Payne, S. R. T., & Elliott, D. S. (2011). Safe2tell: An anonymous,
24/7 reporting system for preventing school violence. New
Directions for Youth Development, 2011(129), 103–111. https://
doi.org/10.1002/yd.390
Pearlman, L. A., & MacIan, P. S. (1995). Vicarious traumatiza-
tion: An empirical study of the effects of trauma work on
trauma therapists. Professional Psychology: Research and Prac-
tice, 26(6), 558–565. https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.26.
6.558
Pedersen, P. B. (1991). Multiculturalism as a generic approach to
counseling. Journal of Counseling & Development, 70(1), 6–12.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.1991.tb01555.x
Pew Research Center. (2021) The changing face of America’s veteran
population. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/
04/05/the-changing-face-of-americas-veteran-population/
Phenix, A., & Epperson, D. L. (2016). Overview of the develop-
ment, reliability, validity, scoring, and uses of the Static-99,
Static-99R, Static-2002, and Static-2002R. In A. Phenix, &
H. Hoberman (Eds.), Sexual offending (pp. 205–231). Springer.
Pincus, S. H., House, R., Christensen, J., & Adler, L. E. (2005).
The emotional cycle of deployment: A military family perspective.
https://www.military.com/spouse/military-deployment/
emotional-cycle-of-deployment-military-family.html
Plener, P. L., Schumacher, T. S., Munz, L. M., & Groschwitz, R. C.
(2015). The longitudinal course of non-suicidal self-injury
and deliberate self-harm: A systematic review of the litera-
ture. Borderline Personality Disorder Emotional Dysregulation,
2(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40479-014-0024-3
Polaris Project. (2022). Myths, facts, and statistics. https://
polarisproject.org/myths-facts-and-statistics/
Polusny, M. A., Erbes, C. R., Thuras, P., Moran, A., Lamberty,
G. J., Collins, R. C., . . . Lim, K. O. (2015). Mindfulness-based
stress reduction for posttraumatic stress disorder among
veterans: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 314(5), 456–465. https://doi.org/
10.1001/jama.2015.8361

-- 524 of 545 --

496 	References
Posluns, K., & Gall, T. L. (2020). Dear mental health practition-
ers, take care of yourselves: A literature review on self-care.
International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling, 42(1),
1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10447-019-09382-w
Posner, K., Brown, G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova,
K. V., Oquendo, M. A., . . . Mann, J. J. (2011). The Columbia-
Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Initial validity and internal
consistency findings from three multisite studies with ado-
lescents and adults. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(12),
1266–1277. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704
Post, J. M., McGinnis, C., & Moody, K. (2014). The changing
face of terrorism in the 21st century: The communications
revolution and the virtual community of hatred. Behavioral
Sciences & the Law, 32(3), 306–334. https://doi.org/10.1002/
bsl.2123
Powers, M., Halpern, J., Ferenschack, M., Gillihan, S., & Foa, E.
(2010). A meta-analytic review of prolonged exposure for
posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical Psychology Review,
30(6), 635–641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2010.04.007
Pozgar, G. D. (2018). Legal aspects of healthcare administration
(13th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Priebe, G., & Svedin, C. G. (2010). Child sexual abuse is largely
hidden from the adult society: An epidemiological study of
adolescents’ disclosures. Child Abuse & Neglect, 32(12),
1095–1108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2008.04.001
Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau. (2022). Mission.
https://www.fcc.gov/about-fcc/what-we-do
Pullman L., & Seto, M. (2012). Assessment and treatment of ado-
lescent sexual offenders: Implications of recent research on
generalist versus specialist explanations. Child Abuse &
Neglect, 36(3), 203–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.
2011.11.003
Purcell, R., Powell, M. B., & Mullen, P. C. (2005). Clients who
stalk psychologists: Prevalence, methods, motives. Profes-
sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 36(5), 531–543.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.36.5.537
Purvis, K. (2022). The TBRI playbook. https://child.tcu.edu/
store/the-tbri-playbook/#sthash.YeJTsvAP.Z25EJK5a.dpbs
Pynoos, R. S., Weathers, F. W., Steinberg, A. M., Marx, B. P.,
Layne, C. M., Kaloupek, D. G., . . . Kriegler, J. A. (2015). Clini-
cian-administered PTSD scale for DSM-5—child/adolescent ver-
sion. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/assessment/
child/caps-ca.asp
Qasem, H. D., Hamadah, F. A., Qasem, K. D., Kamel, M. I., &
El-Shazly, M. K. (2013). Knowledge and attitude of primary
health care staff screening and not screening for domestic
violence against women. Alexandria Journal of Medicine, 49(2),
181–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajme.2012.07.006
Rainsberger, R. (2019). Understand “legitimate educational
interest” under FERPA. Disability Compliance for Higher Edu-
cation, 24(9), 7. https://doi.org/10.1002/dhe.30618
Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2015a).
The nation’s largest anti-sexual assault organization. https://
www.rainn.org
Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2015b).
Programs and expertise. https://www.rainn.org/programs-
and-expertise
Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2016).
Sexual assault kit initiative.. https://www.rainn.org/news/
sexual-assault-kit-initiative-helps-states-erase-rape-kit-
backlogs
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2020).
Consent laws. https://apps.rainn.org/policy/compare/
consent-laws.cfm?_ga=2.81063252.276890065.1645379180-
1608790709.1645045973
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022a).
The criminal justice system: Statistics. https://www.rainn.org/
statistics/criminal-justice-system
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022b).
Drug-facilitated sexual assault. https://rainn.org/articles/
drug-facilitated-sexual-assault
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022c).
Eating disorders. https://www.rainn.org/articles/eating-
disorders
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022d).
Key terms and phrases. https://www.rainn.org/articles/
key-terms-and-phrases
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022e).
Self-harm. https://www.rainn.org/articles/self-harm
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022f).
Sexual violence preparedness and response during COVID-19.
https://www.rainn.org/articles/sexual-violence-
preparedness-and-response-during-covid-19
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022g).
Stalking. https://www.rainn.org/articles/stalking
Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2022h).
Statistics. https://www.rainn.org/statistics
Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network. (RAINN). (2023).
About the prevention navigator. https://www.rainn.org/
preventionnavigator-about
Raphael, B. (2000). Promoting the mental health and wellbeing of
children and young people. Department of Health and Aged
Care.
Ratts, M. J., Singh, A. A., Nassar-McMillan, S., Butler, S. K., &
McCullough, J. R. (2015). Multicultural and social justice coun-
seling competencies. http://www.multiculturalcounseling.
org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&
id=205:amcd-endorses-multicultural-and-social-justice-
counseling-competencies&catid=1:latest&Itemid=123
Ray, D. C., Armstrong, S. A., Balkin, R. S., & Jayne, K. M. (2015).
Child-centered play therapy in the schools: Review and
meta-analysis. Psychology in the Schools, 52(2), 107–123.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pits.21798
Rebocho, M. F., & Goncalves, R. A. (2012). Sexual predators and
prey: A comparative study of the hunting behavior of
rapists and child molesters. Journal of Interpersonal Violence,
27(14), 2770–2789. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0886260512438280
Redmond, S. A., Wilcox, S. L., Campbell, S., Kim, A., Finney, K.,
Barr, K., & Hassan, A. M. (2015). A brief introduction to the
military workplace culture. Work, 50(1), 9–20. https://doi.
org/10.3233/WOR-141987
Rees, C. S., & Maclaine, E. (2015). A systematic review of video-
conference-delivered psychological treatment for anxiety
disorders. Australian Psychologist, 50(4), 259–264. https://doi.
org/10.111/ap.12122
Reeves, A. (2016). Working with risk in counselling and
psychotherapy. Sage.

-- 525 of 545 --

References 	497
Reitzel, L. R., & Carbonell, J. L. (2006). The effectiveness of sex-
ual offender treatment for juveniles as measured by recidi-
vism: A meta-analysis. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and
Treatment, 18(4), 401–421.
Remley, T. P., & Herlihy, B. (2020). Ethical, legal, and professional
issues in counseling (6th ed.). Pearson.
Renzenbrink, I. (2011). Caregiver stress and staff support in illness,
dying, and bereavement. Oxford University Press.
Resick, P. A., Monson, C. M., & Chard, K. M. (2017). Cognitive
processing therapy for PTSD: A comprehensive manual. Guilford
Press.
Resick, P. A., Wachen, J. S., Mintz, J., Young-McCaughan, S.,
Roache, J. D., Borah, A. M., . . . Peterson, A. L. (2015).
A randomized clinical trial of group cognitive processing
therapy compared with group present-centered therapy for
PTSD among active duty military personnel. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 83(6), 1058–1068. https://doi.
org/10.1037/ccp0000016
Rettenberger, M., Briken, P., Turner, D., & Eher, R. (2015). Sexual
offender recidivism among a population-based prison sam-
ple. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 59(4), 424–444. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0306624X13516732
Rettenberger, M., Rice, M. E., Harris, G. T., & Eher, R. (2017).
Actuarial risk assessment of sexual offenders: The psycho-
metric properties of the Sex Offender Risk Appraisal Guide
(SORAG). Psychological Assessment, 29(6), 624–638. https://
doi.org/10.1037/pas0000390
Rice, M. E., & Harris, G. T. (2016). The sex offender risk appraisal
guide. In A. Phenix & D. L. Epperson (Eds.), Sexual offend-
ing: Predisposing antecedents, assessments and management
(pp. 471–488). Springer.
Richards, D., & Vigano, N. (2013). Online counseling: A narra-
tive and critical review of the literature. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 69(9), 994–1011. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jclp.21974
Richman, J. A., Wislar, J. S., Flaherty, J. A., Fendrich, M., &
Rospenda, K. M. (2004). Effects on alcohol use and anxiety of
the September 11, 2001 attacks and chronic work stressors: A
longitudinal cohort study. American Journal of Public Health,
94(11), 2010–2015.
Richmond, J. S., Berlin, J. S., Fishkind, A. B., Holloman, Jr., G. H.,
Zeller, S. L., Wilson, M. P., . . . Ng, A. T. (2012). Verbal
de-escalation of the agitated patient: Consensus statement of
the American Association for Emergency Psychiatry Project
BETA De-escalation Workgroup. Western Journal of Emer-
gency Medicine, 13(1), 17–25. https://doi.org/10.5811/
westjem.2011.9.6864
Rivera-Kloeppel, B., & Mendenhall, T. (2021). Examining the
relationship between self-care and compassion fatigue in
mental health professionals: A critical review. Traumatology.
https://doi.org/10.1037/trm0000362
Roach, L. F., & Young, M. E. (2007). Do counselor education pro-
grams promote wellness in their students? Counselor Educa-
tion & Supervision, 47(1), 29–45. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6978.2007.tb00036.x
Roberts, L. C., & Franzo, T. B. (2013). Requiring personal therapy for
counselors-in-training: Application of an ethical decision-making
model. https://www.counseling.org/knowledge-center/
vistas/by-subject2/vistas-education-and-supervision/docs/
default-source/vistas/article_27
Roe, K. J. (2004). The Violence Against Women Act and its impact
on sexual violence public policy: Looking back and looking for-
ward. https://vawnet.org/material/violence-against-
women-act-and-its-impact-sexual-violence-public-policy-
looking-back-and
Rogers, C. R. (1995). On becoming a person: A therapist’s view of
psychotherapy (2nd ed.). HarperOne.
Rojas, E. Y., & Olver, M. E. (2020). Validity and reliability of the
Violence Risk Scale–Youth Sexual Offense Version. Sexual
Abuse, 32(7), 826–849. https://doi.org/10.1177/107906321
9858064
Rolling, E., & Brosi, M. (2010). A multi-leveled and integrated
approach to assessment and intervention of intimate partner
violence. Journal of Family Violence, 25(3), 229–236. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10896-009-9286-8
Rosario, M., Schrimshaw, E. W., & Hunter, J. (2012). Homeless-
ness among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth: Implications
for subsequent internalizing and externalizing symptoms.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 41(5), 544–560. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10964-011-9681-3
Rosenblatt, P. C., Walsh, R. P., & Jackson, D. A. (1976). Grief and
mourning in cross-cultural perspective. Human Relations Area
Files Press.
Rothschild, B. (2010). Eight keys to safe trauma recovery: Take-
charge strategies to empower your healing. Norton.
Rothstein, M. A. (2014). Tarasoff duties after Newtown. Journal
of Law, Medicine and Ethics, 42(1), 104–109. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jlme.12123
Roud, E., Gausdal, A. H., Asgary, A., & Carlström, E. (2021).
Outcome of collaborative emergency exercises: Differences
between full-scale and tabletop exercises. Journal of Contin-
gencies and Crisis Management, 29(2), 170–184. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1468-5973.12339
Rowe, C. L., La Greca, A. M., & Alexandersson, A. (2010). Family
and individual factors associated with substance involvement
and PTS symptoms among adolescents in greater New Orleans
after Hurricane Katrina. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 78(6), 806–817. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020808
Royle, L., Keenan, P., & Farrell, D. (2009). Issues of stigma for
first responders accessing support for post-traumatic stress.
International Journal of Emergency Mental Health, 11(2), 79–85.
Rudd, M. D. (2006). The assessment and management of suicidality.
Professional Resource Exchange.
Rudd, M. D., Berman, A. L., Joiner, T. E., Nock, M. K.,
Silverman, M. M., Mandrusiak, M., . . .Witte, T. (2006).
Warning signs for suicide: Theory, research, and clinical
applications. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 36(3),
255–262. https://doi.org/10.1521/suli.2006.36.3.255
Rupert, P. A., & Dorociak, K. E. (2019). Self-care, stress, and
well-being among practicing psychologists. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 50(5), 343–350. https://
doi.org/10.1037/pro0000251
Russell, A. (2013). Multidisciplinary response to youth with
sexual behavior problems. William Mitchell Law Review, 40,
1058–1082.
Ruzek, J. L., Brymer, M. J., Jacobs, A. K., Layne, C. M., Vernberg,
E. M., & Watson, P. J. (2007). Psychological first aid. Journal

-- 526 of 545 --

498 	References
of Mental Health Counseling, 29(1), 17–27. https://doi.org/
10.17744/mehc.29.1.5racqxjueafabgwp
Rynearson, E. K. (2012). The narrative dynamic of grief after
homicide. Omega, 65(3), 507–510. https://doi.org/10.2190/
OM.65.3.f
SafeHelpline. (2016). About us. https://safehelpline.org/effects-
of-sexual-assault/substance-abuse
Saindon, C., Rheingold, A. A., Baddeley, J., Wallace, M. M.,
Brown, C., & Rynearson, E. K. (2014). Restorative retelling
for violent loss: An open clinical trial. Death Studies, 38(4),
251–258. https://doi.org/10.1080/07481187.2013.783654
Sandover, J. C., & Freeman, N. J. (2007). Typology of female
sex offenders: A test of Vandiver and Kercher. Sexual Abuse:
A Journal of Research and Treatment, 19(2), 73–89. https://doi.
org/10.1177/107906320701900201
Sankaranarayanan, A. (2007). Suicide risk assessment made
easy. Internet Journal of Mental Health, 5(2).
Sansbury, B. S., Graves, K., & Scott, W. (2015). Managing trau-
matic stress responses among clinicians: Individual and
organizational tools for self-care. Trauma, 17(2), 114–122.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1460408614551978
Sapkota, S. (2019). Contributing factors to relapse of drug
addiction among clients attending rehabilitation centres of
Dharan, Nepal. Journal of Chitwan Medical College, 6(17),
20–25.
Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor, T. F., de la Fuente, J. R., &
Grant, M. (1993). Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT): WHO collaborative project on
early detection of persons with harmful alcohol consump-
tion. Addiction, 88(6), 791–804. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1360-0443.1993.tb02093.x
Savic-Jabrow, P. C. (2010). Where do counsellors in private prac-
tice receive their support?: A pilot study. Counselling and
Psychotherapy Research, 10(3), 229–232. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14733140903469889
Sayers, S. L., Farrow, V. A., Ross, J., & Oslin, D. W. (2009). Fam-
ily problems among recently returned military veterans
referred for a mental health evaluation. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 70(2), 163–170. https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.
07m03863
Schmucker, M., & Lösel, F. (2015). The effects of sexual offender
treatment on recidivism: An international meta-analysis of
sound quality evaluations. Journal of Experimental Criminol-
ogy, 11(4), 597–630. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292-015-
9241-z
Schneider, B. (2009). Substance use disorders and risk for com-
pleted suicide. Archives of Suicide Research, 13(4), 303–316.
https://doi.org/10.1080/138111110903263191
Schwarz, J. E., Baber, D., Giantisco, E., & Isaacson, B. (2021).
EMDR for survivors of sexual and intimate partner violence
at a nonprofit counseling agency. Journal of EMDR Practice
and Research, 15(4). https://doi.org/10.1891/EMDR-
D-21-00014
Scott, C. L., & Resnick, P. J. (2012). Patient suicide and litigation.
In R. I. Simon, & R. E. Hales (Eds.), Suicide assessment and
management (2nd ed., pp. 539–552). American Psychological
Association.
Scott, L. N., Pilkonis, P. A., Hipwell, A. E., Keenan, K., & Stepp,
S. D. (2015). Non-suicidal self-injury and suicidal ideation as
predictors of suicide attempts in adolescent girls: A multi-
wave prospective study. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 58, 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comppsych.2014.12.011
Seewald, K., Rossegger, A., Gerth, J., Urbaniok, F., Phillips, G., &
Endrass, J. (2018). Effectiveness of a risk-need-responsivity-
based treatment program for violent and sexual offenders:
Results of a retrospective, quasi-experimental study. Legal
and Criminological Psychology, 23(1), 85–99. https://doi.org/
10.1111/lcrp.12122
Seligman, M. E. (1992). Helplessness: On depression, development
and death (Reprint ed.). Freeman.
Selye, H. (1978). The stress of life (2nd ed.). McGraw Hill.
Selzer, M. L. (1971). The Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test:
The quest for a new diagnostic instrument. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 127(12), 1653–1658. https://doi.org/10.1176/
ajp.127.12.1653
Shapiro, E. (2012). EMDR and early psychological intervention
following trauma. European Review of Applied Psychology,
62(4), 241–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erap.2012.09.003
Shapiro, S. L., Brown, K. W., & Biegel, G. M. (2007). Teaching
self-care to caregivers: Effects of mindfulness-based stress
reduction on the mental health of therapists in training.
Training & Education in Professional Psychology, 1(2), 105–115.
https://doi.org/10.1037/1931-3918.1.2.105
Shared Hope International. (2022). The problem. http://shared-
hope.org/theproblem/what-is-sex-trafficking/
Sheperis, D. S., & Sheperis, C. J. (2015). Clinical mental health
counseling: Fundamentals of applied practice. Pearson.
Shorey, R. C., Tirone, V., & Stuart, G. L. (2014). Coordinated
community response components for victims of intimate
partner violence: A review of the literature. Aggression and
Violent Behavior, 19(4), 363–371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
avb.2014.06.001
Sigurdardottir, S., Halldorsdottir, S., & Bender, S. S. (2014). Con-
sequences of childhood sexual abuse for health and well-
being: Gender similarities and differences. Scandinavian
Journal of Public Health, 42(3), 278–286. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1403494813514645
Simon, R. I. (2011). Patient violence against health care profes-
sionals: Safety assessment and management. Psychiatric
Times, 28(2), 16–21.
Simon, R. I. (2012). Patient safety and freedom of movement:
Coping with uncertainty. In R. I. Simon & R. E. Hales (Eds.),
Suicide assessment and management (2nd ed., pp. 539–552).
American Psychological Association.
Singhal, M., & Vahali, H. O. (2014). Building broken sandcastles:
Explorations in play therapy with a sexually abused child.
Journal of Indian Association for Child & Adolescent Mental
Health, 10(2), 132–144.
Sinozich, S., & Langton, L. (2014). Special report: Rape and sexual
assault victimization among college-age females, 1995–2013.
https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/rsavcaf9513.pdf
Sixbey, M. B., & Daniels, H. (2008). Supervisors aiding in exploring
therapist perceptions of crisis experiences based on level of experi-
ence. Paper presented at annual meeting of the Southern
Association of Counselor Education and Supervision,
Houston, TX.
Skovholt, T. M., & Trotter-Mathison, M. J. (2014). The resilient
practitioner: Burnout prevention and self-care strategies for coun-
selors, therapists, teachers, and health professionals (2nd ed.).
Routledge.

-- 527 of 545 --

References 	499
Smith, A. C., Thomas, E., Snoswell, C. L., Haydon, H., Mehrotra,
A., Clemensen, J., & Caffery, L. J. (2020). Telehealth for
global emergencies: Implications for coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19). Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 26(5),
309–313. https://doi.org/10.1177/1357633X20916567
Smith, D. W., Christiansen, E. H., Vincent, R., & Hann, N. E.
(1999). Population effects of the bombing of Oklahoma City.
Journal of the Oklahoma State Medical Association, 92(4), 193–198.
Sories, F., Maier, C., Beer, A., & Thomas, V. (2015). Addressing
the needs of military children through family-based play
therapy. Contemporary Family Therapy: An International Journal,
37(3), 209–220. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10591-015-9342.x
Sorsoli, L., Kia-Keating, M., & Grossman, F. (2008). “I keep
that hush-hush”: Male survivors of sexual abuse and the
challenges of disclosure. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
55(3), 333–345. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0167.55.3.333
Spearman, K. J., Hardesty, J. L., & Campbell, J. (2022). Post-
separation abuse: A concept analysis. Journal of Advanced
Nursing. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.15310
Stamm, B. H. (2009). Professional quality of life: Compassion satisfac-
tion and fatigue version 5. https://ncvc.dspacedirect.org/
bitstream/id/2065/ProQOL_IR_508.pdf
Stander, V. A., Olson, C. B., & Merrill, L. L. (2002). Self-defini-
tion as a survivor of childhood sexual abuse among Navy
recruits. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70(2),
369–377. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.70.2.369
Stanley, B., & Brown, G. (2009). Safety planning guide. https://
suicidesafetyplan.com
Stasiak, K., Merry, S. N., Frampton, C., & Moor, S. (2018). Deliv-
ering solid treatments on shaky ground: Feasibility study of
an online therapy for child anxiety in the aftermath of a nat-
ural disaster. Psychotherapy Research, 28(4), 643–653. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10503307.2016.1244617
Stauffer, M. D., Capuzzi, D., & Tanigoshi, H. (2020). Assess-
ment: An overview. In D. Capuzzi & M. D. Stauffer (Eds.),
Foundations of addictions counseling (4th ed., pp. 76–100).
Pearson.
Steil, R., Dittmann, C., Müller-Engelmann, M., Dyer, A., Maasch,
A.-M., & Priebe, K. (2018). Dialectical behaviour therapy for
posttraumatic stress disorder related to childhood sexual
abuse: A pilot study in an outpatient treatment setting. Euro-
pean Journal of Psychotraumatology, 9(1), 1423832. https://doi.
org/10.1080/20008198.2018.1423832
Sterner, W., & Jackson-Cherry, L. R. (2015). The influence of
spirituality and religion on coping for combat-deployed mil-
itary personnel. Journal of Counseling and Values, 60(1), 48–66.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-007X.2015.00060.x
Stickney, D., & Nordstrom, R. H. (2010). Water bugs and dragon-
flies: Explaining death to young children. Pilgrim Press.
Stiles, D. A., Moyer, J. M., Brewer, S., Klaus, L. M., Falconer, J., &
Moss, L. (2015). Practicing psychology in challenging times:
School and the Ferguson crisis. Educational and Child
Psychology, 32(4), 21–38.
Stinson, J. D., & Becker, J. V. (2018). Treating sex offenders: An evi-
dence-based manual. Guilford Press.
Strentz, T. (2018). Psychological aspects of crisis negotiation
(3rd ed.). Routledge.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
(SAMHSA). (2014). SAMHSA’s concept of trauma and guidance
for a trauma-informed approach (HHS Publication No. [SMA]
14-4884). https://ncsacw.acf.hhs.gov/userfiles/files/
SAMHSA_Trauma.pdf
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
(SAMHSA). (2018). Disaster Technical Assistance Center sup-
plemental research bulletin first responders: Behavioral health con-
cerns, emergency response, and trauma. https://www.samhsa.
gov/sites/default/files/dtac/supplementalresearchbulletin-
firstresponders-may2018.pdf
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
(SAMHSA). (2019). 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health: Summary of national findings. https://www.samhsa.
gov/data/release/2019-national-survey-drug-use-and-
health-nsduh-releases
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
(SAMHSA). (2022). Co-occurring disorders. http://www
.samhsa.gov/co-occurring
Sude, M. E. (2013). Text messaging and private practice: Ethical
challenges and guidelines for developing personal best prac-
tices. Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 35(3), 211–227.
https://doi.org/10.17744/mehc.35.3.q37l2236up62l713
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education. (2022). Suicide statistics.
https://save.org/about-suicide/suicide-statistics/
Survivors of Loved Ones’ Suicides, Inc. (2006). The suicide para-
digm. http://www.adph.org/suicideprevention/assets/
SuicideParadigm.pdf
Sutton, H. (2015). Understand best practices for records reten-
tion under FERPA. The Successful Registrar, 15(10), 1–7.
https://doi.org/10.1002/tsr.30128
Swannell, S. V., Martin, G. E., Page, A., Hasking, P., & St John,
N. J. (2014). Prevalence of nonsuicidal self-injury in nonclini-
cal samples: Systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-
regression. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 44(3),
273–303. https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12070
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, 529 P.2d. 553, 118
Cal. Rptr. 129 (1974), vacated, 17 Cal. 3d 425, 551 P.2d 334, 131
Cal. Rptr. 14 (1976).
Tedeschi, R. G., & Calhoun, L. G. (2004). A clinical approach to
post-traumatic growth. In P. A. Linley & S. Joseph (Eds.),
Positive psychology in practice (pp. 405–419). Wiley.
Thakur, V., & Jain, A. (2020). COVID 2019-suicides: A global
psychological pandemic. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 88,
952–953. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.04.062
Thefreedictionary.com. (2016). Riot. http://legal-dictionary.the-
freedictionary.com/Riot
Thomas, M. D., Bennett, L. W., & Stoops, C. (2012). The treatment
needs of substance abusing batterers: A comparison of men
who batter their female partners. Journal of Family Violence,
28(2), 121–129. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10896-012-9479-4
Thomas, S. P., Phillips, K., Carlson, K., Shieh, E., Kirkwood, E.,
Cabage, L., & Worley, J. (2013). Childhood experiences of
perpetrators of child sexual abuse. Perspectives in Psychiatric
Care, 49(3), 187–201. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6163.
2012.00349.x
Tishler, C. L., Gordon, L. B., & Landry-Meyer, L. (2000). Manag-
ing the violent patient: A guide for psychologists and other
mental health professionals. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 31(1), 34–41. https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-
7028.31.1.34
Todahl, J., & Walters, E. (2011). Universal screening for intimate
partner violence: A systematic review. Journal of Marriage and

-- 528 of 545 --

500 	References
Family Therapy, 37(3), 355–369. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1752-0606.2009.00179x
Torniainen-Holm, M., Pankakoski, M., Lehto, T., Saarelma, O.,
Mustonen, P., Joutsenniemi, K., & Suvisaari, J. (2016). The
effectiveness of email-based exercises in promoting psycho-
logical wellbeing and healthy lifestyle: A two-year follow-up
study. BMC Psychology, 4(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s40359-016-0125-4
Townsend, C., & Rheingold, A. A. (2013). Estimating a child sex-
ual abuse prevalence rate for practitioners: A review of child sexual
abuse prevalence studies. https://www.d2l.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/02/PREVALENCE-RATE-WHITE-PAPER-
D2L.pdf
Trask, E. V., Walsh, K., & DiLillo, D. (2011). Treatment effects
for common outcomes of child sexual abuse: A current
meta-analysis. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 16(1), 6–19.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2010.10.001
Trauma and Learning Policy Initiative. (2016). Our model of change.
http://traumasensitiveschools.org/about-tlpi/successes/
Trickett, P. K. (2006). Defining child sexual abuse. In M. M.
Feerick, J. F. Knutson, P. K. Trickett, & S. M. Flanzer (Eds.),
Child abuse and neglect: Definitions, classifications, and a frame-
work for research (pp. 123–150). Brookes.
Trippany, R. L., White Kress, V. E., & Wilcoxon, A. S. (2004).
Preventing vicarious trauma: What counselors should know
when working with trauma survivors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 82(1), 31–37. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6678.2004.tb00283.x
Turgoose, D., Ashwick, R., & Murphy, D. (2018). Systematic
review of lessons learned from delivering tele-therapy to
veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Tel-
emedicine and Telecare, 24(9), 575–585. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1357633X17730443
Turner, R. J. (2010). Understanding health disparities: The
promise of the stress process model. In W. R. Avison,
C. S. Aneshensel, S. Schieman, & B. Wheaton (Eds.),
Advances in the conceptualization and study of the stress process:
Essays in honor of Leonard I. Pearlin (pp. 3–21). Springer.
Underwood, E. (2015). Measuring child abuse’s legacy. Science,
347, 1408. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.347.6229.1408
University of South Florida (USF). (2012). Youth suicide school-
based prevention guide. http://theguide.fmhi.usf.edu/
pdf/2012PDFs/2012GuideAll.pdf
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2021). Census of Fatal Occupa-
tional Injuries (CFOI). https://www.bls.gov/iif/oshcfoi1.
htm#2020
U.S. Census Bureau. (2020). Those who served: America’s veterans
from World War II to the War on Terror. https://www.census.
gov/library/publications/2020/demo/acs-43.html
U.S. Department of Defense. (2020). Quarterly suicide report 4th
quarter, CY 2020. https://www.dspo.mil/Portals/113/
Documents/2020QSRs/TAB%20A_20210309_OFR_Rpt_
Q4%20CY%202020%20QSR.pdf?ver=UKN194rEw5MhM_
vaGy0j0w%3d%3d
U.S. Department of Defense. (2021). Defense manpower require-
ments report, fiscal year 2020. https://prhome.defense.gov/
Portals/52/Documents/MRA_Docs/FINAL%20FY20%20
DMRR%20Cleared%20for%20Open%20Publication.pdf?
ver=2019-04-24-114457-517
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Safe and Drug-Free
Schools. (2017). Practical information on crisis planning: A guide
for schools and communities. https://www2.ed.gov/admins/
lead/safety/crisisplanning.html
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics. (2020a). Report on indicators of school crime and
safety: 2020. https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2021/2021092.pdf
U.S. Department of Education. (2020b). Sex-based harassment.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/frontpage/
pro-students/issues/sex-issue01.html
U.S. Department of Education. (2020c). Understanding the
NEW FERPA guidance for school security staff from the
U.S. Department of Education. https://rems.ed.gov/docs/
FERPAGuidanceSchoolSecurityStaffWebinar_Presentation_
508C.pdf
U.S. Department of Education. (2022). Sex discrimination: Over-
view of the law. https://www2.ed.gov/policy/rights/guid/
ocr/sexoverview.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). (n.d.).
Fact sheet: Human trafficking. https://www.acf.hhs.gov/otip/
fact-sheet/resource/fshumantrafficking
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). (2002).
Standards for privacy of individually identifiable health informa-
tion; Final rule. https://aspe.hhs.gov/standards-privacy-
individually-identifiable-health-information
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). (2019).
Mandatory reporters of child abuse and neglect: State statutes
series. https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubpdfs/manda.pdf
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office of Civil
Rights. (2021). Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
https://www.hhs.gov/civil-rights/for-individuals/sex-
discrimination/title-ix-education-amendments/index.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
(2022a). Emergency situations: Preparedness, planning, and
response. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/
special-topics/emergency-preparedness/index.html
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS). (2022b).
Fact sheet: Human trafficking. https://www.acf.hhs.gov/otip/
fact-sheet/resource/fshumantrafficking
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). (2022c).
Summary of the HIPAA privacy rule. https://www.hhs.gov/
hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/laws-regulations/index.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
(2022d). Where the HIPAA Privacy Rule applies, does it permit a
health care provider to disclose protected health information (PHI)
about a patient to law enforcement, family members, or others if
the provider believes the patient presents a serious danger to self or
others? https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/
faq/520/does-hipaa-permit-a-health-care-provider-to-
disclose-information-if-the-patient-is-a-danger/index.html
U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women.
(2013). A national protocol for sexual assault medical forensic
examinations: Adults/adolescents (2nd ed.). https://www.ncjrs.
gov/pdffiles1/ovw/241903.pdf
U.S. Department of Justice. (2014). Frequently asked questions: The
Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA) final
guidelines. http://www.defenseforsvp.com/Resources/US_
gov/Frequently_Asked_Questions-_The_Sex_Offender_
Registration_and_Notification_Act_Final_Guidelines.pdf

-- 529 of 545 --

References 	501
U.S. Department of Justice. (2017). Sex offender management
assessment and planning initiative (Grant Report 2010-DB-BX-
K086). www.smart.gov/SOMAPI/pdfs/SOMAPI_Full%20
Report.pdf https://smart.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh231/
files/media/document/somapi_full_report.pdf
U.S. Department of Justice. (2022). Human trafficking. https://
www.justice.gov/humantrafficking
U.S. Department of Labor (2019). Workplace violence. https://
www.osha.gov/workplace-violence
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2021). National Center for
Veterans Analysis and Statistics. https://www.va.gov/
vetdata/veteran_population.asp
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2022). PTSD: National Center
for PTSD. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)
for PTSD. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/understand_tx/emdr.asp
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
(2023). Sexual harassment. https://www.eeoc.gov/sexual-
harassment
U.S. Marshals Service Behavioral Analysis Unit. (2022). Wellness
Survey for Public Safety Personnel: Data summary, Sworn law
enforcement. https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.nena.org/
resource/resmgr/docs/National_Wellness_Survey_Ove.pdf
U.S. Secret Service. (2010). National Threat Assessment Center: Avert-
ing targeted school violence. https://www.secretservice.gov/
sites/default/files/reports/2021-03/USSS%20Averting%
20Targeted%20School%20Violence.2021.03.pdf
Van Brunt, B. (2015). Harm to others: The assessment and treatment
of dangerousness. American Counseling Association.
Van den Heuvel, C., & Alison, L. (2014). Coping with uncer-
tainty: Police strategies for resilient decision-making and
action implementation. Cognition, Technology & Work, 16(1),
25–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10111-012-0241-8
van der Kolk, B. A. (2015). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind,
and the body in the healing of trauma. Penguin.
Vandiver, D., & Kercher, G. (2004). Offender and victim charac-
teristics of registered female sexual offenders in Texas: A
proposed typology of female sexual offenders. Sexual Abuse:
A Journal of Research and Treatment, 16(2), 121–137. https://
doi.org/10.1023/B:SEBU.0000023061.77061.17
Varma, S., Gillespie, S., McCracken, C., & Greenbaum, V. J.
(2015). Characteristics of child commercial sexual exploita-
tion and sex trafficking victims presenting for medical care
in the United States. Child Abuse & Neglect, 44, 98–105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2015.04.004
Verstrael, S., van der Wurff, P., & Vermetten, E. (2013). Eye move-
ment desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) as treatment
for combat-related PTSD: A meta-analysis. Military Behavioral
Health, 1(2), 68–73. https://doi.org/10.1080/21635781.2013.
827088
Veterans Health Administration. (2017). VA/DoD Clinical practice
guideline for management of post-traumatic stress. https://www
.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/MH/ptsd/
Vigil, N. H., Grant, A., Octavio, P., Blust, R., Chikani, V., &
Vadeboncoeur T. (2018). Death by suicide—The EMS profes-
sion compared to the general public. Prehospital Emergency
Care, 23(3), 340–345. https://doi.org/10.1080/10903127.2018.
1514090
Violanti, J. M., Gu, J. K., Charles, L. E., Fekedulegn, D., Andrew,
M. E., & Burchfiel, C. M. (2011). Is suicide higher among sep-
arated/retired police officers?: An epidemiological investi-
gation. International Journal of Emergency Mental Health, 13(4),
221–228.
Violanti, J. M., Hartley, T. A., Gu, J. K., Fekedulegn, D., Andrew,
M. E., & Burchfiel, C. M. (2013). Life expectancy in police
officers: A comparison with the U.S. general population.
International Journal of Emergency Mental Health, 15(4), 217–228.
Violanti, J., Mnatsakanova, A., & Andrew, M. (2013). Suicidal
ideation in police officers: Exploring an additional measure.
Suicidology Online, 4, 31–44.
Vlahov, D., Galea, S., Ahern, J., Resnick, H., Boscarino, J. A., &
Kilpatrick, D. (2004). Sustained increased consumption of
cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana among Manhattan resi-
dents after September 11, 2001. American Journal of Public
Health, 94(2), 253–254.
Vlahov, D., Galea, S., Ahern, J., Rudenstine, S., Resnick, H.,
Kilpatrick, D., & Crum, R. M. (2006). Alcohol drinking prob-
lems among New York City residents after the September 11
terrorist attacks. Substance Use and Misuse, 41(9), 1295–1311.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10826080600754900
von Feigenblat, O. F., Dominguez, C. D., & Valles, J. E. G. (2015).
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA).
Journal of Alternative Perspectives in the Social Sciences, 6(3),
229–335.
Waitzkin, H., Cruz, M., Shuey, B., Smithers, D., Muncy, L., &
Noble, M. (2018). Military personnel who seek health and
mental health services outside the military. Military Medicine,
183(5–6), e232–e240. https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usx051
Walker, J. K. (2015). Investigating trans people’s vulnerabilities
to intimate partner violence/abuse. Partner Abuse, 6(1),
107–125. https://doi.org/10.1891/1946-6560.6.1.107
Walker, L. E. (1980). The battered woman. William Morrow.
Ward, C. L., Lombard, C. J., & Gwebushe, N. (2006). Critical
incident exposure in South African emergency services per-
sonnel: Prevalence and associated mental health issues.
Emergency Medicine Journal, 23(3), 226–231. https://doi.org/
10.1136/emj.2005.025908
Warren, L. J., Mullen, P. E., & Ogloff, J. R. P. (2011). A clinical
study of those who utter threats to kill. Behavioral Sciences
and the Law, 29(2), 141–154. https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.974
Warshaw, R. (1994). I never called it rape: The Ms. report on recog-
nizing, fighting and surviving date and acquaintance rape.
HarperPerennial.
Watlington, C. G., & Murphy, C. M. (2006). The roles of religion
and spirituality among African American survivors of
domestic violence. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62(7),
837–857. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20268
Wearick-Silva, L. E., Tractenberg, S. G., Levandowski, M. L.,
Viola, T. W., Pires, J. A., & Grassi-Oliveira, R. (2014). Moth-
ers who were sexually abused during childhood are more
likely to have a child victim of sexual violence. Trends in Psy-
chiatry and Psychotherapy, 36(2), 119–122. https://doi.org/
10.1590/2237-6089-2013-0054
Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G.,
Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013). The Clinician-Administered
PTSD scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5). https://www.ptsd.va.gov/
professional/assessment/adult-int/caps.asp
Wee, D. F., Mills, D. M., & Koehler, G. (1999). The effects of Crit-
ical Incident Stress Debriefing on emergency medical ser-

-- 530 of 545 --

502 	References
vices personnel following the Los Angeles Civil Disturbance.
International Journal of Emergency Mental Health, 1(1), 33–37.
Weiss, D. S. (2004). The Impact of Event Scale—Revised. In
J. Wilson & T. M. Keane (Eds.), Assessing psychological trauma
and PTSD (pp. 168–189). Guilford Press.
Welfel, E. R. (2016). Ethics in counseling and psychotherapy
(6th ed.). Brooks/Cole.
Wester, K., & Trepal, H. (2017). Wellness perspectives on behaviors,
symptoms, and diagnosis. Routledge.
Whiffen, V. E., & MacIntosh, H. B. (2005). Mediators of the link
between childhood sexual abuse and emotional distress.
Journal of Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 6(1), 24–39. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1524838004272543
Wilcox, N. (2015). The importance of mental health training in law
enforcement. https://leb.fbi.gov/2015/july/the-importance-
of-mental-health-training-in-law-enforcement
Wilensky, S. E., & Teitelbaum, J. B. (2023). Essentials of health pol-
icy and law (5th ed.). Jones & Bartlett.
Williams, R., & Vinson, D. C. (2001). Validation of a single
screening question for problem drinking. Journal of Family
Practice, 50(4), 307–312.
Williamson, V., Stevelink, S. A. M., Da Silva, E., & Fear, N. T.
(2018). A systematic review of wellbeing in children: A com-
parison of military and civilian families. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry and Mental Health, 12(1), 1. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13034-018-0252-1
Wilmoth, J. (2014). Trouble in mind. https://www.firefighter
closecalls.com/trouble-in-mind/
Winokur, M., Rozen, D., Batchelder, K., & Valentine, D. (2006).
Juvenile sexual offender treatment: A systematic review of
evidence-based research. https://www.chhs.colostate.edu/
ssw/wp- content/uploads/sites/7/2018/11/jsot-systematic-
review.pdf
Wise, E. H., & Barnett, J. E. (2016). Self-care for psychologists.
In J. C. Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, D. K. Freedheim, &
L. F. Campbell (Eds.), APA handbook of clinical psychology:
Education and profession (pp. 290–322). https://doi.org/
10.1037/14774-014
Wise, R. A., King, A. R., Miller, J. C., & Pearce, M. W. (2011).
When HIPAA and FERPA apply to university training
clinics. Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 5(1),
48–56. https://doi.org/10.103/a0022857
Wolak, J., Finkelhor, D., & Mitchell, K. (2012). Trends in law
enforcement responses to technology-facilitated child sexual exploi-
tation crimes: The Third National Juvenile Online Victimization
Study. Crimes Against Children Research Center.
Wolf, C. P., Thompson, I. A., & Smith-Adcock, S. (2012).
Wellness in counselor preparation: Promoting individual
well-being. Journal of Individual Psychology, 68(2), 164–181.
Worden, J. W. (2001). Children and grief: When a parent dies.
Guilford Press.
Worden, J. W. (2018). Grief counseling and grief therapy: A hand-
book for the mental health practitioner (5th ed.). Springer.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021a). COVID-19 and vio-
lence against women What the health sector/system can do.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331699
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021b). Violence against
women. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/violence-against-women
World Health Organization. (2021c). Suicide: Key facts. https://
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide
World Life Expectancy. (2020). Deaths by age and gender. https://
www.worldlifeexpectancy.com/usa-cause-of-death-by-age-
and-gender
World Population Review. (2022). Gun deaths by country 2022.
https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/
gun-deaths-by-country
Worling, J. R., Litteljohn, A., & Bookalam, D. (2009). 20-year pro-
spective follow-up study of specialized treatment for adoles-
cents who offended sexually. Behavioral Sciences and the Law,
28(1), 46–57. https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.912
Xiaoyun, C., & Fenglan, L. (2020). The relationships among inse-
cure attachment, social support, and psychological experi-
ences in family caregivers of cancer inpatients. European
Journal of Oncology Nursing, 44, 101691. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejon.2019.101691
Yates, P. (2013). Treatment of sexual offenders: Research, best
practices, and emerging models. International Journal of
Behavioral Consultation and Therapy, 8(3), 89–95. https://doi.
org/10.1037/h0100989
Yoshihama, M., Dabby, C., & Asian and Pacific Islander Institute
on Domestic Violence. (2015). Facts & stats report: Domestic
violence in Asian & Pacific Islander homes. http://www.api-
gbv.org/files/Facts.Stats-APIIDV-2015.pdf
Young, M. E. (2017). Learning the art of helping: Building blocks and
techniques (6th ed.). Pearson Education.
Young, M. S., Harford, K. L., Kinder, B., & Savell, J. K. (2007).
The relationship between childhood sexual abuse and adult
mental health among undergraduates: Victim gender doesn’t
matter. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 22(10), 1315–1331.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260507304552
Yuce, M., Karabekiroglu, K., Yildirim, Z., Şahin, S., Sapmaz, D.,
Babadagi, Z., . . . Aydin, B. (2015). The psychiatric conse-
quences of child and adolescent sexual abuse. Archives of
Neuropsychiatry, 52(4), 393–399. https://doi.org/10.5152/
npa.2015.7472
Zalaquett, C., Carrión, I., & Exum, H. (2009). Counseling survi-
vors of national disasters: Issues and strategies for a diverse
society. In J. Webber & J. B. Mascari (Ed.), Terrorism, trauma,
and tragedies: A counselor’s guide to preparing and responding
(3rd ed.). American Counseling Association.
Zhai, Y., & Du, X. (2020). Loss and grief amidst COVID-19:
A path to adaptation and resilience. Brain, Behavior, and
Immunity, 87, 80–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.
04.053
Zhang, N., & Parsons, R. D. (2016). Field experience: Transitioning
from student to professional. Sage.
Zhou, J., Ko, J. Y., Haight, S. C., & Tong, V. T. (2019). Treatment
of substance use disorders among women of reproductive
age by depression and anxiety disorder status, 2008–2014.
Journal of Women’s Health, 28(8), 1068–1076. https://doi.org/
10.1089/jwh.2018.7597
Zinzow, H. M., Resnick, H. S., Amstadter, A. B., McCauley, J. L.,
Ruggiero, K. J., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (2010). Drug-or alcohol-
facilitated, incapacitated, and forcible rape in relationship
to mental health among a national sample of women. Journal
of Interpersonal Violence, 25(12), 2217–2236. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0886260509354887

-- 531 of 545 --

503
INDEX
A
Aaron, M., 335
Abandonment, termination of care, 90
ABCE (affect, behavior, cognition,
development, environment)
assessment, 24–25
ABC-X model of crisis, 36–37, 188
ACA. See American Counseling Association
(ACA)
Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT),
314
ACEs. See Adverse childhood experiences
(ACEs)
Acquaintance rape, 290
Action stage, behavior change, 227
Active interventions, 106
Active shooter shelter-in-place, 451–452
Acute grief, 19
Acute stress disorder (ASD), 5–6
grief and, 19
natural disasters and, 406
sexual violence, effects of, 304
Acute suicidal risk, 170–172
Adamson, N., 450
Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety
Act (AWA) (2006), 328
Adaptation
ABC-X and Double ABC-X models,
36–37
defined, 7–8
Adaptational theory, 20–21
Addiction. See also Substance use disorders
(SUDs)
FERPA and, 76
sexual violence, effects of, 304
Administration for Children and Families,
334, 335, 349
Advanced EMTs, 389
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs)
dating violence, 265
effects of, 206–207
resilience and, 8
Affect, ABCE assessment and, 24–25
Affirmative consent, 290–291
Aggression. See also Domestic violence;
Homicidal behavior; Intimate partner
violence (IPV)
deescalating client emotions, 119–122
strategies for handling, 121
types of, 120
Ahrens, C. E., 319, 320
Al-ANON, 240
Alcohol / drug-facilitated penetration, 287,
293
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA),
239–240, 319
Alcohol use and abuse. See also Substance
use disorders (SUDs)
FERPA and, 76
hotline resources, 43
sexual violence, effects of, 304
violent behavior, role in, 218
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT), 222
Alexander, D. A., 407
Alison, L., 420
Allen, B., 352
Allen, M. H., 120
Alliance-building, 100
Almond, L., 94
Alotaby, I. Y., 266
Al-Sharif, M. A. B., 77
Amado, B. G., 339
Ambiguous losses, 130–133
Amédée, L. M., 313
American Addictions Centers, 390
American Association for Marriage and
Family and Therapy, 85
American Association of Suicidology, 78
American Counseling Association (ACA),
10, 64, 84, 93, 318, 349, 457
Code of Ethics, 66–67, 74, 82, 83, 86–90,
318–319, 320, 468
training resources, 97
American Mental Health Counselors
Association, 85, 457
American Mental Health Foundation, 56
American Pet Products Association, 135
American Psychiatric Association (APA), 5,
14, 85, 129, 138, 166, 191, 226, 303, 464
American Red Cross, 85, 87, 91–92, 310
training resources, 97
American School Counselor Association
(ASCA), 13, 85, 206, 431, 439,
443, 457
American Society of Addiction
Medicine, 228
Andrews, D. A., 357
Anger
aggression, types of, 120
deescalating client emotions, 119–122
grief and, 125, 129
Animal companions, death of, 135–136
Anxiety, sexual violence, effects of,
302–306
Anxiety management training (AMT),
315–316
APA. See American Psychiatric Association
(APA)
Applied crisis theory, 21
Armour, B. S., 264
Art therapy, 317
Asberg, K., 304
ASCA. See American School Counselor
Association (ASCA)
ASCA National Model: A Framework for School
Counseling Programs, 206
ASD. See Acute stress disorder (ASD)
Asian culture, 93
Asoka, H., 414
Assertion training, 312
Assessment
ABCE (affect, behavior, cognition,
development, environment)
assessment, 24–25
ABC-X and Double ABC-X models,
36–37
Case Studies, 27–36
counselor self-assessment, 458–460
crisis assessment, 12
documentation and record keeping, 85
domestic violence, screening for,
266–270
of environment, 25
of homicide risk, 196–197
of nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI) risk,
191–193
in online counseling, 66
of perpetrators of intimate partner
violence, 279–280
psychological first aid, 393
risk assessments, 11
safety, risk assessment of clients, 50–53,
60–61
of school homicide and violence risk,
197–200
stress and crisis theory, 38–40
of stress levels, 5
of substance use disorders (SUDs),
220–230
of suicide risk, 166–169, 177–182, 377
of survivors of sexual assault,
312–313
task model of, 22–35
of threat of violence, 201–204
trauma-informed care, 12
Association for Counselor Education and
Supervision, 458
Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and
Religious Values in Counseling
(ASERVIC), 320
Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development
(ASCD), 197
Association for the Treatment of Sexual
Abusers, 329, 357
Attachment
described, 8
loss, grief and, 128–129
Attempt survivors, suicide
terminology, 167
Attending skills, 101–106
Augusterfer, E. F., 410

-- 532 of 545 --

504 	Index
Autonomic nervous system, 6
Avoidance, trauma response and, 6
Avoidance-focused coping, 7
B
Babor, T. F., 222
Bagalman, E., 370
Baker, S., 401
Balk, D. E., 148
Band, M., 127
Band, S. R., 386–387
Barber, E., 390
Barnett, J. E., 460
Bartlett, M. L., 64, 83, 89
Basic crisis theory, 20
Bates, E. A., 267
Battered woman syndrome, 274
Batterer intervention
accountability, 278
assessment of batterers, 279–280
Case Study, 281
cessation of violence, 277–278
completion rates, 279
counselor safety, 280–281
financial resources and, 279
overview, 277
referrals, challenges to,
278–279
resources, 281–282
safety and, 277
Voices from the Field, 279
Baylor University, 391
Becker, J. V., 357
Beck Scale for Suicide ideation
(BSI), 180
Behar, R., 303
Behavior. See also Violent behavior
ABCE assessment, 24–25
assessing client’s readiness to change,
226–227
Case Study, 32–35
transtheoretical model (TTM) of
behavior, 191
trauma, responses to, 6
treatment for sex offenders, 326
Belisle, H., 474
Beneficence model, 66
Bennett, N., 338
Bennice, J. A., 294
Benuto, L. T., 351
Bereavement, 129. See also Grief
complicated bereavement, 138–139
normal bereavement, 137–138
persistent complex bereavement
disorder, 137
Berghuis, D. J., 196
Berzoff, J. N., 125, 126
Beuerlein, Alissa Sawyer, 317–318
Bibliotherapy, 473
Bishopp, S. A., 383
Bisson, J. I., 375
Blaustein, M., 317
Blue HELP, 384
Body language, 66, 102–103
Boer, D. P., 358
Bonadaptation, 37
Bond, T., 84, 90
Boots, D. P., 383
Borduin, C., 331
Bosch-Fiol, E., 279
Boss, P. G., 4, 36, 38–40, 131
Boundary violations
aggression and, 120
counselor self-care and, 465
Bourduin, C. M., 359
Bowenkamp, C., 417
Bowlby, J., 128, 129, 133
Boyle, D. J., 383, 384
Bralo, D., 314
Breiding, M. J., 264, 286, 288, 303
Breuer, J., 20
Brief Resilience Scale (BRS), 30–31
Brock, S. E., 46, 430
Brosi, M., 256
Brown, A., 76
Brown, G., 183
Brown, Meghan, 245–246
Brown, W. C., 457
Brownmiller, S., 286
Brucia, E. F., 392
Brymer, M., 310
Buckley, J. L., 73
Budden, M., 94
Bullying, 198–199
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 218, 253,
288–289, 290, 295, 297, 323,
327–328, 381
Burgess, A. W., 301
Burke, C., 76
Burnam, M., 373
Burnout, 461–463
Burrows, C. J., 314
Bush, K. R., 4, 7, 37, 39, 40
Bushatz, A., 369
Butler, R. N., 145
Byock, I., 136–137
C
Cacciatore, J., 391
CACREP (Council for Accreditation of
Counseling and Related Educational
Programs), 399–400
CAGE, 222
Calhoun, L. G., 37
Cameron, E. E., 65
Campus assessment response and
evaluation (CARE) teams, 453–454
CAMS (Collaborative Assessment for
Managing Suicide), 180
Cannon, C. E., 307
Caplan, G., 19, 20
CAPTA, 349
Capuzzi, D., 219
Carbonell, J. L., 330
Careers, mental health professions, 12–17
Carr, J. L., 199
Carroll, A., 194, 205
Caruso, Michele, 291–292
CASE (Chronological Assessment of Suicide
Events), 180
Cashwell, C., 319
Castellano, C., 415
Cause of death, 164–166
CBI (Counselor Burnout Inventory),
462–463
Center for Mental Health in Schools, 431
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 123, 165, 195, 197, 201, 260,
265, 277, 287, 302, 303, 321, 376, 426
hotline resources, 43
National Intimate Partner and Sexual
Violence Survey, 288–289
Cerel, J., 164
Chae, M. H., 383, 384
Chaffin, M., 340
Chan, V., 76, 78
Chandra, A., 370, 372
Chassman, L., 472
Chemical dependency counselors, 13
Chen, J., 46
Chen, Y., 352
Cherry, A., 388
Cherry, G., 388
Cheung, M., 347
Child abuse. See also Child sexual abuse
(CSA)
hotline resources, 43
mandatory reporting, 258
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act
(CAPTA)(2010), 337
Child Protective Services (CSP), 258,
334, 356
Children. See also Child sexual abuse (CSA)
animal companions, death of, 135–136
attachment and, 8
COPS-Kids (Concerns of Police Survivors-
Kids), 151
death of, grief response to, 133–134
grief interventions for, 147–150
hotline resources, 43
infertility, grief response to, 131–133
miscarriage, grief response to, 131–133
play therapy, 412
psychological first aid, 412–414
resilience in, 8–10
sex-trafficking and, 298
Children and Grief: When a Parent Dies
(Worden), 148
Child sexual abuse (CSA)
Case Studies, 343–346, 353–354
coping strategies, impact on treatment,
353–354
cycle of, 338–339
definitions of, 337–338
diagnostic considerations, 361–362
essential skills for intervention, 362–363

-- 533 of 545 --

Index 	505
Child sexual abuse (CSA) (continued)
forensic interview for, 347–349
initial disclosure and interviewing,
341–346
initial report, collecting information for,
346–347
perpetrators of, 354–357
prevalence of, 334–336
prevention of, 336
reporting of, 349–350
resources, 362
safety concerns, 361
sexual violence and school-age children,
299–301
signs and symptoms, 339–341
statutory rape, 294, 338
treatment of adolescent offenders, 359
treatment of adult sex offenders,
357–359
treatment of survivors, 350–352
Voices from the Field, 352, 360–361
Child Sexual Abuse Interview Protocol
(CSAIP), 347–349
Choi, K. M., 455
Christopher, J. C., 470
Chronic anger, 120
Chronic suicide risk, 170–172.
See also Suicide
Chronological Assessment of Suicide Events
(CASE), 180
CISD (critical incident stress debriefing),
414–416
CISM (critical incident stress management),
393–394, 414–416
Civil Rights Act (1964), 297
Clark, A. J., 462
Clark, C. J., 266
Clinician-assisted emotional disclosure, 312
Closed questions, 106–111
Coaston, S. C., 457
Cocoanut Grove fire, 19, 124–125
Coercion, defined, 299
Cognitive-behavioral therapy
for child sexual abuse survivors, 351
for grief, 145
for juvenile sex offenders, 331
for survivors of sexual violence, 313–315
for treatment for sex offenders, 326
Cognitive function
ABCE assessment, 24–25
problem solving skills, resilience
and, 8–10
trauma, responses to, 6
Voices from the Field, 186–187
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT), 312,
314–315, 375
Cohen, J. A., 351
Collaborative approaches, 17–18
HIPAA and crisis counseling, 70–71
safety, approaches to, 46–47
Voices from the Field, 35–36
Collaborative Assessment for Managing
Suicide (CAMS), 180
Colleges. See Universities and colleges
Collins, B. G., 40, 81
Collins, R. C., 371
Collins, T. M., 40, 81
Collin-Vézina, D., 337
Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale
(C-SSRS), 181
Commercial sex act, 298, 299
Commitment to treatment statement
(CTS), 235
Communication skills
attending skills, 101–106
body position, 102–103
Case Studies, 109–110, 118
deescalating client emotions, 119–122
listening sequence, basic, 106
microskills, 99–100
open and closed questions, use of,
106–111
paraphrasing, 111–113
reflecting feelings, 114–116
reflecting skills, 106–110
restating, 113–114
silence, use of, 104–106
summarizing, 117–118
vocal tone, 103–104
Community losses. See also Emergency
preparedness and response; Natural
disasters; Schools; Universities and
colleges
grief and, 137
response timeline, 403–409
terrorism and, 410–416
Community mental health
history of, 19
safety training and, 46
Community resources, stress and crisis
theory, 39
Community response teams (CERTs), 400.
See also Emergency preparedness and
response
Compassion fatigue, 463
Complicated bereavement, 138–139
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
Control Act (1970), 217
Concerns of Police Officers (COPS), 395
Confidentiality, 87–89. See also Privacy
concerns
Connors, G. J., 227
Consent, sexual violence and, 288,
290–293
Constructivist theory, domestic violence
and, 256
Contemplation stage, behavior
change, 227
Contextual model of family, 256
Continuing education, 65
Co-occurring disorders, 240–241
Cook, C. C. H., 237
Cooley, M. E., 352
Coombs, D., 183
Cooper, J., 99, 106, 114
Coordinated community response
(CCR), 277
Coping
defined, 6–7
stress and crisis theory, 40
task model crisis assessment, 22, 25
COPS (Concerns of Police Officers), 395
Corey, G., 65, 66, 68, 79, 80, 83, 85, 91,
457, 465
Corey, M., 457
Cornille, T., 395
Corr, C. A., 136, 148
Cortoni, F., 324, 327, 357
Costello, E. J., 218
Council for Accreditation of Counseling and
Related Educational Programs
(CACREP), 64, 399–400, 458
Counseling
crisis intervention and traditional
counseling, 10–12
defined, 10
treatment for sex offenders, 325
Counselor Burnout Inventory (CBI),
462–463
Counselor(s)
attending skills, 101–106
body position, 102–103
counseling the crisis counselor,
grief and, 154
death notifications, delivery of, 154–161
deescalating client emotions, 119–122
eye contact, 101–102
listening sequence, 106
microskills, 99–100
open and closed questions, use of,
106–111
reflecting skills, 111–118
restating skills, 113–114
role of, 12–14
silence, use of, 104–106
vocal tone, 103–104
Voices from the Field, 106, 114
Counselor self-care
burnout, 461–463
Case Studies, 461, 466–467, 475–476
compassion fatigue, 463
counselor training programs, self-care
emphasis, 468–471
countertransference, 461
importance of, 64, 457–458
resources, 476–478
self-assessment, 458–460
supervision and self-care, 471–473
vicarious resiliency, 466–467
vicarious trauma, 464–465
Voices from the Field, 458–459, 468,
474–475
Countertransference, 461
Covered entities, HIPAA, 69
Covey, S. R., 473

-- 534 of 545 --

506 	Index
COVID-19 pandemic
child maltreatment reporting, 336
domestic violence and, 276
effect on counselors, 64
grief and, 143–144
impact on crisis counseling, 16–17
informed consent and online
services, 87
sexual violence rates during, 306–307
virtual services during, 94–95
Voices from the Field, 95–96
CPS. See Child Protective Services (CSP)
CPT (cognitive processing therapy), 312,
314–315, 375
Creamer, M., 374
Crime prevention through environmental
design (CPTED), 429
Crisis assessment, 12
Crisis counseling program (CCP), 416
Crisis(es)
adaptation, 7–8
applied crisis theory domains, 21
coping, 6–7
defined, 2
resilience, 8–10
safety and, 45–62
stress and, 4–5
trauma and, 5–6
Crisis hotlines, 16
Crisis intervention. See also Emergency
preparedness and response
ABC-X and Double ABC-X models,
36–37
adaptation, 7–8
applied crisis theory, 21
case studies, 2–3, 41–42
collaborative approaches, 17–18
coping, defined, 6–7
COVID-19, impact of, 16–17
crisis, defined, 2
developmental-ecological perspective,
40–41
directive approaches, 17–18
essential skills for, 99–122
HIPAA and crisis counseling, 70–71
history of, 19–21
hotlines, 16
mental health teams, roles in, 12–17
microskills for, 99–100
nondirective approaches, 17–18
professional collaboration, 16
resilience, 8–10
resources for, 43
stress, defined, 4–5
stress and crisis theory, 38–40
task model of assessment and
intervention, 22–35
termination in, 89–92
traditional counseling and, 10–12
trauma, 5–6
trauma-informed care, 12
Critical incident stress debriefing (CISD),
414–416
Critical incident stress management (CISM),
393–394, 414–416
CSA. See Child sexual abuse (CSA)
Culture
defined, 242
domestic violence and, 260–265
ethical decision-making models and,
66–67
ethics and multicultural concerns,
92–93
eye contact and, 101
grief and, 129–130, 207
military culture, 367–368
response to disasters, 93
risk assessments and, 168–169
sexual violence survivors, care for,
320–322
substance use disorders and, 242–244
Cyber stalking, 56
Cycle of violence theory, 253–255
D
Daigre, C., 304
Dance therapy, 317
Daniels, H., 472
Darke, S., 218
Darkness to Light, 336
Date rape, 290
Date rape drugs, 293
Dating violence, adolescents and young
adults, 265
Daughhetee, C., 45, 468, 472
Davidson, R. J., 145
Davis, T. E., 66
Dawgert, S., 218
Death. See also Grief; Suicide
of animal companions, 135–136
causes of, 164
of a child, 133–134
death notifications, delivery of,
154–161, 439–443, 447–448
firefighter deaths, 391
five stages of dying, 125–126
HIPAA information disclosure, 71, 78
law enforcement deaths, 382–383
loss of partner, 135
mortality liaison, 400
of parent or guardian, 134
response to, cultural differences, 129–130
schools and universities, crisis
interventions and, 74–75, 430,
439–443, 447–448, 453–454
sibling loss, 134–135
sudden death, 137
terminal illness, 136–137
Death awareness movement, 125–126
Death: The Final Stage of Growth
(Kübler-Ross), 125
Debriefing
after death notification delivery, 160
counselor self-care, 459, 464, 471, 475
critical incident stress management,
393–394, 414–415
emergency preparedness and planning,
427, 433, 435, 439, 448, 449–450
First Response Resiliency
Program, 395
in grief counseling, 151
for law enforcement officers (LEOs), 383,
393–394
psychological first aid (PFA), 413
school crisis and, 449
Debt bondage, 299
Decision-making models
continuing education and, 65
ethical decision-making, 66–67
Decker, S., 310
Deering, R., 356
Deming, A., 326
Dennis, M. L., 237
de Tychey, C., 335
Development, ABCE assessment, 24–25
Developmental crisis, 21
Developmental-Ecological Model of Crisis
Intervention (Collins, Collins), 81
Developmental-ecological perspective,
40–41
DHHS. See U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS)
Diagnosis
during a crisis, considerations for, 247
in crisis intervention, 11
documentation and record keeping, 85
grief diagnoses, 137–139
of substance use disorders (SUDs),
225–226
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR), 129,
166, 187
acute stress disorder, 304
grief diagnoses, 137–139
PTSD criteria, 303
substance use disorders, 226
trauma and trauma response, 5, 6
vicarious trauma, 464
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT),
313–314
Dieltjens, T., 413
Dill, J., 391
DiMaggio, C., 217
Di Napoli, I., 256
Direct actions, as coping mechanism, 40
Directive approaches, 17–18
Disability status
child sexual abuse and, 336
domestic violence and, 264
Disaster response. See Natural disasters;
Terrorism
Discover Policing, 381
Disenfranchised grief, 130–133
Disequilibrium, state of, 20
Distress, 4

-- 535 of 545 --

Index 	507
Documentation
confidentiality and, 87–89
ethics and, 84–86
of intimate partner violence, 270–271
malpractice suits and, 83
task model of crisis intervention, 27
telehealth counseling, 96
termination and, 89–92
Doka, K. J., 144
Domestic Abuse Intervention
Programs, 255
Domestic violence
adolescents and young adults, 265
batterer interventions, 277–280
Case Studies, 252–253, 274–275, 281
common crisis issues, 257–259
counselor response to disclosure,
270–271
COVID-19 pandemic and, 276
cycle of violence theory, 253–255
disability status and, 264
elder abuse, 264–265
emotional impact, addressing of,
273–275
female-to-male violence, 262
hotline resources, 43
immigration status and, 261
intimate partner sexual violence, 294
LGBTQ+ community and, 262–264
models for understanding, 255–256
overview of, 252–253
race and ethnicity, data on, 260–261
religious and spiritual beliefs, 262
resources, 271, 281–282
safety and harm reduction planning,
271–272
screening for, 266–270
shelters, 273
socioeconomic status and, 261
substance use, role in, 218
Voices from the Field, 272, 279
D’Orazio, D. M., 326, 357, 358, 359
Dorociak, K. E., 463
Double ABC-X model of crisis, 36–37, 188
Double Trouble groups, 240
Doucette, M. S., 195, 200
Douglas, E. M., 262
Doyle, K., 317
Dragisic, T., 218
Drake, R. E., 241
Drapeau, C. W., 164
Driessen, M., 245
Drug-facilitated sexual assault, 293
Drug use and abuse. See also Substance use
disorders (SUDs)
drug classifications, 216–217
FERPA and, 76
sexual violence, effects of, 304
violent behavior, role in, 218
Drysdale, D., 453
Du, X., 143–144
Duluth model, domestic violence, 255
Duplechain, R., 199
Dupre, M., 471–472
Dutton, J., 267
Duty to consult, 81
Duty to protect, 80–82
Duty to warn, 79–82
Dye, L., 457
Dying Well (Byock), 136–137
E
Earthquakes, response teams and, 402
Eating disorders, 55, 171, 303, 340
Ecological theory, domestic violence
and, 256
Ecosystemic crisis, 21
Edelkott, N., 466
Educate, task model of crisis intervention, 26
Edwards, K. M., 265
Edwards, T., 72, 73
Egan, G., 101, 102, 105
Eifling, K., 413
Eisenberg, D., 78
Elder abuse, 258, 264–265
Electronic health records (EHR), 85.
See also Medical records
Elliott, T. L., 73, 74
EMDR. See Eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing (EMDR) therapy
Emergency medical responders (EMRs), 388.
See also Emergency preparedness and
response
Emergency medical service professionals,
388–390
Case Studies, 394
crisis intervention for, 392–396
Emergency medical technicians (EMTs), 389
Emergency planning, safety and, 45–46
Emergency preparedness and response
active shooter shelter-in-place, 451–452
Case Study, hostage situations,
421–422
Case Study, natural disasters, 408–409
Case Study, university or college, 454–455
crisis counseling program (CCP), 416
critical incident stress management
(CISM), 414–416
hostage situations, 418–422
leadership roles in, 399–402
natural disasters, 402–410
psychological first aid, 412–414
resources for, 422–423
riots, 416–418
school and university crises,
characteristics of, 425–427
school and university crises, mitigation
and prevention, 427–429
school and university crises, resources for,
444–445
school and university crises, response
strategies, 438–440
school and university crisis planning and
preparedness, 427–429
school and university crisis recovery,
440–450
school and university crisis response
teams, 430–431
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
terrorism, 410–416
Voices from the Field, 401, 405, 440,
446–447, 450, 455
Emotion-focused coping, 7, 40
Emotions. See also Grief
burnout, 461–463
deescalating client emotions, 119–122
domestic violence, emotional impact of,
273–275
sexual violence, effects of, 302–306
trauma, responses to, 6
vocal tone and, 103–104
Empathos, 180
Empathy, burnout and, 462
Environment
ABCE assessment, 25
developmental-ecological perspective,
40–41
risk assessments and, 168–169
Epperson, D. L., 357
Equality Wheel, 255
Erbes, C. R., 369
Erford, B. T., 5, 6, 7, 45, 64, 80, 93, 99, 130,
135, 198–199, 222, 425, 457, 463, 464,
468, 472
Erich, J., 389
Erikson, E. H., 145
Erikson, J. M., 145
Eronen, M., 205
Ethics
ACA Code of Ethics, 66–67, 74, 82, 83,
86–90, 318–319, 320, 468
Case Studies, 69, 71–72, 73, 75–76, 82,
86, 91
confidentiality and, 87–89
continuing education and, 65
documentation and record keeping, 83,
84–86
duty to warn and duty to protect, 79–82
ethical decision-making models, 66–67
FERPA, 72–78
HIPAA and, 67–71, 77–78
informed consent, 86–87
negligence and malpractice, 83–84
peer supervision and consultation, 65–66
preventing ethical and legal problems,
64–67
sexual violence survivors and,
318–319, 320
spiritual considerations, 92–93
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of
California (1976), 79–82
technology and crisis response, 93–96
termination in crisis intervention, 89–92
Voices from the Field, 70, 73–74, 84, 89,
95–96
Eustress, 4

-- 536 of 545 --

508 	Index
Evacuation protocols, 436–437
Evans, Amanda, 186–187
Evans, D. R., 115, 117
Everly, G. S., 393, 407, 413, 414–415
Ewing, J. A., 222
Ewing v. Goldstein (2004), 80
Existential crisis, 21
Expressive therapy, 145, 317
External stressors, 38–39
Eye contact, 101–102
Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR) therapy, 312,
315, 352, 375–376
F
Fahy, R., 391
Faith development theory (FDT), 141–143
Fallot, R. D., 319
Famili, A., 387
Families. See also Military personnel and
families
crisis intervention theory and, 19
of law enforcement officers, 387–388
stress and, 4–5
Family counselors, role of, 13
Family resources, stress and crisis theory, 39
Family systems counseling, 359
Farmer, T. W., 206
FBI National Center for the Analysis of
Violent Crime, 202
FBI Unified Crime Report, 196
Fear-driven aggression, 120
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 198,
382, 383, 410
Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), 46, 48, 427, 437, 438, 440,
449, 451
response teams, leadership roles in,
399–402
Feeling Blue Suicide Prevention Council, 186
Feminist model, ethical decision-making, 66
Fenglan, L., 64, 94
FERPA (Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act), 63, 72–78
Case Study, 75–76
confidentiality and, 87–89
Ferrer-Perez, V. A., 279
FICA Spiritual Assessment Tool, 141
Figley, C. R., 472
Finkelhor, D., 338
Finn, J., 256
Firefighter Behavioral Health Alliance
(FFBHA), 391
Firefighters, 47, 391–392
crisis intervention for, 392–396
physical safety, 48–49
First responders. See also Emergency
preparedness and response
Case Study, 394
crisis intervention for, 392–396
emergency medical services, 388–390
firefighters, 391–392
law enforcement officers, 381–388
leadership roles in, 399–402
mental health access, 387
occupational stress, 384–385
resources for, 396
retirement programs, 396
special risks faced by, 380
Voices from the Field, 386–387,
388, 390
First Response Resiliency Program
(FRP), 395
Five-stage change model (Norcross), 227
Flannery, R. B., 46, 55–56
Fleming, M. F., 221
Flexible Framework, 432
Floods, response teams and, 403
Flynn, B. W., 413
Foa, E. B., 312, 313
Focusing summaries, 117
Folstein, M. F., 181, 223
Forbes, D., 374, 376
Forbes, L. L., 83
Force, defined, 299
Forced penetration, 287
Forensic inpatient units, 54
Forensic interview, child sexual abuse,
347–349
Forensic mental health care, 204–205
Forester-Miller, H., 66
Fowler, J. W., 141–142
Fox, K. R., 191
Frankl, V., 125, 145
Franzo, T. B., 469
Fraud, 299
Freeman, J., 54
Freeman, N. J., 357
Freud, S., 20
Furber, G., 94
Furukawa, M. F., 85
G
Gall, T. L., 457
Gamblers Anonymous, 240
Gannon, T. A., 324, 327, 357
Gary, J. M., 94
General adaptation syndrome, 4
Gerber, M. M., 9, 378
Ghandour, R., 257, 258
GHB (gamma-hydroxybutyric
acid), 293
Gibbs, D. A., 298
Giddings, M., 154
Gidycz, C. A., 218
Gilliland, B., 2, 15, 20–21, 109, 116, 403–404,
432–433
Gilmour, N., 46
Gitterman, A., 130, 131
Gladding, S. T., 11, 13, 473
Glasgow, R. E., 85
Goncalves, R. A., 355
Goodson, J., 375
Goodwin, A., 72
Gould, M., 183
Granello, D. H., 93
Granello, P. F., 93
Graney, B., 3–4
Greenberg, L. S., 114
Greenstone, J. L., 257
Grepmair, L., 471
Grief
ambiguous losses, 130–133
animal companion, death of, 135–136
attachment and loss, 128–129
Case Studies, 131–133, 152–153
child, death of, 133–134
community losses, 137
complicated bereavement, 138–139
counseling the crisis counselor, 154
COVID-19 and other pandemics, 143–144
crisis intervention theory and, 19
cultural factors in, 129–130, 207
death notifications, delivery of, 154–161
defined, 129
disenfranchised grief, 130–133
family interventions, 151
group support, 146–147
homicide and, 137, 207–208
interventions for, 139–151
Kübler-Ross (Elizabeth) approach,
125–126
Lindemann (Erich) approach, 124–125
models of grief work, 123–129
normal bereavement, 137–138
parent or guardian, death of, 134
partner, death of, 135
religion and spirituality and, 140–143
sibling, death of, 134–135
sudden death and, 137
suicide and, 137, 187–190
terminal illness and, 136–137
Voices from the Field, 127, 146, 151,
158, 161
withdrawal, 152–153
Worden, task model of grieving, 127–128
working with children, 147–150
Grief overload, 135
Gross v. Allen (1994), 80
Groth, N., 323–324, 326
Group therapy
grief support, 146–147
support groups for substance use
disorders, 239–240
for survivors of sexual violence, 316–317
Groupthink, terrorism and, 411
Grubb, A., 418
Gunderson, J., 395
H
Hakkanen, H., 204, 206
Halifax, J., 154
Hamel, J., 279
Hammersly, R., 219
Hanson, R. K., 357
Harboring, defined, 299

-- 537 of 545 --

Index 	509
Hard, P. F., 64, 65, 92, 93
Harm reduction approaches, 238–239,
271–272
Harrichand, J. S., 64
Harrington, J. A., 187, 457
Harris, G. T., 358
Harris, J. I., 314, 378
Hart, S. D., 358
Hasin, D. S., 237
Hassan, M., 334
Hayden, S. C. W., 365, 374, 377
Hayes, S. C., 314
Hays, D. G., 7, 93, 130
Health care provider, defined, 69
Healthcare Providers Service Organization
(HPSO), 83, 84, 88
Heath, C., 64
Hebda, T., 68
Hébert, M., 313
Heckman, J. P., 319
Heick, R., 389
Help for Our Heroes, 389
HelpGuide, 136
Herlihy, B., 65, 66, 68, 79, 80, 83, 85, 86, 91,
92, 93
Hernandez-Wolf, P., 466
Hetzel-Riggin, M. D., 351
Hien, D., 261
Hierarchy of needs, Maslow, 20
Higher education institutions.
See Universities and colleges
Hill, R., 188
Hill, Reuben, 19, 36–37, 40
Hines, D. A., 338
Hiott, Amber, 315
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act), 63, 67–71
Case Study, 71–72
confidentiality and, 87–89
university student records and, 77–78
Hiraoka, R., 314
Hissett, J., 376
Hoffman, R. M., 227–228, 475
Holistic biopsychosocial-spritual approach,
22, 23–25
Holmstrom, L. L., 301
Homicidal behavior, 194–195. See also
Domestic violence
Case Studies, 200, 203, 205–206
duty to warn and duty to protect,
79–82
high-risk clients, safety and, 47–48
hostage situations, 418–422
legal issues, 195–196
referrals for, 204–205
resource lists, 209–210, 212
risk factors for homicide, 196–197
school homicide and violence,
197–200
substance use, role in, 218
task model crisis assessment, 22–23
threat level assessment, 201–204
treatment options, 205–207
Voices from the Field, 203–204
workplace violence, 200–210
Homicide
defined, 195
grief and, 137
prevalence and rates of, 164–166
survivors, needs of, 207–209
Homophobia, 263
Hoogsteder, L. M., 351, 352
Hope, J., 72
Horvath, A. O., 114
Hoshmand, A., 377
Hoshmand, L. T., 377
Hospice movement, 136–137
Hospitalization, treatment decisions,
185–186
Hostage situations, 418–422
Hostile environment, 300
Hotline workers, 16. See also Resources
Houser, R. A., 82
Houston-Kolnik, J. D., 262
HPSO. See Healthcare Providers Service
Organization (HPSO)
Huebner, A. J., 377
Hughes, A., 46
Human trafficking, 297–299
Humphrey, K. M., 145
Hurricane Katrina, 9–10, 217–218, 306, 402
Hurricanes
response teams and, 403
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
Hyatt, L., 457
Hyperarousal, 6
I
Immigrants
case study, 2–3, 41–42
domestic violence and, 259, 261
Infertility, 131–133
Informed consent, 74, 86–87
In-home counseling, safety concerns,
56–58
Instrumental aggression, 120
Internal stressors, 38–39
Intervention plan, task model of crisis
intervention, 26
Intimate partner violence (IPV), 294
adolescents and young adults, 265
batterer interventions, 277–280
Case Studies, 252–253, 274–275, 281
common crisis issues, 257–259
counselor response to disclosure, 270–271
COVID-19 pandemic and, 276
cycle of violence theory, 253–255
disability status and, 264
elder abuse, 264–265
emotional impact, addressing of, 273–275
female-to-male violence, 262
immigration status and, 261
LGBTQ+ community and, 262–264
models for understanding, 255–256
overview of, 252–253
race and ethnicity, data on, 260–261
religious and spiritual beliefs, 262
resources, 271, 281–282
safety and harm reduction planning,
271–272
screening for, 266–270
shelters, 273
socioeconomic status and, 261
substance use, role in, 218
Voices from the Field, 272, 279
Intrapsychic coping mechanisms, 40
In vivo therapy, 313
Involuntary hospitalization, 185
Involuntary servitude, 299
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America,
367, 368
Irritable aggression, 120
Ivey, A. E., 100, 103, 106, 107, 111, 115
J
Jackson, J., 45, 58, 60–61, 457, 458–459
Jackson, R., 202
Jackson-Cherry, L., 22, 35–36, 45, 64, 99, 151,
155, 158, 181, 182, 365, 378, 425, 457
Jacobs, E., 316, 317
Jaffe, A. E., 314
Jahn, D., 141
James, R., 2, 15, 20–21, 109, 116, 403–404,
423–433
James, S. E., 263
Jaycox, L., 313
Jennings, J. L., 326
Jennings, W. G., 354
Jobes, D. A., 171, 172, 180, 182, 183
Johnson, K., 420
Johnson, R., 81
Joiner, T. E., 377
Jongsma, A. E., 85, 206
Joseph, S., 6, 7
Juodis, A., 197, 218
Jussab, F., 58, 59
Justice for All Act (2004), 309
Justice for All Reauthorization Act
(2013), 309
Juvenile sex offenders, 328–331
K
Kabisa, E., 237
Kalafat, J., 178
Kamphuis, W., 374
Kanable, R., 155
Kanan, L. M., 199
Kanno, N., 154
Kanters, T., 358
Kaplan, D. M., 10
Kaur, G., 94
Kehle-Forbes, S. M., 376
Kellogg, N. D., 340
Kennedy, M. C., 371
Kenny, M. C., 313

-- 538 of 545 --

510 	Index
Kercher, G., 357
Kerr, M. M., 13, 425, 429, 430–431
Kerst, A., 94
Kessler, D., 126
Ketamine, 293
Kilpatrick, D. G., 312
Kim, K., 339
Kime, P., 371
Kinch, M. S., 216
King, G., 13, 425, 429, 430–431
Kinniburgh, K., 317
Kivisto, A. J., 56
Kleespies, P. M., 170
Klein, A., 306
Klott, J., 196
Knapp, S. J., 81
Knight, C., 130, 131
Knox, K. S., 438
Kolski, T. D., 85, 205, 206
Koss, M. P., 286
Kress, V., 272
Kruzan, K. P., 191
Kübler-Ross, E., 125–126
L
Laajasalo, T., 204, 206
La Guardia, A. C., 194
Lambert, S. F., 459, 460
Landau, J., 376
Langan, P. A., 328
Langdon, S., 273
Langton, L., 218, 290
Lanning, K. V., 355, 356
Lapse, defined, 237
Large, M. M., 194
Largen, M. A., 286
Larned, J. G., 383
Laux, J. M., 194
Law enforcement
Case Study, 394
collaboration with, 47
COPS-Kids (Concerns of Police
Survivors-Kids), 151
crisis intervention for officers, 392–396
deaths and assaults on officers, 382–383
domestic violence and, 258–259
duty to warn and duty to protect, 79–82
FERPA and, 75
high-risk clients and, 47–48
HIPAA and crisis counseling, 70–71
mental health access for officers, 387
occupational stressors, 384–385
officer family members, 387–388
officer mental health concerns, 385
physical safety, 48–49
riots and, 416–418
secondary traumatic stress and PTSD, 386
separation and retirement, 386
sexual violence interventions and, 307–309
special risks faced by, 381–388
suicide and suicide ideation by officers,
383–384
Voices from the Field, 386–387, 388
Lawson, G., 64, 459, 460, 462, 463
Lazowski, L. E., 222
Leading questions, 107
Learned helplessness, 255–256
Lee, D., 403, 462
Legal concerns
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention
and Control Act (1970), 217
documentation and record keeping, 84,
85–86
duty to warn and duty to protect, 79–82
HIPAA, 67–71
mandatory reporting, domestic violence
and, 258–259
negligence and malpractice, 83–84
preventing ethical and legal problems,
64–67
protective orders, 271
sexual violence and law enforcement,
307–309, 318–319
termination, documentation of, 89–92
violent or homicidal clients, working
with, 195–196
Leiter, M. P., 461
Letourneau, E. J., 359
Leviton, S. C., 257
Lewellen, C., 203–204
Lewey, J. H., 351, 352
Lewis, J. A., 237
LGBTQ+ community
domestic violence and, 259, 262–264
sexual violence and, 321–322
spiritual and cultural considerations, 93
Violence Against Women Act, 286–287
Lies, M. A., 200–201
Life history, writing of, 145
Lincoln, A., 370
Lindemann, E., 19, 124–125
Linehan, M., 313
Ling, J., 466
Linley, P., 6, 7
Linton, J. M., 473
Lipsky, S., 261
Listening skills
basic sequence, 106
Case Study, 118
open and closed questions, use of, 106–110
reflecting feelings, 114–116
reflecting skills, 111–118
SOLER technique, 105–106
Lockdown protocols, 435–436
Logan, K. V., 369
Logotherapy, grief and, 145
Lonergran, M., 412
Lone-wolf terrorist, 411
Lopes, A. P., 412
Lösel, F., 357
Louisiana Foundation Against Sexual
Assault, 306
Lowenberg, T. J., 417
Luthar, S. S., 8
M
MacIan, P. S., 64
MacIntosh, H. B., 342
Maclaine, E., 94
MacNeil, G. A., 462, 463, 464, 473
Maehira, Y., 237
Magor-Blatch, L. E., 317
Maintenance stage, behavior change, 227
Malinowski, A. J., 64
Malpractice, 83–84, 90–91
Mancini, J. A., 373
Mandatory reporting
of child sexual abuse, 349–350
domestic violence, 258–259
HIPAA and crisis counseling, 70–71
MANERS psychological first aid, 394
Mann, J. J., 183
Marburger, K., 299
Maris, J. A., 470
Marital and family treatment (MFT), 240
Marlatt, G. A., 238
Marques, J. K., 326
Marriage counselors, 13
Marshall, W. L., 326
Martín-Fernández, M., 270, 271
Maslach, C., 461
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 20
Mason, J., 342, 349
Masten, A. S., 8, 9
Mathews, R., 356
Mavranezouli, I., 351, 352
Mayo Clinic, 43, 207
McCabe, O. L., 310, 413–414
McCubbin, H. I., 36, 37, 39, 188
McGlothlin, J. M., 399
McIntosh, J. L., 164
McLeod, A. L., 255, 256, 274
McLeod, D., 356
MCRTs. See Multidisciplinary crisis response
teams (MCRTs)
Meaning and perception, stress and crisis
theory, 39
Media liaison, 400
Medical issues
domestic violence and, 257–258
sexual violence, examinations for, 307–308
task model crisis assessment, 23–25
Medical records
confidentiality and, 87–89
documentation and record keeping, 84–86
HIPAA, 67–71
termination, documentation for, 89–92
Meditation, self-care and, 469–471
Meichenbaum, D. H., 315–316
Mellor, D., 356
Meloy, J. R., 195, 198
Mendenhall, T., 457
Merkouris, S. S., 240
Meyers, T., 395

-- 539 of 545 --

Index 	511
Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test, 222
Microskills for crisis intervention, 99
Military personnel and families, 366–367
active-duty military, 368
Case Study, 372
counselor intervention, 373–374
cycle of deployment, 369–370
familial stress and deployment, 372–373
mental health and stigmatization, 368–370
military culture, 367–368
posttraumatic stress disorder, 374–376
reservists and National Guard, 368
resources for, 379–380
spiritual and religious needs, 378
suicide and, 371–372
suicide risk assessment, 377
supporting families, 377–378
traumatic brain injury and, 376–377
Voices from the Field, 378–379
war-zone deployment, effects of, 370–372
Miller, L., 65, 94
Miller, T., 199
Miller, W. R., 227, 231
Miller-Perrin, C. L., 326
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, grief
and, 145
Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR),
376, 469
Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE),
181, 223
Minnie, L., 389
Miscarriage, 131–132
Mitchell, J., 393, 407, 414–415
Mitchels, B., 84, 90
Mitigation, defined, 427
Mitra, M., 336
Moate, R. M., 146
Mohl, A., 359
Monteith, L. L., 377
Moradinazar, M., 237
Morgan, R. E., 280, 297, 323
Morris, C. W., 333
Morris, R., 199
Mortality liaison, 400
Moss, R., 237
Motivational interviewing (MI), 227
Motivation to change, 226–227
Mourning, 129. See also Grief
Moy, P., 413
Mpofu, E., 326
Mueller, S., 58
Muldoon, J., 279
Multidisciplinary crisis response teams
(MCRTs), 400–402
leadership roles in, 399–402
Multisystemic therapy, 331
Murphy, C. M., 256
Murphy, G., 183, 186
Murphy, H., 58, 59
Music therapy, 317
Myers, J. E., 462, 463, 469
N
Narcotics Anonymous (NA), 239–240
Narrative therapy, grief and, 145
National Alliance of Mental Illness, 241
National Association for Social Workers
(NASW), 85, 121, 122
National Association of Adult Survivors of
Child Abuse, 334
National Association of School
Psychologists, 442
National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control, 287
National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children, 298
National Center for Victims of Crime, 261,
262, 263, 265, 271, 309
National Center on Elder Abuse, 264
National Child Abuse and Neglect Data
System (NCANDS), 333
National Child Traumatic Stress Network,
313, 412
National Conference of State Legislatures, 80
National Crime Victimization Survey, 218,
288–289
National Domestic Violence Hotline, 271
National Education Association, 433
National Fire Protection Association, 391
National Guard, 47, 416–418
National Incidence System (NIS), 334, 335
National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH), 388, 389
National Institute of Justice, 218, 298
National Intimate Partner and Sexual
Violence Survey, 303, 321
National Law Enforcement Officers
Memorial Fund, 381, 395
National Network to End Domestic Violence
(NNEDV), 286, 287
National Organization for Victim
Assistance, 286
National Organization for Women, 286
National Protocol for Sexual Assault
Medical Forensics, 321
National Resource Center on Domestic
Violence, 280
National Sexual Assault Hotline, 307
National Sexual Violence Resource
Center, 306
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, 174
National Survey on Drug Use and
Health, 216
National Terror Alert Response Center, 451
National Volunteer Fire Council, 391
Native American culture, 93, 286–287
Natural disasters. See also Emergency
preparedness and response
Case Studies, 2–3, 41–42, 408–409
crisis counseling program (CCP), 416
critical incident stress management
(CISM), 414–416
Hurricane Katrina, 9–10, 306, 402
interventions after, 412–416
physical safety concerns, 48–49
resiliency and, 38
responses to, timeline of, 403–409
safety concerns, 402–403
spiritual and cultural considerations,
92–93
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
substance use following, 217–218
telehealth counseling, 410
termination of care, 91–92
types of, 402–403
Voices from the Field, 9–10, 405
Naugle, A., 310
NDCHealth Corporation, 217–218
Negative interrogatives, 109
Negative self-talk, 278
Negligence, professional, 83–84
Neimeyer, R. A., 145
Newell, J., 462, 463, 464, 473
Newsome, D. W., 13
Nixon, R. D. V., 314
No-harm contract, 182–185
Nondirective approaches, 17–18
Nonphysically forced penetration, 287
Nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI), 163, 190–191
assessments and Q-Tree, 191–193
prevalence and rates of, 164–166
resource lists, 209–210, 212
treatment approaches, 193–194
Voices from the Field, 194
Nonverbal communication, 66
silence, use of, 104–106
Norcross, J. C., 227
Nordstrom, K., 120, 206
Nordstrom, R. H., 148
Normal bereavement, 137–138
Normalize, task model of crisis
intervention, 26
Norris, H., 92
North, C. S., 217
NSSI. See Nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI)
O
Obradovic, J., 8, 9
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA),
53–54, 59
O’Donohue, W., 338, 351
Office for Victims of Crime, 309
Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools,
426–427, 450–451
Office of Sex Offender Sentencing,
Monitoring, Apprehending,
Registering, and Tracking (SMART),
328–329
Officer Down Memorial Page, 382
O’Halloran, T. M., 473
O’Hara, A. F., 383
Oliver, M., 328
Olivia, J., 381
Olver, M. E., 326, 358
On Death and Dying (Kübler-Ross), 125

-- 540 of 545 --

512 	Index
O’Neal, C. W., 373
Online counseling, 65–66, 93–96. See also
Telehealth counseling
Online supervision, 65–66
Open questions, 106–111
Options, task model of crisis intervention, 26
Orpinas, P., 262
O’Toole, M. E., 198, 201–202, 204
Overeaters Anonymous, 240
P
Pabian, Y. L., 81
Page, D., 155
Palmer, G., 70
Paramedics, 389
Paraphilia, 355
Paraphrasing, 111–113, 118
Paraprofessionals, 14–15
Parcesepe, A., 312
Parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT), 352
Park, C. L., 37
Parker, L., 45, 457
Parker, S., 141
Parkes, C. M., 128
Parsons, R. D., 83, 85, 88
Partial hospitalization, 185–186
Pascual-Leone, A., 114
Pastoral counselors, 13
Paterson, J. M., 188
Patronizing, sex trafficking and, 299
Patterson, J. M., 36, 37, 39
Paylo, Matthew J., 50
Payne, S. R. T., 199
Pearlman, L. A., 64
Pedersen, P. B., 242
Pedophilia, 355
Peer supervision and consultation, 65–66
Penetration, 287
Peonage, 299
Perrin, R. D., 326
Persistent complex bereavement
disorder, 137
Pew Research Center, 366
PFA. See Psychological first aid (PFA)
Phenix, A., 357
Phone-based therapy, 94
Physical response to trauma, 6
Pickover, S., 299
Planning summaries, 117
Play therapy, 351–352, 412
Plener, P. L., 191
Plionis, E., 415
Poddar, P., 79
Poison control hotline, 43
Polaris Project, 298
Pollock, G., 208–209
Polusny, M. A., 376
Positive and Negative Suicide Ideation
Inventory (PANSI), 181
Positive-self talk, 278
Posluns, K., 457
Posner, K., 181
Post, J. M., 411
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 5–6,
20. See also Counselor self-care
acceptance and commitment therapy
(ACT), 314
assessment for, 312
child sexual abuse survivors and, 351
cognitive processing therapy (CPT),
314–315
compassion fatigue and, 463
critical incident stress management
(CISM), 414–416
eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR) therapy, 315
law enforcement officers and, 386
military personnel and, 374–376
natural disasters and, 406
prolonged exposure therapy, 313
psychoeducation, 316
rape trauma syndrome and, 301–302,
303, 312
riots and, 417–418
trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral
therapy, 313
war-zone deployment, effects of, 370–372
Poundstone, E., 84
Power and Control Wheel, 255
Powers, M., 375
Pozgar, G. D., 68, 69
PRACTICE acronym, 313
A Practitioner’s Guide to Ethical Decision
Making (Forester-Miller, Davis),
66–67
Precontemplation stage, behavior
change, 227
Preparation stage, behavior change, 227
PREPaRE model, 430
Preventive psychiatry, 20
Price, C. A., 4, 7, 37, 39, 40
Priebe, G., 334
Prigerson, H. G., 128
Primary victim, suicide terminology, 167
Privacy concerns
Case Studies, 69, 71–72, 73, 75–76, 82, 86
confidentiality and, 87–89
FERPA, 72–78
HIPAA, 67–71, 77–78
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of
California (1976), 79–82
telehealth counseling, 96
Privacy Rule, HIPAA (2003), 68, 70–71
Problem clarification, task model crisis
assessment, 22, 25
Problem-focused coping, 6–7
Professional counselors. See also
Counselor(s)
negligence and malpractice, 83–84
role of, 12–14
Professional Quality of Life (ProQOL)
scale, 463
Prolonged exposure therapy, 312, 313
Protective factors, 169–170
Protective orders, 271
Psychiatrists, 14
Psychoeducation, 325, 395
Psychological first aid (PFA), 20, 310,
392–393, 412–414
Psychologists, 14
Public Safety and Homeland Security
Bureau, 380
Pullman, L., 330, 331
Purcell, R., 56
Purvis, K., 317
Q
Qasem, H. D., 266
Questions
Case Study, 109–110
Child Sexual Abuse Interview Protocol
(CSAIP), 347–349
leading questions, 107
open and closed questions, 106–111
Question-tree (Q-tree) assessment tool
for domestic violence, 269–270
for nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI), 191–193
for suicide risk, 178–179
for survivors of sexual assault, 311
R
Race
child sexual abuse prevalence, 336
domestic violence, data on, 260–261
RAINN (Rape, Abuse, and Incest National
Network), 286, 288, 289, 290, 291, 297,
301, 303, 304, 307, 338
Rainsberger, R., 74
Rape, 288–296. See also Sexual violence
defined, 289
motivations for, 323–324
statutory, 294, 338
Rape Prevention and Education (RPE)
program, 287
Rape trauma syndrome, 301–302
Raphael, B., 20
Rapport, developing, 100
Rational emotive behavior therapy
(REBT), 331
Ratts, M. J., 242
Ray, D. C., 351
Rebocho, M. F., 355
Recruiting, 299
Red Cross
resources, 423
response teams, leadership roles in,
399–402
Redmond, S. A., 367
Rees, C. S., 94
Reese, R. J., 101, 102, 105
Reeves, A., 50, 51, 52
Reexperiencing, 6
Referrals for continued care, 10–11
risk assessments, safety and, 51–52
violent or homicidal behavior, 204–205

-- 541 of 545 --

Index 	513
Reflecting, listening skills, 106–110
deescalating client aggression, 121–122
Reflecting feelings, listening skills,
114–116, 118
Reflective interventions, 106
Rehabilitation counselors, 13
Reitzel, L. R., 330
Relapse, defined, 237
Relaxation training, 316
Religion
COVID-19 effects of, 144
domestic violence and, 262
ethical concerns, 92–93
faith development theory (FDT), 141–143
FICA Spiritual Assessment Tool, 141
grief and, 140–141
military service members and, 378
resilience and, 8–9
sexual violence survivors and, 318–320
task model crisis assessment, 22, 23–25
trauma, responses to, 6
Remley, T. P., 65, 66, 68, 79, 80, 83, 85, 86, 91,
92, 93
Renk, K., 304
Renzenbrink, I., 154
Resilience, 8–10. See also Counselor self-care
Brief Resilience Scale (BRS), 30–31
First Response Resiliency Program, 395
hotline resources, 43
natural disasters and, 406
vicarious resiliency, 466–467
Resnick, P. A., 294, 375
Resnick, P. J., 83
Resources
for child sexual abuse, 362
community and workplace crisis
response, 422–423
for counselor self-care, 476–478
for domestic violence, 271, 281–282
for first responders, 396
general crisis intervention hotlines, 43
for higher education mental health
services, 77
for homicidal behavior, 209–210, 212
for military personnel and veterans,
379–380
for nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI),
209–210, 212
schools, colleges, and university, 444–445
for sexual violence, 305–306
stress and crisis theory, 39
for substance use disorders (SUDs), 248
for suicide, 209–212
task model crisis assessment, 22, 25
Responder volunteers, 460
Restating, listening skills, 113–114
Restraining orders, 56
Restraints, use of, 54
Rettenberger, M., 328, 357
Reverse evacuation, 437
Rheingold, A. A., 334, 335
Rice, M. E., 358
Richards, D., 94
Richman, J. A., 217
Richmond, J. S., 119, 120
Riots, 416–418
RISE, 307
Risk, need, responsivity (RNR)
principles, 357
Risk assessment, 11
documentation, importance of,
83, 85
high-risk clients, 47–48
for homicide, 196–197
for nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI), 191–193
for school homicide and violence, 197–200
for substance use disorders, 219
for suicide, 167–169, 172–177
task model crisis assessment, 22–23
for threat of violence, 201–204
Rivera-Kloeppel, B., 457
Roach, L. F., 470
Roberts, A. R., 438
Roberts, L. C., 469
Roe, K. J., 286
Rogers, C. R., 358
Rohypnol (roofies), 293
Rojas, E. Y., 358
Rolling, E., 256
Rollnick, S., 227
Rosario, M., 340
Rosen, C. S., 92
Rosenblatt, P. C., 129
Rothbaum, B. O., 312, 313
Rothschild, B., 353
Rothstein, M. A., 196
Roud, E., 432
Rowe, C. L., 218
Royle, L., 464
Rudd, M. D., 170, 182, 223, 235
Ruglass, L., 261
Rupert, P. A., 463
Russell, A., 330
Ruzek, J. L., 413
Rynearson, E. K., 207
S
SafeHelpline, 304
Safety
Case Studies, 57, 59–60
child sexual abuse interventions, 361
client violence, research and
recommendations, 58–61
collaboration and crisis management,
46–47
counselors most at risk, 55–56
domestic violence, counselor safety and,
280–281
domestic violence, response to, 257–259,
271–272, 277
duty to warn and duty to protect, 79–82
high-risk clients, 47–48
HIPAA and crisis counseling, 70–71
individual clients in crisis, 50–53
in-home counseling, 56–58
natural disasters, types and precautions
for, 402–403
physical safety, 48–50
proactive approaches to, 45–46
stalking, 56
task model crisis assessment, 22–23
Voices from the Field, 50, 58, 60–61
vulnerability assessment, 429
workplace violence and counselors, 53–55
Safety plan, 182–185
Saindon, C., 207
Sandover, J. C., 357
Sansbury, B. S., 464
Sapkota, S., 237
Saunders, J. B., 222
Savic-Jabrow, P. C., 472
Sayers, S. L., 372
Scaling, assessment technique, 5
Schmucker, M., 357
Schneider, B., 218
School climate, defined, 428
School counselors. See also Schools
FERPA, 72–78
role of, 13–14
Voice from the Field, 3–4, 9–10
School crisis, defined, 425
School response teams, 399–402, 430–431.
See also Emergency preparedness and
response
Schools
active shooter shelter-in-place, 451–452
Case Studies, 200, 445–446
communication and other protocols,
437–438
crises, characteristics of, 425–427
crisis, mitigation and prevention, 427–429
crisis, recovery from, 440–450
crisis planning and preparedness, 429–438
crisis response teams, 399–402, 430–431
debriefing, 449
emergency response strategies, 438–440
evacuation protocols, 436–437
FERPA and, 72–78
grief and, 137
homicide and violence, risk assessment,
197–200
lockdown protocols, 435–436
parent and guardian communication,
442–444
resources, 444–445
safety concerns, 49
sexual violence, Title IX provisions
and, 300
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
student notifications of death, accident, or
event, 447–448
trauma and, 5
Voices from the Field, 43–44, 440,
446–447, 450
School Survey on Crime and Safety, 429
Schwarz, J. E., 315

-- 542 of 545 --

514 	Index
Scott, C. L., 83
Scott, L. N., 191
Secondary traumatic stress, 386, 463
Security Rule, HIPAA (2005), 69
Seewald, K., 358
Self-care. See Counselor self-care
Self-Care Assessment for Psychologists
(SCAP), 463
Self-harm. See also Nonsuicidal self-injury
(NSSI); Suicide
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT),
313–314
duty to warn and duty to protect, 80
prevalence and rates of, 164–166
sexual violence, effects of, 303
Self-talk, 278
Self-violence, defined, 303
Seligman, M. E., 255–256
Selye, Hans, 4
Selzer, M. L., 222
Seto, M., 330, 331
Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous, 240
Sex Offender Registration and Notification
Act (SORNA), 328
Sex offender registry, 328–329
Sex Offender Risk Appraisal Guide
(SORAG), 357
Sex offenders, treatment of, 324–327
adolescent offenders, 359
adult offenders, 357–359
Sex Offender Treatment and Evaluation
Project (SOTEP), 326
Sexual assault, 285–296. See also Sexual
violence
defined, 289
Sexual assault forensic exams (SAFEs), 308
Sexual assault nurse examiners (SANEs),
307–308
Sexual harassment, 297
Sexual violence. See also Child sexual
abuse (CSA)
anxiety management training (AMT)
programs, 315–316
Case Studies, 292–293, 295–296, 300–301,
322–323, 327
cognitive-behavioral approaches, 313–315
consent, 288
current issues, 306–307
defined, 285, 286, 287
drug-facilitative assault, 293
effects of, 301–306
emerging treatment approaches, 317
expressive arts approaches, 317
group counseling, 316–317
hotline resources, 43
human trafficking, 297–299
intimate partner violence, 294
long-term interventions, 312–313
medical examinations, 307–308
motivators of rape, 323–324
noncontact unwanted experiences, 288
overview of, 285–287
psychoeducation, 316
rape myths, 294–296
rape trauma syndrome, 301–302
recidivism of sex offenders, 327–328
resources for, 305–306
school-age children and, 299–301
sex offender registry, 328–329
sexual assault and rape, 288–296
sexual harassment, 297
short-term/immediate interventions,
310–311
spiritual and multicultural issues, 318–323
stalking, 297
statutory rape, 294
substance use, role in, 218
terminology of, 287–288, 289
trauma and, 5
treatment of juvenile offenders, 329–331
treatment of sex offenders, 324–327
victim vs. survivor, 296
Voices from the Field, 291–292, 315,
317–318
Sexual Violence Surveillance (CDC), 287
Shapiro, E., 353
Shapiro, S. L., 469
Shelter-in-place
active shooter shelter-in-place, 451–452
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
Sheperis, C. J., 66
Sheperis, D. S., 66
Shifflet, E., 89
Shorey, R. C., 277
Signal summaries, 117
Sigurdardottir, S., 341
Silence, use of, 104–106
Silverman, P. R., 125, 126
Simon, R. I., 54
Simonsen, C. B., 200–201
Simpson, S., 360–361
Singhal, M., 351
Sinozich, S., 218, 290
Situational crisis, 21
Sixbey, M. B., 472
Skovholt, T. M., 465, 469
Slavery, 299
Sleeper effects, 341
SMART goals, 473
SMART groups, 240
Smith, A. C., 94
Social constructionism, ethical decision-
making model, 67
Social media, 70, 94
Social networks, resilience and, 8–10
Social workers, 14
Socioeconomic status
domestic violence and, 261
risk assessments and, 168–169
Sole practitioners, 50–53
SOLER technique, 105–106
Soliciting, 299
Sories, F., 412
Sorsoli, L., 335
Spearman, K. J., 267
Spears, C., 202
Spencer-Thomas, S., 141
Spirituality
COVID-19 effects of, 144
domestic violence and, 262
ethical concerns, 92–93
faith development theory (FDT), 141–143
FICA Spiritual Assessment Tool, 141
grief and, 140–141
military service members and, 378
resilience and, 8–9
sexual violence survivors and, 318–320
task model crisis assessment, 22, 23–25
trauma, responses to, 6
Spousal rape, 294
Stabilization, task model crisis assessment,
22–23
Stalking, 56, 280, 297
Stamm, B. H., 463
Stander, V. A., 335
Stanley, B., 183
Stasiak, K., 410
Statutory rape, 294, 338
Stauffer, M. D., 219, 222
Steil, R., 314
Sterner, W., 378
Stickney, D., 148
Stigma
grief reactions and, 131, 187
military personnel and mental health,
368–370
of sex offenders, 329
sexual assault and, 294, 321
suicide and, 187, 188, 189
Stiles, D. A., 417
Stinson, J. D., 357
Stockholm syndrome, 420
Storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
Strentz, T., 418
Stress. See also Counselor self-care
adaptation, 7–8
coping and, 6–7
COVID-19 effects of, 144
defined, 4–5
of emergency medical services
professionals, 389–390
of firefighters, 391–392
internal and external stressors, 38–39
law enforcement occupational stress,
384–385
mindfulness-based stress reduction, 376
resilience and, 8–10
secondary traumatic stress, 386
stressor events, 38–39
trauma and, 5–6
Stress and crisis theory, 38–40
Stress inoculation training (SIT), 312,
315–316
Stress-related growth, 37
Stubbs, J., 390
Student care teams, 453–454

-- 543 of 545 --

Index 	515
Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA),
12, 55, 186, 216, 240–241, 245, 246,
380, 385, 389
disaster response resources, 423
training resources, 97
Substance Abuse Subtle Screening
Inventory-4 (SASSI-4), 222
Substance use disorders (SUDs)
Case Studies, 229–230, 231–237, 243–244
co-occurring disorders and crisis, 240–241
crisis treatment, 230–237
diagnosis of, 225–226, 247
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT),
313–314
drug classifications, 216–217
etiology and risk factors for, 219
harm reduction, 238–239
hotline resources, 43
marital and family treatment, 240
multicultural perspectives, 242–244
relapse and crisis, 237
resources for, 248
safety and self-care, 245–247
screening, assessment, and diagnosis,
220–230
sexual violence, effects of, 304
substance use and society, 216–219
support groups, 239–240
treatment admission and placement,
assessment for, 228–230
Voices from the Field, 227–228, 231,
245–246
Sude, M. E., 94
SUDs. See Substance use disorders (SUDs)
Sugai, G., 54
Suicide
acute suicidal risk, 170–172
bereavement, 187–188
Case Studies, 27–32, 174–176
chronic suicide risk, 170–172
counseling malpractice suits and, 83
crisis follow-up, 186
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT),
313–314
duty to warn and duty to protect, 80–82
of firefighters, 391
grief and, 137, 147
hotline resources, 43
by law enforcement officers, 383–384
lethality assessments, 180–182
level of risk, 172–177
military personnel and, 371–372, 377
outpatient and inpatient treatment
decisions, 185–186
prevalence and rates of, 164–166, 426
protective factors, 169–170
question-tree (Q-tree) assessment, 178–179
resource lists, 209–212
risk factors, 167–169
safety plan, 182–185
sexual violence, effects of, 303
survivors, framework for intervention,
188–190
task model crisis assessment, 22–23
terminology of, 166–167
Voices from the Field, 89, 450
warning signs, 170
Suicide Assessment Five-Step Evaluation
and Triage (SAFE-T), 181
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education, 187
Summarizing, listening skills, 117–118
Supervision, counselor self-care and,
471–473
Support groups, substance use disorders,
239–240
Supports, task model crisis assessment,
22, 25
Survivor, use of term, 296
Survivors, suicide terminology, 167
Survivor SafeHaven, 307
Survivors of Loved Ones’ Suicides, 187
Survivor volunteers, 460
Svedin, C. G., 334
Swannell, S. V., 165
Systems theory, 36–37
T
Talbott-Forbes, L. L., 64
Tarasoff, Tatiana, 79
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of
California (1976), 79–82, 196
Task model of crisis assessment and
intervention, 181–182
Case Studies, 27–36
crisis assessment, four essential tasks,
22–25
crisis intervention, four essential tasks, 22,
26–35
Task model of grieving (Worden), 127–128
Tear Soup (Corr, Balk), 148
Technology
crisis response, ethics and, 93–96
natural disasters and telehealth
counseling, 410
stalking and cyberstalking, 297
Voices from the Field, 95–96
Tedeschi, R. G., 37
Teitelbaum, J. B., 69
Telehealth counseling. See also Online
counseling
after natural disasters, 410
Voices from the Field, 95–96
Terminal illness, 125, 136–137
Termination
in crisis intervention care, 10–11
ethics of, 89–92
Terrorism, 5
crisis counseling program (CCP), 416
critical incident stress management
(CISM), 414–416
domestic terrorism, 410
emergency preparedness and response,
410–416
grief and, 137
international terrorism, 410
interventions after, 412–416
substance use following attacks, 217
Text messages, 94
Thoma, S., 82
Thomas, M. D., 280
Thomas, S. P., 339
Threat assessment teams, 46
Tishler, C. L., 205
Title IX, 300
Todahl, J., 266, 271
Tornadoes
response teams and, 403
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
Torniainen-Holm, M., 94
Townsend, C., 334, 335
Trafficking Victims Protection Act (2000)
(TVPA), 297–298
Transcultural integrative model, 67
Transphobia, 263
Transporting, sex trafficking and, 299
Transtheoretical model (TTM) of
behavior, 191
Trask, E. V., 341
Trauma. See also Counselor self-care;
Emergency preparedness and
response; Posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD)
defined, 5
domestic violence, emotional impact of,
273–275
effects on counselors, 64
emerging treatment approaches, 317
hostage situations, 418–422
law enforcement officers experience of,
382–383, 386
play therapy, 412
psychoeducation, 316
psychological first aid, 412–414
rape trauma syndrome, 301–302
responses to, 5–6
secondary traumatic stress, 463
substance use following crisis, 217–218
trauma-sensitive schools, 432
vicarious trauma, 464–465
Trauma and Learning Policy Initiative, 432
Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral
therapy (TF-CBT), 313, 351, 374–375
Trauma-informed care (TIC), 12, 55
Trauma Lens, 432
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 370–372,
376–377
Treatment for self-injurious behavior
(T-SIB), 193–194, 359
Trepal, H., 192
TRIAGE approach, suicide assessment,
178–179
Trickett, P. K., 335
Trippany, R. L., 464
Trotter-Mathison, M. J., 465, 469
Truman, J. L., 280, 297, 323

-- 544 of 545 --

516 	Index
Tschan, F., 58
Tucker, E., 95–96
Turgoose, D., 94
Turner, R. J., 449
Tyre, Y., 74–75
U
Underwood, E., 339
Universities and colleges
acquaintance rape data, 290
active shooter shelter-in-place, 451–452
campus assessment response and
evaluation (CARE) team, 453–454
Case Study, 454–455
communication and other protocols,
437–438
crises, characteristics of, 425–427
crisis, mitigation and prevention, 427–429
crisis, recovery from, 440–450
crisis planning and preparedness, 429–438
crisis response strategies, 450–455
crisis response teams, 399–402, 430–431
debriefing, 449
emergency response strategies, 438–440
evacuation protocols, 436–437
FERPA and, 72–78
HIPAA and, 77–78
lockdown protocols, 435–436
parent and guardian communication,
442–444
storm shelter-in-place, 452–453
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of
California (1976), 79–82
threat assessment teams, 453
Voices from the Field, 440, 455
University of South Florida, 428, 439–440
Uppercue, T., 440
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 200
U.S. Census Bureau, 367
U.S. Department of Defense, 366, 368, 373
U.S. Department of Education, 72, 73, 75, 76,
300, 426–427, 429, 437, 450–451
U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS), 68, 70, 72, 298, 300,
336, 349
U.S. Department of Justice, 298, 327, 328,
330, 359
Office on Violence Against Women, 308
Victims’ Rights Ombudsman, 309
U.S. Department of Labor, 54
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
366, 375
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC), 297
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
216–217
U.S. Marshals Service Behavioral Analysis
Unit, 382, 384, 385, 387
U.S. Secret Service, 199
V
Vahali, H. O., 351
Van Brunt, B., 195, 196, 200, 202
Van den Heuvel, C., 420
van der Kolk, B. A., 351, 353
Vandiver, D., 357
Varma, S., 298
Verbal underlining, 103
Vernart, B., 64
Verstrael, S., 376
Veterans Benefits, Healthcare, and
Information Technology Act
(2006), 367
Veterans Health Administration, 367, 373,
374, 376
Vicarious resiliency, 466–467
Vicarious trauma, 464–465
Vick, M., 161, 352, 474–475
Victim, legal use of term, 252, 296
Vigano, N., 94
Vigil, N. H., 390
Violanti, J. M., 383, 386, 396
Violence Against Women Act (VAWA),
286–287
Violent behavior. See also Domestic violence;
Homicidal behavior; Intimate partner
violence (IPV)
aggression, types of, 120
Case Studies, 200, 203, 205–206
counselors most at risk, 55–56
cycle of violence theory, 253–255
deescalating client emotions, 119–122
duty to warn and duty to protect, 79–82
high-risk clients, safety and, 47–48
hostage situations, 418–422
individual clients in crisis, 50–53
referrals for, 204–205
research and recommendations, 58–61
resource lists, 209–210
safety training and, 46
school homicide and violence, 197–200
substance use, role in, 218
survivors, needs of, 207–209
task model crisis assessment, 22–23
threat level assessment, 201–204
treatment options, 205–207
Voices from the Field, 50, 203–204
workplace violence, 53–55, 200–210
Virtual counseling, 65–66, 93–96
Vlahov, D., 217
Vocal tone, 103–104
Voluntary hospitalization, 185
von Feigenblat, O. F., 73
Vulnerability assessment, 429
W
Waitzkin, H., 370
Walker, J. K., 263, 264, 273, 274
Walker, L. E., 253–255, 256
Walters, E., 266, 271
Ward, C. L., 389
Ward, R. L., 199
Warren, L. J., 195, 201, 204
Warshaw, R., 286
Waterbugs and Dragonflies (Stickney,
Nordstrom), 148
Watlington, C. G., 256
Wearick-Silva, L. E., 339
Weathers, F. W., 312
Wee, D. F., 393
Weiss, D. S., 312
Welfel, E. R., 84, 195, 196, 458,
460, 461
Wellesley Project, 20
Wester, K., 192
Whiffen, V. E., 342
Whitlock, J., 191
Wilcox, N., 47
Wildfires, response teams and, 403
Wilensky, S. E., 69
Wiley, C., 74
Williamson, V., 373
Wilmoth, J., 391, 392
Winokur, M., 330
Winter storms
response teams and, 402
storm shelter-in-place, 453
Wise, E. H., 460
Wise, R. A., 77
Withdrawal, grief and, 152–153
Wolf, C. P., 469
Worden, J. W., 127–128, 140, 147–148, 154
Workplace violence, 53–55, 200–210. See also
Violent behavior
Case Study, 206–207
World Health Organization (WHO), 165,
222, 261, 276
World Life Expectancy, 164
World Population Review, 165
Worling, J. R., 330
Writing therapy, 317
X
Xiaoyun, C., 64, 94
Y
Yates, P., 357, 358
Yates, P. M., 357
Yoshihama, M., 260
Young, J., 319
Young, M. E., 102, 112, 114, 117, 470
Young, M. S., 335
Yuce, M., 341
Z
Zalaquett, C., 92
Zappalla, S., 231
Zhai, Y., 143–144
Zhang, N., 83, 85, 88
Zhou, J., 303
Zinzow, H. M., 245

-- 545 of 545 --

