

-- 1 of 209 --



-- 2 of 209 --



-- 3 of 209 --

Bearing the Unbearable
Trauma, Gospel, and Pastoral Care Deborah
van Deusen Hunsinger WILLIAM B. EERDMANS
PUBLISHING COMPANY
GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN / CAMBRIDGE, U.K.

-- 4 of 209 --

© 2015 Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger
All rights reserved
Published 2015 by
Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.
2140 Oak Industrial Drive N.E., Grand Rapids, Michigan 49505 /
P.O. Box 163, Cambridge CB3 9PU U.K.
Printed in the United States of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication
Data Hunsinger, Deborah van Deusen.
Bearing the unbearable: trauma, gospel, and pastoral care /
Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8028-7103-9 (pbk.: alk. paper)
eISBN 978-1-4674-4393-7 (ePub)
eISBN 978-1-4674-4353-1 (Kindle)
1. Pastoral psychology. 2. Psychology, Religious. 3. Pastoral theology. I. Title.
BV4012.H83 2015
253.5´2 — dc23
2014049875
www.eerdmans.com

-- 5 of 209 --

For my whole family — with deep appreciation
for their love and presence in my life

-- 6 of 209 --

Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction
1. Bearing the Unbearable:
Trauma, Gospel, and Pastoral Care
2. Rooted and Grounded in Love:
Compassionate Witnessing
3. Christian Forgiveness:
Healing the Emotional Wounds of Childhood
4. Keeping an Open Heart in Troubled Times:
Self-Empathy as a Christian Spiritual Practice
5. Prayers of Lament:
“How Long, O Lord?”
6. Practicing Koinonia:
Life Together
7. Members of One Another:
Building a Restorative Church
Appendix 1: Criteria for PTSD:
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual–5
Appendix 2: Professional Quality of Life Scale:
Compassion Satisfaction and Fatigue Subscales—Revision IV
Index

-- 7 of 209 --

Acknowledgments
Among the many important conversational partners that have
contributed to my thinking over the years, I must single out my
beloved husband, George Hunsinger, whose influence on my
theology and my life is incalculable. His steadfast love,
encouragement, and support have undergirded my vocation as a
pastoral theologian and given me daily joy.
I am grateful for my years of study with a number of theological
mentors at Yale Divinity School and for my treasured teacher, Ann
Belford Ulanov, at Union Theological Seminary in New York City.
A number of colleagues have been important as my thought has
developed, among whom Theresa F. Latini is foremost. I first met
Theresa when she enrolled in the M.Div. program at Princeton
Seminary in the 1990s. Many years later, after she had completed a
Ph.D. in practical theology, she became my sister-in-law. Still later,
she became a coauthor and coteacher as we worked together to think
through the implications of contextualizing nonviolent
communication for the church. I continue to be profoundly grateful
for her generous, lively, and collaborative spirit.
My years of intensive study of nonviolent communication were
greatly enriched by relationships developed in that community. My
teachers, especially Robert Gonzales, Susan Skye, Miki and Inbal
Kashtan, and Dominic Barter, contributed immensely both to my
conceptual understanding and to my personal growth.
I am indebted to teachers and colleagues at the International
Institute of Restorative Practices in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and to
the STAR program (Strategies for Trauma Awareness and
Resilience) at Eastern Mennonite University in Harrisonburg,
Virginia. Mark Vander Vennen of FaithCare in Toronto was a

-- 8 of 209 --

faithful companion and guide as I learned how to bring restorative
practices to the church.
I am also indebted to the generous sabbatical leaves granted by
the trustees of Princeton Theological Seminary, which enabled me to
craft each of the chapters in this volume with care.
I am also grateful to Vinod Gnanaraj for the preparation of the
index.
To all my friends and colleagues — spiritual direction groups and
prayer groups, students and former students, counselees and
supervisees — I owe profound debts of gratitude for the many ways
in which we have shared our lives as I have struggled with the
complex ideas developed in this book.
Above all, the love of my family — not only that of my parents,
Robert Holt and Martha Moon van Deusen, but also that of my
brothers and sisters, my husband, children, and grandchildren — has
formed the essential matrix in which my mind and heart have been
shaped. Grateful to be so richly blessed, I dedicate this book to
them.
I am grateful for permission to reprint material that first appeared in
earlier publications:
“Bearing the Unbearable: Trauma, Gospel and Pastoral Care,”
Theology Today 68, no. 1 (2011): 8-25.
“Forgiving Abusive Parents,” in Forgiveness and Truth, ed. Alistair
McFadyen and Marcel Sarot (New York: T&T Clark, 2001), 71-
98. Reprinted by permission of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.
“Keeping an Open Heart in Troubled Times: Self-Empathy as a
Christian Spiritual Practice,” in A Spiritual Life: Perspectives
from Poets, Prophets, and Preachers, ed. Allan H. Cole
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2011), 123-34.
“Prayers of Lament,” in Pray without Ceasing (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 2006), 138-55.
“Practicing Koinonia,” Theology Today 66, no. 3 (October 2009):
346-67.
“Members of One Another: Building a Restorative Church,” in

-- 9 of 209 --

Theology in Service to the Church, ed. Allan H. Cole (Eugene,
Ore.: Wipf and Stock, Cascade Books, 2014), 155-79. Used by
permission 	of 	Wipf 	and 	Stock 	Publishers.
www.wipfandstock.com.

-- 10 of 209 --

Introduction
I envision trauma as a series of nested concentric circles, affecting
every level of our lives, beginning with the suffering involved in
facing our own mortality and personal capacity for evil and reaching
progressively outward to traumas that have greater scope: with the
next circle comprising the interpersonal traumas of divorce, death,
disease, or disability affecting ourselves or those we love. As the
concentric circles grow larger, we encounter the kind of trauma that
has the betrayal of trust at its core: infidelity, domestic violence,
rape, incest, and child abuse.
Intergenerational trauma that is often passed from one generation
to the next includes the indelible impact of assault, suicide, or
murder on families and communities. Moving further out toward a
wider scope and greater impact, we find that the next concentric
circle entails the crushing structural violence of poverty,
homelessness, imprisonment, racism, enslavement, immigration,
and political oppression. Finally, in the outermost circle of hell, we
encounter not only the terror of natural and ecological disasters but
also the moral catastrophes of war, torture, genocide, and terrorism.
Pastoral theology, as a contemporary field of inquiry, has long
studied those issues in the middle circles, shedding light on the
complex suffering that comes in the wake of disease, death,
violence, and abuse, focusing especially on its interpersonal,
familial, and community impact. The rise of psychology in the
twentieth century, joined now by breakthroughs in neuroscientific
research, has given pastoral theology deeper insight into the
multiple causes of trauma as well as suggested multiple approaches
to its healing.
In recent decades, the field of pastoral theology has shifted from

-- 11 of 209 --

exclusively clinical or therapeutic considerations (regarding both
diagnosis and treatment) to wider cultural, economic, and political
considerations, addressing in one way or another virtually every
form of human suffering mentioned. Like every discipline in
theological study, pastoral theology is intrinsically interdisciplinary,
as it builds bridges of scholarly conversation with a wide number of
fields: not only psychology and psychotherapy in relation to
theology and biblical studies, but also economics, sociology,
political science, ethics, literary studies, poetry and the arts, criminal
justice, and peace studies.
This volume reflects some of those shifts, examining trauma from
a number of interpretive frameworks that are then brought into
dialogue with Christian theology. While psychology and
psychotherapy continue to be primary conversation partners, other
disciplines contribute to the discussion, particularly those that have
developed the theoretical underpinnings and practical strategies for
restorative practices (primarily social work, criminal justice, and
education). The overriding aim of the book is to illuminate the
impact of trauma on people’s lives and to present conceptual
frameworks and practical strategies for healing, particularly in a
North American context, from a center in the gospel. Each chapter
weaves together various theoretical and practical threads with the
faith, practice, and theology of the church. For if the scope of
trauma’s impact is envisioned as a series of nested concentric
circles, so also the gospel’s restorative power is understood to
emanate outward, as the presence and work of Jesus Christ
mercifully address every kind of human misery and need.
Christ’s healing and reconciling work, completed once for all in
his death on the cross, continues to radiate outward, reaching
persons and communities, and even nations that are reeling from
overwhelming pain at every level of their common life. By Word
and sacrament, through preaching and prayer, and through those
who hunger and thirst for justice both within and outside the church,
Christ’s work is attested and mediated to the world. By God’s
mercy, it reaches the minds and hearts of those afflicted with
trauma. Those who are far from remembering the goodness of God,

-- 12 of 209 --

who carry personal memories of horror in their bodies and souls,
receive the ministry of compassionate witnesses willing to share
their burden of suffering. By God’s grace, many of the afflicted find
pathways to wrest wisdom from a tangle of pain. Because trauma is
not a single event but a complex series of events, what happens after
a traumatic episode may be as significant as the episode itself. This
is the point at which enduring post- traumatic distress might even be
prevented. It is at this juncture that human sufferers most need their
fellow human beings to demonstrate care for them, to hear their
story, however fragmented or inchoate, with compassion. For
finally, human beings are able to bear the unbearable only as others
are willing to bear it with them.
Yet, because God alone can bear the full weight of sin and death
— the manifold ways that human beings hurt, maim, and destroy
each other with their words, deeds, and deadly weapons — those in
the church learn to rely not on the strength of their own meager
efforts, but on the One who reveals the vast reaches of God’s
compassion, Jesus Christ. They recognize that it is only through
God’s grace, mercy, and loving compassion that both survivors and
witnesses are able to keep their equanimity when hopelessness
threatens. As the community bears one another’s burdens through
compassionate witnessing, it relies not so much on its own skill and
resourcefulness as on its trust in the redemptive suffering of Christ.
Chapter 1, “Bearing the Unbearable: Trauma, Gospel, and
Pastoral Care,” traces the recent history of trauma studies, describes
trauma’s symptoms, and offers guidance in those “best practices”
that promise healing. It then offers theological reflection for
understanding trauma in the light of Christian faith. The chapter is
written to serve as a basic primer for pastors and lay caregivers as
they seek to offer sensitive, compassionate care to those suffering
from trauma.
Chapter 2, “Rooted and Grounded in Love: Compassionate
Witnessing,” draws on the generative work of family therapist and
clinical psychologist Kaethe Weingarten as it considers what it
means to become an active and empowered witness of the suffering

-- 13 of 209 --

of others. After setting forth several of Weingarten’s key ideas, I
endeavor to place them within a Christian theological context.
Chapter 3, “Christian Forgiveness: Healing the Emotional
Wounds of Childhood,” considers the traumatic impact of abusive
parenting on children, by drawing on depth psychological findings
and family systems research. These perspectives are then brought
into conversation with Christian theology, which serves essentially
to reframe them. A psychological understanding of healing is
contrasted with and ordered in relation to a theological
understanding of forgiveness. If the different logical levels of these
concepts (psychological and theological) are not respected,
confusion is the result. Theological reflection offers a unique
understanding of the spiritual challenges faced by those who suffer
from early childhood abuse, while Christian faith offers a unique
perspective on post-traumatic growth.
Chapter 4, “Keeping an Open Heart in Troubled Times: Self-‐
Empathy as a Christian Spiritual Practice,” examines the plight of
the pastoral caregiver (or compassionate witness) faced with
compassion fatigue or vicarious traumatic stress. How can empathic
and caring persons continue to listen to the anguished stories of
others without becoming overwhelmed themselves? A practical
strategy is introduced, by means of nonviolent communication’s
teachings on the practice of self-empathy, with its countercultural
understanding of human needs. Christian theology reinforces the
perception that ultimately God alone can open one’s heart, granting
caregivers the gift of willingness to share in the painful mourning of
others.
Chapter 5, “Prayers of Lament: ‘How Long, O Lord?’ ” describes
an ancient Christian practice that enables the afflicted to keep hope
alive. Only by keeping the channel of communication and
communion with God open is a person able to stay alive spiritually.
Without an impassioned cry of lament directed toward God,
believers can be cast adrift in a chaotic sea of pain and despair.
Lament paradoxically deepens the sufferer’s connection to God
despite all signs of God’s absence. It gives strength to endure even
in the shadow of death.

-- 14 of 209 --

Chapter 6, “Practicing Koinonia: Life Together,” begins with a
theological description of God’s gift of koinonia (communion,
fellowship, partnership) to the church. Whenever “brothers and
sisters dwell together in unity,” this gift becomes visible as a living
parable of God’s kingdom here on earth. The skills offered by
nonviolent communication are described and placed in service to
this telos, as empathic listening, speaking honestly, and self-‐
empathy are presented as practical tools for dealing with criticism,
avoiding pastoral burnout and pastoral misconduct, and deepening
our life of prayer. Skills of empathy are placed into a christological
framework to show how they can be used faithfully in our witness to
a compassionate God.
Chapter 7, “Members of One Another: Building a Restorative
Church,” introduces a set of practices that seems to be little known
in the church, although it is widely used elsewhere to help
communities in distress. Here the focus is on congregational trauma,
as I seek to glean what is useful from the transdisciplinary field of
restorative practices. Transdisciplinary studies combine the
knowledge of a number of academic fields with the hands-on
knowledge and skill of nonacademic practitioners. In this case,
criminal justice, education, counseling, social work, organizational
management, and theology each responds creatively not only to the
fragmentation of knowledge in academic disciplines but also to the
growing interpersonal disconnection in our communities. The
chapter offers a practical model for working with churches in
distress while showing the model’s congruence with basic themes of
the gospel, particularly the interdependence of all members of the
community and the ultimate aim of reconciliation for all parties, not
only victims of harm but also those who have perpetrated it, as well
as those members of the community vitally affected as witnesses.
Some form of justice needs to be extended to all those affected, not
only the victims and families of those directly harmed but also
everyone in the surrounding community, for “if one person suffers,
all suffer together.”
The book closes with two brief appendices for easy reference, one
summarizing the symptoms of trauma as delineated in the

-- 15 of 209 --

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5), and the other a metric
developed to help caregivers determine their level of potential
burnout or compassion fatigue, called the “Compassion Satisfaction
and Fatigue Subscales.”
The book seeks to provide conceptual resources for the upbuilding
of the church of Jesus Christ as an exercise in pastoral theology.
Near the end of his life the apostle Paul wrote that though he was
afflicted in every way, he was not crushed; though perplexed, he
was not driven to despair; though persecuted, he was not forsaken;
and though struck down, he was not destroyed (2 Cor. 4). By the
mercy of God, he did “not lose heart.”
What enabled one so afflicted to keep his heart open toward the
misery of others, to know God’s mercy so intimately that he could
extend that mercy even toward those who sought to destroy him?
What enabled him not to lose heart in the midst of ongoing
persecution and suffering? Paul reminds his readers that though the
church has its treasure in earthen vessels, it nevertheless does have a
treasure. It is the treasure given to those who have eyes to see “the
light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the likeness of God”
(2 Cor. 4:4).1 Paul sees the vast scope of God’s grace extending
always further outward, to reach peoples everywhere: “As grace
extends to more and more people it may increase thanksgiving, to
the glory of God. So we do not lose heart” (2 Cor. 4:15-16). May
this work serve God’s glory by helping its readers not to lose heart
in these challenging times.
1. Unless otherwise indicated, all Scripture quotations in this book come from the Revised
Standard Version.

-- 16 of 209 --



-- 17 of 209 --

CHAPTER 1
Bearing the Unbearable Trauma, Gospel, and
Pastoral Care
Traumatic loss lies at the very heart of the Christian imagination.
The souls of those who call themselves Christian are indelibly
stamped with the unbearable sorrow of this man, Jesus. After raising
the hopes of many, Jesus died a shameful death, indeed an unjust
and horrible death. What is more, his friends denied, betrayed, and
abandoned him in his hour of need. He was tortured and executed as
a common criminal, even though he had done nothing to warrant
condemnation. Jesus Christ drank the cup of bitterness all the way to
its dregs, and descended into the very depths of hell: How can such
a terrible story be borne? Much more than an intellectual puzzle
about so-called theories of atonement is at stake here. Believers who
have survived trauma stake their very lives on the power of the
gospel to heal.
Trauma: How can we give it the kind of disciplined attention that
it deserves? Holding even a fraction of this suffering steadily in our
attention can be challenging. Is it possible to talk about trauma
without causing pain to those already bearing trauma in their bodies
and souls?1 Daily through the media, we are bombarded with stories
capable of breaking our hearts, yet little attention is given to the
impact of such accounts on their hearers. How can we bear these
stories with an open heart?2 Indeed, how do we bear them at all?
Pastoral theology, as I understand it, is first and foremost a
theology of God’s care for the world in Jesus Christ, in which we
are invited to participate.3 This means that all pastoral care depends
upon prayer, leads to worship, and trusts in the promises of God.
Such an orientation leads us to confess that though we ourselves,
with our enduring failures to love, cannot truly redeem traumatic
loss, we cling in hope to the One who can and does. That One drank
the cup of bitterness, died a death of anguish, and descends into
every darkness that threatens to overwhelm us.

-- 18 of 209 --

Those who study theology are called to ponder holocausts of
every kind, from biblical “texts of terror,”4 to grueling historical or
theological tracts, to the horrors of the evening news. How can we
fortify ourselves, our students, or our children for the kind of world
we live in? Whether painted on a vast canvas of national or
international significance, or in a miniature of a single family or
community, traumatic loss is ubiquitous. When it hits us personally,
it changes our lives irrevocably: through the shock of an accident, a
criminal assault, or a tragic death, or through the multiple and
complex traumas that arise in relation to immigration, war,
imprisonment, torture, domestic violence, or sexual abuse, among
others. Unacknowledged and unhealed, trauma often leads to further
violence, either against oneself or against others, and thus to more
trauma. With knowledgeable intervention and wise support,
however, trauma can be healed, and may even become “a catalyst
for growth and transformation,”5 the turning point of a life, a sign
and symbol of God’s goodness and care.
As caregivers in the church who seek to help others, how can we
be sure that we will first do no harm? How can we be a source of
spiritual strength and practical support for the communities we
serve? Moreover, as witnesses to the trauma of others or as persons
afflicted by trauma ourselves, where do we turn for help? In this
chapter, I want to set forth an understanding of the impact of trauma
and inquire into the role of the gospel and the church in its healing. I
plan to address three basic issues:
What is trauma and how does it affect us?
How do we break free from the vicious cycle of trauma’s
impact?
How does the gospel with the pastoral care of the church
bring healing to the traumatized?
What Is Trauma and How Does It Affect Us?
The twentieth century offered countless opportunities for studying
trauma, but it was not until the 1970s that social and political

-- 19 of 209 --

ferment enabled its study to advance decisively.6 By the mid-1970s,
hundreds of “rap” groups had been organized by Vietnam Veterans
against the War where men could speak honestly about the horror of
war. At the same time, women gained collective courage as they
shared, among other things, their stories of rape, sexual abuse, or
domestic violence. No longer willing to allow “denial, secrecy and
shame”7 to render them mute, both men and women were able to
transform what had previously been private suffering into powerful
public action for social and political change. In the 1970s and 1980s,
crisis centers, rape hotlines, and safe shelters were established with
painstaking effort in state after state.8
At the same time, the Veterans Administration commissioned
thorough studies of the war’s impact on returning Vietnam vets.9
Subsequently, a “five-volume study on the legacies of Vietnam . . .
demonstrated beyond any reasonable doubt [the] direct relationship
[of trauma] to combat exposure.”10 With multiple vectors for social
change converging, the American Psychiatric Association included a
new diagnosis in its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for 1980
called post- traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In their first attempt to
capture its essence, psychiatrists described traumatic events as lying
“outside the range of usual human experience,”11 a definition that
proved untenable since traumatic incidents of one kind or another
are quite common.12 As psychiatrist Judith Herman writes:
“Traumatic events are extraordinary, not because they occur rarely,
but rather because they overwhelm the ordinary human adaptations
to life.”13 In fact, a simple thumbnail definition of trauma might be:
“an inescapably stressful event that overwhelms people’s coping
mechanisms.”14 When people face “intense fear, helplessness, loss
of control, and the threat of annihilation,”15 and when these feelings
persist for more than a month, PTSD becomes the chosen
diagnosis.16 Witnesses to horrific events are also vulnerable to
trauma. Watching helplessly as a loved one dies, seeing the Twin
Towers fall to the earth, or listening in fear as one’s mother or
sibling gets beaten — such events can trigger a traumatic reaction.17
The subjective experience of feeling overwhelmed uniquely
characterizes trauma and differentiates it from those situations that

-- 20 of 209 --

are experienced, perhaps, as exceptionally stressful but not as
traumatic. Peter Levine elaborates: “Traumatized people . . . are
unable to overcome the anxiety of their experience. They remain
overwhelmed by the event, defeated and terrified. Virtually
imprisoned by their fear, they are unable to re-engage in life. Others
who experience similar events may have no enduring symptoms at
all. . . . No matter how frightening an event may seem, not everyone
who experiences it will be traumatized.”18 The imponderable factor
here is that the nature of the triggering event in and of itself does not
guarantee a traumatic reaction.19 One person may experience the
event as traumatic while her neighbor, friend, or daughter
experiencing the exact same event may find it stressful, but not
traumatic. This fact remains completely inexplicable until we realize
that none of us ever actually has the exact same experience because
our minds organize our experiences in a completely idiosyncratic
way. The meaning of an experience will be different for each person
because our way of making narrative sense of our lives is utterly
unique. Thus, feeling overwhelmed or immobilized is a variable that
cannot be predicted by either the nature, magnitude, or intensity of
the triggering event.20 “Consequently,” writes Carolyn Yoder, “a
traumatic reaction needs to be treated as valid, regardless of how
the event that induced it appears to anyone else.”21
I believe this point is fundamental to competent pastoral care.
Time and again one hears people minimizing or discounting the
anguish of others, essentially encouraging them to “get over it.”
Wanting those they love to be whole, they try to encourage them by
rationally explaining why they should not be upset by so small a
thing. Yet, nothing so completely obstructs the healing process as
having someone offer the free advice to “get over it” or “put it
behind” them. While such defense mechanisms — denial and
minimization — on the part of friends or caregivers are
understandable human reactions to pain in those they love, they only
injure the traumatized further, perhaps to the point of shaming them
into silence and truly unbearable isolation.
Yet, why aren’t they able simply to “get over it”? The various
symptoms of post- traumatic stress have been aptly summarized by

-- 21 of 209 --

Judith Herman as hyperarousal, intrusion, and constriction:
“Hyperarousal reflects the persistent expectation of danger;
intrusion reflects the indelible imprint of the traumatic moment;
constriction reflects the numbing response of surrender.”22 While
each symptom originates in the triggering event itself, they all have
an afterlife in the person’s unfolding post-trauma history.
Any kind of physical or emotional shock has the potential to set
certain physiological responses in motion. Typical responses include
an increased pulse rate, difficulty in breathing, rising blood pressure,
and constriction of the stomach. One’s thoughts may begin to race
and the skin may become cold. These responses all stem from the
autonomic nervous system putting the body on high alert in
response to a perception of threat. The release of hormones
mobilizes the body for fight or flight. When neither fight nor flight
seems possible, the physiological response of the body is to freeze.23
In the freeze response, “the victim of trauma enters an altered
reality. Time slows down and there is no fear or pain. In this state, if
harm or death do occur, the pain is not felt as intensely.”24 There is a
notable shift in consciousness, in which there is a subjective sense
of detachment. Victims of sexual assault, for instance, sometimes
speak of “leaving their body” and watching themselves from another
point in the room: standing next to the bed or looking down from the
ceiling.25 Metaphorically, it is as if the soul escapes the body to
protect the person from the physical pain and the full emotional
impact of his radical vulnerability.
Like the fight or flight response, freezing is heralded by a flood of
hormones. In 1844, Dr. David Livingstone described his subjective
experience of being seized by a lion: “Growling horribly close to my
ear, he shook me as a terrier dog does a rat. It produced a sort of
dreaminess in which there was no sense of pain, nor feeling of
terror, though I was quite conscious of all that was happening. . . .
This placidity is probably produced in all animals killed by the
carnivore; and if so, is a merciful provision of the Creator for
lessening the pain of death.”26 The capacity of the mind to dissociate
like this may reduce the immediate pain and horror of the event, but
it does so at a high cost. Studies now demonstrate that “people who

-- 22 of 209 --

enter a dissociative state at the time of the traumatic event are
among those most likely to develop long-lasting PTSD.”27
During a traumatic ordeal, the intense hyperarousal of the
emotions often “interfere[s] with proper information processing and
the storage of information in narrative (explicit) memory.”28 This
means that memory of the trauma is often fragmented; it is not
organized in a linear, narrative fashion as normal memories are.
Instead, certain features associated with sensory data are vividly
remembered such as a particular smell, sound, image, or color. If a
dog was barking when the person was assaulted, for instance, the
sound of a barking dog might evoke subsequent feelings of terror or
rage, yet strangely unaccompanied by an explicit memory of the
assault. Or, alternatively, the memory of the assault may be explicit,
yet strangely dissociated from the accompanying emotions. Bessel
van der Kolk comments: Although the individual may be unable to
produce a coherent narrative of the incident, there may be no
interference with implicit memory; the person may “know” the
emotional valence of a stimulus and be aware of associated
perceptions, without being able to articulate the reasons for feeling
or behaving in a particular way. [Pierre] Janet [1859-1947] proposed
that traumatic memories are split off (dissociated) from
consciousness, and instead are stored as sensory perceptions,
obsessional ruminations or behavioral reenactments.29
Such intrusive memories can be quite distressing, as aspects of the
traumatic event are replayed in the mind over and over again, but
without the full picture, without the experience of “normal memory”
that enables a coherent sense of self-understanding.
After such an event, the hyperarousal of the nervous system keeps
persons on a kind of “permanent alert,”30 where they may startle
easily and sleep poorly. Subject to nightmares and intrusive
flashbacks, they may begin to circumscribe their world to avoid
anything that might retrigger the feelings of helplessness, rage, fear,
grief, panic, and shame associated with the event. Flashbacks are
something like having nightmares while awake. Something triggers
the memory of the trauma, perhaps the smell of alcohol, the sound
of a particular footfall, a certain tone of voice or characteristic

-- 23 of 209 --

gesture. Indeed, anything can trigger a flashback because of the way
the brain organizes data in a vast web of interconnected
associations. Neurologists remind us that neurons that “fire together,
wire together.”31 Two or more things are forever associated, “wired
together” in the brain’s neural pathways. Suddenly, one is shaking
and sweating in response to an ordinary, everyday event.32 Yet,
knowing that one’s response is out of proportion to what triggered it
only increases a sense of powerlessness, anxiety, and shame.
Because such experiences of intrusion are so frightening and
because survivors can make little rational sense of them, survivors
often do whatever they can to avoid these states or to deaden the
pain by numbing out in some way.
If they do not actively seek help, a whole range of defensive
patterns may develop. Rather than facing the pain directly, survivors
may turn the intense traumatic energy against themselves. Many
addictive behaviors have their source in unresolved trauma that is
not consciously faced: substance abuse, workaholism, eating
disorders, even rituals of self-mutilation can seem preferable to
experiencing the buried pain of trauma.33 Shame, dread, and
helplessness are pervasive, alternating with numbness, depression,
or a sense of emptiness. Their sense of agency is damaged; they
often feel powerless and alone in a hostile world, wondering
whether anyone cares if they live or die.34 Spiritual questions may
become particularly intense with a growing sense of disorientation
or even meaninglessness. Living in an unsafe world, survivors of
trauma put themselves on constant alert, watching for danger.
While many victims suffer in silence, others turn the intensity of
their suffering outward. Feelings of rage may predominate. They
want justice, and fantasies of revenge may become an obsession.
Sometimes narratives are created where the plotline of good versus
evil has them perpetually in the role of the “good guy,” with “the
other” as the “bad guy.” The enemy is typically seen as less than
fully human. The traumatized begin to tell a predictable tale that
seldom varies. Pastoral theologian David Augsburger challenges
victims of trauma with a number of pointed questions: “Can I
identify what I get out of rehearsing an offense over and over? Why

-- 24 of 209 --

do I insist on replaying the history of injury? How often have I told
and retold the story of the offense to others to gain their support and
validation of my role or position as victim?”35 When such desires for
revenge are not consciously wrestled with, attacks on others may
seem justified as a way of restoring a sense of dignity, respect, and
honor, or in the name of justice.36 In a chilling comment, James
Gilligan, director of the Center for the Study of Violence at the
Harvard Medical School, comments that “All violence is an effort to
do justice or to undo injustice.”37 Pain that is not transformed does
not simply disappear. As Ann Ulanov writes: Where we repress our
grudge-holding, our wish to make someone pay for what has
happened to us . . . that repressed shadow does not just go away. It
goes unconscious and remains alive with instinctual impulses,
emotions, but far out of reach of modification by social or personal
reality testing. . . . We put onto others what we do not own in
ourselves and identify them with this rejected bit of ourselves. The
personal becomes social. But then this live bit of shadow menaces
us from the outside.38
Instead of the trauma being “acted in” against the self, it is now
“acted out” against others. The traumatized feel justified in venting
their rage, yet such repeated venting only serves to inscribe the
anger and sense of moral outrage more deeply in body and soul. It
does nothing to bring healing or peace.
Freud describes “repetition compulsion” as a symbolic reliving of
the trauma, as a way the traumatized express their suffering while
yet failing to become fully conscious of it. Children who have been
sexually abused, for example, may engage in ritual play that gives
unconscious voice to the abuse. Those honored for bravery in war
may suffer repetitive nightmares39 or else wreak terrible violence on
their families40 as they struggle with mental pain. The combination
of survivor guilt, depression, frozen grief, anguish, and rage acts as
a kind of seething cauldron beneath the surface, ready to burst forth
in a symbolic reenactment of the original horror, often with tragic
results.

-- 25 of 209 --

How Do We Break Free from the Vicious Cycle of Trauma’s
Impact?
Is it possible to forge a path that seeks neither “oblivion” on the one
hand nor “revenge” on the other?41 Is it possible truly to heal? Ann
Ulanov describes the predicament of those who have constricted
their lives in the aftermath of trauma.
We swap aliveness for restriction in order to feel safer, avoid pain,
survive some blow that seems to us unbearable, that would
destroy us. We fear we are empty inside so we cover it up with
manufactured control, or made-up excitement, or self-promotion.
The emptiness can never change if we refuse to experience it, and
in the company of an other. We need an other to depend on when
we turn to face our deadness. Whatever we are afraid of, it
requires our attention; we must go down into it, look around, not
knowing if and how we will come out.42
Three key phrases need to be underlined here: First, whatever the
traumatized are afraid of requires their attention. Second, they need
to experience it in the company of an other. And third, they take
these steps not knowing if and how they will come out.
Those who seek to reclaim their lives after trauma need to face
what has actually happened to them. It requires their attention. If
their nervous system is in a hyperaroused state, they need to find as
much safety as possible. Only true safety will provide the emotional
security needed to begin the healing process commonly known as
mourning. Giving voice to all they have experienced — the terror
and helplessness, the sense of moral outrage and personal violation,
the sorrow, hurt, anger, and grief — becomes the essential first step
in piecing together a coherent narrative.
Yet none of this can happen apart from the lively presence of a
caring other. Who can bear the anguish of such a narrative, without
minimizing or denying it, without giving advice or offering
strategies to overcome it? Who can listen without offering empty
platitudes or switching the focus to a similar story of his own? Who
has the wisdom to refrain from asking intrusive questions prompted

-- 26 of 209 --

by his own anxiety, allowing the traumatized person space to tell his
story in his own way at his own pace? Who can offer a
compassionate, caring presence, free of pity or sympathy, free of
judgment, praise, or blame?43
Healing begins as the traumatized begin to piece together a
coherent narrative, creating a web of meaning around unspeakable
events while remaining fully connected emotionally both to
themselves and to their listener. It takes courage even to begin such
a conversation. Their feelings can be confusing and difficult to sort
out. Often there seem to be no words that adequately describe the
horror. Moreover, is it safe to trust the listener? Feelings of shame,
fear of judgment, extreme vulnerability are common. Maybe talking
about it will make matters worse.
Talking about it can, in actual fact, make matters worse. Any kind
of direct processing of the traumatic experience needs to be
balanced at all times with a sense of safety and containment.
Anchoring oneself in the present, feeling safe with one’s listener,
processing one small piece at a time, mourning each of the profound
losses involved — all these steps take time, patience, and exquisite
self-care. Trauma specialists are trained to pay attention to signs of
distress and deliberately slow down the process, remembering the
maxim that “the slower you go, the faster you get there.”44 The goal
in talking about it is to stay fully connected to the feelings without
becoming overwhelmed. Eye contact with the caregiver, slowing
down the pace, taking a break from the past, returning to the present
with clear focus on one’s bodily sensations — all help to put on the
brakes.45 Understanding what is happening and why profoundly
assists the healing process as well. This is why a clear conceptual
understanding of trauma is important: understanding becomes a part
of the holding environment that contains anxiety and increases a
sense of empowerment.46
Those who have courageously faced trauma give powerful
witness to the risks involved. Will they choose life by facing the
pain, or will they shrink back once again into numbing defenses?
When I get into a crisis now, instead of saying, “Oh my God, I’m

-- 27 of 209 --

never going to heal,” I see that it’s like layers, and the more I
work with it, the more they keep coming around. And even though
it’s like “But I was feeling good two days ago and now I’m
shaking and crying and I can’t sleep,” I’m beginning to see that
I’m not coming back to the same place. I’m coming back at a
different level. . . . When I reach the next level where the tears
are, where the fear is, where the tiredness is, I have to trust.47
For me the decision not to identify with the past was a decision,
not just a change I went through in the healing process. I had to
make a quantum leap that I was no longer going to have the abuse
be the cause and my life be the effect. . . . Right now you have to
choose what standpoint you are going to live life from. And it’s a
constant choice.48
Trauma survivors need to choose life over death, not once but many
times, reaching out with the fragile hope that the trauma can be
healed or transformed, that the pain will abate, or that some kind of
normalcy will return. Some try to take their lives. Tragically, many
succeed, despairing that nothing can stop the eternal recurrence of
the trauma. Each person needs the love, support, respect, and
understanding of caring others.49 Those who grow through and
beyond trauma do so in part by forging a spiritual framework for
what is called post- traumatic growth. Not knowing if or how they
will come out, they nevertheless are freed to take steps toward
greater and greater freedom. It is to one such framework that I now
turn.
How Does the Gospel with the Pastoral Care of the Church
Bring Healing to the Traumatized?
When we enter “the strange new world of the Bible,” we are
confronted with paradox and mystery at every turn. Here we behold
a crucified Savior, a God who bears our grief and carries our sorrow,
who heals by taking away the sin of the world, both the evil we
suffer and the evil we do. It makes no rational sense. Looked at from
outside the circle of faith, it is a complete conundrum. “Getting in”

-- 28 of 209 --

on this religion wrenches your mind inside out: Is the cross of Christ
sheer foolishness or is it the very power of God (1 Cor. 1:18)?
At its core, the cross becomes gospel for the traumatized only if
they are able to see there a divine love willing to bear what is
unbearable for mortal, fallen human beings. God bears for us the full
weight of both sin and death. If God in Jesus Christ descends into
the worst hell imaginable in order to deliver us from the hells we
inflict upon one another, then such a God is worthy of our trust. We
need not stand by helplessly witnessing the suffering and dying of
those we love; we have a God to whom we can entrust them in life
and in death. For Jesus Christ is not simply a human companion
who comforts us by suffering trauma alongside us. As the creeds of
the church attest, he is known to us as the risen Lord, the very
Wisdom and Power of God, through whom God will fulfill his
purpose of redemption. Jesus Christ, the gospel attests, bears what
cannot be borne by fragile, fallen human beings. He alone bears the
sin of the world, and he alone bears it away.
As the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world, Christ
is known as that One who suffers for our sake as well. On our behalf
and for our sake, he takes human depravity into his own divine heart
in order to transform it, so that it no longer has the power to separate
us from God. The powers of sin and death that have such a hold on
us — and that are at the root of all trauma — are finally nullified.
Not only the fear of death, by which human beings are made
“subject to lifelong bondage” (Heb. 2:15), but also the fear of
eternal estrangement from the very Source of Life, is proclaimed to
be overcome in Christ. Through Christ, we have access to all that we
long for: the loving gaze of one who cherishes us, miraculous
outpourings of grace, a steady anchor in times of distress, mercy on
our weakness, forgiveness of our sins, and most basic of all, the
lifeline of basic trust.
If salvation means forgiveness of sin and the promise of eternal
life, then all our pastoral arts of healing have this promise as their
telos. Healing, whether physical, emotional, or spiritual, is always
set within this larger context of the unimaginable reaches of God’s
salvation.50 If our hope is nothing less than the salvation of the world

-- 29 of 209 --

in Jesus Christ, it is also a hope held out for the perpetrators of
trauma as well as for its victims. All those human beings from whom
we normally seek to separate ourselves by every conceivable means,
those perpetrators of unspeakable horror — they, too, perhaps more
than anyone, need to hear the gospel word of God’s judgment and
mercy. If One died for all, then he died for those who have brought
the terrors of hell, not only upon others, but also upon themselves
through their own actions.51
Indeed, whenever we affirm that Christ died for sinners, we affirm
our solidarity with all who do harm, solidarity in sin as well as in
our deliverance from sin. In confessing ourselves as sinners, utterly
unable to save ourselves, we recognize that under similar
circumstances of deprivation, terror, or colossal historic evils, we,
too, would be capable of monstrous crimes toward our fellow
human beings. The cross of Jesus Christ is God’s response not only
to the terror of human trauma but also to the anguish of human guilt,
bringing succor and healing to the one, and judgment, forgiveness,
and the “godly grief” of repentance to the other (2 Cor. 7:10). When
we affirm the resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ, we affirm
his power to bring every kind of evil to an end. “Though innocent,
Christ suffers as if guilty and ends the logic of evil by taking our
suffering onto his body, and not being destroyed by it nor by the
death it inflicts. The abyss of love is revealed as stronger than the
abyss of death, the power of love as stronger than the power of
hate.”52 This is an interpretive framework that no psychiatrist or
therapist has to offer, no twelve-step program or self-help group can
claim, but which can be preached and taught week after week in the
context of ordinary pastoral care: that in overcoming the world,
Jesus Christ saves us from both the guilt and anguish of human sin,
as well as the terror and trauma of suffering and death.
These are words of hope to which the traumatized may cling.
“Now hope that is seen is not hope” (Rom. 8:24). Though our faith
holds us fast to this hope, we know that many descend into their
graves with nothing but hatred toward those who have harmed them
or those they love. Forgiveness, though freely given by God, does
not seem to be a human possibility for us in turn. Try as we might, it

-- 30 of 209 --

does not seem subject to our human will but comes, when it does, as
a miracle of God.53 While not subject to our human will, forgiveness
rarely happens apart from an active decision to forgive. Pastoral
theologian David Augsburger gives one definition of forgiveness: it
“is an act of laying aside one’s rational arguments for repayment,
my principled arguments for my being truly in the right and you
being wholly in the wrong, and at last offering a full and complete
pardon to the other, whether or not there are any believable signs of
authentic remorse or repentance in the perpetrator. In granting the
other person release, one receives one’s own.”54 We have seen this
miracle of forgiveness in the testimonies of those who appeared
before the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission. One
that has stayed with me is the testimony of Ms. Babalwa Mhlauli.
Bishop Tutu writes, “When she had finished telling her story, she
said she wanted to know who had killed her father. She spoke
quietly and, for someone so young, with much maturity and dignity.
You could have heard a pin drop in that hushed City Hall when she
said, ‘We do want to forgive but we don’t know whom to forgive.’
”55 We see it in Marietta Jaeger-Lane, who has worked tirelessly for
both victims and perpetrators in the years that followed the
kidnapping and murder of her seven-year-old daughter, Susie.
Founder of Murdered Victims’ Families for Reconciliation, Ms.
Jaeger-Lane continues to honor her daughter by offering testimony
to end capital punishment for capital crimes.56 Such stories
challenge us to consider those for whom we harbor ill will, those we
are unable or unwilling to forgive. Sometimes, we can only lay them
at the foot of the cross for God to judge, confessing our inability to
fathom either the extent of the evil or its redemption. We can only
point away from ourselves to the transcendent hope of the gospel we
are called to proclaim.
If maintaining hope is the foundation of all healing, as
psychotherapist Jon G. Allen attests, then the gospel has something
fundamental to offer those afflicted by trauma.57 While ministry
cannot replace the work of psychiatry or psychotherapy, it can
nevertheless function as an indispensable part of the healing
process.58 When human trust has eluded them, the traumatized

-- 31 of 209 --

desperately need an anchor, a point of reference, something or
someone reliable in which to place their trust. Scripture attests again
and again that by the power of the Spirit, God comes to those who
cry out for help: I called on Your name, O LORD,
From the lowest pit.
You have heard my voice:
“Do not hide Your ear
From my sighing, from my cry for help.”
You drew near on the day I called on You,
And said, “Do not fear!” (Lam. 3:55-57 NKJV) We thus facilitate
healing when we help the afflicted cry out their sorrow, rage, and
tears to God. Prayers of lament — crying out to God for deliverance
— seem to be faith’s only alternative to despair.59 Instead of
protecting themselves against the pain, the afflicted are encouraged
to go down into it, clinging to God’s promises as they do so. Listen
to one such lament, in which the afflicted one directs her anguish
toward God.
There comes a time when both body and soul
enter into such a vast darkness
that one loses light and consciousness
and knows nothing more of God’s intimacy.
At such a time, when the light in the lantern burns out
the beauty of the lantern can no longer be seen,
with longing and distress we are reminded of our nothingness.
At such a time I pray to God:
“O God, this burden is too heavy for me!”
And God replies:
“I will take this burden first and clasp it close to Myself
and that way you may more easily bear it.” . . .
If God leaves me unanointed, I could never recover.
Even if all the hills flowed with healing oils,
and all the waters contained healing powers,
and all the flowers and all the trees dripped with healing
ointments,
still, I could never recover.

-- 32 of 209 --

“God, I will tear the heart of my soul in two
and you must lie therein.
You must lay yourself in the wounds of my soul.”60
These words of Mechthild of Magdeburg, a mystic of the thirteenth
century, echo down through the centuries, offering a startling image
of healing through the palpable presence of Christ’s own body. In
her fervent prayer, Mechthild offers the wounds of her soul for
healing through the intimate presence of Christ’s broken body. Here
we meet profound mystery. An image of union with Christ rises up
from the depths and is given voice in her prayer. Only the full, living
presence of a wounded Savior can heal her soul.
Psychologist Robert Stolorow speaks of the fundamental necessity
of finding what he calls a “relational home” for traumatic
experience. He writes, “Trauma is constituted in an intersubjective
context in which severe emotional pain cannot find a relational
home in which it can be held. In such a context, painful affect states
become unendurable.”61 Severe emotional pain cannot be endured if
it does not have a relational home, someone to hold what cannot be
borne.62 Ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ who are rooted and
grounded in the love of God provide just such a relational home for
all those who groan for the redemption of the world. They offer a
steady, sturdy, compassionate, and loving witness to all who have
suffered trauma. Insofar as they thus participate in Christ’s own
compassion, they become witnesses to and mediators of Christ’s
miraculous grace.

-- 33 of 209 --

Conclusion
In recent decades pastoral theology has turned more and more to the
public, social, and political dimensions of both affliction and
pastoral care. Ministers of the church not only attend to individual
members of their congregations but also participate in larger
communities of outreach and care. Especially in the light of recent
large-scale disasters, pastoral leaders need to respond with
sensitivity to the needs of those who do not share the gospel
narrative as the overarching context of meaning of their lives. I
believe that it is crucial for us also to address questions such as
these, even though they lie outside the scope of this chapter.63
As leaders in their own church communities, pastors need to
recognize the power inherent in their position to frame and interpret
any traumatic event that has occurred. In so doing, they can either
inflame the situation by escalating anxiety (through name-calling,
rushing to judgment and blame, using us/them dichotomies, labeling
dissenting views, or withholding or misrepresenting the facts)64 or
decrease anxiety and facilitate healing by opening channels of
communication among all parties involved.65 As they offer a secure
holding environment to strengthen frayed bonds of trust, and as they
call upon God to minister to the community in its pain, they offer
space to the hurting to tell their story. In some cases, nearly
everyone in the community has been hurt by trauma, but in
strangely diverse ways.66 In this kind of situation, it is essential that
pastors refrain from moralizing or blaming, but position themselves
in such a way that all persons can be heard.67 The community needs
to gather in order to share their common grief, which serves to
counteract the fear, shame, isolation, and horror of what has
occurred.68
The pastoral care of the community finds its final locus in ritual,
psalm, and song, in worship and the mystery of the Lord’s Supper.
Personal trauma and loss are woven into the losses of the larger
community as the liturgy unfolds. That which is most deeply
personal becomes part of the communal lament of the people of God

-- 34 of 209 --

through the ages. Walter Brueggemann reminds us that the “public
dimension of grief is deep underneath personal loss, and for the
most part, not easily articulated among us. But grief will not be
worked well or adequately until attention goes underneath the
personal to the public and communal. My expectation is that
pastors, liturgically and pastorally, most need to provide opportunity
and script for lament and complaint and grief for a long time. No
second maneuver after grief shall be permitted to crowd in upon this
raw, elemental requirement.”69 By permitting an unrelieved descent
into the raw emotions of grief within the secure boundaries of ritual
space, hope and trust may be paradoxically restored.70
As the church gathers for worship, we are told of a God who is
“the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, who comforts us in
all our affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in
any affliction, with the comfort with which we ourselves are
comforted by God” (2 Cor. 1:3-4). In worship we find space both to
mourn and to hope, as we wait with painful longing for the
redemption of the world. We find comfort in the midst of affliction
when we are reminded that the One who descends into every human
hell we create, and unwittingly or maliciously perpetuate, is the very
One who sits at the right hand of the Father in glory.
The community that responds to trauma in these ways will, by the
grace and power of God, find itself stronger, wiser, more
compassionate, and more resilient. Its collective story will be one of
overcoming adversity together rather than a story of shame,
revictimization, fear, and silencing. By reclaiming the essential
practices of our faith — compassionate witnessing, communal
lament, and public worship — we “enable people to continue to love
God in the face of evil and suffering and in so doing to prevent
tragic suffering from becoming evil.”71 As John Swinton writes,
“Loving God does not take away the pain that [trauma] inflicts, but
it does transform it.”72 May God work out our salvation by bearing
what cannot be borne, by transforming our mourning into longing,
our longing into lament, our lament into hope, and, through the
redemption of this beloved world, our hope into joy.73
1. Serene Jones asks a similar question: “How can ministers craft sermons that speak to the plight

-- 35 of 209 --

of trauma survivors without retraumatizing them?” See Serene Jones, Trauma and Grace: Theology
in a Ruptured World (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2009), 85.
2. See chapter 4 in this volume, “Keeping an Open Heart in Troubled Times: Self-Empathy as a
Christian Spiritual Practice.”
3. See Andrew Purves, Reconstructing Pastoral Theology: A Christological Foundation
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2004).
4. Phyllis Trible, Texts of Terror: Literary-Feminist Readings of Biblical Narratives (Philadelphia:
Fortress, 1984).
5. Patricia Mathes Cane, Trauma Healing and Transformation: Awakening a New Heart with
Body-Mind-Spirit Practices (Watsonville, Calif.: Capacitar, 2000), 17.
6. For a fascinating account of the history of the study of psychological trauma, see Judith
Herman’s classic text, Trauma and Recovery (New York: Basic Books, 1997), chap. 1.
7. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 29.
8. For the fascinating and distressing article “History of Battered Women’s Movement,” see
www.icadvinc.org/what-is-domestic-violence/history-of-battered-womens
-movement/, accessed December 16, 2014. The following quotations cite Del Martin, Battered Wives
(New York: Pocket Books, 1976), 4. “A study in Chicago reveals that from September 1965 to March
1966, 46.1% of the major crimes perpetrated against women took place in the home. It also found
that police response to domestic disturbance calls exceeded total response for murder, rape,
aggravated assault, and other service crimes.” “From 1968 to 1973, the crime of rape increased 62%
nationwide.” With a statistic like this, one wonders whether the crime actually increased so
dramatically or whether the increase was due to more and more women being willing to acknowledge
and report it.
9. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 27.
10. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 27.
11. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 33.
12. “Norris (1992), in a study of 1,000 adults in the southern United States, found that 69% of the
sample had experienced a traumatic stressor in their lives, and that this included 21% in the past year
alone.” From Bessel A. van der Kolk, Alexander C. McFarlane, and Lars Weisaeth, eds., Traumatic
Stress: The Effects of Overwhelming Experience on Mind, Body, and Society (New York: Guilford
Press, 2006), 135.
13. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 33.
14. Van der Kolk, McFarlane, and Weisaeth, Traumatic Stress, 279.
15. N. C. Andreasen, “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder,” in Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry,
ed. H. I. Kaplan and B. J. Sadock, 4th ed. (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1985), 918-24, quoted
in Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 33.
16. Following the criteria for diagnoses can be dizzying since PTSD has so many close cousins,
such as acute stress disorder, panic disorder, anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, etc. However, a synopsis
of the seven criteria of PTSD are: (1) the traumatic stressor involves death, injury, or serious threat
(or witnessing or learning about such occurring to another); (2) the response involves intense fear,
helplessness, or horror; (3) the person persistently reexperiences the traumatic event; (4) the person
persistently avoids stimuli associated with the trauma and tries to numb general responsiveness; (5)
symptoms of hyperarousal persist; (6) they persist for a month or more; (7) and the symptoms cause

-- 36 of 209 --

“clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.” See appendix 1.
17. See Kaethe Weingarten, Common Shock: Witnessing Violence Everyday (New York: New
American Library, 2003). See also Kaethe Weingarten, “Witnessing the Effects of Political Violence
in Families: Mechanisms of Intergenerational Transmission and Clinical Interventions,” Journal of
Marital and Family Therapy 30, no. 1 (January 2004): 45-59.
18. Peter Levine, Waking the Tiger: Healing Trauma (Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 1997), 28.
1919. For a thoughtful analysis of the most salient etiological factors that specify a likelihood of
vulnerability to PTSD, see Alexander C. McFarlane and Rachel Yehuda, “Resilience, Vulnerability,
and the Course of Posttraumatic Reactions,” chapter 8 in van der Kolk, McFarlane, and Weisaeth,
Traumatic Stress, 155-81.
20. Carolyn Yoder, The Little Book of Trauma Healing (Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 2005), 10.
21. Yoder, The Little Book, 11.
22. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 35.
23. Babette Rothschild, The Body Remembers: The Psychophysiology of Trauma and Trauma
Treatment (New York: Norton, 2000), 8.
24. Rothschild, The Body Remembers, 10.
25. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 43.
26. www.heroesofhistory.com/page13.html, accessed December 16, 2014.
27. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 239.
28. Van der Kolk, McFarlane, and Weisaeth, Traumatic Stress, 286.
29. Van der Kolk, McFarlane, and Weisaeth, Traumatic Stress, 287.
30. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, 35.
31. See Daniel Siegel, The Developing Mind: How Relationships and the Brain Interact to Shape
Who We Are (New York: Guilford Press), chap. 4.
32. “Painful life experiences get encoded in our brains and bodies and can be reactivated with
great intensity by the right kind of trigger decades later, even if we believe that we have dealt with
them or have completely forgotten about them.” A. J. van den Blink, “Trauma and Spirituality,” in
Reflective Practice: Formation and Supervision in Ministry, vol. 28 (Decatur, Ga.: Journal of Pastoral
Care Publications, 2008), 30-47, here 38.
33. Yoder, The Little Book, 33.
34. Feeling helpless and alone in a potentially hostile world was Karen Horney’s definition of
neurosis. See Neurosis and Human Growth: The Struggle toward Self-Realization (New York:
Norton, 1950). Serene Jones speaks repeatedly throughout her book of the damaged sense of agency
of the traumatized and their need for experiences of empowerment. See Trauma and Grace.
35. David Augsburger, Hate-Work: Working through the Pain and Pleasures of Hate (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 2004), 227.
36. Howard Zehr, “Doing Justice, Healing Trauma: The Role of Restorative Justice in
Peacebuilding,” South Asian Journal of Peacebuilding 1, no. 1 (Spring 2008): 15.
37. James Gilligan, Violence: Reflections on a National Epidemic (New York: Random House,
1996), quoted in Zehr, “Doing Justice, Healing Trauma,” 5.
38. Ann Belford Ulanov, The Unshuttered Heart: Opening to Aliveness/Deadness in the Self
(Nashville: Abingdon, 2007), 140-41.
39. Harry Wilmer, “The Healing Nightmare: A Study of the War Dreams of Vietnam Combat

-- 37 of 209 --

Veterans,” Quadrant 19, no. 1 (Spring 1986).
40. See the story told by “Gizelle” in which the unhealed suffering of war leads to sexual assault
with horrific effects in Ellen Bass and Laura Davis, The Courage to Heal: A Guide for Women
Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse, 4th ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 2008).
41. Bessel van der Kolk dedicates his remarkable anthology, Traumatic Stress: The Effects of
Overwhelming Experience on Mind, Body, and Society, “to Nelson Mandela and all who, after having
been hurt, work on transforming the trauma of others rather than seeking oblivion or revenge.”
42. Ulanov, The Unshuttered Heart, 38.
43. Training in nonviolent or compassionate communication teaches an exquisite awareness and
concrete strategies for the kind of empathic attunement described here. See Marshall Rosenberg,
Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life (Encinitas, Calif.: PuddleDancer Press, 2003).
44. Jon G. Allen, Coping with Trauma: Hope through Understanding, 2nd ed. (Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2005), 251-53.
45. Babette Rothschild writes: “I never help clients call forth traumatic memories unless I and my
clients are confident that the flow of their anxiety, emotion, memories, and body sensations can be
contained at will. I never teach a client to hit the accelerator, in other words, before I know that he
can 	find 	the 	brake.” 	See
http://www.saskworld.com/bodymindspirit/edition21/17_article_rothschild.htm, accessed July 10,
2010.
4646. “Developing a cognitive frame that helps patients understand their intrusions and avoidance
helps them gain some emotional distance from the experience, and begins to put the event into the
larger context of their lives.” See Bessel van der Kolk, Alexander C. McFarlane, and Onno van der
Hart, “A General Approach to Treatment,” in van der Kolk, McFarlane, and Weisaeth, Traumatic
Stress, 426.
47. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 457.
48. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 438.
49. Sometimes teens and children are overlooked. Where early attachment is threatened or
ruptured, children are much more vulnerable to trauma throughout their lives. See the valuable work
done by the National Child Traumatic Stress Network for helpful resources. http://www.nctsnet.org. I
am indebted to Jennie Olbrych for this reference.
50. See Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, Theology and Pastoral Counseling: A New
Interdisciplinary Approach (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995). See also Robert W. Jenson, “Story and
Promise in Pastoral Care,” Pastoral Psychology 26, no. 7 (1977): 113-23. “In historical fact and by
manifest anthropological necessity, nothing but final hope ever sustains genuine suffering or enables
creative historic action.”
51. “More recently has come an awareness of ‘perpetrator-induced trauma’ and its role in
perpetuating the cycle of victimization and offending; severe offending can itself cause trauma in
offenders.” Zehr, “Doing Justice, Healing Trauma,” 10. See also Robert MacNair, Perpetration-‐
Induced Traumatic Stress: The Psychological Consequences of Killing (Westport, Conn.: Praeger,
2002). For a compelling story, see Wendell Berry, “Pray without Ceasing,” in Fidelity (New York:
Pantheon Books, 1992), 3-60.
52. Ulanov, The Unshuttered Heart, 150-51.
53. Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, “Forgiving Abusive Parents,” in Forgiveness and Truth, ed.
Alistair McFadyen and Marcel Sarot (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2001), 71-98.

-- 38 of 209 --

54. Augsburger, Hate-Work, 232.
55. Desmond Tutu, No Future without Forgiveness (New York: Doubleday, 1999), 149.
56. Testimony of Marietta Jaeger-Lane on behalf of Murder Victims’ Families for Human Rights
and Journey of Hope, an act abolishing the death penalty and replacing it with life imprisonment
without possibility of release, Senate Judiciary Committee Hearing, February 7, 2007.
http://4and20blackbirds.wordpress.com/2009/03/24/bill-to-abolish-death-penalty-hearing-is-
wednesday/, accessed December 16, 2014. “To say the death of any other person would be just
retribution is to insult the immeasurable worth of our loved ones who are victims. We can not put a
price on their lives. In my case, my own daughter was such a gift of joy and sweetness and beauty,
that to kill someone in her name would have been to violate and profane the goodness of her life; the
idea is offensive and repulsive to me.” See also Marietta Jaeger, The Lost Child (Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1983).
57. Allen, Coping with Trauma.
58. In the United States context, those diagnosed with PTSD will often turn for help to therapists
especially trained in trauma. In other contexts around the world, imaginative rituals and collective
healing processes have been developed. See, for example, the work of Martha Cabrera, “Living and
Surviving in a Multiply Wounded Country,” describing her work in Nicaragua.
www.envio.org.ni/articulo/1629, accessed November 14, 2014.
59. Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, “Prayers of Lament,” in Hunsinger, Pray without Ceasing:
Revitalizing Pastoral Care (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006).
60. Marchiene Vroon Rienstra, Swallow’s Nest: A Feminine Reading of the Psalms (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1992), appendix. From The Flowing Light of the Godhead, by Mechthild of Magdeburg,
Cistercian nun (1210–ca. 1285).
61. Robert D. Stolorow, Trauma and Human Existence: Autobiographical, Psychoanalytic, and
Philosophical Reflections (New York: Routledge, 2007), 10.
62. See also the example in chapter 4 below. The experience described there illustrates the
importance of having one’s pain “witnessed” as described by Weingarten in Common Shock.
63. Jeannette Sutton writes about the wariness that disaster coordinators have toward providers of
spiritual care who volunteer their assistance. “There has been unease about hidden agendas, the
appropriateness of religiously oriented interventions, and concern for victims who might feel that
contact with some minister-types is intrusive and assaultive.” “Convergence of the Faithful: Spiritual
Care Response to Disaster and Mass Casualty Events,” Journal of Pastoral Theology 16, no. 1 (Fall
2006): 19. Through ministries of “presence” and “hospitality,” spiritual care providers in the public
sphere offer comfort and reassurance while helping victims to draw upon their “own religious and/or
spiritual resources in order to construct meaning out of chaos.” They respect personal boundaries,
know how to work in an interfaith manner, and are responsive to training from the disaster assistance
professionals such as the American Red Cross.
64. Vamik Volkan, Blind Trust: Large Groups and Their Leaders in Times of Crisis and Terror
(Charlottesville, Va.: Pitchstone Publishing, 2004), cited in STAR training, “Part III: The Trauma
Healing Journey, Breaking the Cycles of Violence,” Eastern Mennonite University, 2002.
65. See Howard Zehr, The Little Book of Restorative Justice (Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 2002),
67-69.
66. Ministers themselves are vulnerable to any trauma afflicting their community. Pastors and
church leaders occupy a unique dual role, as those called to give pastoral care, yet at the same time as

-- 39 of 209 --

human beings who are themselves personally affected. Those in caregiving roles need to be
exquisitely attuned to their own needs for care, especially when their immediate community is in
crisis. Ministers’ families are vitally affected and need support as well. Presbyterian Disaster
Assistance (PDA) consists of PCUSA pastors, elders, and mental health professionals who are trained
in trauma and crisis response, who offer companionship and support to church leaders in
congregations affected by “human-caused disasters.” I am indebted to Katherine Wiebe, who serves
on the PDA, for this point. Dr. Wiebe founded the Institute for Congregational Trauma and Growth
for congregations experiencing disaster, violence, or trauma. See www.ictg.org.
67. Zehr, The Little Book, 67-69.
68. Zehr, The Little Book, 19-41.
69. Walter Brueggemann, as cited by John Swinton, Raging with Compassion: Pastoral Responses
to the Problem of Evil (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2007), 121.
70. See Cedric C. Johnson, “Unspeakable Things Spoken: Globalization, Imperial Trauma and the
Development of African American Identities” (Ph.D. diss., Princeton Theological Seminary, May
2010), for a description and analysis of a whole community engaged in a transformative healing
process as they confront horrific historic and ongoing trauma.
71. Swinton, Raging with Compassion, 85.
72. Swinton, Raging with Compassion, 75.
73. I am indebted to colleagues George Hunsinger, Katherine Sonderegger, Katherine Wiebe, and
Barbara Chaapel for valuable comments on earlier drafts of this chapter.

-- 40 of 209 --

CHAPTER 2
Rooted and Grounded in Love
Compassionate Witnessing
Trauma depends upon the conviction that what we are faced with
cannot be borne. We feel overwhelmed and helpless, not knowing
how to deal with trauma’s treacherous symptoms. Sometimes we
either lack awareness of the possibility of support or desire to
protect others from our pain. The lack of support — or the belief
that, for a variety of reasons, we cannot secure it — helps unlock the
mystery of why some are more prone to post- traumatic stress than
others. It is not so much the intensity of the stressor that determines
whether we are traumatized, in other words, as it is the presence (or
absence) of others who are willing to show their care for us when
we are overwhelmed.
Some events are obviously so horrific that anyone would become
overwhelmed. Events such as slavery, torture, captivity, and war
come readily to mind. In the aftermath of catastrophe, violence, or
violation, we need what Kaethe Weingarten has called a
“compassionate witness.”1 While much of the trauma literature
focuses on those who are either victims of violence or perpetrators
of violence, a third category of people is often overlooked. It
includes all who witness violence or violation. It is the role of the
witness that Weingarten leads us to consider.2 In this chapter we will
examine Weingarten’s key concepts in order to deepen our
understanding of trauma’s scope. Not all stressful incidents lead to
PTSD, yet one cannot predict in advance what will — or will not —
lead to traumatic symptoms. Weingarten reminds us that all of us
witness violence and violation every day. Typically we respond to
such occasions with what she calls “common shock.” Some of these
“shocks” induce traumatic symptoms in the witness while others do

-- 41 of 209 --

not. Weingarten offers a theoretical framework through which such
situations can be analyzed. She wants to help witnesses become both
aware and empowered so that they can be helpful to those more
directly affected. In this chapter, we will seek to understand the role
of the witness in situations of traumatic stress. We will then offer
some reflections on Weingarten’s work from a Christian perspective.
In the course of an ordinary day we might witness a mother bark
orders at her child in the grocery store, read about people killed in
an accident, hear a story of rape, and talk with a friend diagnosed
with a terminal illness. As we witness the suffering of others —
some more distant and some closer to home — we become
vulnerable to its emotional impact. Common shock is the emotional
impact of violence or violation on the witness. The shocks we
undergo may or may not have a traumatic impact on us, but as the
examples show, they are common and ordinary, a part of everyday
life.
As the instances of suffering and pain edge closer to home,
witnesses stand in danger of becoming overwhelmed, just as the
victims and perpetrators are, because to be placed in the presence of
trauma is to witness horror secondhand.3 It is to enter a realm that
many would choose to avoid. While the task for the sufferer is to
resist isolation, the task for the witness is to refuse indifference.4
Instead of fleeing, compassionate witnesses choose to stay present.
Weingarten, recognizing the difficulty of the task, offers a variety of
conceptual resources, inspiring stories, and clinical observations for
engaging the suffering of others.
How do we develop the skills we need to witness another’s
suffering? In her book Common Shock: Witnessing Violence Every
Day, Weingarten addresses the question in detail. A clinical
psychologist, family therapist, and professor at Harvard Medical
School, Dr. Weingarten seeks to empower those who witness
violence to become conscious witnesses rather than reactive or
numb bystanders. She chooses the term “common shock” rather
than “trauma” because she believes that not all response to violence
or violation warrants a mental health diagnosis. Common shock is
just that: common to all humanity. It belongs to being human. Shock

-- 42 of 209 --

might lead to an acute or chronic stress reaction, to trauma
symptoms, or to full-blown post- traumatic stress disorder. The
phrase “common shock,” in other words, is meant to cover a wide
range of responses that have varied consequences for the individual,
her interpersonal relationships, her community, the larger society,
and the world. Common shock comes to nations, to communities, to
families, and to individuals through a variety of means: a medical
diagnosis, a chronic disability, a criminal assault, a tornado, a flood,
a bombing, or a politically oppressive regime, among others. While
some people might undergo an acute stress reaction and others
might need therapeutic help for post- traumatic stress disorder, many
who undergo severe stress do not need or even seek medical
attention. The difference between a shocking event that leads to
trauma and one that does not, Weingarten suggests, might lie more
in the individual’s or community’s response to the event than in the
event itself. Thus the decisive question becomes: Are there
witnesses available who are willing to listen compassionately to
those devastated?
Weingarten draws on her own life experience to elucidate some of
the sufferer’s dilemmas. At one point she describes the painful
isolation she experienced after a year of cancer treatments. “My life
was bleak and lonely because I lived in silence: certain that no one
could bear to hear the feelings and thoughts I had following my year
of treatment; unwilling to find out if I was right; certain that I
needed to protect people from my experience; and failing in those
few times that I tried to put into words the chaos of my emotions
and the terror that lived in my flesh.”5 As she worked through her
personal impasse, Weingarten came to see that a person’s ability to
give voice to his suffering is not the achievement of the lone
individual, but depends instead upon “the willingness of the
listeners that make up the person’s community. In this view, voice is
contingent on who listens with what attention and attunement. Voice
depends on witnessing.”6 Weingarten’s life took a dramatic turn
once she broke free from her self-imposed isolation, when she began
to question the assumption that she needed to protect those she
loved from her fear and despair.

-- 43 of 209 --

Though compassionate witnessing does not remove the pain of
trauma, it reconfigures it by restoring human connection, building
strength and hope even in the midst of tragedy. According to
Weingarten, three key elements are involved: selecting a witnessing
focus; listening with care and responding with compassion; and
undertaking a concrete action that addresses the other’s need, either
literally or symbolically.7 In order not to be overwhelmed by grief or
paralyzed into inaction, the witness must actively choose a
witnessing focus that is doable. Selecting a focus is a creative
process that requires the witness to connect one’s “understanding of
a situation with one’s response to it and bring this into alignment
with one’s resources, commitments and values.”8
When a beloved violin repair store burned to the ground,
Weingarten was concerned about how it would affect her four-year-‐
old son. Ben admired the violins and had come to know the store
owners through periodic visits to the store with his mother.
Believing that knowledge of the fire would be devastating for him,
Weingarten diverted their route home for several days. On their
regular day for making bread, they walked past the place where the
store had been reduced to ashes. Ben’s mother made sure to give her
son time to express his shock at the burned building and his distress
over the lost violins. After a time, she asked him what he would
want the store owners to know. Ben replied, “I’m sorry that the
violins burned.” She then asked whether he’d like to shape a loaf of
bread into a violin and give it to the store owners as a way of saying
they were sorry about their loss. Ben thought that was a fine idea.
Making the dough, kneading it, shaping it, and baking it gave the
mother and son time to reflect together on the loss and its meaning.
They took the bread, still warm from the oven, to the store’s owners.
With his mother’s help, the shy lad lifted up the cookie sheet with
the bread violin, as an expression of their care. The owners were
moved by their kind gesture. And Ben, very early in life, learned
that in situations of loss and distress, it is possible to do something
that effectively offers comfort to others.9
The story illustrates each of Weingarten’s key points. She wanted
to choose a focus that would enable her son to feel his feelings, to

-- 44 of 209 --

express them in a safe and reflective space, and then to do
something constructive with his response. The overall process was
designed to undercut the sense of helplessness that often emerges in
the wake of tragedy, enabling Ben to experience his own action
making a difference. All three elements that are essential to
compassionate witnessing are here: selecting a workable focus,
offering compassionate presence, and taking empowering action.
The creativity of Weingarten’s strategy becomes clear as each of the
particulars is examined. Weingarten’s son was four. The repair store
was especially beloved. The mother and son had a weekly bread-‐
baking ritual already in place, an activity that enabled reflective time
together. What is more, Weingarten had given herself a few days to
process her own feelings about the fire before letting her son know
about it. This choice enabled her to be a calm presence for Ben as he
worked through his feelings. Her question to Ben reveals that she
had already selected a specific witnessing focus: “What do you want
the store owners to know?” she asked. She had selected a focus that
she trusted would be meaningful to Ben, who already had a
relationship with the store owners.
With more complex issues, in incidents involving groups of
people rather than a single individual, and in events that are more
shocking to the witness as well as to the one being witnessed, the
witnessing focus and the symbolic action chosen would have to be
adjusted.
Moving from the familial to the professional sphere, and from a
simple common shock to more complex matters, Weingarten argues
that it is crucial for particular professionals to become skilled at
compassionate witnessing, especially those who experience what
she calls “double jeopardy.” Educators, health-care professionals,
police, clergy, and journalists, she says, “expose themselves daily,
repetitively, and cumulatively to the violence and violation that
permeates the lives of their constituents.”10 It is imperative that
those who function in these roles develop habits of mind and heart
that enable them to be both aware and empowered so that they will,
“first, do no harm.” Though fundamental to the Hippocratic oath
taken by those in the medical profession, the vow not to do harm

-- 45 of 209 --

implicitly pervades professional training in every field. Indeed, it is
hard to imagine anything more disheartening than to discover that
one has actually done harm rather than the good one intends.
Weingarten differentiates four possible “witness positions” and
encourages her readers to identify situations in their own lives in
which they can see themselves in each of these four quadrants.11
AWARE UNAWARE
EMPOWERED 1 2
Effective, competent Misguided, possible malpractice
DISEMPOWERED 4 3
Ineffectual, stressed Abandoning, possible malpractice
The ideal position for the witness is to be both aware and
empowered, a position illustrated by the story of making the bread
violin in response to the shock of seeing the destroyed store.
Weingarten could place herself in witness position 1, both aware of
the significance the burned store might have for her son and
empowered as she witnessed his shock, helped him process his
feelings, and undertook a symbolic action of care with him. What is
more, she taught her son how to stay aware and empowered himself
as he witnessed the loss.
Those who are professionally trained to help, teach, heal, protect,
and report the suffering of others seek to place themselves in this
witness position (aware and empowered).12 Here they experience
themselves as effective in what they are called to do. They have an
awareness of the suffering of those they serve as well as a sense of
empowerment in relation to that suffering. Imagine a nurse who
thrives in her work. She knows both her responsibilities and her
limits; she cares about her patients and their needs, and has a vast
array of resources ready at hand. Gifts of healing, well- honed skills,
practical wisdom, and a commitment to serve are combined in a way
that helps others through some of the most stressful days of their
lives: time spent as a patient in a hospital. Though the nurse
witnesses suffering daily, she has enough resiliency and resources

-- 46 of 209 --

(both personal and structural) to get up the next day and serve again
with an open heart.
By contrast, witness position 2 — empowered but unaware — is
the most dangerous of the witness positions, for here the witness has
power over others but little or no awareness of the significance of
what she is witnessing. Weingarten discusses the terrible legacy of
clergy sexual abuse of children, in which the Catholic hierarchy
failed to develop procedures by which perpetrators would be held
accountable for their actions. Not only did no one intervene to
protect the children in the first place, but church officials who
learned of the abuse after the fact sought to cover it up by
transferring offenders elsewhere. Though the church had abundant
resources regarding the process of repentance and making amends,
it made little apparent use of them. Victims, families, churches, and
the society as a whole suffered because those in positions of power
failed to act on behalf of those most vulnerable in their care.
Situations of malpractice are likely to occur whenever people have
power over others but have no clear structures of accountability and
little awareness of the violence they are perpetuating.
Witnesses in position 3, unaware and disempowered, are unaware
and therefore disempowered in relation to the violence they are
surrounded by. Teachers who lack internalized models of care from
mentors and who also lack training in compassionate witnessing
might close their eyes to the structural violence of their institutional
setting and so perpetuate it for another generation. According to one
study cited by Weingarten, “Students hear anti-gay slurs
approximately 25 times a day,” but faculty “intervene in fewer than
3 percent of occurrences.”13 The students’ sense of hopelessness
skyrocketed when teachers were present but said or did nothing to
stop the slurs. Their failure to take action magnified the students’
sense of powerlessness. Whenever there is widespread failure to
address an issue, it is likely a symptom of the whole system’s failure
or even an entire culture’s blind spot. It is possible that some
teachers, aware of the violence but lacking knowledge of how
effectively to intervene, endeavored to stay unaware of the problem
by ignoring it.

-- 47 of 209 --

Witness position 4, aware and disempowered, is the position most
likely to lead to empathic stress reactions. When those who witness
violence are aware of the harm being done but feel disempowered to
help, they become vulnerable to ongoing distress. Professionals in
this witnessing position suffer from various syndromes: burnout,
empathic distress, secondary (or vicarious) traumatic stress, or
compassion fatigue. Each syndrome entails a cluster of symptoms
suffered by those who are aware of the significance of what they are
witnessing but are disempowered, either through a lack of personal
skill or by the structural violence of their institutional setting.
“Empathic stress reactions,” says Weingarten, “are a severe form of
common shock that persists over time.”14 The symptoms of burnout
can be physical, emotional, relational, or spiritual. Perhaps all four
dimensions will be present. Witnesses might suffer from migraines,
ulcers, heart palpitations, panic attacks, general malaise, lack of
energy, perplexing fits of anger, or growing cynicism. They might
question their sense of calling, blame themselves for their lack of
effectiveness, or even fall into a depressive state. Feelings of self-‐
doubt and shame may intensify, causing them to withdraw from
those in whom they usually confide, which contributes to a sense of
isolation and increases the likelihood of a continuing downward
spiral. “Secondary traumatic stress,” another form of empathic
stress, can also emerge in witness position 4. It “refers to the effects
. . . of being exposed to another person’s trauma . . . [and] is usually
accompanied by intense feelings of horror, helplessness and fear.”15
Unlike burnout, which can creep up on people slowly, secondary or
vicarious traumatic stress can happen suddenly when people witness
something that triggers feelings of horror.
“Compassion fatigue,” a term coined by psychologist Charles
Figley, refers to the exhaustion and dysfunction that come with
ongoing exposure to one who is suffering.16 Caregivers of family
members who are chronically ill would be familiar with the
symptoms of compassion fatigue, as would ministers or chaplains
who regularly accompany those who are seriously ill or dying.
Therapists who witness trauma on a daily basis are at risk both for
secondary traumatic stress (experiencing the trauma of another

-- 48 of 209 --

through ongoing witnessing of it) and for compassion fatigue
(reaching the limit of their resources for compassion in the presence
of so much suffering).
These four witnessing positions give implicit acknowledgment to
the risks involved in seeing suffering on an ongoing basis and
refusing to be indifferent or make oneself numb to the needs of
others. Compassionate witnesses allow themselves to feel the impact
of another’s pain; they recognize the common humanity of all who
suffer, what Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh describes as our
essential “interbeing.” “My well- being, my happiness, depends very
much on you, and your well- being, your happiness, depends on me.
I am responsible for you and you are responsible for me. . . .
Therefore in order to take care of you, I have to take care of
myself.”17 Because compassionate witnesses understand human
interdependence, they strive to pay as close attention to their own
needs as they do to the needs of others. One hospital chaplain I
know chose to work only four days a week. She had negotiated her
work schedule to work four-fifths time with Thursdays off, so that
she could stay home and sleep through the entire day. Knowing how
deeply restorative sleep was for her, she sought a strategy that
enabled her to function effectively as a hospital chaplain for more
than twenty- five years. Weingarten comments on all those who
regularly witness the pain of others, demonstrating the importance
of witnessing the witnesses.
The symptoms of secondary traumatic stress are similar to the
symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder and they remit to
similar interventions. People can suffer from either of these
empathic stress reactions or a combination of both. These
responses are normal, common, expectable, and still, often not
recognized. Or they are recognized, but the person feels
considerable shame about them. Sadly, these occupational hazards
of witnessing violence and violation are interpreted by many
people — both within and outside of these professions — as signs
of personal failure.18

-- 49 of 209 --

Clearly they are not signs of personal failure. On the contrary, they
are signs of a conscious choice to bear the burdens of others. They
betray faith and courage, not shame and failure.19
Weingarten’s personal history makes her particularly alert to
forms of common shock experienced in witnessing the suffering of
others. Throughout her writings, she offers her own self-witness,
giving her readers the opportunity to learn from her varied
experiences. When her mother was dying of cancer, Weingarten
learned that her father wanted the family to withhold from her
mother the truth of her diagnosis so that she would not “lose hope.”
Like many medical personnel of that time, her mother’s doctor
believed that withholding the terminal nature of the cancer was a
benevolent choice. Feeling helpless and enraged by her father’s
insistence on this but bound by her loyalty to him, Weingarten was
emotionally cut off from her mother for more than a year until an
intern, not privy to the secret, conveyed the news to Weingarten’s
mother. During that year, Weingarten repeatedly argued with her
father, urging him to let her speak about the cancer. Her father’s
response never varied. Each time she pleaded with him, he
answered, “If she wants to know, she will ask.” Weingarten
eventually concluded that the real message the family sent to her
mother during this time was that they could not tolerate her mother
hearing the truth.20 For years after her mother’s death, Weingarten
reflected on her family’s dynamics, recognizing fully just how
disempowered she had been, even while completely aware of the
destructive power of secrets.21 Weingarten came to see that she was
in the aware but disempowered quadrant, the position that is most
enervating to the witness. By identifying the forces in play — for
example, her desire to spare her father pain while grieving the
imminent loss of his wife; cultural attitudes that conferred expert
status on the doctor, assuming that he knew best; her own desire to
honor her mother’s trust in her doctor — Weingarten was finally
able to witness herself with compassion. All these things had
silenced her during some of the most excruciating days of her life.
Perhaps because of this experience and others like it, Weingarten
created a conceptual framework to help others become conscious of

-- 50 of 209 --

their powerlessness so that they might find pathways toward both
empowerment and awareness.
The pathos of this personal tragedy in Weingarten’s life was
preceded by an even more consequential vow of silence she had
taken as a young child. The secret of her mother’s cancer that tied
her in knots as a young woman was subsequent to an earlier “secret”
in which she was caught as a child in the 1950s. There Kaethe was a
disempowered witness to her parents’ ongoing political trauma. Her
position as an (at least partially) aware but completely
disempowered witness to her parents’ fears affected her for decades.
Having once overheard them speak of the man who had “stabbed
them in the back” by reporting that they were Communists during
the McCarthy era, Kaethe suffered nightmares in which a shadowy
figure chased her, wielding a knife, ready to stab her in the back.
Terrified, the child learned to fall asleep sitting with her back against
the wall and spent her childhood years hypervigilant about every
turn of political events. Though her mother had explained the
outlines of the situation to Kaethe, she had asked her to promise
never to mention it to her father, a request Kaethe honored for
forty-six years (135). When Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were
executed in 1953 “for conspiring to provide stolen atomic secrets to
the Soviet Union” (136), Kaethe knew only that they, like her
parents, were Communists. And they were killed. Having limited
information, and determined never to break her promise, Kaethe
lived in terror that the same fate would befall her parents.
“Emotionally disconnected from my parents, relying on my own
woefully inadequate resources, I collapsed. No one knew. I didn’t
tell. I kept silent. I was good” (138). Noting that the effects of this
witnessing were both lifelong and life-shaping, she writes: “My
parents’ trauma was transferred to me through my witnessing it”
(138).
These poignant stories anticipate still other personal narratives of
common shock, especially those in which Weingarten or members
of her immediate family suffered serious illness. She writes of the
shock she experienced, for example, as a new mother when she was
informed that her son had been born with a heart defect and might

-- 51 of 209 --

not live. (He did live.) A few years later, her daughter was born with
a rare genetic abnormality that presaged a life of chronic disabilities.
Weingarten herself has suffered breast cancer three times. In all
these life circumstances, Weingarten grasps something of the
interpersonal complexity of such witnessing when she writes: “I
witnessed myself as a victim of breast cancer. Miranda [her
daughter] witnessed me living with a life-threatening illness. Friends
witnessed both of us. At each ring there is the potential for any of
the four witness positions to be operative. One way of transforming
the relational impasse of illness is to stay aware and active in
relation to it, creating connections with others that everyone can
bear” (79).
“Creating connections with others that everyone can bear.” This is
the thread that runs through all of Weingarten’s essays, lectures, and
articles. Again and again it is the community whose witness
promises to uphold each individual in it. If a person has little or no
community to call upon, the task at hand is to take action that will
strengthen community ties. There is a great deal that human beings
cannot bear alone, and Weingarten asserts that they do not have to
bear it alone. She has spent her entire professional career helping
others work through the very relational impasses that brought her
such anguish as a child and young adult. The key to renewed life is
to take trusted friends into one’s confidence in times of crisis. The
resilience and creativity of the community as a whole are what
provide the wider and wider circles of support that are needed. In
each situation, Weingarten threads her way forward, finding
renewed determination to transform suffering into meaningful
action. While acknowledging that illness and death can break one’s
heart, she attests that “it can be put back together” by breaking the
silence and building sturdy connections with others (79).
Families that suffer ongoing health challenges need to add more
and more witnesses in order to stay emotionally buoyed.
Weingarten’s daughter Miranda’s rare genetic disorder and its
unusual symptoms tended to isolate her from neighbors and peers.
Together, mother and daughter found a way to educate their friends
about the disorder and informed them of the specific kind of support

-- 52 of 209 --

they needed. Weingarten writes: “I proposed to Miranda that we
design a ceremony and invite a group of friends and helpers whom
she would trust to share the history of her living with her syndrome.
. . . With [such an] audience, I hoped that she would also activate
her own witness role in relation to this disorder . . . that she would
no longer feel solely its victim” (83). Making her aim explicit,
Miranda designed the invitation. She wrote: “I am hoping that you
will become members of an ‘opposing despair/nourishing hope’
team to help me deal with the ongoing trials of my life” (83).
Miranda also designed the ritual that followed. She gave each of the
twelve people gathered a candle, and lit the one in front of her. “She
began to tell her story. She asked people to light their candle from
hers when they felt that they understood the magnitude of her
experience. As people lit their candles one by one, at different
intervals of time, she said she felt that ‘each lit candle took some of
the burden off me’ ” (83). This team provided the social support the
family needed as they navigated one challenge after another related
to Miranda’s extraordinary needs. What began as a “team approach”
to nourishing hope in the most intimate sphere of family life was
reconceptualized for Weingarten’s fellow family therapists.
In her article “Reasonable Hope: Construct, Clinical Applications,
and Supports,”22 Weingarten develops a conceptual framework for
approaching devastating life circumstances. Desiring to make
explicit what is often left implicit, she differentiates her definition of
“reasonable” hope from other commonly accepted definitions of
hope. Reasonable hope is not simply a feeling sustained by
individuals, she insists, but rather is a practice sustained by an
interdependent community. Reasonable hope doesn’t exist as a
“struggle against an uncertain, unknowable future” but instead
perceives the future as “open, uncertain, and influenceable” (8).
Persons with reasonable hope don’t wait helplessly for a situation to
change, but instead develop goals and seek specific strategies to
meet them. And finally, reasonable hope is not a “black and white
category” that admits no doubt or despair, but exists alongside
contradictory feelings.
First, reasonable hope is relational. While recognizing that not all

-- 53 of 209 --

relationships are supportive of hope, Weingarten asserts that
reasonable hope is best sustained by groups of people rather than by
lone individuals. Drawing on Martin Buber’s understanding of I-‐
Thou relationships as well as Desmond Tutu’s description of ubuntu,
Weingarten maintains that conventional views of hope are too
individualistic. Hope cannot be maintained apart from the
willingness of others to care about one’s suffering. Second,
“reasonable hope is a practice; it is something we do with others . . .
work[ing] together toward a preferred future.” Weingarten says that
this practice of “thinking of hope as a verb and not a noun” leads
one toward communal action (8). Third, reasonable hope requires an
attitude of expectancy toward a future that can be changed by
actions undertaken in the present. Even when one cannot fully
envision that future, hope is generated by concrete steps —
especially those in the form of “creative communal synergies”
undertaken now (9). Fourth, reasonable hope seeks to clarify
realistic goals. It does not hope for the moon but for something that
is concrete and doable. Hopelessness arises when one is
overwhelmed and convinced that nothing that one does will help. As
one scales back one’s expectations and notices that even while one
cannot do everything one can do something, goals and pathways
into the future are formed. The process involves trial and error,
perseverance, and an ability to notice when progress is being made,
even very small steps toward one’s goals. Finally, reasonable hope
coexists with doubt and despair. If one assumes that despair cannot
coexist alongside hope, one might ironically despair over one’s very
lack of hope, deeming it insufficient (10). With reasonable hope one
learns to live in the midst of life’s messiness and disappointments
and to work with whatever is at hand.
Once these conceptual categories are in place, Weingarten
illustrates them with clinical vignettes, demonstrating again the
importance of learning to identify one’s own witness position.
Family therapists need to be both aware and empowered so they can
cocreate conversations that allow hope to arise, interview for
resilience, and use questions that will activate reasonable hope.
They need to identify barriers to reasonable hope as well as possible

-- 54 of 209 --

sources of support, and to assess and remove possible obstructions
to love. Weingarten concludes the article by naming specific
practices that she believes would be supportive for anyone, but
especially for those colleagues who deal with seemingly intractable
problems. She writes: “Believe that the small is not trivial; accept
proxy measures of success; register reasonable hope, welcome joy;
enjoy vicarious hope; and finally, embrace resistance” (19-22).
Weingarten personally embodies what she commends to others.
She has traveled to Croatia and South Africa, witnessing the
suffering of communities devastated by war or AIDS, by racism or
other forms of structural violence. She writes about the
intergenerational transmission of trauma, as the impact of trauma in
one generation is passed along to the next, especially among the
poor and those most vulnerable in any society. Jewish by heritage,
she is particularly sensitive to the impact of the Holocaust on
subsequent generations. At times her exhortations toward her fellow
clinicians draw upon collective Jewish wisdom. She urges therapists
to welcome joy even in dire circumstances, to enjoy vicarious hope,
and to work for justice. “Resisting what is not just and pursuing
what is just activates and promotes reasonable hope” (22), she
advises. Generations of Jewish struggle for justice give historic
weight to her witness.
To underscore the importance of human interdependence for
healing trauma, Weingarten draws on conceptions developed by
Martin Buber
(I-Thou relationships), Desmond Tutu (an African understanding of
ubuntu), and Thich Nhat Hanh (a Buddhist concept of interbeing).
While there are nuances unique to each conception, all of them
develop an understanding of human beings as being responsible, not
only for themselves, but also for others. They bring to mind, from a
Christian perspective, the paradox of the apostle Paul’s injunction
that we are each to bear the burdens of others while also bearing our
own load. “Bear one another’s burdens, and in this way you will
fulfill the law of Christ,” is followed three verses later by “For all
must carry their own loads” (Gal. 6:2, 5 NRSV). The passage
assumes that all persons are in danger of falling into temptation or

-- 55 of 209 --

despair. Thus, when we see another’s need, we are to support him in
a spirit of gentleness, not deceiving ourselves that we are better than
others. While today a sister in Christ may be afflicted with fear and
need to be reminded to rest in God’s love, tomorrow our own
anxious ruminations may need the compassionate presence of that
very sister, in order to restore our trust in the sufficiency of God’s
grace. Each person is to bear the burdens of others and is to carry
one’s own load. Bearing the burdens of others means reaching out to
them with compassion. Carrying one’s own load means taking
responsibility for our own self-care, asking others for compassionate
witnessing when we need it, and not setting ourselves up as
somehow above needing the help of others. Being aware of our own
needs for care, we are willing to turn to others, asking them to
witness us while we give voice to our own sorrows and burdens.
Mutual care is at the very heart of the church’s life together in
Christ.
When we consider Weingarten’s concept of reasonable hope from
a Christian standpoint, we first discover a surprising congruence
between her concept of “reasonable hope” and a number of beliefs
and practices in the church. First, as suggested above, Weingarten’s
understanding of human identity as corporate rather than
individualistic is congruent with a New Testament depiction of the
body of Christ as an interdependent community (as described by
Paul in 1 Corinthians 12 and Romans 12 with the extended
metaphor of our being members of a single body). Persons in
community are members of one another who cannot pretend that
they have no need of others. Just as each organ in the human body
cannot function on its own, so each person in the community cannot
function apart from every other person’s contribution to the whole.
Further, when one considers how members of the church are upheld
by others in a time of crisis, one sees the kind of hope in action that
Weingarten commends. Members of the church care for the afflicted
by listening to their stories, praying for them, and offering them
various kinds of practical help when needed. These small “but not
trivial” actions inspire hope by offering support and care in a time of
great vulnerability.

-- 56 of 209 --

Based on an ethnographic study of what he describes as an
“activist” congregation, Don Browning concludes that “the most
meaningful part of care from the perspective of lay people is what
they receive from one another in the informal and formal groups
making up the ongoing life of the congregation,” and not solely nor
even primarily the pastoral care of the ordained clergy.23 Just as
Weingarten describes, persons are sustained in hope even if in the
present they have little access to feelings of hope. Hope functions
more as a verb, a process or action, than as a feeling, a noun, or a
personal attribute that one does or does not possess. In such
circumstances it is common to hear members of the church attest
that they are being upheld by the prayers of others. When they have
no personal access to hope themselves, they rely on the hope of the
community. Such a conviction resonates with Weingarten’s notion of
vicarious hope, in which the hope-filled actions of others buoy one
up. Similarly, the ability to welcome joy even in painful situations
echoes Paul’s exhortation to “give thanks in all circumstances” (1
Thess. 5:18). Christian belief and practice are filled with instances
of desolation and consolation existing side by side in the same life at
the same time.
In practices of lament, despair and hope also exist side by side in
the same breast. Indeed, it is one’s faith in God that enables the
believer to give voice to despair, which paradoxically claims hope at
the same time.24 Like Weingarten’s depiction of reasonable hope,
Christian hope is able to “accommodate doubt, contradictions and
despair,”25 not because it is reasonable but because it trusts in the
power of a merciful God. Christian prayers of lament, so steeped in
the psalms of the Hebrew Bible, not only provide a clear pathway to
move through rage and shame into grief and mourning, they also
help one discover courage and renewed trust even as one is filled
with doubt and despair. In the prayer of lament, the psalmist cries
out from a pit of shame, terror, and despair to a God as close as his
own breath. Time after time, he is delivered against all odds and
lives to praise God with heart and voice.
Unlike Weingarten’s conception of “reasonable hope,” however,
the church is anchored in a transcendent hope, one that might be

-- 57 of 209 --

deemed unreasonable by the world. God’s miraculous grace and
steadfast love is preached every Sunday of the year. While those in
personal crisis may not themselves fully trust it for a long, dark
season of their lives, they are nevertheless reminded of it in story,
creed, ritual, sermon, image, and song week after week. The biblical
narrative of divine intervention — of manna in the wilderness, of
angels descending with glad tidings, of prophets taken up into
heaven in chariots of fire — feeds the church’s imagination for all
that is impossible, unreasonable, and hope beyond hope, and
anchors it in a ground utterly beyond its own making. Each person is
given opportunities to find her unique life story in a larger story that
began long before she was born and that will continue long after she
has departed this world because it is a divine story. It is the story of
God with us. Each person’s own life’s saga, when set narratively
within that divine saga, gives rise to the community’s hope.
Like those who live without faith, those in the church know that
their lives are precarious and that the future is unknowable.
Weingarten states that “the future is not determined but is
influenceable . . . that we can join with others, that creative
communal synergies can happen . . . that spontaneous actions . . .
arise from collective commitments.”26 To one rooted and grounded
in biblical hope, these words sound remarkably similar to a
description of God’s gracious providence. Yet, for persons of faith,
the future is influenceable because God is influenceable. We may
indeed hope for creative communal synergies to arise, but any trust
we put in human action is bracketed by a larger trust in God. That is
why the church is constant in prayer. Don Saliers writes:
Suppose we regard the sustained practice of the Christian life as a
continual intercessory prayer, and a willingness not to claim too
much for God on our own terms. Life as intercession — in word
and action — is a constant holding of the world in all its suffering
and tragedy before God. Such intercession requires both lament
and doxology. . . . The difference between drowning in the
tragedy of the world and turning toward the slow work of God is
discerned in the witness of those whose lives embody lament,

-- 58 of 209 --

intercession and praise. . . . Taking the passion of Christ and the
continuing suffering of the world as the matrix of authentic
spirituality implies that the suffering life of Christ is encountered
ever anew in history.27
As in Weingarten’s picture of reasonable hope, those who hope in
God seek goals and give thanks for pathways that open before them.
But unlike Weingarten, the church relies not solely on a community
of caring individuals, but more fundamentally on a belief in the
Compassionate One, the source of all human compassion.
Weingarten encourages her fellow family therapists to engage in
“a daily practice of awe” in order to find ongoing inspiration for the
task of helping others rebuild their lives in the wake of trauma or
tragedy. Such a practice also finds parallels in the Christian life. For
example, members of the church are encouraged to read Scripture
regularly, to praise God for the good gifts of creation and
redemption, and to ponder “any excellence [and] anything worthy of
praise” (Phil. 4:8). Indeed, at several points Weingarten’s
exhortations seem to echo the very things that Scripture attests will
enable a community not to be “overcome by evil, but [to] overcome
evil with good” (Rom. 12:21), or to “do justice, and to love
kindness, and to walk humbly with [its] God” (Mic. 6:8). From a
standpoint in Christian belief, such practices cannot be understood
apart from their transcendent grounding in the compassion of a God
who actively sustains the community by the grace that continually
pours out upon it.
In preparing students for ministry, Andrew Purves reminds them
that “to suffer with another is still to suffer . . . [and that]
compassion will increase our experience of suffering. We can buckle
under the weight of accumulated pain.”28 Noting that suffering has
the capacity to “cut the ground out from under our feet,”29 Purves,
like Weingarten, does not romanticize suffering nor commend it for
its possible spiritual benefits.30 He knows that one can become
overwhelmed and can shut down one’s openness toward others in
order to reduce the impact of the pain. Instead, he asks what makes
it possible to continue to be willing to respond to others with care

-- 59 of 209 --

and compassion. “Compassion,” Purves writes, “is deeply rooted in
the life of God as revealed to us in Jesus Christ.”31 We cannot
engage in such a ministry if it is grounded in the shallow soil of our
own spiritual strength. “A compassionate ministry must be grounded
in God and God’s own compassion for the world.”32 Such an
axiomatic standpoint reframes and reconfigures Weingarten’s model
of compassionate witnessing, placing it into an explicitly Christian
context.
God alone can bear the sins of the world and not be destroyed by
them. God alone can fully witness the horror and the terror of what
human beings are capable of inflicting on one another. In Jesus
Christ, God takes the suffering of the world into his own capacious
heart and ministers, openly or secretly, through the Holy Spirit to
every creature in distress. While God calls human witnesses to
partake in this ministry, it is first and foremost God’s ministry into
which human beings are called to participate. It is God’s Spirit who
opens human hearts to hear and to respond to the suffering of others.
It is not something that human beings are capable of by their own
power. Purves’s definition of pastoral theology is pertinent here. He
writes: “Pastoral theology is understood properly first of all as a
theology of the care of God for us in, through, and as Jesus Christ. .
. . Only secondarily, derivatively, and above all, participatively, . . .
is pastoral theology an account of the pastoral work of the church.”33
The church’s capacity for staying open to others depends
fundamentally on its faithfulness in listening to God and on its
turning to God for daily sustenance, guidance, inspiration, and
nurture. If the church is not to be grounded in the shallow soil of its
own spiritual strength, it needs constantly to hear God’s Word of
hope. Purves comments: “We have to live the theological reality of
new life in Christ in such a way that we are always being healed.
Either we are being healed of our own suffering or compassion will
become increasingly impossible for us.”34 As those in the church are
healed of their own suffering, they may grow in creativity,
resilience, and personal strength even in the midst of trial and
affliction, what has been called “post-traumatic growth” in the
psychological literature.35 Post-traumatic growth is not a return to a

-- 60 of 209 --

pretrauma existence, but it gives evidence of a new identity and a
new narrative. Strength and resilience replace powerlessness and
being overwhelmed. Even so, Christian hope cannot simply be
equated with post- traumatic hope. It functions within a different
conceptual matrix than any psychological concept. By definition, it
entails claims to truth that do not function at an empirical level.
While Weingarten’s “reasonable hope” can be embraced by the
church in a penultimate sense, it needs to be lodged within an
ultimate framework of faith in God’s action on our behalf and for
our sake. In this context, Weingarten’s concept of witnessing
reclaims the ancient meaning of religious testimony. Examples of
such testimony pervade Nicholas Wolterstorff’s reflections in his
book Lament for a Son.
Suffering may do us good — may be a blessing, something to be
thankful for. This I have learned. . . . Suffering is the shout of
“No” by one’s whole existence to that over which one suffers —
the shout of “No” by nerves and gut and gland and heart to pain,
to death, to injustice, to depression, to hunger, to humiliation, to
bondage, to abandonment. And sometimes, when the cry is
intense, there emerges a radiance which elsewhere seldom
appears: a glow of courage, of love, of insight, of selflessness, of
faith. In that radiance we see best what humanity was meant to be.
. . . In the valley of suffering, despair and bitterness are brewed.
But there also character is made. The valley of suffering is the
vale of soul-making.36
Those whose souls have been made in such a deep vale are called by
God to minister to others with the compassion they have come to
know and trust (2 Cor. 1:3-5).37
1. See Kaethe Weingarten, Common Shock: Witnessing Violence Every Day (New York: New
American Library, 2003).
2. Shelly Rambo’s fascinating book Spirit and Trauma: A Theology of Remaining (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 2010) considers the role of the witness in a more strictly theological sense.
With the traumatic story of Jesus’ death and descent into hell as her focus, Rambo sounds many
familiar themes, particularly the challenge of speaking and writing on a topic “given the profound
shattering of language and meaning in trauma.” Instead of “comprehension and understanding,” our
rhetoric needs to shift to one of “witnessing and testifying” (27-28).

-- 61 of 209 --

3. See Robert MacNair, Perpetration-Induced Traumatic Stress: The Psychological Consequences
of Killing (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2002), cited in Howard Zehr, “Doing Justice, Healing Trauma:
The Role of Restorative Justice in Peacebuilding,” Peace Prints: South Asian Journal of
Peacebuilding 1, no. 1 (Spring 2008): 10.
4. Kaethe Weingarten, “Hope in a Time of Global Despair,” http://www.witnessing
project.org/our-projects, accessed January 10, 2014.
5. Weingarten, “Witnessing, Wonder and Hope,” Family Process 39, no. 4 (Winter 2000): 390.
6. Weingarten, “Witnessing, Wonder and Hope,” 392.
7. Weingarten, Common Shock, 192-93.
8. Weingarten, Common Shock, 193.
9. Weingarten, Common Shock, 193-94.
10. Weingarten, Common Shock, 93.
11. Weingarten, Common Shock, 95.
12. Weingarten’s discussion of witness positions can be found in chapter 5 of Common Shock.
13. M. Bochenek et al., Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination against Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2001),
cited in Weingarten, Common Shock, 97. Given the sea change that has occurred in cultural attitudes
toward LGBT people over the course of the past decade, one would hope that these statistics would
be drastically different today. See “Building a Restorative Practice Curriculum in Middle and High
Schools in the U.S.,” by Gerald Monk, Ph.D., at http://www.iirp.edu/pdf/Hull-2010/Hull-2010-
Monk.pdf, for a creative approach that addresses complex cultural attitudes and trains school
personnel in practical strategies to bring about cultural shifts. Accessed July 2014.
14. Weingarten, Common Shock, 100.
15. Weingarten, Common Shock, 100.
16. Weingarten, Common Shock, 81.
17. Weingarten, Common Shock, 223.
18. Weingarten, Common Shock, 105.
19. See “Professional Quality of Life Scale: Compassion Satisfaction and Fatigue Subscales,” in
appendix 2, developed by B. Hudnall Stamm, a questionnaire designed to help people assess their
vulnerability to burnout and compassion fatigue or secondary trauma, as well as determine the level
of satisfaction they derive from being in a profession that calls upon their capacity to respond
compassionately to others. See also Pamela Cooper-White, “The Pastor as Wounded Healer,” chapter
8 in The Cry of Tamar: Violence against Women and the Church’s Response (Minneapolis: Fortress,
2012). See especially her practical guidelines for clergy in “Staying Effective,” 194-204.
20. Weingarten, Common Shock, 29. Page references to this work have been placed in the
following text.
21. See page 57 in this book, note 30.
22. Weingarten, “Reasonable Hope: Construct, Clinical Applications, and Supports,” Family
Process 49, no. 1 (2010). Page references to this work have been placed in the following text.
23. Don Browning, “Pastoral Care and the Study of the Congregation,” in Beyond Clericalism:
The Congregation as a Focus for Theological Education, ed. Joseph C. Hough Jr. and Barbara G.
Wheeler (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1988), 117. The liturgical function and pastoral care of the clergy
are crucial, however, in major life-cycle transitions, illness, and crisis. “The ministers don’t have to
be available all the time as long as they are available at the right time” (109).

-- 62 of 209 --

24. See also chapter 5 of this volume.
25. Weingarten, “Reasonable Hope,” 10.
26. Weingarten, “Reasonable Hope,” 5.
27. Don Saliers, “The Bitter Christ: Suffering and Spirituality in Denial,” Spiritus: A Journal of
Christian Spirituality 10, no. 2 (Fall 2010): 294-303. Spiritus is published by the Johns Hopkins
University Press.
28. Andrew Purves, The Search for Compassion: Spirituality and Ministry (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 1989), 83.
29. Purves, The Search for Compassion, 83.
30. Weingarten writes: “I do not subscribe to the idea that suffering can be redeemed. Rather, I
believe suffering is always terrible, often tragic. I do not believe that suffering serves a purpose,
although many people, and I am one, have used suffering to serve a purpose. . . . Cancer brought me
nothing but tsuris, the Yiddish for trouble. I, on the other hand, worked mightily hard to make some
good come of it, for myself and others.” Common Shock, 231.
31. Purves, The Search for Compassion, 12.
32. Purves, The Search for Compassion, 28.
33. Andrew Purves, Reconstructing Pastoral Theology: A Christological Foundation (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 2004), xviii.
34. Purves, The Search for Compassion, 84.
35. See, for example, R. G. Tedeshi and L. G. Calhoun, Posttraumatic Growth: Conceptual
Foundation and Empirical Evidence (Philadelphia: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004).
36. Nicholas Wolterstorff, Lament for a Son (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1987), 96-97.
37. In Spirit and Trauma Shelly Rambo seems to deny anything that might be characterized as
“post-traumatic growth,” instead suggesting that the best one can do is “remain” in the wake of
trauma. Divine love does not triumph over death. “Instead, divine love survives” (170). Maybe the
most one can claim is that the Christian story tells of a “divine remaining, the story of love that
survives . . . a cry arising from the abyss.” She ends her book by asking, “The question is: can we
witness it?”

-- 63 of 209 --

CHAPTER 3
Christian Forgiveness
Healing the Emotional Wounds of Childhood
Are adults who were abused by their parents when they were
children obligated to forgive them? When an adult Christian
undergoes therapy and begins to recover memories of painful abuse
that are at the very heart of her suffering, and when she realizes that
those who abused her were none other than her own parents, is she
still obliged to “honor them in the Lord”? If she actually confronts
her parents and they minimize or deny their culpability, is she
justified in cutting them off, in turning away from them and having
nothing further to do with them? Or must she forgive their
trespasses against her, knowing as she does the unfathomable depth
of the mercy and forgiveness of God toward her own sins? If she
attempts to forgive them, what is she to do with her rage and
outrage, with the feelings of hurt and betrayal that keep emerging?
Questions like these burden those who seek to heal from the
emotional wounds of childhood and to live faithful lives of Christian
discipleship. For innumerable Christians, these questions are not
merely theoretical, but have tremendous practical implications for
their most intimate relationships and for the living out of their faith.
In this chapter I want to examine a nexus of questions about the
nature of forgiveness with this particular situation in mind: the adult
who is seeking to heal from genuine harm committed by his parents
when he was a child. What is the relationship between the healing
he seeks and a Christian understanding of forgiveness? I ask this
question as a Reformed pastoral theologian who, as a practicing
pastoral counselor, has faced the question of human forgiveness in
many guises.
I begin with a description of what I mean by parental abuse,

-- 64 of 209 --

particularly because, as Marie Fortune has observed, the word
“abuse” is sometimes used so loosely that anything that is
considered harmful or that lowers a person’s self-esteem is labeled
abusive, making the term too broad to be helpful.1 First, situations of
abuse are those “which are dominated by fear”2 where, in the case of
physical abuse, parents subject their children to physical violence
and use force, threats, and intimidation to make their children obey
them. Second, children who grow up in homes where they are
sexually violated are victims of incestuous abuse. Sexual abuse
would include not only sexual touching of the child, but also having
the child touch the parent sexually. It would also include sexualized
talk, showing a child pornographic materials, or some kind of
intentional parental exhibitionism in front of the child.3 Third, the
phenomenon of psychological abuse is “a pattern which occurs over
time and which instills in that person a sense of their worthlessness
and their inability to take care of themselves.”4 Repeated shaming
and humiliating comments, efforts at keeping the child totally in
control (basically not seeing the child as a separate person with a
will of her own), while attempting to isolate the child from outside
sources of help, all contribute to this kind of abuse. Such patterns of
psychological abuse are familiar to us from literature on cults
(which we think of as “brainwashing”), as members are
systematically taught not to trust their own perceptions and thus lose
their capacity for independent judgment and initiative and become
dominated by fear and dependency.5 The suffering of persons
subjected to extensive psychological abuse has also been compared
to the anguish of hostages and prisoners of war.6
Perhaps it goes without saying that all such abuse, whether
physical, sexual, or psychological, is sinful. It is impossible to
overestimate the damage done to children; such wounding leaves
lasting scars, sometimes completely debilitating them. Children are
to be cherished as gifts from God, not abused, hurt, or in any way
wounded by those whose God-given calling is to raise, guide,
nurture, and protect them. To inflict any kind of abuse upon a small
child, whose very life depends upon its parents, quite rightly evokes
strong feelings of moral outrage. Such abusive behavior not only

-- 65 of 209 --

clearly betrays a gross failure to love one’s nearest neighbor, but
more fundamentally indicates a gaping abyss between the person
engaging in such abuse and God. The distortion and rupture in the
abuser’s primary relationship with God have disastrous effects on
his interpersonal relationships with those in his family. Such sin is
particularly disconcerting in the context of the parent/child
relationship because that relationship is meant to shower God’s own
blessing on children. Recall that through their relationship with their
parents, children are given God’s express promise of blessing. The
fifth commandment reads, “Honor your father and your mother, as
the LORD your God commanded you; that your days may be
prolonged, and that it may go well with you, in the land which the
LORD your God gives you” (Deut. 5:16). In explicating the
obedience, honor, and gratitude that children owe their parents,
Calvin emphasizes that since God himself places parents in
authority over them, “it makes no difference whether they [the
parents] are worthy or unworthy of this honor.”7 But he goes on to
say that
we ought in passing to note that we are bidden to obey our parents
only in the Lord (Eph. 6:1). This is apparent from the principle
already laid down. For they sit in that place to which they have
been advanced by the Lord, who shares with them a part of his
honor. Therefore, the submission paid to them ought to be a step
toward honoring that highest Father. Hence, if they spur us to
transgress the law we have a perfect right to regard them not as
parents, but as strangers who are trying to lead us away from
obedience to our true Father.8
“We have a perfect right to regard them not as parents, but as
strangers.” Parents who dishonor God by abusing their children are
putting their children in terrible jeopardy, the worst of which may be
in undermining their trust in God. In today’s world, we have plenty
of evidence showing how abusive fathers can lead their children into
questioning the very goodness of God. Certain contemporary
feminist readings of the gospel, for instance, call the loving

-- 66 of 209 --

Fatherhood of God into question because of the abusive practices of
human fathers.9 But Calvin’s argument is based on diametrically
opposite presuppositions. He assumes that since God is the true
Father, all human fathers (and mothers) are but pale and distant
reflections of that Fatherhood. Human parents who reflect the light
and goodness of God’s Fatherhood (that is, the watchful providential
care of his children) are worthy of their children’s honor precisely
because they point beyond themselves to God, the One parents and
their children are both called to honor. It is not that an abusive father
is capable of calling into question the goodness of God as Father,
but rather that God calls into question the fatherhood of that parent
who abuses his children. Karl Barth takes a line of thought similar to
Calvin’s:
No human father, but God alone, is properly, truly and primarily
Father. No human father is the creator of his child, the controller
of its destiny, or its savior from sin, guilt and death. No human
father is by his word the source of its temporal and eternal life. In
this proper, true and primary sense, God — and He alone — is
Father. He is so as the Father of mercy, as the Father of His Son,
of the Lord Jesus Christ. But it is of this Father’s grace that, in
correspondence to His own, there should exist a human
fatherhood also. And the fact that the latter may symbolize the
fatherhood of God in a human and creaturely form is what lends it
its meaning and value and entitles it to respect.10
Though children seeking to honor God might justly regard their
parents as strangers, doing so entails serious problems. First,
because of the way we grow psychologically and develop as human
beings, it is literally impossible to sever this primary relationship.
Second, when we view the parent/child relationship in the context of
the intergenerational family system, any attempt at cutting off a
member only exacerbates the problem, not only for the victim, but
also for the entire extended family. And third, cutting another off in
this way actually reinforces a pattern of mutual alienation, hostility,

-- 67 of 209 --

and lack of trust. Nevertheless, it seems humanly impossible that
anyone could forgive this kind of violence.
Those little acquainted with the effects of childhood abuse
sometimes have difficulty imagining the extent of the suffering
caused by it and may consequently minimize its impact. A great deal
of additional harm is done, however, if such persons recommend
that the sufferer “forgive and forget,” or suggest that she should not
spend so many useless hours solipsistically focusing on past events
that she can’t change anyway. Such comments have the effect of
shaming the person for doing the one thing that might actually bring
some healing, namely, paying attention to the effects of the trauma
in her life and allowing herself to feel the profound grief related to
it. Minimizing the extent of another’s suffering seems to be a
perennial temptation on the part of helpers, simply because being
willing to acknowledge the magnitude of the harm is so painful.
Some have aptly called it “soul murder.”11
To provide a particular focus to our discussion, let me describe the
situation of a woman who sought psychotherapy in adulthood in
order to heal from having been raped by her father when she was
three. Like most persons healing from sexual abuse, it took her
many years even to learn the nature of her most intimate suffering,
for she had repressed all memory of the traumatic event as a way to
survive. I will not quote her description of the rape (once she
recovered her memory of it), but rather of its protracted effects as
she was growing up. While each person’s experience is unique, the
kinds of symptoms and experiences Gizelle (a pseudonym)
describes are characteristic for persons who have undergone
traumatic sexual abuse.
The effects of the abuse manifested through my body. I
sleepwalked. I had high fevers that were life threatening. And they
could never find a cause. I had nightmares. I had severe asthma. I
would just stop breathing. I was at the doctor’s all the time. I was
in the bed, always sick. My legs were turned out so badly that I
could not walk without tripping over my own feet. I had to wear
corrective shoes. It all fits now.

-- 68 of 209 --

I split my father into two different people, because there was no
other way to sit across the breakfast table from him. The man who
came down and sat at the kitchen table was my father. The man
who came in the middle of the night and molested me was a
shadow. I made him into someone else.
And as I split him into two, I split myself into two. There was
the little girl whose father taught her to ride a bike, who got A’s
and became a perfectionist. And then there was the little girl who
played in the attic, felt that she was dying, wanted to commit
suicide, had nightmares. But I never could speak of her. Her voice
had been taken away.
I felt caught, trapped in my body. That’s continued into
adulthood. I never heard any messages from my body. I would be
really sick and I’d stagger around and go to work. I made a
lifetime dedication of not listening to my body, because if I had, I
would have had to hear that I was raped, and I couldn’t do that
and survive.
I developed an eating disorder when I was eighteen, which they
now call anorexia nervosa. I was at college. I felt obese if I
weighed over ninety-five pounds.12
Gizelle’s travail continued as an adult.
I remember very distinctly that when my daughter was the age I
had been when I was raped, I began to distance myself from her.
She came to me in tears and said, “Mommy, you don’t like me
anymore.” I didn’t remember the rape at all. When Adrienne was
five, I developed chronic hip and back problems. I became
crippled by the pain. I had anxiety attacks so bad I couldn’t move.
I was in severe depression. One morning when I was thirty-eight
and my daughter was almost twelve, I took a lot of pills. I never
said anything to anybody. I just knew I couldn’t go on in the kind
of pain I was in, that I had tried everything I could think of. As I
said, it was not just the physical pain, but the terror that hooked
into the physical pain. The two completely overwhelmed me.13
Gizelle tried to commit suicide on four different occasions. Her

-- 69 of 209 --

last attempt very nearly succeeded. After recovering from the fourth
attempt, she sought therapy. After a long and arduous process, she
was eventually able to remember what had happened to her nearly
forty years earlier. She experienced immense relief once she was
able to bring it to conscious awareness.
Since it’s come out, it’s been the difference of night and day, of
living in hell and living on the earth. For so much of my life, I
have fought death wishes. Now I feel grounded, very connected to
the earth, very determined to stay. My strength and energy to deal
with my life is returning. My neck has begun to unlock. I’ve
begun to feel a looseness in my hips that I never felt before. I
really can’t tell you how far my body can heal. But I do know that
I will heal physically enough to be able to lead a productive, full,
and happy life, even if I have residual pain.14
While symptoms of physical and psychological abuse may differ
from those specific to sexual abuse, all three types of abuse can be
severe enough to lead to suicide.
How might someone like Gizelle heal from trauma of such
immensity? What steps would she need to take to find any kind of
peace or wholeness or restoration? Would forgiving her father be a
necessary step for her to become fully healed? Would it somehow
help promote her healing process? Or is it rather the converse, that
emotional healing would somehow facilitate her ability to forgive?
Or are healing and forgiveness not related to each other in either of
these ways? If not, how then are they related?
Two contemporary schools of psychological thought may help us
think about the issues of healing, forgiveness, and reconciliation.
One school is more oriented toward the internal dynamics of the self
while the other is more oriented toward the outer relationship with
the parents. Both perspectives provide insight into the question of
forgiveness insofar as it is a matter of human growth and maturity.
That is to say, being able truly to forgive a person is, among other
things, a matter of a certain measure of psychological maturity. The
first approach, known generally as “family systems,” focuses on the

-- 70 of 209 --

wider implications of abuse, both its origins and its consequences,
for the extended family. Any “symptom,” such as abuse, comes into
being over a period of generations, so that an adequate theory must
take into account more than one generation. Family systems theory
may be especially pertinent to the church, not only because the
church itself is obviously a system that can be analyzed, but even
more because the theory can facilitate a glimpse into the communal
nature of sin, into the ways that sin arises in specific relational
contexts and involves a vast hidden web of complex circumstances
and relationships. Just as grace is passed from one generation to
another, as God blesses persons through families rich in love, so
also is sin mysteriously visited on children and children’s children
unto the third and fourth generation. Family systems theory, when
placed into a Christian theological context, enables a glimpse into
the hidden truth of our human solidarity in both sin and grace.
The second approach, known generally as “object relations”
theory, has to do with the developmental process each of us
undergoes as infants, as we learn in our earliest years about love and
hate, guilt and reparation, and as we respond to both the
gratifications and the frustrations of being completely dependent
upon another human being to meet all our needs. This theory is
pertinent to our subject, not only because it shows the psychological
capacities needed for forgiveness to take place, but also because of
its specific focus on the relationship between children and parents.
Learning to forgive our parents has enormous implications for our
emotional and spiritual growth, perhaps more than any other
relationship we have, for the simple reason that our parents are
internalized parts of our own personality in a unique sense.
Achieving a more harmonious relationship with our parents in the
outer world simultaneously affects our inner world as well, that is,
our relationship to ourselves. If we experience forgiving our actual
mother and father for the hurt they caused us, the internalized
representations of our parents would also change, allowing for less
need to split off or repress painful aspects of the self. Our “inner”
parents would become far less persecuting and more supportive as a
consequence. While such psychological concepts, though very

-- 71 of 209 --

important, are not sufficient for understanding the complexity of
what is involved in the event of forgiveness, at least not from a
Christian perspective, they can nevertheless help illuminate certain
crucial features. I will first look at a family systems approach by
drawing on the work of Murray Bowen, and then turn to an object
relations perspective, drawing on the work of Melanie Klein, before
putting both into a theological framework.15
The first step many survivors of abuse take is a literal one away
from the abuser; that is to say, they put as much distance between
themselves and their parents as is physically possible. Angry, hurt,
betrayed, and at last free of the household where the abuse took
place, they are eager to begin a life of their own as far away from
that home as possible. Particularly in a mobile society like the
United States, a decision to distance themselves from their family of
origin and simply cut off contact has not only been possible but, by
the advice given by much popular therapeutic “self-help,” has also
been widespread. Thus bonds of kinship already frayed by economic
considerations that take grown children to faraway locations are
further strained as children intentionally distance themselves, both
physically and emotionally, from their parents and siblings. In the
cultural ethos of the United States since the late 1960s, there have
been advocates for this kind of radical dismembering of the family.
Cutting off their parents, seeking to dissociate themselves from a
“dysfunctional” family, and avoiding the “toxic” relationships of
their family of origin have all been recommended to survivors of
abuse as ways of coping with its ongoing painful effects. Underlying
such recommendations is an implicit portrait of emotional maturity
as a matter of separateness and autonomy. “Maturity is ending
dysfunctional relationships, writing off controlling persons,
distancing from dominating people, getting out of trapped or
manipulative relationships, becoming an autonomous self-reliant
individual with freedom from co-dependence.”16
Murray Bowen and other family systems therapists, however,
would strongly contest such an understanding of emotional maturity.
Human maturity for Bowen is not a matter of becoming more and
more “independent” or autonomous, but rather a matter of growing

-- 72 of 209 --

from the infant’s original emotional fusion with his mother toward
becoming a fully differentiated self in relation to those in his family.
A mature, differentiated adult would be capable of taking a clear “I”
stand while remaining emotionally linked to significant others; that
is to say, he would be able to stand alone and claim who he is while
also remaining closely connected to those he loves. He is
differentiated from others without being separated, cut off, or
isolated from them. This is more difficult to do than it might at first
seem. It is difficult to state with conviction what one believes,
thinks, feels, and values in a clearly differentiated way to those with
whom one is emotionally close, particularly when one’s feelings,
ideas, and values are unlike those of others in the family. The
“togetherness forces” in a family exert strong pressure either to
“fuse” with others, blending one’s own values and identity in with
theirs, or are so strong that one feels compelled to distance oneself
by reactively taking an opposite position. Staying connected to one’s
family is a matter of knowing how to stay centered and nonanxious,
how to interact nonreactively with family members, especially when
“taboo” topics are raised, those issues that arouse shame, guilt,
anxiety, or grief. Those in the family who are anxious about human
separateness would tend to gloss over differences. In situations of
conflict or anxiety, they would seek to reestablish some kind of
emotional fusion.17 Those anxious about human closeness would
seek to distance themselves from others or to cut them off as a way
of dealing with the anxiety involved in being in a conflictual or
painful relationship with them. The goal of human maturity would
be a position midway between these two poles of moving
compulsively either toward or away from intimate others. Those
who are emotionally mature would be able to tolerate the anxiety of
being close to others without losing their identity, on the one hand,
and the anxiety of being separate from others without feeling
isolated or abandoned, on the other.
When confronted with another’s hurt or anger, those who
normally distance themselves under stress would tend to give an
account or offer an explanation, in an effort to excuse any
wrongdoing, rather than facing it frankly and acknowledging it

-- 73 of 209 --

openly. By contrast, those whose anxiety is activated by
separateness would tend to appease or placate the other, negate any
rightful claims they may have, and generally give up their own point
of view as a way of seeking reconciliation at any cost. Fully mature
adults, in contrast to both of these positions, would be able to take
responsibility for their own point of view, values, and actions, and
could stand up for them vigorously, but could also openly admit it
when they have acted contrary to their values and apologize to
whomever they have hurt. When entering into a process of
reconciliation with one they have harmed, they would attempt
neither to appease the other nor to exonerate themselves, but would
be capable of offering a true apology. A true apology “offers no
defense or excuse, gives true sorrow or regret for the injury, pledges
full change in a clear appeal to the whole person [and involves] a
painful embracing of [their] deeds and their consequences.”18
By definition, families in which abuse has occurred do not have
clear boundaries safeguarding each member’s physical and
emotional space. Human closeness is experienced as being
extremely dangerous because to be close means to be violated.
Therefore, in such families the temptation to move compulsively
away from the other is very great indeed. Unfortunately, cutting off
from the family of origin not only fails to resolve the problem of
how to cope with intimacy but also transfers it to the next
generation. When such compulsive distance is maintained between
an adult and her extended family, “the cutoff tends to make
emotional forces in the nuclear family system implosive, with the
result that the reactivity of its members becomes more automatic.”19
Cutoffs in one generation have the effect of increasing overall
family anxiety and intensifying emotional fusion in the following
generation. When abused children become adults and cut off
relationships with their families of origin, the unresolved emotional
issues that belong with their parents unwittingly get transferred in
some form to their children. This transfer process usually happens
outside of their awareness. If they are distant or detached from their
family of origin, for example, they would likely become overly
invested in and emotionally enmeshed with their own children,

-- 74 of 209 --

making it difficult for the children to grow normally. They would
likely feel engulfed by the overcloseness of their parent, and would
typically react by disconnecting and pulling away, thus perpetuating
the cycle for yet another generation. Cutting off parents apparently
does not resolve the relational impasse; it merely displaces it.
Augsburger asks several questions that go right to the heart of the
matter: “If the frozen grief is denied and mourning is displaced onto
subsequent generations, what will be the new shape of this system?
How will the pain trickle down? With what long-range increase in
enmeshment? What payments will be charged to the children, what
emotional story of repetition without reparation, recapitulation
without reconciliation [will] be turned in a new direction?”20 It is an
observable psychological phenomenon that whatever is not
emotionally confronted and worked through in one generation will
be passed on to the next. “Repetition compulsion,” or being
compelled to repeat unconsciously what cannot be faced
consciously, does not happen simply in the lives of isolated
individuals. It is rather an intergenerational, complex social reality.
If parents fail to do this [embrace their own unconscious wounds],
they unwittingly pass on the weight of unhealed suffering to their
children. It is not the psychic wounds of the parents which are,
themselves, toxic to the children, but the lack of conscious
encounter with those wounds that pervades the family
unconscious and gets transferred to the next generation. If the
previous generation hasn’t consciously suffered, the pain will be
handed on, often unconsciously, to the next generation.21
Lasting resolution, it would seem, happens only when adult children
decide to confront the impasse with their parents, only when they
stop running away and face the depths of their own pain. And
because the pain from the abuse is both an interpersonal and an
intrapersonal phenomenon, it can be approached either externally or
internally.
Let us turn, then, to an intrapsychic perspective on the same set of
issues. From an object relations point of view, “reconciliation . . .

-- 75 of 209 --

comes about as a result of peacemaking within — resolving
intrapersonal relationships — leading to peacemaking between in
personal harmony.”22 Intrapsychically, reconciliation with our
parents is an event that is unique in kind because the very building
blocks of our psychic makeup are the primary internalized objects of
our mother and father. Given the way we develop as human beings,
the internalization of our parents inevitably forms an integral part of
our identity. Our peculiar psychology is substantively shaped by
what we have introjected of our parents (assuming that they were
our primary caregivers), by what we have taken of them into
ourselves, into our own sense of self. We piece together an identity
by internalizing them, their way of speaking, their way of holding
and feeding us, and our feelings about how they move and smell and
taste. We drink in their eyes and the way they look at us. We become
finely attuned to their emotional state of being. We absorb
everything about them and weave fantasies about everything they do
(or fail to do) from the earliest beginnings of our lives. If we later
turn away from them and reject them because they have hurt us, we
are also thereby rejecting and “cutting off” an essential part of
ourselves. The distinctively Christian perception that we “are
members one of another” is applicable not to our ecclesiology alone.
In an analogous way, it is also a profound psychological truth
pertaining to what it means to live in a family, to have a mother and
a father whom we have internalized even before we consciously
knew who they were. Melanie Klein describes this process of
internalization as follows:
The baby, having incorporated the parents, feels them to be live
people inside its body in the concrete way in which deep
unconscious phantasies are experienced — they are, in its mind,
“internal” or “inner” objects, as I have termed them. Thus an inner
world is being built up in the child’s unconscious mind,
corresponding to actual experiences and impressions gained from
people and the external world, and yet altered by its own
phantasies and impulses. If it is a world of people predominantly

-- 76 of 209 --

at peace with each other and with the ego, inner harmony, security
and integration ensue.23
The reverse of Klein’s statement is unfortunately also true. If the
world we internalize is one where the people are predominantly at
war with each other and with us, then inner disharmony, insecurity,
and disintegration or splitting occur. Because the normal process of
human bonding and attachment entails the psychic introjection of
our parents, our relationship with them occupies a unique place in
our psychology. They become the prototype or template, so to
speak, of all subsequent relationships. Working things through with
our parents therefore has the potential to affect all our relationships
profoundly, even our relationship with ourselves. Because the
internalized image of our parents is so formative of our own sense
of self, we are mistaken if we think we can rid ourselves of our
parents simply by putting the distance of time or space between
them and us. Decades, indeed a whole lifetime, can go by without
seeing them, but our relationship with them will not cease to live on
inside our own minds. Even if we have consciously “forgotten”
them, they are nevertheless operative and present to us
unconsciously, that is, outside of our awareness. Insofar as we
successfully dissociate ourselves from them inwardly, all that we
actually accomplish is to split them off from our ego awareness;
unfortunately, in doing so we also cut off any possibility for growth,
change, or healing to take place in relation to them.
From an intrapsychic perspective, a person needs to reach a
certain minimal level of emotional maturity to have the
psychological capacity to forgive. In Klein’s understanding of
normal development, every infant goes through stages from a phase
of primary attachment where the mother and infant are one and the
mother is internalized as all good (ages one to three months, the so-‐
called schizoid position), to a second phase where the mother and
infant begin to separate and the mother begins to be split into good
and bad (four to six months, the so-called paranoid position). In this
second phase of development, the baby experiences intense love
toward the gratifying object and intense hate toward the frustrating

-- 77 of 209 --

object, not yet realizing that they are one and the same person. Just
as the emotions split, so also does the mother; she is perceived by
the infant as the idealized “good” mother, who satisfies her every
need, on the one hand, and the persecuting “bad” mother, who
frustrates the infant in her wishes and desires, on the other. Finally,
if all goes well, the infant is able to achieve the so-called depressive
position (at about age six months to three years) when she can
perceive the mother as a unified whole, at once the persecuting
“bad” mother and the gratifying “good” one. And just as the mother
is eventually perceived as a whole person, so the child also begins to
experience herself as a separate whole person with contradictory
feelings toward one and the same mother. “When love and hate are
experienced together, a new set of feelings emerges for the first
time: guilt, sadness, depression, and grief: guilt that one’s hostile
feelings have hurt the other, sadness at the loss, grief and depression
in consequence. This emotional position — the depressive position
— makes possible feelings of concern.”24
The transition to the depressive position is what enables the child
to make reparations to the parent. The infant becomes anxious that
her hate may be too powerful for the parent, that her bad feelings
will outweigh the good ones and she may even have the power to
annihilate her mother’s goodness. If the mother survives the infant’s
destructive impulses and fantasies and does not retaliate, but
continues to love and nurture the child, then feelings of gratitude
and love will well up in the child. The child would then wish to
repair any damage she has done in her imagination and would desire
to reconcile her mother to herself, safeguarding “the good object”
outside her and restoring the good object representation within. As
the infant’s earliest experience of the mother’s forgiveness, this
primitive psychological process forms the rudimentary
underpinnings of the adult capacity to forgive. The child who has
this kind of experience with a mother in the earliest months of life
will have the psychological capacity for building relationships
where forgiveness is emotionally possible.
True reparation, rising out of psychic realities between infant and

-- 78 of 209 --

mother, allows the experiencing of real pain and grief and a
genuine desire to reshape the inner world of love, hate, and guilt
into a new unity and to respond to the external reality in bonding
ways. . . . Authentic forgiveness . . . is marked by a reconciliation
in which there is movement by both parties toward each other,
cessation of continuing animosity over the injury, and a reopening
of the future in trust as each accepts both the good and bad parts
of the self and the other. . . . [Thus] the capacity to forgive
another’s offenses is directly related to the ability to deal with
one’s inner offender. As a person learns to deal with the bad
objects within, bad objects in others become less troublesome.
The ability to deal with the internal is requisite for dealing with
the external.25
A person who lacks this kind of emotional maturity would tend to
split both the self and the other as he regresses to earlier stages of
development (the paranoid and schizoid positions). Such splitting
accounts for the well- known phenomenon in which he sees himself
as “all good” and the other as “all bad,” while the other carries the
“unowned, unacceptable parts of the self. . . . As we see these traits
in the face of the foe, projections though they are, they disappear in
the self. Anxiety and guilt, aided by selective perception and recall,
now diminish and disappear.”26 The other is perceived to be all-‐
powerful (like the formerly all-powerful parent), and the self is
perceived to be little and helpless (like the infant he used to be and
with whom he is unconsciously identified in this regressed state).
Augsburger’s observation at this point corroborates the conclusion
already reached from a family systems perspective, namely, that
“the degree to which one blames one’s parents is the degree to
which one is still stuck in the family of origin, is still a child.”27
Harsh though this judgment may sound to those adults unable to
forgive their parents for the wrong done them, it nevertheless points
to the central impasse where people find themselves “stuck” in both
an inner and an outer sense. They are unable genuinely to come to
terms with the past in such a way that they can prevent repeating it
in another form. If they are psychologically still children blaming

-- 79 of 209 --

their parents, they will inevitably repeat the past in some form.
Child psychotherapist Dorothy Martyn captures the essence of the
problem: “Psychological distress in itself is not erasable because
there is no way to start over. We are caught in an infinite series of
mirrors in which repetition of man’s error is inevitable because
internalization from one’s relational matrix is axiomatic.”28
The normal psychological phenomenon of human functioning,
psychic introjection, is thus responsible for the fact that the inner
world and the outer world of our interpersonal relationships actually
mirror each other. Thus our attitude toward the outer abuser is
intimately entwined with our attitude toward “the inner abuser.” The
“inner abuser” would be the internalized representation of the
person with whom we have a primary relationship in the outside
world. He (or she) becomes an integral part of the self, with both
good and bad characteristics. Growth or development in the outer
relationship would inevitably have a powerful impact on our inner
world; and coming to terms with the reality of the abuse inwardly
could empower us to approach the parent in the external world.
Inner and outer reality thus mirror one another. As Augsburger
points out, “Our special relations [e.g., intimate relations with
family] contain deep involvements, profound loyalties, intimate
feelings, and covenantal obligations that connect us to inner layers
of the soul, former selves in the developmental process, and other
persons in our family systems. . . . We become systemically
interrelated with the whole person and the other as a totality is
connected with us.”29
Because our parents live inside us as part of our own psychic
constitution, cutting them off would be something like trying to
excise a liver or heart, a part of our body essential for life. “Cutting
off” parents as a way of managing anxiety and pain may provide
temporary relief, but as an attempt at a permanent solution it is
bound to have deleterious effects on everyone: on the perpetrator of
the abuse, who never gets confronted with the effects of his sin; on
the victim, who not only remains in a victimized position vis- à- vis
her parents, but is also seriously split (i.e., cut off from herself)
insofar as she avoids facing the internalized representations of her

-- 80 of 209 --

parents; and also on the whole extended family, who are adversely
affected by the taboos and secrets related to the abuse, even if they
themselves have no direct knowledge of it.30
Insofar as forgiveness and reconciliation are a psychological
possibility, they involve processes of emotional maturing. From an
interpersonal perspective, they require a person to be able to take a
clear, differentiated stand. In terms of the concrete situation that we
are considering, taking such a stand would be a matter of the victim
taking her own suffering seriously enough to stand steadfastly with
the emotionally traumatized child that she once was (and who
therefore still lives inside her). It would involve a capacity to
confront the abuser in some way with a description of the suffering
she has undergone as a result of the abuse. It would include the
recognition that what was done to her was unjust and intolerable.
Taking steps toward some kind of reconciliation with the abuser
therefore would not mean that she was offering him “cheap grace.”
On the contrary, she would confront him as a way of giving him the
opportunity truly to repent the wrong he has committed. She would
not be interested in hearing explanations that sought to deny his
responsibility because of possible extenuating circumstances. In
other words, even if the abuse arose out of the abuser’s own terrible
inheritance of twisted relationships, he nevertheless would need to
take responsibility for his own actions. In recounting her suffering to
the one who has harmed her, she would be giving the perpetrator an
opportunity to begin genuinely to make amends. Far from being
retaliatory or vindictive, confrontation in this sense could be one of
the most loving and generous actions a victim could undertake.
From an intrapsychic perspective, emotional maturity would mean
that the victim has come to terms with the fact that the abuser is also
a part of her own psychic structure; that is to say, he is not only an
outer person, but also a part of herself.
We must face the truth that we are not merely innocent victims
who have suffered at the hands of our families. Instead, we
ourselves continue to wound others until we can become
conscious of the hurt and anger within us and slowly let go of it.

-- 81 of 209 --

In working with clients who have been abused as children, it is
always a sobering moment of truth when the one who was abused
can finally see the ways he or she now abuses others. It is a scary
but potentially liberating thing to see how the cycle we are trying
so hard to escape is repeated with frighteningly unconscious
accuracy in our own lives.31
What Bennett refers to here as “a sobering moment of truth” is that
point in the therapeutic process when the victim realizes that she too
is caught in the same web of sin that already caught the parent who
abused her. She, herself, is subject to the same powerful forces of
hatred and rage, of defensiveness, self-righteousness, and self-‐
deception that all flesh is heir to. But what makes the recognition of
her own sin uncanny is its particular manifestation that has this
“frighteningly unconscious accuracy.” Eventually she comes to see
that the abuser is also an internalized aspect of herself. She, herself,
is a culpable sinner, unable by her own power to extract herself from
the web in which she is caught.
If human beings are in truth knit together in sin and in grace, as
the gospel attests (“But God shows his love for us in that while we
were yet sinners Christ died for us” [Rom. 5:8]), it would seem that
the only way out of the dilemma is somehow through the narrow
gate of repentance and the renewal of life. This narrow gate is
approached in the therapeutic process when a victim of abuse begins
to catch glimpses of her own failings and sinfulness before God. But
such glimpses would come only after the person has gone through a
process of profound grief over the multiple losses involved in the
abusive situation. “Adult reparations and adult mourning are
possible when the objects within (both good and bad internalized
identifications) are accepted; then others who act evilly (external
bad objects) can be seen with empathy and compassion.”32 Abused
persons who begin to mature emotionally in the ways described do
so only by another relationship, a relationship in which they are
listened to, believed, and understood, cared for and respected. In the
context of a loving relationship with another who respects and

-- 82 of 209 --

safeguards proper human boundaries, they can begin to explore the
pain and terror of what they have undergone.
The work of psychotherapy has long been conceptualized as a
unique kind of “reparenting” process. Through the offering of a new
relationship that symbolically recapitulates the relationship between
parent and child, the therapist is internalized as a beneficent other,
which eventually has a marked impact on the originally internalized
parental representations.33 The “good enough” therapist restores
trust by respecting the person’s inviolable personal boundaries and
by providing a safe space in which she can grieve the immense
losses of her childhood years. For if therapy is to bring healing, it
will involve remembering the abuse, recalling concrete events and
connecting them with the feelings she would have had, had she not
dissociated herself from them. These feelings inevitably are the
emotions inherent to the grieving process: shock, horror, fear, rage,
outrage, sorrow, and despair, interspersed with recurring bouts of
denial, minimization, bargaining, and numbness, when the intensity
of raw feeling seems too overwhelming.34 Sometimes improvement
comes by allowing the emotions to emerge, even if no conscious
memories can be attached to them. Put in its simplest form,
emotional healing is grieving.
Once Gizelle broke through to her memories of the abuse, she was
flooded with feelings that needed some kind of containment.
Therapy by itself was no longer enough. She needed a whole
community of persons to support and uphold her while she poured
out the torrent of formerly repressed feelings that now threatened to
overwhelm her.
By that time, I had made a few good friends who stood by me. I
started with a very sparse network of support, which has since
spiraled, one person at a time. I felt so blessed with the support I
had. I went home and made a list of all my dearest friends, female
and male, and I said, “This is what I’m discovering. And I need
someone to listen. I’m calling all my friends. I’m going to
structure seven days, and I want you to tell me what day you can
come, and if you can give me a commitment to come every

-- 83 of 209 --

Monday between two and four, it’d be great.” And people came
through. I talked and I talked. About my feelings. About the
molestation. About my health. About my suicides. About my
father. Giving it form. Giving it shape. Naming it. Feeling it. I just
needed to have someone listen to me.35
But what about forgiveness? Was it possible in the context of this
grief work for Gizelle to forgive her father? Regrettably, we are not
told, for her story was still unfolding even as she related it to the
authors of the volume in which it appeared. She had made great
strides, however, in accepting the full range of her emotional
responses, her rage and outrage toward her father, right alongside
her feelings of love and compassion, thus showing that she had
achieved the “depressive position.” In her inner world, she was able
to bring together the bad and the good of the self, and to recognize
how her own struggles had in turn harmed her daughter, to whom
she then sought to make amends. She was able, in other words, not
only to attain a united self but also to begin to make amends for the
trauma she inflicted on her daughter when she had despaired of life
itself. At the same time, she was also able to acknowledge both the
good and the bad in her father, no longer needing to see him only as
evil. She recognized, for instance, something of his own suffering
by acknowledging the dehumanizing hell from which he had come.
“It was soon after I was born that my father went away to Burma
and spent two years in a MASH unit in the jungle, putting together
blown-up bodies,” Gizelle said. “When he came back, he was
unable to work. He was in a lot of emotional difficulty. One of his
best friends had committed suicide right after the war.”36
Acknowledgment of his suffering, however, did not excuse his
actions, even if, from a Christian perspective, it set them into the
proper context of the universality of sin, showing that his culpability
was not his alone, but belonged in the larger context of the ravages
and terrors of war and destruction of which human beings are
frighteningly capable. Human sin is a mysterious combination of
both guilt and power, at once a vast web in which we are caught and

-- 84 of 209 --

particular actions that we culpably undertake by our choices that
keep us even more forcefully caught in sin’s grip.
Gizelle was able to stand courageously with the abused child who
was once herself (and who thus still lived in her), and tell her father
that she remembered the incident in which he raped her. When he
proceeded to deny it with some vehemence, she was not dissuaded
from continuing her work, even though she did let go of the fantasy
that he might help her or that some kind of reconciliation with him
might be possible. She also made the brave decision not to protect
her father by keeping the abuse a secret from her daughter. “And
then I thought, ‘No, that’s where this is passed on. This is the denial
that allows this to happen. My daughter has a right to know the truth
of what’s going on.’ ”37 Near the end of her story she writes:
“Sometimes I sit here and feel such compassion for my father, I
weep. Other times I see myself taking a gun and shooting [him]. I
am letting it all come right on through. And the more I allow all of it
to come up, the more I find myself moving toward love. The more I
block the rage, the more I stay stuck. And so for me they’re both
right there. I reconcile it by saying I trust the process. I trust the
validity of my outrage. The outrage is because I honor and value and
love life.”38
Although Gizelle herself did not undergo her therapeutic process
as a Christian, it might be instructive for our own purposes to make
some observations from an explicitly theological frame of reference.
First, it is possible to interpret the work of a secular therapist as a
sign of God’s grace. The healing compassion and gifted insight of
the therapist and the support of Gizelle’s caring circle of friends can
be seen as a sign of God’s mercy that comes to Gizelle as a gift of
grace and can be understood as a kind of secular parable of the
truth.39 For God’s grace and mercy are not limited to working within
the sphere of the church alone. The wind of God’s healing Spirit
blows where it will.
Second, there is an important distinction between the vertical and
the horizontal dimensions of forgiveness. The so-called vertical
dimension of God’s forgiveness is based on God’s free decision to
be for us despite our wickedness toward others and godlessness

-- 85 of 209 --

toward him. “Because of Jesus Christ, God no longer holds my sins
against me. Christ alone is my righteousness and my life; Christ is
my only hope. Grace alone, not my merits, is the basis on which
God has forgiven me in him.”40 The actuality of God’s grace toward
sinners not only assures us of our own forgiveness, but is also the
condition for the possibility of our forgiving anyone who has
harmed us. Only insofar as forgiveness is first received as God’s
unimaginable gift can it be offered to another in love. That is to say,
only as we receive the actuality of God’s forgiveness do we have the
capacity to forgive another who has harmed us. Question 83 in the
new Presbyterian catechism puts these vertical and horizontal
dimensions of forgiveness into proper relationship. “How can you
forgive those who have really hurt you?” it asks. “I cannot love my
enemies, I cannot pray for those who persecute me, I cannot even be
ready to forgive those who have really hurt me, without the grace
that comes from above. I cannot be conformed to the image of
God’s Son, apart from the power of God’s Word and Spirit. Yet I am
promised that I can do all things through Christ who strengthens
me.”41
Third, it is a profound mistake to understand forgiveness as a law
or moral demand rather than the gospel of life that it is. Alice Miller,
the Swiss psychologist whose vocation has been to challenge the
abusive child-rearing practices of her culture, shows how making
forgiveness into a demand can itself be a form of moral violence.
The demand to forgive another in this sense would function as a way
of adding layers of guilt and shame to an already overburdened and
traumatized soul. The abused person thus wonders why she is
unable to forgive and further injures herself by heaping guilt upon
herself for being selfish and unforgiving. Miller rejects
reconciliation as a goal of the therapeutic process. She writes:
“Since, to me, therapy means a sensory, emotional and mental
discovery of the long-repressed truth, I regard the moral demand for
reconciliation with parents as an inevitable blocking and paralyzing
of the therapeutic process.”42 How would the “moral demand for
reconciliation” block and paralyze the work of healing? It would
prevent the person from recalling her own experiences and feeling

-- 86 of 209 --

her own emotions. By putting an overlay of a “should” over her
feelings, it would effectively alienate her from herself. And that is
the thing that very likely happened to Gizelle as a child. A child with
abusive parents is typically instructed as to how she “should” act,
how she “should” feel, indeed, how she “should” completely forgo
her own true feelings and put forth an acceptable, but false, front.
Telling her in the context of therapeutic work that she “should”
forgive her parents would only perpetuate this destructive pattern.
The authors of the book in which Gizelle’s story appears do not
wish to jeopardize the healing process of survivors of abuse by any
such moral demands for forgiveness or reconciliation. In their
chapter on forgiveness they write:
The only necessity as far as healing is concerned is forgiving
yourself. Developing compassion and forgiveness for your abuser,
or for the members of your family who did not protect you, is not
a required part of the healing process. It is not something to hope
for or shoot for. It is not the final goal. . . . You may never reach
an attitude of forgiveness, and that’s perfectly all right. . . . “Why
should you [forgive]? First they steal everything else from you
and then they want forgiveness too? Let them get their own.
You’ve given enough.”43
While the bitterness of such an attitude is an understandable human
reaction, can we say from a Christian perspective that it is even
possible to grant ourselves such forgiveness? As mere creatures and
not God, are we able to grant ourselves forgiveness any more than
we can create ourselves or grant ourselves eternal life? Are we not
dependent upon our fellow human beings and on God himself to
grant us the forgiveness of our sins? There is nothing in the New
Testament about forgiving ourselves, although there is much there to
indicate a close connection between our forgiveness of another and
God’s forgiveness of us. (“Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors.” “What you bind on earth is bound in heaven and what you
loose on earth is loosed in heaven.”)44 If forgiveness is not law, but
rather gospel, then it is not properly understood as a therapeutic

-- 87 of 209 --

goal, or even as something we should strive willfully to attain, but
only as something we can pray for. While we cannot forgive another
as an act of the will, we can by grace willingly pray for the capacity
to forgive one who has harmed us.
But this perspective also raises the question of our fourth point:
the relationship between healing and forgiveness. The authors here
seem to indicate that forgiveness of the abuser is not a necessary
element for emotional healing to occur. While it may be helpful to
forgive oneself, so they seem to say, there is no necessity to forgive
one’s abuser in order to heal. One can heal without taking the abuser
into consideration at all. Forgiveness is thus seen only from a
perspective of its instrumental value for healing. From the
perspective of Christian theology, however, forgiveness could never
be such an instrumental value, for it is an end in itself. Forgiveness
is God’s unfathomable gift of grace to humanity, a gift that enables
us to be set free from the power of guilt and sin to destroy us.
Emotional healing, from this perspective, would be understood
within the context of forgiveness, rather than the other way around.
Healing in this view would be considered a sign of God’s mercy and
grace that points beyond itself to the salvation accomplished apart
from us in Jesus Christ. That is to say, emotional healing would be
understood as a kind of inbreaking of the kingdom, a little light that
would encourage hope for the greater light of salvation promised to
break forth at the end of all things. The theological significance of
healing for the believer is its function as a sign of our eschatological
hope for all persons. Conceptually, healing and forgiveness thus
stand in a particular relation to each other. “They occur on two
different levels and indicate two different contexts of meaning.
Whereas the significance of the one is temporal, the significance of
the other is eternal; whereas the one is penultimate, the other is
ultimate. . . . The significance of salvation as the ultimate term is
thus independent of that of healing as the penultimate term, but the
relationship is irreversible, for the significance of the penultimate
depends on that of the ultimate.”45 While healing of a sort can occur
without forgiveness, the ultimate unity of the two is “eschatological
in form,” namely, in the final salvation of the world in Jesus Christ.

-- 88 of 209 --

All our attempts at human healing and human forgiveness are
inevitably fragmentary and partial. When forgiveness occurs as an
actual human event, however, it feels indeed like a miracle and
cannot help but bring in its train a tremendous release of joy and
deeper emotional healing. For Christians, it points beyond itself as a
joyful sign of God’s coming kingdom when God will be all in all.
Fifth, there is an important distinction between forgiveness and
reconciliation. Some have argued that in situations of abuse,
Christians should not forgive the perpetrator unless and until there is
evidence of genuine repentance. Thus, Marie Fortune argues that
confession, repentance, and restitution are all necessary actions to be
taken by the perpetrator before a victim of abuse should forgive.
“Prior to justice,” she writes, “forgiveness is an empty exercise.”
She goes on to say, “Forgiveness before justice is ‘cheap grace’ and
cannot contribute to authentic healing and restoration to wholeness
for the victim or for the offender. It cuts the healing process short
and may well perpetuate the cycle of abuse. It also undercuts the
redemption of abusers by preventing them from being accountable
for their abusive behavior.”46 It is understandable that Fortune would
argue against the dangers of premature forgiveness, particularly
since it is known that perpetrators of abuse have little awareness of
the costliness of the forgiveness they ask for. Offenders might seem
remorseful after battering their partners and terrifying their children,
and might offer what seems like a sincere apology. Yet within days
or weeks, the cycle begins again with a buildup of tension leading to
another explosion of anger and family members being badly hurt.
Insisting on a repentance in which the perpetrator gives evidence of
starting anew by actually taking steps to change his ways seems to
be the better part of wisdom. Not mere good intentions are called
for, but rather actions that show genuine remorse and a commitment
to change. Withholding forgiveness is thus set forth as a kind of
strategy to demonstrate that change has to happen before anything
can be forgiven. One group of incest offenders who were in a
treatment program actually spoke out against forgiveness because it
gave them the message that they were not going to be held
accountable for their actions. “A group of incest offenders in a

-- 89 of 209 --

treatment program made a powerful plea: ‘Don’t forgive so easily.’
All were Christians and had gone to their pastors as soon as they
were arrested, asking to be forgiven. Each had been prayed over,
forgiven and sent home. They said that this pastoral response had
been the least helpful to them because it enabled them to continue to
avoid accountability for their offenses.”47 It is truly horrifying to
think of someone continuing in sin because a priest or minister had
forgiven him. Somewhere the preaching of the church has failed.
What kind of distortions of the gospel are we perpetrating because
we no longer know how to hold people accountable, because we
have eliminated all forms of church discipline? “What shall we say
then? Are we to continue in sin that grace may abound? By no
means! How can we who died to sin still live in it?” (Rom. 6:1-2).
And yet, it seems more true to the gospel to say that while there
can be no real reconciliation without repentance, there could indeed
be occasions of forgiveness without repentance. That is to say,
though reconciliation depends upon genuine repentance, forgiveness
itself hinges neither upon healing nor upon repentance. Just as
forgiveness is not an instrumental value for healing, so it cannot
function as a strategic ploy to keep offenders in line. Forgiveness is
God’s free gift freely offered. If “Christ died for us while we were
yet sinners,” the forgiveness extended to us was not conditional.
One might argue, in fact, that it is the free offering of this
unconditional grace that actually enables us to see the depth of our
own sin against God. In the light of God’s gracious forgiveness, in
other words, our sin is all the more starkly revealed. The victim of
abuse does not need to wait for the offender to repent before
forgiving him.48 Forgiveness sets the forgiver free from bitterness
and dark desires for revenge. Forgiveness also sets the offender free
from unbearable burdens of guilt, regret, shame, and remorse, free
to begin anew a life lived in Christ. While it is possible that
Gizelle’s forgiveness of her father may one day lead him to repent of
his violence and brutality toward her, he might also remain in
denial, never to acknowledge the truth of what actually occurred
between them. In such a case, reconciliation would be an
impossibility. Reconciliation would require her father openly to

-- 90 of 209 --

acknowledge the truth, take genuine responsibility for his actions,
express sincere sorrow, and take concrete steps that communicate
how seriously and earnestly he desires his daughter’s renewed trust.
True reconciliation would thus in the mystery of God’s grace
actually transform the relationship between them even though it
wouldn’t erase the pain and anguish of the past.49
Sixth, how might Gizelle’s therapeutic process have been different
if the church and its practices had been the overarching context for
her work of healing? Would it have made a difference if Gizelle had
sought out a Christian pastoral counselor for her therapeutic work,
that is, if she herself had sought healing as a Christian disciple? If it
made a difference, what sort of difference would that be?
Pastoral counseling, at least as practiced in the United States
today, would perhaps not look very different from the kind of
therapy Gizelle received. Lamentably, the pastoral counseling
movement has in large part forsaken the traditions and doctrinal
riches of the church in its work. But if the pastoral counseling
sought were Christian, it would not only avail itself of the treasury
of psychoanalytic insight, but would also self-consciously draw
from the wealth to be found in the Scripture, prayer, doctrine,
preaching, worship, sacraments, and fellowship of the church. While
Gizelle herself did not seek Christian pastoral counseling, it could
be instructive to imagine what it might have looked like if she had.
Three brief observations may be in order.
First, the work of healing would not be the work of an isolated
individual, nor even of an individual with her therapist and her
friends. While it is impressive to see Gizelle’s creativity at work as
she sought to gather a group of friends to help her heal from the
trauma of her past, there is for me considerable pathos in pondering
how hard she had to work to create a community of care for herself.
How meager and threadbare it seems by comparison to the church as
a living community, given as a gift from God. There is something
poignant about Gizelle calling friends and asking for individual
commitments of two-hour time slots. Each friend is connected to
Gizelle like a spoke on a wheel with Gizelle at the center, but no one
spoke is intrinsically connected to any other spoke. The friends may

-- 91 of 209 --

not even know each other. The Monday afternoon listener has likely
never met the Monday evening friend. So many of our
contemporary efforts to create “communities of care” strike me as
just such patchwork affairs pieced together by huge expenditures of
individual initiative, rather than a rich interwoven tapestry where
everyone is connected to everyone else by each person’s connection
to Jesus Christ. Gizelle’s crying need, as her actions so vividly
demonstrate, is for a whole community to surround her with love
and care. That need is not Gizelle’s alone, but every person’s in our
atomized and rootless society.
Second, how might the church become a real agent of
reconciliation, where it could actually provide safe and structured
settings for parents and their adult children to meet face- to-face?
How can forgiveness actually take place under current conditions of
modern life if parents and children never come together to talk about
their common painful history? Estranged families sustained by the
daily bread of Scripture could develop an imagination for human
forgiveness (as in the story of Joseph and his brothers), could take
heed from cautionary tales of warning (like Tamar and Amnon and
Absalom), and could visualize anew goals worth striving for (like
“speaking the truth in love”). The intercessory prayers of the
community could uphold all those who cannot bring themselves
even to ask for the willingness to forgive.
Finally, when faced with the magnitude of the hurt, it seems
obvious that a psychotherapist or pastoral counselor, no matter how
gifted, would simply be incapable of providing the level of care
needed to restore a single individual to renewed life. Yet that seems
to be what many of us have been trying to do in many of our
contemporary therapeutic practices. It is significant that Anna Freud
saw the clear limits of psychotherapy more than fifty years ago.
Robert Coles recounts a conversation he once had with Miss Freud,
in which she described the painful psychiatric history of an elderly
woman. Then she wondered aloud what they (as psychotherapists,
as human beings) would really desire for her. “Oh, I don’t mean
psychotherapy!” she exclaimed.

-- 92 of 209 --

She’s had lots of that. It would take more years, I suspect, of
psychoanalysis than the good Lord has given her. . . . I will
confess to you: when I was listening to all of this, I thought to
myself that this poor old lady doesn’t need us at all. No she’s had
her fill of “us,” even if she doesn’t know it. . . . What she needs . .
. is forgiveness. She needs to make peace with her soul, not talk
about her mind. There must be a God, somewhere, to help her, to
hear her, to heal her. . . . But I fear she’ll not find him! And we
certainly aren’t the ones who will be of assistance to her in that
regard!50
But who are the ones who will be of assistance in that regard if not
Christian pastors and pastoral counselors? Can Christian pastoral
counselors once again claim the full power of the gospel as intrinsic
to the vocation to which they are called?
1. Marie Fortune, “The Nature of Abuse,” Pastoral Psychology 41 (1993): 275-88.
2. Fortune, “The Nature of Abuse,” 276.
3. Mic Hunter, Abused Boys: The Neglected Victims of Sexual Abuse (New York: Fawcett
Columbine, 1990), 8-9.
4. Fortune, “The Nature of Abuse,” 277.
5. Cf. Steven Hassan, Combatting Cult Mind Control (Rochester, Vt.: Park Street Press, 1988), 55-
56. Hassan makes a distinction between “brainwashing,” which is a coercive process undertaken by
an enemy, and “mind control,” which is a more subtle process involving hypnotic techniques
undertaken by one perceived to be a friend or peer. In the latter case, the victim participates in his
own victimization as information that he voluntarily gives is used to manipulate or deceive him.
6. Fortune, “The Nature of Abuse,” 277. See also Margaret Z. Kornfeld, Cultivating Wholeness: A
Guide to Care and Counseling in Faith Communities (New York: Continuum, 1999), 262.
7. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion 2.8.36, ed. John T. McNeill, vol. 1
(Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960), 402.
8. Calvin, Institutes 2.8.38, pp. 403-4.
9. See, for example, Joanne Carlson Brown and Rebecca Parker, “For God So Loved the World?”
in Christianity, Patriarchy, and Abuse: A Feminist Critique, ed. Carole R. Bohn and Joanne C. Brown
(Cleveland: Pilgrim Press, 1989), 1-30.
10. Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics III/4 (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1961), 245.
11. Leonard Shengold, Soul Murder: The Effects of Childhood Abuse and Deprivation (New York:
Ballantine Books, 1991).
12. Ellen Bass and Laura Davis, The Courage to Heal: A Guide for Women Survivors of Child
Sexual Abuse (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), 448-49.
13. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 449-50.
14. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 456.
15. I am greatly indebted to a book by David W. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive (Louisville:

-- 93 of 209 --

Westminster John Knox, 1996), in which Augsburger features each of these psychological theories in
relation to its implications for the process of forgiveness.
16. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 47. This sentence does not represent Augsburger’s own
view of maturity, but rather is his depiction of how some people conceive of it.
17. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 42.
18. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 42. The chart on this page vividly differentiates these
three options sought by those attempting to reconcile with one another.
19. Edwin H. Friedman, Generation to Generation: Family Process in Church and Synagogue
(New York: Guilford Press, 1985), 26.
20. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 30-31.
21. Phillip Bennett, “Family Complexes and Individuation,” Round Table Review 1, no. 5 (May-‐
June 1994): 9.
22. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 53.
23. Melanie Klein, Love, Guilt, and Reparation, and Other Works, 1921-1945 (New York: Free
Press, 1975), 312-13, cited by Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 54.
24. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 57; see also figure 3.2, p. 58.
25. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 60-61, 64-65.
26. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 63.
27. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 63.
28. Dorothy Martyn, “A Child and Adam: A Parable of the Two Ages,” Journal of Religion and
Health 16 (1977): 278.
29. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 34.
30. “Secrets function to divide a family, as an avalanche would a community. The most important
effect of secrets on a family’s emotional system is that they exacerbate other pathological processes
unrelated to the content of the particular secret, because secrets generally function to keep anxiety at
higher energy levels. [Secrets] are never on the side of challenge and change. Secrets are very serious
stuff.” Friedman, Generation to Generation, 52-54.
31. Bennett, “Family Complexes and Individuation,” 12.
32. Augsburger, Helping People Forgive, 166.
33. Martyn, “A Child and Adam,” 275-87.
34. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross first described the emotional stages of the grieving process in her
celebrated book, On Death and Dying, as denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance.
Since its publication, a general consensus has evolved that these are not stages that one follows in
strict time sequence, but fluid steps that one can cycle through numerous times as one grieves a loss.
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, On Death and Dying (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1969).
35. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 454.
36. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 447.
37. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 456.
38. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 456.
39. Martyn, “A Child and Adam,” 285.
40. The Study Catechism (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1998), question 80.
41. The Study Catechism, question 83.
42. Alice Miller, Banished Knowledge: Facing Childhood Injuries (New York: Doubleday, 1990),
154.

-- 94 of 209 --

43. Bass and Davis, The Courage to Heal, 149-50.
44. L. Gregory Jones also addresses this problem in what he calls “therapeutic forgiveness.” He
says that “forgiveness, at least as Christians ought to understand and embody it, is not about ‘healing
ourselves,’ it is about being healed by God and by others in and through specific practices of
forgiveness.” L. Gregory Jones, Embodying Forgiveness: A Theological Analysis (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1995), 50.
45. Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, Theology and Pastoral Counseling: A New Interdisciplinary
Approach (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995), 74-75.
46. Marie Fortune, Violence in the Family: A Workshop Curriculum for Clergy and Other Helpers,
rev. ed. (Cleveland: Pilgrim Press, 1991), 174.
47. Fortune, Violence in the Family, 178.
48. Margaret R. Holmgren argues on philosophical grounds (from a standpoint in virtue-ethics),
that because offenders (like victims) are “sentient beings and moral agents,” they need to be treated
with “an attitude of respect, compassion, and real goodwill” (p. 98), which is her definition of
forgiveness. In this case, forgiveness needs to be offered unconditionally, even without any
repentance on the part of the offender. She helpfully outlines six steps that are intrinsic to the victim’s
self-respect and to her healing: (1) recover her self-esteem; (2) differentiate between forgiving and
condoning the wrong done to her; (3) acknowledge her true (often intense) feelings about the
incident; (4) take steps to protect herself from further victimization; (5) if she feels the need to
express her feelings directly to the offender, to do so with the support of others; (6) determine
whether she wants to seek restitution from the offender. See Margaret R. Holmgren, Forgiveness and
Retribution: Responding to Wrongdoing (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 58-64.
49. For a helpful discussion of the dangers of “premature forgiveness,” the relationship between
forgiveness and reconciliation, and what it means for the church to be called to be “ambassadors of
reconciliation,” see Pamela Cooper-White’s concluding chapter in The Cry of Tamar: Violence
against Women and the Church’s Response (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2012), 251-61.
50. Robert Coles, Harvard Diary: Reflections on the Sacred and the Secular (New York:
Crossroad, 1990), 177-80, cited in Johann Christoph Arnold, Seventy Times Seven: The Power of
Forgiveness (Farmington, Pa.: Plough Publishing House, 1997), 133-34.

-- 95 of 209 --

CHAPTER 4
Keeping an Open Heart in Troubled Times
Self-Empathy as a Christian Spiritual Practice
How do you keep your heart open when you see person after person
afflicted with trauma? I used to think that 95 percent of the female
population in this country had been sexually abused as children.1
Were the statistics of sexual abuse vastly underreported, I wondered,
or was my perception skewed because of my work as a pastoral
counselor? When you listen to stories of pain day after day, how do
you keep your own spirit alive? The root meaning of the word
“compassion” is “to suffer with.” What do you do when you reach
the limit of your capacity for compassion?
We are contextual beings whose many contexts exist not simply
outside us but also within us. As one member of a particular family,
we internalize every member in it, along with the family culture as a
whole with its unique dynamics, both for good and for ill. Similarly,
as cultural beings, we dwell within a particular culture, but that
culture also dwells in us.2 We internalize the context in which we
live, a context so complex that it would take hours adequately to
describe it.3
The overarching context that each of us has internalized — that
affects us daily, body and soul — includes the tragic events of
September 11, 2001, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the daily
terror and anguish of those in the Middle East. Depending on which
issues live in our hearts, we may also bear the pain of those who
suffer from HIV-AIDS, political oppression, torture, or any number
of tragic features of today’s world. As members of a common
humanity, each of us participates in the world’s distress. Those of us
in ministry internalize certain levels of pain by our commitment to
be fully present with the handful of persons we serve on a daily

-- 96 of 209 --

basis. The cumulative effect of being in the presence of so much
pain puts us in danger of compassion fatigue, in which we simply
reach our limits.4 We stop caring, not because we want to, but
because we no longer have the capacity to take in anything more.
Philip Hallie, author of Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed, describes
the danger of having a vocation that continually confronts one with
suffering and evil. He writes of researching the Nazi era:
For years, I had been studying the slow crushing and grinding of a
human being by other human beings. . . . Across all these studies,
the pattern of the strong crushing the weak kept repeating itself
and repeating itself, so that when I was not bitterly angry, I was
bored at the repetition of the patterns of persecution. When I was
not desiring to be cruel with the cruel, I was a monster — like,
perhaps, many others around me — who could look upon torture
and death without a shudder.5
Being exposed to evil in this secondhand way had taken a heavy toll
on Hallie’s spirit, even without his knowing it. Harry Wilmer, a
Jungian analyst who studied the repetitive nightmares of Vietnam
veterans ten years after the war had ended, acknowledges something
of the personal cost. “It goes almost without saying that my work
with these men was often painful to me. Many times I asked myself
why I had taken it on, or more correctly, why it had taken me on. At
times I experienced war nightmares and dreams of combat. Then I
knew that the suffering of the men was getting to me.”6 While Hallie
apparently defended against the pain for a while, he came to see that
he had done so at the cost of his own humanity. Wilmer, by contrast,
allowed the veterans’ suffering to affect him intimately. Years after
the war had ended, he himself awoke at night in a sweat of terror.
The war lived on, as he says, “in the nightmares of combat veterans
and in the collective unconscious of us all.”7
In January 2006 my husband, George Hunsinger, organized a
national conference for religious and military leaders, human rights
activists, and lawyers to launch the National Religious Campaign
against Torture, a group of “national, regional, and local religious

-- 97 of 209 --

and secular organizations committed to ensuring that the United
States does not engage in torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment of anyone, without exceptions.”8 My husband spends
hours each day reading volumes of material on the Internet about
our current world crisis. Books on torture are piled on the breakfast
table, in the living room, and on the floor beside the bed. Stories of
torture fill his heart, fueling his commitment to do what he can to
bring these horrifying practices to an end.
One evening some time ago, as I went to him to say goodnight, he
began to tell me about what he was reading. Worried about the next
day’s responsibilities, I interrupted him, stating emphatically that I
couldn’t bear to hear stories about torture right before going to bed.
I was anxious about lying awake for hours seeing these images over
and over in my mind’s eye. No longer able to keep my heart open, I
told my husband with considerable energy that I just could not bear
to hear one more story of trauma.
As I have reflected on that moment, I have come to see something
of the cost of telling myself that “I cannot bear it.” First, I cut
myself off from the solace of shared suffering, in this case my
husband’s and my own. In subsequent weeks, my husband
acknowledged that he was now consciously keeping such stories
from me. Second, I found that I was shielding myself from any news
that might upset my peace of mind or interfere with my ability to
concentrate. Third, I felt regret over constricting my awareness in
this way, limiting my freedom to learn and to act. The victims of
torture were actually suffering torture while I could not even bear to
hear about it. Wanting to expand my capacities for compassion
rather than shrink away from such stories in self-protection, I found
myself at odds with my core values.
This, then, is the dilemma: How do I keep an open heart toward
those who need my compassion, whether it is my husband with
whom I share my life, myself, as I face my very real limits, or the
victims of torture living in prisons or dungeons whose very lives
may depend upon the willingness of others to feel their plight and
act on their behalf?

-- 98 of 209 --

Nonviolent Communication: Self-Empathy
In his book Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life,
Marshall Rosenberg teaches a mode of consciousness and a set of
skills that enable us not only to practice empathic reception of
others, but also to learn how to respond empathically to ourselves.9
While empathy is considered an essential skill for pastoral care, I do
not believe that it can flourish apart from self-empathy. To hear
another with compassion, we need first to hear ourselves with
compassion. If our anxiety is triggered (as mine was when my
husband wished to share a story of torture), we are unable to hear
little beyond our own internal static. As I have written elsewhere,
“Much of the self-discipline required in listening to others without
interjecting one’s own reactions develops as one learns to pay
attention to one’s anxiety. In order to focus on another, one must
know, paradoxically, how to pay attention to oneself.”10
In nonviolent communication, Rosenberg teaches us how to pay
attention not only to our feelings but also to the underlying needs or
values that are causing the feelings. Needs are understood to be
universal qualities that enhance life. They are life-giving, by
definition. Thus, all human beings have physical needs, such as
food, rest, water, warmth, and shelter. But just as essential to human
thriving are our interpersonal needs for love, acceptance,
understanding, community, and mutuality, among others. In
addition, we might identify spiritual needs for forgiveness, hope,
courage, trust, faith, integrity. These brief lists are meant to be
suggestive, not definitive. What is pertinent here is that needs are
evidence of our basic humanity. Though they transcend culture, each
culture has its own particular way of understanding and expressing
them. For Rosenberg, human needs are the underlying motivation
for all our choices, whether we are conscious of them or not.11 When
our needs are met, we typically feel satisfied, delighted, or joyful.
When our needs are unmet, we might feel frustrated, angry,
sorrowful, or perplexed.
When we have chronically unmet needs, we experience emotional
pain and need healing. When we attune ourselves inwardly with an

-- 99 of 209 --

attitude of caring attentiveness toward ourselves, seeking to
understand our own feelings and needs, we are practicing self-‐
empathy. I believe that we cannot remain openhearted toward others
unless we know how to metabolize our own pain. In the example
above, I was unable to connect with my husband’s pain because I
was not fully present to my own. I needed more understanding of
my reaction to his request to share what he was reading. Why, I
wondered, did I interrupt him with such intensity?
I have come to regard moments like these, when I am “triggered”
into uncharacteristic reactivity, as significant nodal points of
potential healing and growth. I believe that any time I react rather
than respond, it is because forces outside my awareness are at work.
This is the “psychopathology of everyday life” that Freud describes
so lucidly. Slips of the tongue, moments of lightning rage, and
irritability over which I have no apparent control are opportunities
to become aware of unknown forces at work within me. In
nonviolent communication (NVC) terms, they are opportunities to
practice self-empathy in order to connect with unmet needs.
The life-giving human needs at work in me were as yet impossible
for me to grasp. On the surface, my need for rest seemed paramount.
Yet the intensity of my reaction signaled that something deeper was
possibly at stake. In the days and weeks that followed, I found
myself repeating the words “I cannot bear it.” I would say to myself,
“I cannot bear to hear the stories of abused and tortured human
beings; I simply cannot bear it.” Though I understood this kind of
self-talk to be life-alienating, something that disconnected me from
myself and others, I did not know how to change it.
Practicing Self-Empathy
Self- empathy gives us the opportunity to listen to our own hearts
with the same quality of compassionate attention that we would
offer another in our best moments. However, simply finding words
that accurately describe our feelings and needs is not the same as
actually connecting with them. The process of connecting with an
activated need in any particular situation requires us first to notice

-- 100 of 209 --

what is happening in the body. We ask ourselves gently what it is
that we are seeking: “What is the longing of our heart?” As we listen
for the answer, we focus on what goes on in our body, not on words
in our mind.
As we attend to the body, we are seeking to name the unmet need
that activated the feeling of frustration or pain. NVC teaches a kind
of exquisite awareness of the range and variety of human needs.
When several needs are tied up together in a gnarled ball, it takes
time, care, and patience to identify each one. When we discover and
accurately connect with the activated need(s), we experience an
internal shift in the body. By internal shift, I mean something similar
to what we experience when we finally remember a person’s name
that has been on “the tip of our tongue.” When we discover the
name, our body relaxes; we might give a deep sigh and say, “Ahh, I
am so relieved to have remembered her name.” In NVC, a similar
feeling of shift and relaxation comes when we find the need that
matches our feeling.12
So, for example, when I am upset by the kitchen piled high with
dirty dishes, I want to identify my underlying need. Is it, I wonder, a
need for order? Am I upset because I value a sense of order and
beauty in my surroundings? Or is my underlying need one for trust
and reliability? Perhaps I had a conversation with a family member
who promised to clean the kitchen before going off with friends but
did not follow through on that promise. Or is it really support that I
need most of all? Are guests coming in thirty minutes and I am
desperately needing support to make everything ready? The need, in
other words, is always nested in a set of particular circumstances. I
alone can identify my true need by attuning myself to how my body
responds. What need, if met, would bring about palpable relaxation
in my body?
The feelings I identify then become the thread that takes me
deeper into my underlying longings. The feelings are usually more
on the surface, whereas the needs are the buried treasure. We can
feel the same feelings for weeks, months, even decades; they remain
inert, a simple story that we tell again and again unless we connect
with the unfulfilled desires that are causing the feelings. In NVC it

-- 101 of 209 --

is not necessary to understand the problem intellectually to bring
about clarity or release. In fact, intellectual understanding can
actually delay or block the desired liberating shift.
In order fully to connect with my need (rather than merely
identifying the word), I might imagine a situation where that need is
fully met. For example, I connect emotionally with the joy I feel
whenever I see this quality in myself or anyone else (e.g., order,
trust, reliability, or support, to take the example above). In other
words, truly to connect with the need means that I imagine it as
something fulfilled and present rather than as something lacking.
Truly to connect with the need is to experience its life-giving
power. When I check how it feels in my body not to have the need
met, I notice a heavy, tight, or constricted feeling. To connect with
its life-giving value, by contrast, I shift to imagine the need being
fully met. How do I actually feel in my body when I have order and
beauty surrounding me, for example, or when I trust that those I live
with will follow through on their promises? When I identify the
actual need at work in the specific circumstances, I will experience a
shift in my body when I ask myself this question. As I look inwardly
with self-empathy, I am looking for an inner sense of release or
relaxation, an “aha” feeling: this is the quality of being that I want
in my life. “I want my surroundings to be orderly and beautiful
because that gives me peace and joy.” I don’t focus, in other words,
on the dirty dishes or the messy kitchen, but rather on the feeling in
my body when the need is met.
Connecting with the need means to connect with its beauty, as one
NVC trainer has put it.13 It means that we live in a consciousness of
this need or quality as an enduring value in our life. When we dwell
in the need, we celebrate its presence and mourn its absence. When
we feel the pain associated with its absence, we shift our attention to
the joy of its intrinsic beauty or preciousness. Connected inwardly to
its life-giving goodness, we may consent to living vulnerably with
our unfulfilled longings.

-- 102 of 209 --

Self- Empathy as Opening the Heart
In an NVC workshop on self-empathy, NVC trainer Robert
Gonzales asked us to identify a sentence in our minds that seemed to
disconnect us from ourselves or others. I knew that the sentence “I
cannot bear it” truly disconnected me from others because I had
seen how it had disconnected me from my husband. I was also
aware that it alienated me from myself.
I began, with Robert’s guidance, to repeat the phrase “I cannot
bear it.” Because we were working on “old” material (as opposed to
a current trigger), Robert encouraged me to repeat the phrase several
times until I could become fully connected to the emotions
associated with it. After several repetitions, the underlying pain
searing my soul emerged. What was it in particular that I was
telling myself I could not bear? What was the specific observation
that I was reacting to?14 In this case, the observation was not
something my husband had actually said, but something I had
remembered from an earlier conversation. What in particular I could
not bear was the torture technique of waterboarding, in which
human beings were brought to the very brink of drowning, and the
hypothermia techniques that put naked prisoners into cold prison
cells. Shivering and miserable, they were denied the most basic
human need for warmth. As I lay snug in my bed at night with my
down comforter wrapped around me, I would meditate on their
plight until I thought I would go mad with the terror, the rage, and
the sorrow of it.
As I began to tell Robert the specific images that haunted my
imagination, my tears began to flow, to the point that my words
were swallowed up by sobs. Robert did not simply hear my agony;
he listened for my needs. He heard and reflected back each need
with care. “You long for compassion for these prisoners. You want
respect for all people, no matter what their sins or crimes. You want
the truth to be spoken. You want it known what our country is doing
to human beings in our name.”
It required intense concentration as I struggled to give words to
every facet of the pain. Then suddenly, unexpectedly, when every

-- 103 of 209 --

need had been fully heard and named, I became calm. I said matter-‐
of-factly: “I can bear it because I just did. I can bear it because you
were willing to hear it.”15

-- 104 of 209 --

Further Reflections
As I processed what had just occurred, I was astonished to realize
that in shielding myself from the pain I felt, I had been perpetuating
the very thing I abhorred. In a strange way, I was unwilling to
acknowledge what we were doing to other human beings because I
continually told myself that I could not bear to do so. I was
unwilling to speak the truth as I understood it because I feared
plunging others into the same nightmare of raw pain, fear, and grief
that I was avoiding in myself. I, myself, thus kept the very
complicity of silence that would enable these practices to continue.
Were there others, I wondered, who also told themselves that they
could not bear to acknowledge the truth? Did I now understand
something of the horror and shame, I wondered, the sickening
feeling, that might have swept the hearts of our German brothers
and sisters during the Nazi era when they heard whispers of what
was being done in their name?
Self- Empathy as a Christian Spiritual Practice
NVC is a form of consciousness and a set of skills that have an
implicit spirituality all their own.16 Depending on the theological
assumptions of any particular teacher, different aspects will be
emphasized. I have been instructed and edified over the years, as I
have learned from serious practitioners of other religious paths how
NVC has contributed to their ability to live out their deepest
convictions. This ongoing interreligious dialogue is a fascinating
subject that unfortunately lies outside the scope of this book. From
the beginning of my own study of NVC, however, my interest has
been in how it can be used practically in living out the gospel. My
specific focus here is how I understand self-empathy as a Christian
spiritual practice.
As a Christian, I am aware that my needs and core values are
deeply shaped by the gospel. Whenever I seek to respond
empathically to others, I am assuming that they, like all human

-- 105 of 209 --

beings, have, in the words of John Webster, “a given teleology. . . .
They are not simply discrete units of personal need, but are what
they are as they belong to an order of reality with certain ends.”17 I
understand the order of reality to which they belong as the kingdom
of God. In other words, I understand all human need in the light of
the prayer that Jesus taught, that God’s kingdom should come, on
earth as it is in heaven.
In my personal anguish over the plight of the tortured, I
recognized my own most urgent need for the balm of human
compassion. What I could not bear to imagine was the apparent lack
of compassion for the suffering of human beings who were denied
access to the most fundamental human need for breath and warmth.
How could human beings so harden their hearts toward other human
beings who, like them, were made in the image of God?
It is a curious fact that in the New Testament the verb for our
word “compassion” is used only of Jesus or of the God figure in
Jesus’ parables.18 I have come to see that my understanding of
compassion has an inevitable christological shape. My faith has
been decisively shaped by the stories of Jesus’ compassion for the
blind, the deaf, and the lame, for the ill and the grief-stricken. I am
moved by the stories in which he has compassion on the crowds, in
which he feeds the thousands who hunger for bread and for the
smallest morsel of hope. I am astounded by his words of
compassion toward those who brought about his death. In all these
ways and more, I understand Jesus’ compassion to be “a window of
access into the nature of . . . God’s vulnerability and willingness to
suffer with us.”19 I believe that Robert’s willingness to open his
heart with compassion toward me had its source in God’s grace,
enabling him to “participate in God’s compassion for the world.”20
Compassion, in my understanding, does not arise out of our own
finally limited human capacities, but is grounded instead in God’s
love for the world.
Whenever I practice self-empathy, I am in search of what I most
deeply need in any given situation. Though I can sometimes be
badly mistaken in assessing my true need, in Christian worship,
song, and prayer I confess my need of God and of God’s grace in its

-- 106 of 209 --

rich multiplicity of forms. When discouraged, I need patience or
courage. If I am disappointed in myself, I may identify my need as a
sturdy sense of integrity or a more complete honesty. When afraid, I
may recognize that I am lacking trust. If I only had more faith, I
could act with more freedom. If I am in despair, I recognize my need
for hope. Our human needs, in other words, are all ultimately rooted
and grounded in God. They are not finally qualities that we can
develop on our own but are rather gifts that come from above.
It follows, therefore, that self-empathy as a Christian spiritual
practice leads directly to prayer: to asking God for what I need.
When I turn to God in prayer, I don’t simply rattle off requests as if I
were reading a grocery list. Instead, I meditate on the true nature of
my need, and offer it up to God, trusting him as the author of every
good and perfect gift. I cling to the promise that God will hear my
requests and meet my needs (or else give me the strength to live in
the midst of unmet need): “Rejoice in the Lord always. . . . The Lord
is at hand. Have no anxiety about anything, but in everything by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known to God” (Phil. 4:4-6). “And my God will supply every need
of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus” (Phil.
4:19).
Prayer connects us to God and to all the needs that are fulfilled in
him.21 Through its stories and images of our core human needs
fulfilled in the person of Jesus Christ, the gospel actually shapes the
awareness of our needs. Jesus Christ is presented as the light of the
world, fulfilling our human longings for illumination, for wisdom,
for understanding; as the bread of life, fulfilling our daily need for
basic sustenance, both body and soul; as the water of life, assuaging
the thirst of every soul that aches for justice and peace. There is no
longer any separation between your need and my need; there is
simply human need that God alone can fulfill. Praying fervently
about our needs deepens our sense of longing for God’s kingdom to
come on earth as it is in heaven. Indeed, it magnifies our longing
until we join the groaning of creation for the new world to come
(Rom. 8:22-23).
The gospel also underscores our fundamental need of one another.

-- 107 of 209 --

In the body of Christ, the church, we recognize our profound need
for community, for mutual care, forgiveness, and love. “The eye
cannot say to the hand, ‘I have no need of you,’ nor again the head
to the feet, ‘I have no need of you’ ” (1 Cor. 12:21). Our attempts to
be self-sufficient are revealed as signs of our fallenness and sin. We
need one another as fundamentally as a “fish needs water.” Karl
Barth comments: “My humanity depends upon the fact that I am
always aware, and my action is determined by the awareness, that I
need the assistance of others as a fish needs water.”22 Barth goes on
to say that my humanity also depends upon the fact “that I need to
give my assistance to others as a fish needs water.”23 Thus Barth
underscores Rosenberg’s basic conviction that mutual and reciprocal
care lies at the very heart of what it means to be human.
I believe that God’s love is the wellspring from which we draw
when we need compassion for ourselves or others. Not only
Robert’s caring presence toward me, but also my own ability to
accept my human limitations, was finally sustained by a
transcendent source of caring, the unfathomable abyss of God’s
love. Though my meditation began in deep grief, it led through the
anguish for the tortured to compassion for myself and every human
being who consents to bear a portion of the world’s suffering. I was
filled with gratitude for Robert and for all those willing to keep their
hearts open in longing and vulnerability, to share in the suffering of
our frail and fallen humanity.24
I believe that it is finally our connection to this transcendent
source of compassion that enables us keep our hearts open in
troubled times. When I am exhausted or confused or lost in a
wilderness of sorrow, worry, or despair, I believe that there is One to
whom I can turn for strength. In worship, in the great hymns and
creeds of the church, in the comfort that comes from the simple
compassion of another human being — in all these ways — I am
comforted by the comfort of the gospel. For the New Testament
presents Jesus Christ as One who has taken the suffering of the
entire world into his own heart. He does not leave us to suffer the
anguish of our mortal condition, nor the consequences of our sin,
alone, but actively intercedes for us. Though I cannot fathom the

-- 108 of 209 --

depth of such a love, nor comprehend the mystery of his atoning
sacrifice, nevertheless I am able to anchor myself in a transcendent
ground for hope, a vision of the redemption of the entire world. Like
the saints who have gone before us, I, too, long for the kingdom of
God to come on earth as it is in heaven, where all human needs
matter and every human need is fulfilled: a great banquet where the
human family feasts in mutual joy.

-- 109 of 209 --

Concluding Remarks
In this chapter I have sought to introduce a spiritual practice that has
given me hope in a time when I desperately needed to be anchored
in hope. The events following 9/11 have compelled me to dig more
deeply in an attempt to be equal to the times. How do we keep our
own spirits alive and not plunge into a sea of despair? My ability to
speak out followed my willingness to enter a cauldron of grief and
rage. Until I was able to have compassion for my own suffering, I
was paralyzed by the frozen grief in my soul.
The prophetic witness and action to which we are called as
Christians cannot endure without a willingness to suffer with those
who suffer. Yet we cannot do this work with a glad heart unless we
know how to drink regularly from the wellspring of God’s
compassion for all people. Those of us who work as pastors,
counselors, or human helpers know that mourning is itself the work
of healing. Active, fully engaged mourning, crying out in lament to
God, is precisely what enables us to keep our hearts open in troubled
times because we thereby open ourselves to the immeasurable
compassion of God for each vulnerable human heart.
1. See Pamela Cooper-White’s chapter “The Sexual Abuse of Children,” in The Cry of Tamar:
Violence against Women and the Church’s Response (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2012), 168-92. See also
Nancy J. Ramsay, “Sexual Abuse and Shame: The Travail of Recovery,” in Women in Travail and
Transition: A New Pastoral Care, ed. Jeanne Stevenson-Moessner and Maxine Glaz (Minneapolis:
Fortress, 1991), 109-25.
2. A. J. van den Blink, “Empathy amid Diversity: Problems and Possibilities,” Journal of Pastoral
Theology (Summer 1993): 8.
3. For a fascinating firsthand account of some of the cultural, socioeconomic, and theological
factors that influenced her own beliefs about self-care, see Teresa E. Snorton, “Self-Care for the
African American Woman,” in In Her Own Time: Women and Developmental Issues in Pastoral
Care, ed. Jeanne Stevenson-Moessner (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2000), 285-94.
4. See B. Hudnall Stamm, Professional Quality of Life: Compassion Satisfaction and Fatigue
Subscales, R-IV (ProQOL). www.proqol.org/ProQol_Test.html.
5. Philip Hallie, Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed (New York: Harper and Row, 1979), 2.
6. Harry A. Wilmer, “The Healing Nightmare: A Study of the War Dreams of Vietnam Combat
Veterans,” Quadrant 19, no. 1 (Spring 1986): 57.
7. Wilmer, “The Healing Nightmare,” 47.
8. http://www.nrcat.org/, accessed August 26, 2009.
9. Marshall Rosenberg, Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life (Encinitas, Calif.:

-- 110 of 209 --

PuddleDancer Press, 2003), chap. 9.
10. Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, Pray without Ceasing: Revitalizing Pastoral Care (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006), 85.
11. Rosenberg, Nonviolent Communication, chap. 5.
12. Readers familiar with Eugene Gendlin’s focusing will see close parallels with the practices he
teaches. Both Rosenberg and Gendlin were students of Carl Rogers. See Eugene Gendlin, Focusing
(New York: Bantam Books, 1982).
13. I first learned of the “beauty of human needs” from Robert Gonzales, Ph.D., at an NVC
International Intensive Training session in Rochester, N.Y., in July 2004.
14. In nonviolent communication, it is necessary to specify the exact thing one is reacting to so
that there is clarity about the triggering issue. One aims to describe the specific observation (the
precise words or events that were seen, heard, or remembered) in any communication with oneself or
others. The NVC “template” for complete communication is OFNR: observation, feeling, need,
request. See http://www.cnvc.org/en/online-learning/nvc-concepts/nonviolent-communication,
accessed August 26, 2009.
15. One of the reasons I felt so fully heard and received was the expression of anguish on Robert’s
face as he listened. I was moved by his willingness to enter into my suffering with such compassion.
The example also shows the interconnection between empathy and self-empathy. I was unable to
have empathy for myself until I had received empathy from another.
16. See, for example, http://www.cnvc.org/en/learn-online/spiritual-basis/spiritual-basis-
nonviolent-communication, accessed August 26, 2009.
17. “Response” [to Caroline Simon] by John Webster, For the Sake of the World: Karl Barth and
the Future of Ecclesial Theology, ed. George Hunsinger (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004), 163.
18. Andrew Purves, The Search for Compassion: Spirituality and Ministry (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 1989), 16.
19. Purves, The Search for Compassion, 16.
20. Purves, The Search for Compassion, 12.
21. See also chap. 6 of this volume.
22. Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics III/2 (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1960), 263.
23. Barth, Church Dogmatics III/2, 264.
24. While empathy and self-empathy are interlocking technical skills, compassion, in terms of
one’s willingness to suffer with others, “is only possible for us in and through our relationship with
God.” Purves, The Search for Compassion, 12.

-- 111 of 209 --

CHAPTER 5
Prayers of Lament
“How Long, O Lord?”
Prayers of lament arise in extremis. When the people of God
undergo trial and cry out for deliverance, lament is faith’s alternative
to despair. It is a peculiar form of petitionary prayer, one that springs
from unrelieved suffering. When healing fails, lament is the
hopelessness that refuses to give up hope. When injustice prevails,
lament is the protest that digs in for the long haul. When humiliation
abounds, lament is the self-respect that cries out to a hidden God,
“How long, O Lord?” Lament bends anguish and anger into ardent
supplication. Sometimes it is no more than an inarticulate cry.
Lament is fueled by human longings, whatever they may be. Why
does one woman lament over her inability to conceive a child while
another can accept that a child is not given? Why does one member
of a family still grieve for a beloved but lost brother, refusing to be
consoled? Why does a man of faith persist year after year with the
same plea to God, refusing to let go of a dream that seems within
reach but is nevertheless withheld? Those who cry out to God in
lament refuse to quench their desire. They are like the nuisance in
Jesus’ parable, who wrenches his neighbor from a warm bed in the
dead of night to filch three loaves of bread for his visitors. They are
like the importunate woman who so wears down the judge that he
gives in just to be rid of her. Jesus admonishes his disciples never to
give up hope but to persist in their entreaty to God, that their
petitions may be heard. For if even an unjust human judge gives in
to such importunity, how much more will the righteous Judge of the
universe listen to their cries?
Yet, how long can lament persist? Over time, hope and despair
seem to hang in the balance. The more fervent the hope, the more

-- 112 of 209 --

insistent the whisper of despair. Lament risks everything on God. It
refuses the shell of cynicism that would protect its vulnerable heart.
Instead, it remains open, alive, desiring, and therefore suffering.
Think of Hannah in her longing for a son. Despite the ridicule of Eli,
the priest, and the protestations of Elkanah, her husband, Hannah
refuses to relinquish her desire. Though she has a husband who
loves her tenderly, she weeps and refuses to be comforted. Recall
the details as related in 1 Samuel. Elkanah has a second wife,
Peninnah, who has been blessed abundantly with both daughters and
sons. She flaunts her children, puffing herself up and shaming
Hannah for her childlessness. Month after month, year after year,
Hannah remains barren. When the family undertakes their annual
pilgrimage to Shiloh to offer sacrifices, Peninnah taunts Hannah so
that Hannah burns with desire for a son. The temptation to repress
the desire must surely be present. But Hannah persists. Her husband
protests, “Hannah, why do you weep? And why do you not eat? And
why is your heart sad? Am I not more to you than ten sons?” No
matter how sincere, Elkanah is powerless to change his wife’s heart.
She yearns for a son.
Hannah brings her lament to God when she offers her sacrifice in
the temple. She weeps bitterly, prays in distress, and vows that if she
is granted a son, she will offer him back to the Lord, to serve in the
temple all his days. Eli sees her lips moving and reprimands her for
drunkenness. But she protests; she is not drunk, only praying in
distress. Eli answers, “Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant your
petition which you have made to him” (1 Sam. 1:17). Trusting in the
promise as spoken through the priest, Hannah is no longer sad. As
promised, the Lord opens her womb and grants her a son, whom she
names Samuel. As the Lord is faithful to her, so Hannah keeps her
vow to the Lord. After weaning her firstborn, she returns to the
temple in Shiloh and dedicates him to a lifetime of service.
We are familiar with Hannah’s song about God’s faithfulness in
hearing the lowly. Hymns of joy supplant long nights of sorrow. The
joy is proportional to the suffering that precedes it.
Weeping may tarry for the night,

-- 113 of 209 --

but joy comes with the morning. (Ps. 30:5)
Yet how long does the night endure? A professor once described the
eight years it took to write his dissertation as “an unhappy moment
in my life.” The endless prospect was in retrospect an “unhappy
moment.” How can such “moments” be borne?
Holy Scripture trains the church in hope. The Bible is very largely
a story of hope emerging from hopelessness, of new beginnings
arising from bitter endings. With the resurrection of Christ as the
interpretive key, Scripture testifies that God comes to those who
have lost all hope. Waters spring forth in the lifeless valley of Baca
(Ps. 84). Rejected people are claimed for the work of God. Against
all odds, slaves and prisoners are set free. Joseph is delivered from
the pit, and the brothers who abandoned him are forgiven.
Lament means directing one’s anguish toward God. Left to its
own devices, the church is vulnerable to losing sight of hope. It is
prone to forget the Creator who gives life itself, the Redeemer who
forgives sin, and the Spirit who sustains it in hope. Jesus Christ
releases his people from the burden of harm, both given and
received, that would otherwise ensnare them in consequences
beyond repair. God redeems the past by using what was meant for
evil to bring good (Gen. 50:15-21). This is the tacit knowledge that
sustains lament. Lament presupposes the majesty of God, his power
to bring new life, and his compassion on all he has created. Lament
is the last refuge of courage that hopes in God.

-- 114 of 209 --

Psalms of Lament
In Psalm 88, arguably the most hopeless of the lament psalms, the
psalmist writes,
Thy wrath lies heavy upon me,
and thou dost overwhelm me with all thy waves.
Thou hast caused my companions to shun me. (vv. 7-8)
Yet if God has so afflicted him, why does he cry out day after day to
this very God?
O LORD, my God, I call for help by day;
I cry out in the night before thee. (v. 1)
The psalmist not only laments the troubles of his life, the nearness
of death, and his abandonment by friends and companions. He tells
all this specifically to God, whose wrath afflicts him sorely. Then, in
a series of ironic, almost mocking questions, he addresses God as
Lord of the living:
Dost thou work wonders for the dead?
Do the shades rise up to praise thee?
Is thy steadfast love declared in the grave?
or thy faithfulness in Abaddon?
Are thy wonders known in the darkness,
or thy saving help in the land of forgetfulness? (vv. 10-12)
The questions are hardly a request for information. They push God
to remember his identity. Is he not the One who works wonders,
whose steadfast love is declared daily in prayer, liturgy, and song?1
Surely God has not forgotten himself. The complaint reminds God
that he is the Savior of Israel, the protector of his people. Though
God has visited calamity upon them, his is the power of deliverance.
The God of judgment is nevertheless the God of grace. There is
nowhere else to turn.
Psalm 13 shows how a lament psalm is structured. In only six
verses, it sets forth the major elements of lament:2

-- 115 of 209 --

How long, O LORD? Wilt thou forget me for ever?
How long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
How long must I bear pain in my soul,
and have sorrow in my heart all the day?
How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
Consider and answer me, O LORD my God;
lighten my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;
lest my enemy say, “I have prevailed over him”;
lest my foes rejoice because I am shaken.
But I have trusted in thy steadfast love;
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
I will sing to the LORD,
because he has dealt bountifully with me.
The psalmist constructs his lament in three sections: the
introduction, the body, and the conclusion. He begins by invoking
God with urgency: How long will the Lord forget him? Will it be
forever? One is not left to wonder about the complaint. All the
lament psalms plunge the reader into the immediacy of
abandonment.
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? (Ps. 22:1)
Why dost thou stand afar off, O LORD?
Why dost thou hide thyself in times of trouble?
(Ps. 10:1)
At the same time, a level of intimacy is presupposed. The verbs in
the imperative (“Consider and answer me, O LORD my God; / lighten
my eyes”) are not ones that would be used with a stranger or mere
acquaintance. They imply an existing relationship. They address
someone accessible. So here with God. The imperatives presuppose
a God who is known, loved, and expected to help.
The body of the lament specifies the psalmist’s distress, usually
followed by a petition. In Psalm 13, pain and sorrow, triumphant
enemies, and the nearness of death are the complaints. The psalmist
importunes an answer from God: “Consider and answer me.” Other

-- 116 of 209 --

laments urge God to action, protest innocence, or remind God of
past saving deeds. The psalmist vows fidelity to the God who
delivers him.
The conclusion indicates answered prayer, without showing how
the psalmist moves from suffering to release. Mysteriously, the
prayer is heard. The occasion for sorrow has become an occasion for
joy. Here the psalmist proclaims,
I will sing to the LORD,
because he has dealt bountifully with me.
Something has shifted dramatically, for the psalmist has turned to
song. The trial is over. The psalmist turns from the past toward the
future in thanksgiving for the Lord’s bountiful grace.
Psalm 13 is structured in a form known as chiasmus. In the
ancient world, thought was not always structured syllogistically in a
linear fashion, as one would expect today: if A and B, then C
follows, with C representing the culmination of the argument.
Rather, A is paired with A′ at the beginning and end of the
constructed unit. B is paired with B′ moving in toward the center,
through C and C′ to the cross-point. The Greek letter chi (as in
chiasmus) looks like the letter X, which is the center point of the
construction. If the psalm follows such a chiastic structure, one
would expect to see paired words or themes at the beginning and
end of the piece, with the most important point being made in the
middle. Psalm 13 pairs three themes through the repetition of words
before coming to the cross-point.
A: How long, O LORD? Wilt thou forget me for ever?
How long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
B: How long must I bear pain in my soul,
and have sorrow in my heart all the day?
C: How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
X: Consider and answer me, O LORD my God;
lighten my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;
C′: lest my enemy say, “I have prevailed over him”;
lest my foes rejoice because I am shaken.

-- 117 of 209 --

B′: But I have trusted in thy steadfast love;
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
A′: I will sing to the LORD,
because he has dealt bountifully with me.
The psalm begins and ends, in A and A′, with the psalmist’s
attention on the Lord. At the beginning, he cries out in supplication;
at the end, his cries have turned to song. What begins as lament ends
as praise. In B and B′, the psalmist’s attention is on his own heart. In
B he has sorrow in his heart, whereas in B′ his heart rejoices. In C
and C′, as the psalmist moves toward the center, his focus is on his
enemy. In C the enemy is exalted over him; whereas in C′ the factual
shifts to a hypothetical; no longer a fact, the enemy now would only
prevail if the Lord fails to answer. The center verse is in the
imperative:
Consider and answer me, O LORD my God;
lighten my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death.
The center of the lament is the direct, desperate cry to God for help.
The psalmist calls upon him as “my” God, making a claim of
intimacy and describing the extremity of his peril.
The time sequences shift. The psalmist asks his anguished
question in the present, looking back over a long stretch of the past.
The present pain and sorrow are a reality of long suffering,
sweeping over a vast arc of time: “all the day.” The present perfect
(as the past continuing into the present), “I have trusted,” then shifts
in hope toward the future: “My heart shall rejoice.” Then, reversing
the order, the future is juxtaposed once again with the present
perfect:
I will sing to the LORD,
because he has dealt bountifully with me.
The shifting from present to past to future is a typical feature of
the lament form. Psalm 126, for example, begins with the words
When the LORD restored the fortunes of Zion,

-- 118 of 209 --

we were like those who dream. (v. 1)
Thus it seems that Israel is looking back in time, remembering their
deliverance. The psalmist recalls how their
mouth was filled with laughter,
and [their] tongue with shouts of joy. (v. 2)
But then suddenly, the tenses shift. No longer are they looking back
with joy, but they cry out to God in the present: “Restore our
fortunes, O LORD,” they call, “like the watercourses in the Negeb!”
(v. 4). They seem to be in a situation of trial, calling upon God’s
name. The perpetual shuttling among present desperation, past
deliverance, and anticipated rescue is a characteristic mark of
biblical faith that is structured into the very pattern of the lament
psalms.3 God can be trusted, this mode of depiction suggests,
because he fulfills his promises; God comes when he will, even
when all human possibilities are spent. Again and again the psalms
instruct the church to wait upon God, to call upon the Lord in its day
of trouble. Lament sustains it in hope because the prayer is a living
membrane that connects the people to God and God’s steadfast love.
Psalms of lament are both corporate and personal. There are
laments for the entire nation of Israel (e.g., Ps. 137: “How shall we
sing the LORD’s song / in a foreign land?”) as well as for a single
sufferer (e.g., Ps. 102, described as “the prayer of one afflicted,
when he is faint and pours out his complaint before the Lord”).
Liturgically, the most well- known lament may be Psalm 22, the
prayer of Jesus from the cross: “My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?” In this prayer, Jesus gives voice to all humanity’s
lament over God’s absence in time of need. Hughes Oliphant Old
expresses it this way: “In his Passion Jesus himself prays the psalms
of lamentation. When he offered himself up on the cross in that
perfect act of worship, he presented to the Father the psalms of
lamentation that Israel had prayed for a thousand years, and in those
psalms were the cries of all humanity.”4 Here the personal and
corporate are joined as Jesus conveys the human cry of anguish to
the Father.

-- 119 of 209 --

Worship is especially rich in prayers of lament during Holy Week,
for that’s when the innocent suffering of Christ joins collective
human guilt. Through the cross of Jesus Christ, God takes the sin of
the world into himself and suffers its consequences. Jesus drinks the
bitter cup of godforsakenness by undergoing the worst human
suffering imaginable — an unjust execution for crimes not
committed, betrayal and abandonment by friends, derision from
enemies, physical torture, and public humiliation. When the church
enters into the solemn mysteries of Holy Week, it confesses its
participation in the human sin that cost the Son of God so dearly.
Prayers of lament knit human sorrow over sin together with the
suffering of loss and abandonment. The church beholds Jesus on the
cross as both God and human being. He is the Son of God who
suffers for the world in order to atone for its sin. At the same time,
he is the Son of Man who suffers with the world the terrible plight
of abandonment by God, persecution, and death. The cross of Jesus
Christ is God’s response not only to the guilt of human sin, but also
to the terror and shame of human suffering.
At the heart of lament is a conflict felt by the person of faith who
undergoes rending loss or extended trial. “If there is a just and
loving God watching over his children, why doesn’t he deliver
them?” The prayer of lament does not avoid, but rather enters into,
this tension between the experience of evil and faith’s affirmation of
the goodness of God. Lament takes this tension right to the breaking
point, to a vision of God’s eschatological rescue. Believing that the
Lord is both loving and righteous, both mighty and gracious, the cry
of lament cannot help but be a part of the landscape of faith because
of the continuing presence of evil in the world. The loss of loved
ones evokes anguish and incomprehension. Nicholas Wolterstorff,
who lost his twenty- five-year-old son in a mountaineering accident,
writes movingly about this anguish:
I have no explanation. I can do nothing else than endure in the
face of this deepest and most painful of mysteries. I believe in
God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth and
resurrecter of Jesus Christ. I also believe that my son’s life was

-- 120 of 209 --

cut off in its prime. I cannot fit these pieces together. I am at a
loss. I have read the theodicies produced to justify the ways of
God to man. I find them unconvincing. To the most agonized
question I have ever asked I do not know the answer. I do not
know why God would watch him fall. I do not know why God
would watch me wounded. I cannot even guess.5
Rationalistic explanations fail to do justice to the heart’s anguished
cry of “Why?” Lament alone gives hope. By God’s grace, the prayer
of lament enables one to keep the question alive. By keeping the
channel to God open, lament enables the unendurable to be endured.
Kathleen Billman and Daniel Migliore, authors of Rachel’s Cry,
elaborate:
The prayer of lament is a vivid reminder that persons can survive
the disintegration of their previously unquestioned theological
frameworks. What endures beyond the collapse of the frameworks
is the relationship with the living God, a relationship strong
enough for the telling of truth. . . . It is the deepening of that
relationship with the living God that is the goal of pastoral care,
and it is to that end that the prayer of lament has its place in
Christian life and ministry.6
Lament in the Book of Job
Job is afflicted by every kind of evil: physical pain, the catastrophic
loss of loved ones and worldly goods, social ostracism and public
humiliation, enemies who taunt him, and friends who accuse him
outright of secret sins. Though his anguish is multifaceted, Job
remains notably single-minded. Throughout the narrative, Job insists
on hearing from God alone. He calls upon God repeatedly in the
most intense lament in Scripture. He rejects his friends as
“miserable comforters” who only compound his suffering. He
knows that he has to do with God and God alone. His friends act as
if they speak on God’s behalf, which only exasperates Job. In the
end God acknowledges that they did not “speak what is right”
concerning him.7

-- 121 of 209 --

The prologue makes clear that the calamities visited upon Job are
not due to any sin of his, known or unknown. Therefore, when Job
insists on his innocence —
“There is no violence in my hands,
and my prayer is pure” (16:17)
readers know that Job speaks truthfully but his friends do not.
Indeed, they are scandalized. How can he so blatantly insist on his
own innocence? How can he accuse God? They cannot see beyond
their conviction that the morally upright are blessed and the wicked
are punished. According to them, the universe operates according to
this inviolable law.
Job excoriates them in turn for being full of “windy words.” If
their roles were reversed, he would not preach pious platitudes, nor
presume to speak for God. On the contrary, he would give solace to
the afflicted. He turns from them in disgust and directs his lament
solely to God. He knows that consolation can come only from
beyond. God alone can address him in his affliction. Surely no one
but God can answer his questions of “Why?” and “How long?”
When Job appeals to God as his witness against God his persecutor,
the pattern of prayer from the Psalter reappears. Rather than fleeing
from God as his enemy, he appeals to God as the one who will
vindicate him. He appeals to God for help even though he believes
God is persecuting him. He cries out,
“O earth, cover not my blood,
and let my cry find no resting place.
Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven,
and he that vouches for me is on high. . . .
My eye pours out tears to God,
that he would maintain the right of a man with God,
like that of a man with his neighbor.” (Job 16:18-21)
The image of the witness in heaven comes from the ancient Israelite
custom whereby a kinsman must avenge the blood of one killed
unjustly. His blood, if left uncovered, will continue to cry out for

-- 122 of 209 --

revenge; his spirit will not rest until the death is avenged. Since
there is no earthly kinsman to intercede for Job, who will take up his
case and pursue justice? Who will demonstrate his innocence once
and for all? Job boldly asks God to be his kinsman to defend his
honor. Paradoxically, he calls on God to defend him against God.
As a man who fears God and understands his promises, Job
knows that God is the defender of the defenseless, the protector of
the innocent, and the lover of the poor. Therefore, God will be his
witness, his defender, his redeemer. Despite all contrary evidence,
Job casts himself on God as the only One who can vindicate him.
Much the same occurs in Psalm 88 when the psalmist reminds God
of his own character. Pointed questions are raised about God’s
ability to work wonders, his praiseworthiness among his people, his
steadfast love, and his saving help toward all who call upon him.
Like Job, the psalmist appeals to God against God, reminding him
of his essential identity.
All the dramatic tension builds toward the direct encounter
between Job and God. Job insists on fighting his wife, his friends,
and even God himself until he receives the needed answer. The
tenacity of his faith is fierce. Job relinquishes neither his claim to
righteousness nor his insistence that the Almighty speak. The climax
comes when, out of the whirlwind, God does in fact speak to Job.
Sovereign and free, God vindicates Job before his friends. Yet his
address is incomprehensible to the reader.
All we see in the foreground is a demonstration of God’s power
and might. We don’t see the hidden work of the Holy Spirit. As in
the psalms, so also here, a shift of attitude in the one praying lies
hidden in the encounter with God. Real change occurs. Beyond all
expectation, Job is satisfied with God’s response. Having insisted so
relentlessly on his innocence, Job astonishes the reader with humble
repentance. What is it, one wonders, that prompts Job to repent in
dust and ashes? What does he hear that causes him to rest his case?
The transition that the reader sees in Job — from angry lament to
humble acknowledgment of God’s majesty — is reminiscent of that
in the psalms when cries of anguish turn into shouts of joy. Though
Job hardly shouts with joy, the shift in attitude is nevertheless

-- 123 of 209 --

dramatic. The transition is perplexing. We do not know what occurs
in the spiritual encounter. We only see that something occurs. The
meaning of the encounter is shrouded in mystery. Yet this is so with
each human soul and God. There is a holy inviolability in each
person’s encounter with God. Prayer can bring the sanctification of
anguish even when one’s plea is refused. Prayers for healing, when
healing does not come, are then sustained by a “hope beyond
healing.”8 Prayer points toward something mysterious that changes
the human heart.
A poem that appears in Wendell Berry’s A Timbered Choir hints at
this mystery. In the poem a man is lying in bed in the dark, praying.
Berry writes, “He is a man breathing the fear / of hopeless prayer,
prayed / in hope.” And then, mysteriously, something moves him.
What “causes him to stir / like the dead in the grave” — “his own
love or / Heaven’s, he does not know.”9 In remembering love,
everything changes. He finds himself surrounded by love, and his
connection to God is restored.
Pastoral Care and the Prayer of Lament
The unique history that unfolds between God and Job is a paradigm
for pastoral care. The decisive encounter is shown not to be between
the caregiver and the afflicted, but between the afflicted one and
God. When faced with Job-like suffering, caregivers are wise to
avoid the judgmentalism of Job’s “miserable comforters.” They
cannot be the judge of another’s calamities, or interpret them as
God’s punishment. The God who alone sees the human heart is the
God who alone may judge. Rather than standing in the place of God,
caregivers need to stand alongside the afflicted, helping them to
articulate their lament. “Whether or not the cries of pain and protest
are identified as prayer by the afflicted, when suffering is
experienced in the presence of God, the prayer of lament is in the
process of formation. The caregiver’s role is to hear and help bring
this prayer to voice.”10
When evil is overwhelming, Eugene Peterson says, pastoral care
becomes “an assignment to share experiences of suffering.”11 The

-- 124 of 209 --

sufferer cannot simply put the tragedy behind him. There is no
convenient “moral of the story” to be sought. No meaning can be
found until each detail finds its place in a meaningful whole. To
illustrate his point, Peterson examines Israel’s suffering, as
expressed in Jeremiah’s Lamentations. These lamentations are not
marked by an amorphous primal scream. Instead, actual events are
recounted — the siege of Jerusalem, the deadly famine, the flight of
the king, the looting of the temple, and the dreaded exile. Names,
places, and dates are a way of “tethering suffering,” lest the
framework of history dissolve. “History is necessary,” Peterson
observes, “not to explain, but to anchor.”12
Caregivers who attend to those in distress are not there to explain
the origin of the suffering, as Job’s friends sought to do, or to
minimize its impact. They are there simply to share it and to convey
it to God. Peterson writes: “Pastors have no business interfering
with another’s sorrow, or manipulating it. Suffering is an event in
which we are particularly vulnerable to grace, able to recognize
dimensions in God and depths in the self. To treat it as a ‘problem’ is
to demean the person.”13 Peterson contrasts a “therapeutic” attitude
with a “pastoral” attitude. The one looks at suffering as something to
be fixed by an expert; the other sees suffering as something to be
faced honestly, encountered fully, and shared in community.
Hospital chaplains and hospice workers know that it is an honor to
be asked to share in another’s sorrow.
While enduring a two-year prison term near the end of his life,
Oscar Wilde struck a different tone from the witty, light repartee for
which he is known. His cry from “out of the depths” is powerful:
If, after I am free a friend of mine gave a feast, and did not invite
me to it, I should not mind a bit. I can be perfectly happy by
myself. With freedom, flowers, books and the moon, who could
not be perfectly happy? Besides, feasts are not for me any more. I
have given too many to care about them. That side of life is over
for me, very fortunately, I dare say. But if after I am free a friend
of mine had a sorrow and refused to allow me to share it, I should
feel it most bitterly. If he shut the doors of the house of mourning

-- 125 of 209 --

against me, I would come back again and again and beg to be
admitted, so that I might share in what I was entitled to share in. If
he thought me unworthy, unfit to weep with him, I should feel it
as the most poignant humiliation, as the most terrible mode in
which disgrace could be inflicted on me. But that could not be. I
have a right to share in sorrow, and he who can look at the
loveliness of the world and share its sorrow, and realise something
of the wonder of both, is in immediate contact with divine things,
and has got as near to God’s secret as any one can get.14
Pastoral care counts for little if it is not a form of sharing in
another’s sorrow, and so of being in contact with divine things, a
drawing near to the secret of God. Wilde’s suffering gave him a new
sense of what matters most in life — along with “freedom, flowers,
books and the moon,” the friendship that issues in shared suffering.
The beauty of the world and its sorrow are meant to be shared.
When one shares one’s suffering with others, one receives true
consolation. By contrast, when one is isolated, one’s suffering
increases. To know that someone one loved was cherished by others,
to weep with that person and share the sorrow, draws one into
human connection. The caregiver’s role is to facilitate
communication among those who grieve. Peterson speaks of moving
from private lament to public acknowledgment, “transform[ing]
what is individual into something corporate.” He continues: “Most
cultures show a spontaneous comprehension of this. The suffering
person is joined by friends who join their tears and prayers in a
communal lament. They do not hush up the sound of weeping but
augment it. They do not hide the sufferer away from view but bring
him or her out into the public square.”15 In the villages of Africa,
communal lament is still the norm rather than the exception. When
there is a death, the villagers crowd into the lanes, no matter the
time of day or night, crying out, beating their breasts, and tearing at
their garments. The family is given the gift of seeing their loss
embodied communally. The cries that ring through the streets
confirm the preciousness of the one who has died.
In North America today, it is not unusual for a person to die far

-- 126 of 209 --

from the place where he was born. Local people gather for the
funeral, while family members fly in from miles away. Friends who
learn of the death often must grieve alone, for they too live in far-‐
flung places. At best, they may share their memories with someone
who did not know the deceased. By comparison with the African
villages, these communities seem threadbare and fragile. They lack
the continuity of generations and are held together only by
committed efforts to stay in contact. Few stories belong to the
community as a whole. One may not even know those people who
share one’s loss. One writer expresses the difficulty of connection
this way:
Given how often I have moved, my community is widely
scattered. I have close friends all over the world; none of them
know each other. We have only our own brief intensities of
common experience to bind us, our telephone calls and letters.
Friendship is tethered to loss, dependent on mental reconstruction
instead of daily enactment. Sometimes I feel stranded at the center
of a fragmented orb, my life divided into a series of experiences
and places that can never be brought together — except in the
solitude of memory. My family too is deposited all over the
continent. Crucial junctures in our lives take place in hospital
hallways or over bad coffee in airports.16
Yet human beings need the strength that comes through shared
sorrow. Self-sufficiency melts away in the face of catastrophe and
loss. Each person needs to be surrounded by the love that transcends
death. “When the community joins in the lament, sanction is given
for the expression of loss — the outpouring of emotion is
legitimized in such a way as to provide for catharsis and then
renewal.”17 The church may be one of the few places left where
norms of community life are still valued. When the church joins in
the prayer of lament, each member is upheld, and each person’s
sorrow matters to all.

-- 127 of 209 --

Concluding Personal Reflections
In A Timbered Choir, Wendell Berry includes a poem dedicated to
his granddaughters who visited the Holocaust Museum on the day
that Yitzhak Rabin was buried. The poem begins, “Now you know
the worst / we humans have to know / about ourselves, and I am
sorry.” But it moves gracefully and powerfully from darkness to
light: “If you will have the courage for love, / you may walk in the
light. It will be / the light of those who have suffered / for peace.”18
When I encountered this poem in the fall of 2001, not long after
the events of September 11, I remembered the inarticulate pain I had
felt when I first had to tell our young daughter what had happened to
Jesus. “Now you know the worst we humans have to know about
ourselves and I am sorry.” She was not quite four.19 Christmas had
come and gone, along with the several impromptu plays where
Daddy had been instructed to play the part of “Jophus,” I had been
Mary, and she had been the baby Jesus. Now with Holy Week
approaching, I found myself mute. How could I tell her that Jesus,
whom she loved in such innocence, was betrayed by one of his
closest friends, deserted by the rest, handed over to be killed, and
left to die on a cross? I couldn’t bear the thought of seeing the hurt
in her eyes, nor hear her uncomprehending “Why?” I wanted to
protect her from this story of inhumanity. But there it was, right in
the middle of our faith, the cross of Jesus, not to be evaded.
In the early days after September 11, I walked around in a daze,
unable to concentrate. Images of fire and collapsing towers and
human beings diving headlong to the earth went ceaselessly through
my mind. At night planes flew overhead and fear gripped my heart.
Over and over again I imagined myself as a passenger on one of the
planes that had crashed into the towers. I lay awake, imagining my
way into the terrified hearts of the passengers, of the office workers
at the World Trade Center, of those who jumped, or were burned or
crushed, of those who escaped and those who failed to escape. The
scene etched itself in my mind with a wordless horror, not unlike
that of November 22, 1963.

-- 128 of 209 --

Some pastoral counselors have been trained in what is called
critical incident stress debriefing, a method of working with
communities that have undergone a common trauma. As I listened to
their stories after the events of September 11, I discerned a certain
note that was sounded repeatedly. Never before had these helpers
felt so personally challenged. Never before in entering a traumatized
community — where there had been a fire, a murder, or other tragic
event — had they themselves been so impacted. Previously they had
been able to provide a calm and stable center, around which the
community could give voice to its pain. Now the helpers themselves
were reeling with grief. How could they be anchors when they
themselves were stricken?
When a catastrophe of this magnitude is encountered, where are
words to give it form and voice? None of us is sustained by the
chatter of newscasters or the stories of eyewitnesses, and rarely by
the reassurances of government officials. At such times, we need
something more enduring. In his poem “Loaves and Fishes,” David
Whyte says, “People are hungry, / and one good word is bread / for
a thousand.”20 The bread that sustained me was four good words
from the Apostles’ Creed. Neither sermon, nor anthem, nor the great
hymns could penetrate the numbness that set in. But when we rose
to say what we all knew by heart, I recited the creed up to those
four: “He descended into hell.” Then I could not speak. Here was
the bread to sustain thousands: our Lord descended into hell. He
himself loved each one who had met doom that day. The divine
compassion knew no limit in what he was willing to suffer for our
sake. The psalmist knew this:
If I make my bed in Sheol, thou art there!
If I take the wings of the morning
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
even there thy hand shall lead me,
and thy right hand shall hold me. (Ps. 139:8-10)
Our pain and terror and despair are knit into Christ’s lamentation to
God.

-- 129 of 209 --

When Nicholas Wolterstorff lost his son, he entered a long night
of grief. Questions about God’s goodness, the mystery of evil, and
the incomprehensibility of suffering assailed him. He wrestled, like
Jacob, with God. When day finally dawned, Wolterstorff was led to
see that “to believe in Christ’s rising from the grave is to accept it as
a sign of our own rising from our graves.” He writes:
Slowly I begin to see that there is something more as well. To
believe in Christ’s rising and death’s dying is also to live with the
power and the challenge to rise up now from all our dark graves
of suffering love. If sympathy for the world’s wounds is not
enlarged by our anguish, if love for those around us is not
expanded, if gratitude for what is good does not flame up, if
insight is not deepened, if commitment to what is important is not
strengthened, if aching for a new day is not intensified, if hope is
weakened and faith diminished, if from the experience of death
comes nothing good, then death has won. Then death, be proud.
So I shall struggle to live the reality of Christ’s rising and
death’s dying. In my living, my son’s dying will not be the last
word. But as I rise up, I bear the wounds of his death. My rising
does not remove them. They mark me. If you want to know who I
am put your hand in.21
As the church dares to love the world with an open heart, it will
suffer for the world’s sake. Yet, it is by sharing in suffering love that
it finds its vocation in pastoral care. “For as we share abundantly in
Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in
comfort too” (2 Cor. 1:5). The mystery of participation, koinonia, is
the mystery at the heart of this work. In its own small way, it attests
that greater suffering by which the world is overcome and made
new. This is indeed a strange comfort, but it brings comfort where
no other will do. There is no lament outside the bounds of this
comfort, and no comfort that is not deepened by lament.
1. See Patrick Miller, They Cried to the Lord: The Form and Theology of Biblical Prayer
(Minneapolis: Fortress, 1994), 70.
2. See Miller, They Cried, 99-102.
3. Miller, They Cried, 68-86.

-- 130 of 209 --

4. Hughes Oliphant Old, Leading in Prayer: Workbook for Worship (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1995), 80.
5. Nicholas Wolterstorff, Lament for a Son (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1987), 67-68.
6. Kathleen Billman and Daniel Migliore, Rachel’s Cry: Prayer of Lament and Rebirth of Hope
(Cleveland: United Church Press, 1999), 140.
7. See Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics IV/3 (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1960), 383-88, 398-408,
421-34, 453-61.
8. Dale Aukerman, Hope beyond Healing: A Cancer Jounal (Elgin, Ill.: Brethren Press, 2000).
9. Wendell Berry, A Timbered Choir: The Sabbath Poems, 1979-1997 (Washington, D.C.:
Counterpoint, 1998), 181.
10. Billman and Migliore, Rachel’s Cry, 139.
11. Eugene Peterson, Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work (Atlanta: John Knox, 1980), 114.
12. Peterson, Five Smooth Stones, 126.
13. Peterson, Five Smooth Stones, 139.
14. Oscar Wilde, De Profundis (London: Putnam, 1905), 125-26.
15. Peterson, Five Smooth Stones, 143.
16. Deborah Tall, “Dwelling: Making Peace with Space and Place,” in Rooted in the Land: Essays
on Community and Place, ed. W. Vitek and W. Jackson (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996),
107.
17. Tall, “Dwelling,” 142.
18. Berry, A Timbered Choir, 192.
19. Cf. Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, “Vocation: A Joyous Task,” in Compass Points:
Navigating Vocation (Princeton: Princeton Theological Seminary, 2002), 23-26.
20. David Whyte, House of Belonging (Langley, Wash.: Mary Rivers Press, 1997), 88.
21. Wolterstorff, Lament for a Son, 92-93.

-- 131 of 209 --

CHAPTER 6
Practicing Koinonia
Life Together
One of the most powerful signs of Christ’s resurrection in the early
church was the profound unity experienced among his disciples.
“Now the company of those who believed were of one heart and
soul” (Acts 4:32). The depth of Christian fellowship that developed
is understood to be one of the Spirit’s most precious gifts. When
Saint Paul wants to bless the Corinthian church with the gifts of the
Holy Trinity, he writes: “The grace (charis) of the Lord Jesus Christ
and the love (agape) of God and the fellowship (koinonia) of the
Holy Spirit be with you all” (2 Cor. 13:14). The fellowship of
community is understood to be a blessing of divine origin beyond
human powers to create. What is first of all God’s gift only
subsequently becomes a human task or spiritual practice. While we
cannot create community (koinonia) by merely willing it, we can
gladly nurture it once we are blessed with its presence.
Christian community is subsequent and derivative because its
primary locus is the communion of love and freedom that
characterizes the intimate mutual indwelling among the members of
the Holy Trinity: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Though the Father
and the Son retain their distinct identity and personal integrity, they
are united by the Holy Spirit, who not only makes them an
indivisible unity but also actively brings their love into the world.
Each member of the Trinity dwells wholly within each other
member, establishing a bond of inseparable unity among them.
God’s love flows into the world, because God does not choose to
exist simply for himself, but to be in fellowship with his creatures.
His love is therefore the eternal source and ground of human
community. The Holy Spirit not only binds the Father to the Son,

-- 132 of 209 --

but also binds Jesus Christ to the church, the members of the church
to each other, and the church to the world.
Jesus Christ thus joins the vertical and horizontal dimensions of
our life together, uniting us through the Spirit with God and one
another. Because we belong to Jesus Christ, we belong to each other
as well. In Christ, our relationships with each other become a means
through which God cares for us and through which we grow in faith,
hope, and love. Koinonia describes the spiritual fellowship that is
enjoyed by those who are knit together as one body. Variously
translated as “fellowship” or “communion,” “partnership” or
“community,” it is the same word Paul uses to speak of the bread
and the cup being a participation (koinonia) in the body and blood
of Christ. We live in Christ and Christ lives in us by the Spirit’s
mediation of Christ’s living presence. This participation in Christ
enables us to have a part in his ministry in the world as a community
joined together in love.1
The biblical witness attests that human beings were created to live
in fellowship with one another. “It is not good that the man should
be alone” (Gen. 2:18). “The picture of the solitary Adam in Genesis
2 is one of self-alienation rather than self-fulfillment. . . . The divine
image is not a religious quality of the individual person, but a
spiritual reality expressed through the interchange of persons in
relation.”2 Yet, often in the church we find it difficult to see any
evidence of the koinonia of the saints. Instead, we see interpersonal
conflicts that lead to entrenched power struggles, denominational
factions that give rise to gnawing anxiety about whether the church
can hold together, pastors who exhaust themselves trying to resolve
disputes among staff, chronic disappointment that feeds latent
cynicism, and leaders who burn out and leave the church or act out
and do widespread harm.
We confess in our creed, “I believe in the communion of saints,”
but we long for glimpses of it in our everyday life. How is our
witness to be credible if we are constantly at odds with one another?
How are we to grow in faith, hope, and love if we fail to
acknowledge our need of one another? How can the koinonia we
confess by faith become a living reality among us?

-- 133 of 209 --

Because of our fallen condition, we will not likely see the
complete living out of koinonia until the fullness of time. In the
meantime, however, there are concrete practices that build up the
church, that contribute to koinonia’s flourishing. At the very heart of
our mysterious union in Christ lies our common life of worship,
prayer, and participation in the sacraments. Weekly preaching of the
gospel forms, informs, and transforms believers as it proclaims the
living reality of Jesus Christ in the world. Prophetic action seeks to
witness faithfully to signs of God’s kingdom in our midst. In
pastoral care, koinonia becomes visible when believers entrust one
another with their burdens and afflictions, as well as their common
vocation and hope.
Yet koinonia is often lacking in our routine, everyday interactions.
How might the church truly become what it is called to be: a
community of mutual care, healing, and hope? Are there skills and
practices that can help us communicate in ways that contribute to
the building up of trust, honesty, and mutual understanding?

-- 134 of 209 --

Nonviolent Communication
For the past twenty- five years, I have taught a process of
communication developed by Marshall Rosenberg called
“nonviolent communication” (NVC), which teaches people how to
listen with empathy and speak with honesty. When placed in a
Christian theological framework, it is the best model I know for
practical training in “speaking the truth in love.” In this chapter I
will seek to show how NVC nurtures a kind of consciousness and
teaches a set of skills that can help people to live in glad fellowship
with one another, respect one another in their differences, resolve
their conflicts peacefully, and contribute to one another’s well-‐
being.
In the turbulent 1960s, Marshall Rosenberg, a clinical
psychologist, decided to train ordinary people in skills of empathic
communication. Disturbed by the violence he experienced as a child
in Detroit, he sought to develop a model of communication that
would contribute to cooperation and peace. For more than forty
years, he has been involved in a range of educational and
peacemaking activities, including acting as a mediator between
Palestinians and Jews in the Middle East, between the Hutus and
Tutsis in Rwanda, and between police and gang members in the
inner cities of America. Though he clearly has a special charism for
this work, I believe that he has developed an ingenious model for
teaching the skills he embodies.
NVC has grown into an international training and peacemaking
organization with teachers and trainers in eastern and western
Europe, the Middle East, Russia, Asia, Africa, and North and South
America. It is taught in schools and prisons, in churches and
community centers, in colleges and universities. Teachers have
developed curricular materials to use with students ranging from
kindergartners through high schoolers. Practice groups are springing
up all over the world. I teach a course entitled “Developing
Compassionate Communication in the Church” at Princeton
Seminary in which NVC is central to learning the complex

-- 135 of 209 --

interpersonal, pastoral care, and leadership skills needed for
ministry.
The overall aim of NVC is compassionate connection. The three
major components for achieving a quality of mutual connection
between parties are empathic reception, self-empathy, and honest
expression. Each component has four steps: observation (O), feeling
(F), need (N), and request (R). While these steps can be cognitively
grasped relatively easily, the more challenging task of integrating
them into one’s ordinary functioning requires commitment. The
third step, identifying needs, is the conceptual linchpin of the whole.
Learning how to connect with one’s own and others’ needs is the
key to transforming animosity or indifference into constructive, and
sometimes even joyful, connections.
The first step is observation. Whenever we seek to communicate
clearly with others, it is helpful first to let them know which of their
words or actions in particular are affecting us. If we can describe
what we are observing without at the same time evaluating it,
connection is facilitated. Especially if we have a negative reaction to
another’s words or behavior, it helps simply to describe it with as
little evaluative sense as possible. Negative judgments tend to evoke
defensiveness. Observations describe what is available to our
senses: what we can see, hear, touch, taste, and smell. They are
specific to time and context.
If your friend arrives thirty minutes late for a two o’clock
appointment, you might say, for example, “I’m puzzled because I
have you down in my calendar for two o’clock.” If you were to say
instead, “You are always late for our appointments,” you would
obviously be mixing in an evaluation. Even apart from the
inflammatory use of the word “always,” you don’t actually know
that he is late; all you know is that your calendar says that he was
due to arrive at two. He may have a different understanding about
the time you were to meet. Separating your observation from any
possible evaluation facilitates connection because it gives no
offense. The intention in making an observation is to share helpful
information about what in particular you are reacting to, not to
criticize or lay blame at the other’s door.

-- 136 of 209 --

The second step in the NVC model is stating what you are feeling.
We continually assess what is happening in our environment
through our feeling capacities. Daniel Goleman, in his book
Emotional Intelligence, argues that we are capable of appraising
situations with lightning speed. Laboratories can now measure the
interval between a stimulus and our emotional response to it in the
thousandths of a second.3 Such speed, says Goleman, helped
guarantee human survival when even a millisecond might make the
difference between life and death. If a snarling dog lunges toward
me, my fear reaction will send hormones to my brain that will
activate my fight, flight, or freeze response before I have time
consciously to assess the dog’s relative danger.
Besides acting as a kind of radar for danger, our emotions are also
closely tied to our thoughts. Anyone who practices cognitive-‐
behavioral therapy or mindfulness meditation will know how
intimately interwoven our emotional state is with our beliefs,
judgments, and thoughts. Many of our emotions are not triggered
directly by a change in the environment, but rather by our rational
assessment of that change. If I conclude that my accountant is
cheating me, I would likely feel angry. However, if I realize that I
have misinterpreted his report, my feelings would likely change. No
longer believing that he is cheating me, I would feel relieved. The
emotions I have depend on the cognitive assessment I make.
Learning to take note of our intervening thoughts and to connect
them with our emotions is a key skill in NVC.
NVC not only acknowledges the integral connection between
feelings and thoughts, it also seeks deeper understanding by
connecting feelings with needs. Assessing what we need is the third
step of the NVC model. The key to developing a high level of NVC
consciousness and skill lies in this step. It is a basic presupposition
of NVC that we are trying to get our needs met in every moment.
We are motivated to act, speak, keep silent, move toward or away
from someone on the basis of our needs. Virtually everything we do
(or fail to do) is an attempt to meet a need. Thus, our “needs” are the
source of our underlying motivation. What are we desiring, wanting,
working toward, hoping for, or valuing at any particular moment in

-- 137 of 209 --

time? If our basic needs are being met, we might feel (for example)
contented, excited, relaxed, delighted, joyful, moved, or happy. If
our basic needs are not being met, we might feel frustrated, angry,
sad, discontented, bored, disappointed, or anxious. In the examples I
have given, the pertinent need in relation to my accountant would
likely be trust. The need regarding the snarling dog would be safety.
The need regarding the appointment with your friend might be
clarity or consideration, depending on how you assess the situation.
Needs by definition contribute to life. Though they are met in
different ways in different cultures, needs themselves are universally
shared. Thus all people have a need for food, water, clothing,
warmth, and shelter. All human beings need rest. All persons have
basic needs for safety, connection, community, support, respect, and
understanding. People everywhere need hope and meaning. While
Abraham Maslow identified a hierarchy of needs, suggesting that
one cannot consider meeting the “higher” spiritual and emotional
needs if one is hungry or thirsty, Viktor Frankl’s remarkable book,
Man’s Search for Meaning, is persuasive in arguing that our need for
meaning may be even more basic than our need for bread.4
Notice that this use of the term “need” is quite different from its
common use, where being “needy” can be seen as shameful or
weak. In a North American cultural ethos, many persons strive to be
as “independent” as possible or to appear to be as free of needs as
they can. In our culture one risks being labeled self-absorbed or
selfish for trying to get one’s needs met. One “shouldn’t” ask for
“too much.” One student of NVC writes, “I hate needing other
people and taking their time and energy. I hate it when I burden
others with my pain.”
By contrast, NVC teaches that needs are qualities that contribute
to life, and that it is a gift to let others know what our needs are. To
be connected to our needs is to be connected to our deep
motivations, to the qualities of being that make life worth living.
They do not point to a deficit, but rather to an abundance. Some
NVC trainers speak of the “beauty of the needs” as precious
qualities of human being.5 To connect with a need is to connect with
something desirable and life-giving. When “need” is understood as a

-- 138 of 209 --

fullness rather than a deficit, to connect with the need is to connect
with a vital value or quality of soul.
For example, to connect with your need for affection, you might
first become aware of its absence. Perhaps in recent weeks there has
been little affection expressed between you and your spouse, and
you find yourself longing for its return. Here to notice a “need” for
affection is to experience it as a deficit. To connect with it as a life-‐
giving value, by contrast, you might ponder how much you enjoy
affection in your intimate relationships. You might remember
specific moments of affection exchanged with those you love and
become aware of the tenderness, gentleness, and warmth that
characterized those interchanges. You might even connect with “the
beauty of the need” by thinking about your dog welcoming you
home with exuberant wet kisses. By connecting with the beauty of
the need, you no longer focus on a particular person or situation but
rather connect with the quality inherent in the need itself as
something you value. The process entails finding access to its life-‐
giving energy, in other words, whether or not it is currently a part of
any particular relationship. When we connect with “the beauty of
the need” in this way, we experience our longing for affection as
something rich, multivalent, and full of meaning. It is something of
great value, not something to be embarrassed by or ashamed of.
Sometimes the needs motivating our behavior lie completely
outside of our awareness. This is especially true when we are
“triggered” by another’s words or actions that stimulate strong
emotional reactions. Our feelings, according to Rosenberg, are never
directly caused by another’s action, but rather by our own
underlying need. In the example of the “late” appointment, it is now
2:29 P.M. and your friend has not yet arrived. What might you be
feeling? Annoyed? Worried? Relieved? You could be feeling any of
these depending upon your need. If you want to know that your
friend is safe or if you want clarity about the agreed-on time, you
might be worried. On the other hand, if you want to use your time
efficiently and begin thinking that your friend doesn’t respect your
time, you might feel annoyed, perhaps extremely so. But if you are
needing rest, you might actually feel relieved that your friend has

-- 139 of 209 --

not yet arrived. You can take a much- needed break in the middle of
the day and feel refreshed when he arrives. The source of your
feeling thus lies in your need, whether for respect or clarity or rest,
not in the other’s actions. It is not the fact of your friend being later
than you expected that is causing your feelings, in other words; it is
how you interpret that fact in the light of your needs.
NVC assumes that what the other person does or says is never the
cause of our feelings. What this means practically is that no one else
ever “makes us” feel anything. We alone are responsible for our
feelings. One writer has remarked that the other’s actions are merely
the detonator for our feelings, whereas our unmet need is the
dynamite.6 This quip points to those familiar situations where a
seemingly small provocation can set off an apparently
disproportionate reaction. If you have chronic unmet needs around a
particular issue, your pain may get expressed quite vehemently in
response to the slightest triggering event. Working with these kinds
of triggering events therefore has rich potential to bring about
healing and growth. It is well worth the effort to uncover and work
constructively with chronically unmet needs. Having the skill to
transform pain into an appreciation of one’s core values or needs
reframes the experience of being “triggered” altogether. Instead of
withdrawing, analyzing, or lecturing oneself on one’s obvious
neurotic tendencies (“Here’s that same stupid dynamic I’ve been
trying to overcome for years”), one becomes curious, even
intrigued, to investigate these signs of life sprouting up. One moves
gently toward the pain, inquiring into it with a caring and open
attitude. For underneath the grief, rage, or pain lies an unmet need
that is of great importance.
The process of finding a strategy to address the need is the fourth
step of the model. Once we have clarity about what we need, we can
make a request that we believe will contribute to its being met. The
request needs to be time-specific and doable, what Rosenberg calls
positive action language. It is important to ask specifically for what
you want, not for what you don’t want. Thus, you might say, “I’d
like you to call me once a week,” not “I don’t want you to call me so
often.” The request also needs to be specific and doable: “Would

-- 140 of 209 --

you be willing to give me a hug right now?” not “I’d like you to be
more affectionate.”
Rosenberg sometimes comments that you should never agree to
fulfill another’s request unless you can do so “with the gladness of a
young child feeding a hungry duck.” In other words, requests are
understood as gifts, not as demands. They give us an opportunity to
contribute to another’s life, which Rosenberg believes is a
fundamental human need. If you say no to someone’s request, it is
likely because you are saying yes to some unstated need of your
own. Conversations around requests are thus opportunities to
connect with one another about both persons’ needs, which are
equally valued in NVC. If the other responds to your no by blaming,
coercing, ridiculing, or pleading with you, the request was secretly a
demand. NVC jealously guards the freedom of each person’s choice
and seeks to avoid making demands. Any time you agree to do
something out of fear, shame, or coercion and not freely or gladly,
you build up resentment toward the other. You may “submit” now,
only to “rebel” later. There is little chance for joyful fellowship with
someone who uses his power over you to “make” you do something
you do not wish to do.
Rosenberg coaches people how to hold on to their needs
passionately but to be flexible and creative in finding strategies to
meet them. If your spouse is too tired to go out dancing, the chances
are that he needs rest. If you are needing fun and companionship,
going dancing with your spouse is only one possible strategy. If you
truly value both of your needs, other strategies can be considered.
(You could go dancing with a friend, and your partner could stay at
home and rest. You could play Scrabble with your partner tonight
and go dancing over the weekend. You could gladly stay home and
read him some poetry that makes both of you laugh.) Once your
partner trusts that you want to honor his needs as much as your own,
he may be glad to join you in brainstorming creative strategies
(unless he is so desperately in need of rest that he is already asleep).
Honesty and empathy are the cornerstones of connection: honesty
about what is going on in ourselves and empathy for others. If we
are unable to connect with others’ underlying needs, we cannot hear

-- 141 of 209 --

them with empathy. If we stand in judgment of them, or diagnose or
label them in some way, we will fail to make an empathic
connection. Obstacles to connection include language that denies
choice: “you have to,” or “you must not,” or “you should ”;
language that expresses demands: “If you don’t do this, I’ll do that”;
or language that threatens guilt: “If you don’t do such and such, I’ll
feel so disappointed in you.” Labeling also blocks compassionate
connection: “Roger always tries to dominate our conversations; he
has such a need for control.”7 Even clinical diagnoses can
undermine empathic connection: “He acts that way because he is
bipolar, or a sexual offender, or an alcoholic.” Even if considered
clinically accurate, the diagnosis prevents you from truly connecting
with that person in the present moment.
Working through these four steps can seem mechanical or
awkward, especially at first. Yet, even at their most mechanistic,
they have the potential to change habitual dynamics for the better.
Using the OFNR outline for developing skill is similar to practicing
scales at the piano. If you want to make music, you need the daily
practice. Using the steps as a mental guide facilitates clarity and
contributes to ease in learning. Even a little OFNR can go a long
way. Just as a simple Italian phrase book can find you a place to
sleep, enable you to buy groceries, or allow you to navigate your
way through an unknown city, so knowing the basics of OFNR can
contribute to your life in fundamental ways. This is so because NVC
helps you become aware of your habitual ways of communicating
and provides ready tools for change. By consciously working
through each of the steps, you may become aware, for example, how
frequently you label or judge others, or how in certain situations you
express your feelings without any real awareness of your underlying
need. Or you may realize that certain feeling words are not in your
vocabulary because they are somehow linked with feelings of
shame. Long-standing patterns become readily apparent.

-- 142 of 209 --

Compassionate Communication as a Christian Spiritual
Practice
Marshall Rosenberg does not consider NVC to be a Christian
practice, though he does emphasize its “spiritual” nature.8
Rosenberg, a Jew by heritage, speaks of God as “Beloved Divine
Energy,” which is the basis for every human being’s connection to
life. For Rosenberg, NVC arises out of his desire to manifest love by
connecting with the “Divine Energy” in himself and others. He
writes:
[I]f we get in touch with each other’s Divine Energy, it’s
inevitable that we will enjoy giving and we’ll give back to life.
I’ve been through such ugly stuff with people that I don’t get
worried about it anymore, it’s inevitable. If we get that quality of
connection, we’ll like where it gets us.
It amazes me how effective it is. I could tell you similar
examples between the extremist Israelis, both politically and
religiously, and the same on the Palestinian side, and between the
Hutus and the Tutsis. . . . With all of them it amazes me how easy
it is to bring about this reconciliation and healing. Once again, all
we have to do is get both sides connected to the other person’s
needs. To me the needs are the quickest, closest way to getting in
connection with that Divine Energy. Everyone has the same
needs. The needs come because we’re alive.9
Though Rosenberg does not officially align himself with any
particular religion, he sees connection with the “divine” in himself
and others as the goal of human existence. NVC trainers and
practitioners around the world belong to every conceivable religion.
In my local practice group, I listen empathically to a Hindu, a
Buddhist, a Lutheran, a humanist, a Quaker, a Jew, a Greek
Orthodox, and an agnostic. When we meet we focus not on these
differences, but rather on our common humanity, by connecting with
one another’s feelings and needs.
Nevertheless, if I am going to commit myself to a spiritual
practice, I want it to be congruent with my particular religious

-- 143 of 209 --

beliefs. Though I greatly value the way that NVC has enabled me to
know and love people with a wide range of religious beliefs, I
myself am interested in NVC because I want to be a faithful disciple
of Jesus Christ. After years of study and practice, I have come to
believe that NVC’s fundamental principles are congruent with my
understanding of the gospel.10 The joyful mutual giving and
receiving that Rosenberg describes as the goal of NVC can be
understood as an image of redeemed humanity: not only how we
were originally created to be but also how we will one day live in
love, harmony, and fellowship (koinonia) with one another in the
kingdom of God.
One of the key features of Karl Barth’s theological anthropology
is speaking and listening to one another with gladness. Others
cannot know us unless we consent to making ourselves known.
Others may be able to surmise something about us, but if we want to
be fully human, we need to reveal ourselves. “This two-sided
openness is the first element of humanity. Where it lacks, and to the
extent that it lacks, humanity does not occur. To the extent that we
withhold and conceal ourselves, and therefore do not move to know
others and to let ourselves be known by them, our existence is
inhuman.”11 Insofar as we seek to know and be known by the other,
we try to find a bridge, a way of connecting to the other. “I should
not take him seriously as a human being if I did not seriously try to
find the way from me to him.”12 Moreover, we engage in the mutual
give- and-take of listening and speaking, as well as offering one
another mutual assistance, “with gladness.”
What we indicate in this way is really the secret of humanity. . . .
[I]n doing so we presuppose as the living center of the whole the
decisive point that they meet gladly and in freedom. . . . [T]here is
a discovery, the mutual recognition that each is essential to the
other. . . . [There is] an active willing of this fellowship, a willing
which derives quite simply from the fact that each has received a
gift which he necessarily desires to reciprocate to the best of his
ability. And if it is asked in what this gift consists, the answer

-- 144 of 209 --

must be that the one has quite simply been given the other, and
that what he for his part has to give is again himself.13
Barth’s “gladly” and “in freedom” can be seen to correspond to
Rosenberg’s desire to meet requests only when he can do so in pure
gladness of heart. Both Christian theology and NVC recognize the
importance of honoring the freedom of each person’s choices and of
understanding the “gift” character of our life together.
From a Christian perspective, the theological ground of
compassionate listening is found in God’s own listening to human
hearts whenever we reach out to God in prayer. Scripture gives us
countless instances of God’s love being demonstrated through a
listening responsiveness to human need. Bonhoeffer describes the
integral connection between divine and human listening in his book
Life Together. “The first service that one owes to others in the
community involves listening to them. Just as our love for God
begins with listening to God’s Word, the beginning of love for other
Christians is learning to listen to them. God’s love for us is shown
by the fact that God not only gives us God’s Word but also lends us
God’s ear. We do God’s work for our brothers and sisters when we
learn to listen to them.”14 As we listen to others, we thereby witness
to the love of the listening God and impart hope to those whose
story has not yet been fully articulated nor fully heard. Such deep
listening brings both spiritual sustenance and emotional healing in
its wake.

-- 145 of 209 --

Dealing with Criticism
One of the places that koinonia breaks down, sometimes
irretrievably, is when we are criticized by others. Take the example
of a pastor who hears criticism from one of her parishioners. She
might feel hurt and withdraw from the person who has criticized her,
or she might lash back at him in anger. Alternatively, she might
suppress her reaction and pretend not to be hurt or angry, only to
express her ire to a third party, who is then “triangled in,” which
only serves to perpetuate the problem.15 Yet, in the everyday reality
of church life, what do church leaders do or say when their
preaching, teaching, administrative style, or pastoral care is
criticized? What are they to do with the frustration or anger that
bubbles up or boils over as they hear others criticizing their sincere
efforts? How might a skilled pastor adept at NVC deal with such
criticism?
NVC teaches that it is possible to hear a message in four ways.
First, one may hear the “critical” comment as simply something true
about oneself. In this situation, the pastor might hear the negative
judgment and immediately take it to heart, thinking: “I did a bad
thing,” or “I shouldn’t have said that,” or even “I can’t believe what
an idiot I am.” Hearing a critical message in this way has the
potential to perpetuate self-doubt, shame, or depression.
A second way to hear a critical comment is to defend oneself
against it by blaming, discounting, diagnosing, or judging the
messenger. “Who does he think he is, criticizing my sermon? He
clearly doesn’t have the intellectual interests that I have and so
cannot possibly appreciate what I am trying to do in this situation.”
The pastor might think these things to herself, or she might say
something directly to deflect the criticism: “Perhaps you are
unaware of the controversy in the church that I am addressing here.
There have been several articles in recent theological journals that
consider this an issue of great importance.” Even if this is the reason
the pastor chose a given topic for her sermon, she needs first to hear
and understand what matters to her parishioner. By defending her

-- 146 of 209 --

choice instead of listening with empathy, she fails to learn what is at
stake for him.
A third way of hearing criticism is for the pastor to offer herself
empathy as she listens. She might say to herself, “Gosh, I feel so
discouraged when I hear that. I worked hard on that sermon and
really wanted to contribute to my congregation’s understanding of
what I consider to be one of the most important theological issues of
our time.” Notice how she is acknowledging her feeling
(discouragement) and need (contribution) in this empathic statement
to herself. By anchoring herself in the beauty of her own need, she is
more likely to stay centered and calm as she listens to her
parishioner.
A fourth way of hearing a critical message is to “translate” the
parishioner’s criticism into an empathic guess about his feelings and
needs. The pastor can do this either silently or out loud. Thus, she
might say, “Are you frustrated because you’d like to understand the
relevance of my sermon for our church?” Or, “Are you feeling
annoyed because you’d like some guidance in the kinds of dilemmas
you confront in your daily life?” Here the pastor doesn’t even hear
criticism because her focus is exclusively on understanding the
parishioner’s feelings and needs. Even if he expresses intense
frustration, she knows this is a sign that what is at stake (his
underlying need) matters a great deal to him. The pastor hears, not
that there is something wrong with her (or her sermon), but rather
how fervently her critic longs for a faith that is relevant. Heard in
this way, his message would not be a source of discouragement but
rather an opportunity to connect meaningfully with what really
matters in the life of faith. With NVC skills in hand, the pastor
would be so adept at hearing criticism that she would not even hear
it as criticism. Instead, she would hear the honest expression of
another person’s heartfelt values and longings.
If, by contrast, she were to react with anger and criticism (or self-‐
blame and self-criticism), she could still return to the subject later,
listening once again for feelings and needs. If she were to lash out
with a countercriticism or defend her choice, that means she is likely
caught in judgment and blame, which are generating her feelings of

-- 147 of 209 --

anger. Here Jesus’ words offer wisdom and guidance. “Judge not,
and you will not be judged; condemn not, and you will not be
condemned; forgive, and you will be forgiven; give, and it will be
given to you; good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running
over, will be put into your lap. For the measure you give will be the
measure you get back” (Luke 6:37-38). Insofar as she is judging
herself or the other, she has not fully connected either with her
underlying need or his. To work with her own anger constructively,
she would first need to be brutally honest about her own judgments.
What are the thought processes that are feeding her anger? For
instance, she might be thinking: “He shouldn’t be so critical. He has
no idea how hard that sermon was for me to write. He has also
completely misunderstood my message.” This set of thoughts can be
“translated” into feelings and needs as follows: “I am so
discouraged because I’d like some appreciation for my efforts. It
took quite a bit of courage to preach that sermon. I wanted to help
my congregation see how certain global issues are integrally
connected to our life of faith.” Once she fully understands her own
needs for appreciation and contribution, she can develop other
strategies to address those needs. In other words, she would not set
all her hopes on getting that particular parishioner to appreciate her
contribution. Instead, she might ask a colleague for feedback on
what he considers the sermon’s strengths to be. In addition, she
might explore the pain involved in not being heard with her own
intention (his “misconstruing the message”), exploring the
possibility that his comment is “charged” for her because it
stimulates one of her own chronically unmet needs. Her deeper need
may be for reconciliation with someone in her past who repeatedly
triggered pain over her unmet needs for understanding.
Surprisingly, just recognizing her own unmet needs in the
situation has the potential immediately to defuse her anger. Once she
fully acknowledges her need for appreciation, she can actually go on
to appreciate herself for writing the sermon she wrote. In
acknowledging her courage in giving this particular sermon, she has
already begun to meet her own need for appreciation. Doing this
process of self-empathy is very different from justifying herself or

-- 148 of 209 --

refusing to see her parishioner’s point of view. In connecting with
her own needs, she grounds herself so fully that she is then able to
see that even though she appreciates what she set out to do, this
particular parishioner’s needs were not met in this instance. If she
appreciates her own intention fully and gives herself the
understanding she desires, she doesn’t have to become defensive
because her parishioner didn’t get what he had hoped for on this
particular occasion. Once connected with her own life energy, she is
free to explore his more fully. She can look for the vibrant beauty of
his needs with openheartedness. What might have begun as an
alienated, distant, or conflicted relationship can thereby blossom
into one characterized by mutual understanding and appreciation.
The more clearly she listens to his feelings and needs, the more
deeply connected she will be to what matters to him about his faith
and his participation in the church. Koinonia will be restored.

-- 149 of 209 --

Avoiding Pastoral Burnout and Misconduct
Of critical concern for those in ministry (as well as for the
institutions that educate and sustain them) are the issues of pastoral
burnout and sexual acting out. Some pastors regularly work sixty or
more hours a week, fail to take a Sabbath day of rest, do not
replenish themselves with worship (where they can simply be
participants), have few friends, and are cut off from an inner sense
of what they need. In addition, in the line of duty, they may
experience the vicarious trauma of those suffering from tragic loss
or victimized by violence. “Ministry is dangerous,” writes Margaret
Kornfeld, “for those who are disconnected from themselves.”16
Ministers may be starving emotionally or spiritually and not know
it. Because their duties encourage them to become absorbed in the
lives of others, they can easily lose track of their own lives. Indeed,
they may be completely oblivious to their own needs until those
needs clamor for attention through burnout or acting out. Kornfeld
captures some of the dynamics involved. “Those who burn out often
have an insatiable internal system that requires them to give to
others in order to fill an inner void. At the beginning of their calling,
the void seems to be filled by the community’s appreciation of their
outreach and caregiving. But eventually, they feel empty again and
so they try harder to give to others, repeating what has not worked,
leaving them exhausted.”17 Such pastors experience chronic stress in
their work without ever really identifying it. This kind of stress can
be ameliorated by the simple practice of connecting with their own
needs and then searching for reliable strategies to meet them.
Pastors need friends with whom they can be themselves apart
from their pastoral role. Putting friends as their lowest priority, far
below effectiveness and productivity in their work, is a telltale sign
of the breakdown of koinonia. As they get caught up in busyness,
many also stop drinking deeply from the well of Scripture and
prayer, except to prepare their next sermon or class. Bonhoeffer’s
advice to seminarians addresses this temptation. In his book

-- 150 of 209 --

Meditating on the Word, Bonhoeffer writes, “Do not ask how you
should tell it to others, but ask what it tells you!”18
Sexual misconduct by a pastor or church leader shakes entire
congregations to the core, bringing widespread disillusionment,
acute pain, and mistrust in its wake. At the heart of sexual acting out
lies a similar ignorance about one’s own needs. Ministers who stay
in their pastoral role around the clock, having few intimate
companions with whom they can simply be themselves, are in
danger of losing connection with who they are. If they are starving
for emotional contact and yet are unaware of their own needs, they
will be drawn to the vulnerability of those who come to them for
help. There they can play a “heroic” role of helping the other while
remaining essentially unaware of how much they themselves long
for emotional closeness. Sexual misconduct is often preceded by
inappropriate self-disclosure on the part of the pastor,19 a sure sign
that the pastor is emotionally isolated, with too few friends to
confide in. Other “signs” and “signals” of personal distress go
unheeded when the pastor fails to acknowledge his (or her) feelings
and needs. Feelings of resentment or bitterness, conflict that is
chronic and unresolved, persistent feelings of paralysis or
helplessness, cynicism or depression, reliance on status or prestige
as a core source of self-esteem, recurring sexual fantasies or
fantasies of emotional intimacy with a particular person, painful
difficulties in one’s own marriage or family of origin that are not
fully faced — all these are warning signs for potential burnout or
acting out. In each case, the pastor has failed to connect with his
essential underlying needs.
In her book Beyond Deserving: Children, Parents, and
Responsibility Revisited, Dorothy Martyn discusses the “great open
secret of responsibility.” She writes that “acting out” is better used
to refer to keeping subterranean matters from coming to the surface
by “doing something” instead of becoming aware of those matters
and thereby subjecting oneself to feeling something painful or
unpleasant. In other words, “acting out” is a substitute for something
else, and that something else consists of two activities. The first is to
become acquainted with what is happening in one’s cellar, so to

-- 151 of 209 --

speak, bringing it to the surface. The second, stemming from the
first, is to allow the discernment and judgment of the conscious
mind to consider an action before undertaking it.20
“Subjecting oneself to feeling something painful or unpleasant” is
precisely what the practice of self-connection enables one to do.
One learns to acknowledge painful and unpleasant feelings; one
faces shame, outrage, fear, jealousy, or helplessness in oneself and
stays with these feelings long enough to discover the buried treasure
hidden beneath them. The buried treasure is a bundle of
unacknowledged yet precious needs that are clamoring for attention
through the painful emotions.
In sexual acting out, the chronic unmet need is often for emotional
intimacy. But if such intimacy is completely lacking in the pastor’s
life, and if he is unaware of how much he longs for it, he is
vulnerable to acting out his desire rather than feeling the pain of his
unmet need. By contrast, if he acknowledges his painful longing, he
can then “allow the discernment and judgment of the conscious
mind to consider” what kind of action he wants to undertake. Rather
than “acting out” his feeling, in other words, he can consciously
connect with the depth of his longing. If he can acknowledge the
“beauty of this need” consciously, he will come to appreciate how
much meaning, depth, joy, and delight emotional intimacy brings
into most human lives. Only then can he decide what changes he
might make to meet his need for intimacy in a way consonant with
his values. To avoid burnout or sexual acting out, pastors and church
leaders need not only a rich life of interpersonal fellowship but also
skill in identifying and acting on behalf of their own needs.

-- 152 of 209 --

Deepening Our Life of Prayer
NVC also offers tools for deepening koinonia with God through
prayer. At the heart of Christian theology lies the presupposition that
our most basic need is communion (koinonia) with God. As
Christians, all our needs and values are deeply shaped by the gospel.
Human beings are “not simply discrete units of personal need, but
are what they are as they belong to an order of reality with certain
ends.”21 From a Christian perspective, the order of reality to which
they belong is the kingdom of God.
In intercessory prayer, the church calls upon the compassion of
God as it has been revealed in Jesus Christ. The stories of Jesus’
compassion shape our imagination of God’s compassion for the
world. His feeding of thousands who were hungry, not only for
bread, but for faith, hope, and love, helps us to see ourselves and our
own needs among the hungry. His far-reaching compassion even
toward those who crucified him gives us a glimpse of the immensity
of divine love. When we open our hearts with compassion to any
that suffer, we are thereby enabled by grace to participate in God’s
compassion for the world.22 Our compassion, in other words, does
not arise out of our own meager resources, but is grounded in God’s
own capacious suffering love. This theological grounding in God is
critically important because human compassion is not large enough
to meet the depth of another’s true need. God alone can meet the
need of the human heart. “Our hearts are restless until they rest in
thee” (Saint Augustine).
In intercessory prayer, we listen to others with empathy and then
intercede for them by giving voice to our understanding of their
spirit’s hunger before God.
Sometimes this entails “translating” their thoughts and judgments
into their underlying needs. Consider this example:
Wife: [Referring to a physical therapist]. She’s a bad therapist.
Nurse: (listening empathically to what the wife is feeling and

-- 153 of 209 --

wanting) Are you feeling annoyed and wanting to see a different
quality of care?
Wife: She doesn’t do anything. She made him stop walking when
his pulse got high.
Nurse: (continuing to hear the wife’s feelings and wants) Is it
because you want your husband to get better that you’re scared
if the physical therapist doesn’t push him, he won’t get stronger?
Wife: (starts to cry) Yes, I’m so scared!
Nurse: Are you scared of losing him?
Wife: Yes, we’ve been together so long.
Nurse: (listening for other feelings behind the fear) Are you
worrying about how you would feel if he dies?
Wife: I just can’t imagine how I am going to live without him.
He’s always been there for me. Always.
And later:
Wife: . . . I don’t know how I am going to get through this alone. I
haven’t anyone . . . not even to talk to, except with you here . . .
now. Even he won’t talk about it. . . . Look at him! (Husband
remains silent and impassive). He doesn’t say anything!
Nurse: Are you sad, wishing the two of you could support each
other and feel more connected?
Wife: Yes. (She pauses, then makes a request) Talk to him the way
you talk to me.
Nurse: (wishing to clearly understand the need that is being
addressed behind the wife’s request) Are you wanting him to be
listened to in a way that helps him express what he’s feeling
inside?
Wife: Yes, yes, that’s exactly it!23
Notice how the nurse basically ignores the wife’s criticism and
judgments, first of the physical therapist and then later of the
husband. Instead she focuses entirely on what she hears as the wife’s
feelings and needs in this dire situation. Empathically putting herself
into the woman’s shoes, the nurse guesses that the woman is
desperate for meaningful connection with her husband before he
dies even though she lacks skill in giving voice to this desire. With

-- 154 of 209 --

the nurse’s support, she is able to ask for help in talking with her
husband in what may be the last conversation of their life together.
The nurse then goes on to draw out the husband in the same
empathic way, listening for his needs with sensitivity and care. She
quietly facilitates a conversation between husband and wife that
enables them to share their love and grief as they are about to be
parted from one another. Though the nurse in this example does not
pray for the woman, the concrete help that she offers can be seen as
an answer to the woman’s unacknowledged prayer. The nurse’s offer
of help, in other words, can be interpreted as a sign that God has
heard the woman’s cry of anguish. Had the nurse desired to pray
with her, she might have given explicit voice to the woman’s
longing for intimate connection with her husband. Expressing the
longings of another’s heart in intercessory prayer strengthens
koinonia both vertically and horizontally. Such a prayer would
enable the two to connect intimately with each other at the same
time that they connect with God through prayer.
Similarly, when we pray for ourselves, we search within for the
unexpressed longings of our hearts. In other words, our prayer is
deepened through our skill in identifying needs. Instead of going
directly to our requests (all the things we long for God to “fix” in
our lives), we meditate on the nature of our true need. The process
of connecting with our needs is not a mechanical one, but rather a
growing awareness of how all our needs are finally rooted and
grounded in God. They are not in the end human qualities at all, but
rather gifts of grace. “And my God will supply every need of yours
according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:19). When
we pray, we give voice in honest, vulnerable expression of our own
heart’s longing. Prayer connects us to God and to all the needs
fulfilled in him.
The Christian image of the kingdom of God conveys the sense of
“the beauty of needs,” as qualities of being, better than anything I
know of. The kingdom of God is a place overflowing with abundant
life, goodness, and the fulfillment of every joy. The marriage feast
of the Lamb evokes an image where human hunger, both physical
and spiritual, is fulfilled. The lion and the lamb lie down together in

-- 155 of 209 --

peace. The rivers of righteousness flow down with a mighty roar.
Justice and peace kiss. The hungry are fed; the lame leap for joy;
those who were once in darkness now walk in the light.
Unfathomable joy comes in that resurrection morning when God
will wipe away every tear from our eyes. Thus when we seek to
identify needs, our own or another’s, we are engaging in a spiritual
practice that leads to prayer. In prayer, we identify the specific needs
motivating us in a particular situation, but all our needs point us to
God and to our longing for God’s kingdom to come on earth as it is
in heaven.

-- 156 of 209 --

Conclusion
Koinonia is both the origin and the telos of the church’s existence. It
is the goal of all our practices, and at the same time, it is something
to be practiced. Nonviolent communication provides heightened
awareness of the centrality of koinonia as well as skill in working
toward it. It is especially helpful in situations when the peace and
unity of our fellowship break down. When NVC is practiced as a
spiritual discipline, members of the body of Christ will have
practical tools for dealing constructively with criticism, for avoiding
pastoral burnout or acting out, and for deepening the life of prayer.
At more advanced levels, NVC can help church leaders to mediate
conflict between parties, teach parents how to raise their children
with love and respect, and promote real dialogue between parents
and teens or husbands and wives. Leaders can help their
parishioners heal from profound regret over choices they have made
as well as find healing from past trauma.24 Gifted practitioners can
bring healing to whole communities in pain by helping them to hear
one another’s needs in situations of profound grief or estrangement.
While these more complex applications of NVC lie beyond the
scope of this chapter, even the most basic incorporation of NVC can
deepen, sustain, and restore, again and again, our life together in the
body of Christ until that day when our koinonia with God and each
other is manifest in its fullness.
1. Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, Pray without Ceasing: Revitalizing Pastoral Care (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006), chap. 1: “A Theology of Koinonia.”
2. Ray S. Anderson, Self-Care: A Theology of Personal Empowerment and Spiritual Healing
(Wheaton, Ill.: Victor Books, 1995), 238.
3. Daniel Goleman, Emotional Intelligence (New York: Bantam Books, 2006), 23.
4. Viktor Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning (New York: Beacon Press, 2006). In Frankl’s
harrowing experience in a Nazi death camp, he kept hope alive through meaningful connections with
others, which he believes was more fundamental to his survival than even his daily bread.
5. I first learned of the “beauty of the needs” from Dr. Robert Gonzales, whose teaching has
greatly enriched my understanding of NVC as a spiritual practice.
6. Kelly Bryson, quoted in Jane Connor and Dian Killian, Connecting across Differences (New
York: Hungry Duck Press, 2005), 83.
7. To say that Roger has a “need for control” is labeling or “diagnosing” him rather than truly

-- 157 of 209 --

trying to discover his need. A so-called need for control is not a true need. What is generally
interpreted as a need for control is usually a need for trust or empowerment or even contribution.
8. See https://www.cnvc.org/learn-online/spiritual-basis/spiritual-basis-nonvio
lent-communication, accessed March 13, 2014.
9. https://www.cnvc.org/learn-online/spiritual-basis/spiritual-basis-nonviolent-com
munication, accessed March 13, 2014.
10. See Theresa F. Latini, “Nonviolent Communication and the Image of God,” Perspectives: A
Journal of Reformed Thought 22, no. 5 (May 2007): 10-16.
11. Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics III/2 (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1960), 251.
12. Barth, Church Dogmatics III/2, 257.
13. Barth, Church Dogmatics III/2, 271-72.
14. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Life Together (Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 1996), 98.
15. Edwin Friedman, Generation to Generation: Family Process in Church and Synagogue (New
York: Guilford Press, 1985), 37. Friedman shows how emotional triangles perpetuate stress in an
emotional system and keep issues from being resolved. “The relationship of any two members of an
emotional triangle is kept in balance by the way a third party relates to each of them or to their
relationship. When a given relationship is stuck, therefore, there is probably a third person or issue
that is part of the homeostasis.”
16. Margaret Kornfeld, Cultivating Wholeness: A Guide to Care and Counseling in Faith
Communities (New York: Continuum, 1998), 281.
17. Kornfeld, Cultivating Wholeness, 283.
18. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Meditating on the Word (Cambridge, Mass.: Cowley, 1986), 33.
19. Kornfeld, Cultivating Wholeness, 290.
20. Dorothy W. Martyn, Beyond Deserving: Children, Parents, and Responsibility Revisited
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2007), 159.
21. John Webster, “Response to ‘What Wondrous Love Is This?’ ” in For the Sake of the World:
Karl Barth and the Future of Ecclesial Theology, ed. George Hunsinger (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
2004), 163.
22. Andrew Purves, The Search for Compassion: Spirituality and Ministry (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 1989); see especially chap. 3: “The Wounded, Ministering God: A Theology
of Divine Compassion,” 60-81.
23. Marshall Rosenberg, Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life (Encinitas, Calif.:
PuddleDancer Press, 2003), 105-6.
24. See Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger and Theresa F. Latini, Transforming Church Conflict:
Compassionate Leadership in Action (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2013).

-- 158 of 209 --

CHAPTER 7
Members of One Another
Building a Restorative Church
How is a community to heal when it learns of the sexual misconduct
of its beloved pastor or of the treasurer’s misappropriation of church
funds? Or, where does a church turn for help when conflicts
suddenly rage out of control? When shock, anger, or shame
overwhelms a congregation, what steps will help the community
regain its equilibrium? In the aftermath of churchwide trauma, how
might congregational leaders sensitively open up communication
about the painful ordeal?1
Church communities are often crippled for years, at times even
destroyed, when they face such a shock to the system. Mobilizing
their resources of intelligence, faith, and imagination, they are
nevertheless unable to meet the overwhelming needs clamoring for
their attention. As anxiety rises to a higher and higher pitch,
individuals react from a feeling of personal threat rather than
respond from a place of communal strength. The overriding need to
act together as members of a common body gets lost in the chaotic
emotions that arise.
When the entire church is reeling in pain, it can be difficult to
invent structures and processes that will restore its equilibrium.
Those congregations that have in place a restorative framework for
responding to harm are best equipped to meet the challenges before
them. This chapter seeks to introduce the concept of restorative
practices as a promising avenue for responding to crisis, enduring
conflict, harm, or community-wide trauma.
Restorative practices (RP) is a transdisciplinary field of study that
has grown during the past thirty years in various cultural contexts in
response to complex community needs.2 Though Christian theology

-- 159 of 209 --

has been a significant generative force in shaping fundamental
norms in both theory and practice,3 a restorative framework is little
known and seldom adopted as an overarching structure for its
explicit relational practice in contemporary churches. I believe that
if restorative practices were more widely known, and its structures
and processes more widely put into place, churches would be far
better equipped to deal with conflict, harm, or trauma in a healthy
manner. They might even be able to avoid the kind of entrenched
conflict that not only causes emotional turmoil but also can provoke
a crisis of faith. If the gulf between the preaching of the gospel and
the actual relational practice of the congregation grows too wide,
people are in danger not merely of cognitive dissonance, but of
disillusionment, cynicism, or even loss of faith.
What Is Restorative Practices (RP)?
The International Institute of Restorative Practices offers a succinct
definition:
The social science of restorative practices is an emerging field of
study that enables people to restore and build community in an
increasingly disconnected world. It offers a common thread to tie
together theory, research and practice in seemingly disparate
fields, such as education, counseling, criminal justice, social work
and organizational management.
. . . Restorative practices is the study of building social capital
and achieving social discipline through participatory learning and
decision- making.4
Scholars from the disparate fields engaged in this area of study
approach it from a wide variety of theoretical perspectives, drawn
from their own academic disciplines and the specific needs of their
cultural and social contexts. What unites the various disciplines and
experienced practitioners in this field of study is a commitment
(developed both theoretically and practically) to working with
people in order to deepen community ties instead of doing things to
them or for them (or alternatively, not doing anything at all). “The

-- 160 of 209 --

fundamental premise of restorative practices is that people are
happier, more cooperative and productive, and more likely to make
positive changes when those in authority do things with them, rather
than to them or for them.”5
Consider the following chart.6 A restorative approach is portrayed
in the upper-right-hand quadrant as that relational stance that sets
high expectations for behavior at the same time it offers high levels
of support. None of the other options (FOR, NOT, and TO) reinforce
the kinds of relational patterns that support people in taking
responsibility for themselves. The upper right quadrant that features
the word “WITH” describes a relational style that is respected by
others because it is authoritative without being authoritarian. (The
adjectives at the bottom of each quadrant reflect student evaluations
of teachers whose relational styles are described there. Students are
respectful toward those in authority who first of all respect them by
taking their needs into account when making decisions that affect
their lives.) But the word “WITH” also entails an acknowledgment
by those in authority that they genuinely do not know in any
particular instance what is needed to restore a sense of well- being to
the community. The community decides together how to live out its
values. Those “in authority” do not own the process; the community
as a whole owns it.

-- 161 of 209 --

People need to be included in decisions that matter to them. They
need to have their core values heard and their perspectives
considered. As members of an interdependent society, all persons
need avenues by which they can contribute to the community to
which they belong.7 This becomes even more significant when the
community is in pain because of some harm done. In a healthy
community, individuals are able both to give of themselves and to
perceive their impact on others as well as receive from others and
gratefully acknowledge them in turn. A profound sense of mutuality
is thus embedded in the single word “with.”8 At the heart of this
transdisciplinary field, in both theory and practice, lies a
commitment not to use one’s power over others, but to engage as
much as possible in relationships of mutuality for the sake of
building interdependent community. Such a commitment can be
challenging to sustain in the context of coercive structures that are
intrinsic to many societal institutions.

-- 162 of 209 --

Members of One Another
Typical of contemporary discourse, what was once woven together
as a seamless whole — one’s theological assumptions, ethics, and
practice — has now been fragmented into disparate avenues of
inquiry. As members of a multicultural and multifaith society, we
cannot suppose that others will share our theological assumptions. It
is important, therefore, to differentiate two interdependent aims. I
believe that as Christians, our deepest loyalty and most enduring
commitment are to Jesus Christ and to all that we have received by
faith in him. As we root and ground ourselves in Christ’s love, we
will seek to articulate a set of beliefs and engage in concrete
practices that grow out of our calling to Christian discipleship. At
the same time, as we pursue our mission in the wider world, we will
seek ways to join forces with persons of other faiths (or no faith)
who desire to build and restore community ties on the basis of
fundamental shared values. As Glen Stassen comments, “In public
discourse, in a pluralistic society, we need both (1) an explicitly
Christian ethic with a strong scriptural base and (2) a public ethic
that appeals to reason, experience, and need and that cannot place
the same emphasis on Scripture and prayer that an explicitly
Christian ethic can.”9 In community-wide conflicts or in tragedies of
national or international significance, when we seek to join forces
with those outside the church, we will appeal to shared values such
as compassion and mutual respect or to universal norms such as
justice and peace. But within the Christian community, in order to
articulate our fundamental beliefs and values, we will seek to make
explicit the scriptural base and theological norms by which we
orient ourselves.
The church, though to the eye perhaps just as fragmented as the
world around it, is known by faith to be a single body by virtue of
each member’s participation in Christ. Because all are members of
Christ’s body, all are also members of one another.
For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the

-- 163 of 209 --

members of the body, though many, are one body, so it is with
Christ. For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body —
Jews or Greeks, slaves or free — and all were made to drink of
one Spirit. For the body does not consist of one member but of
many. If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I do not
belong to the body,” that would not make it any less a part of the
body. And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I do
not belong to the body,” that would not make it any less a part of
the body. If the whole body were an eye, where would be the
hearing? If the whole body were an ear, where would be the sense
of smell? But as it is, God arranged the organs in the body, each
one of them, as he chose. If all were a single organ, where would
the body be? As it is, there are many parts, yet one body. The eye
cannot say to the hand, “I have no need of you,” nor again the
head to the feet, “I have no need of you.” On the contrary, the
parts of the body which seem to be weaker are indispensable. (1
Cor. 12:12-22)
Is an eye more important to the functioning of the body than an ear?
Doesn’t a body function best when it has not only eyes, but also
ears, not only a sense of smell, but also hands and feet? Even if the
feet do their part, how can the body function without hands as well?
Doesn’t the body depend upon each member to bring its unique gifts
and capacities to the whole? How could the body function if only
one kind of faculty were present? Even the weakest member is
indispensable.
Each one’s essential indispensability is affirmed, as Paul sets forth
his understanding of the radical interdependence of the members of
the church. While the indispensability of some may not be obvious
to general perception, those who walk by faith know that each
person has a unique place of belonging by virtue of the person’s
participation in Christ. Moreover, because we internalize the context
in which we live, what is outside of us is also inside each of us. We
literally cannot cut ourselves off from the body to which we belong.
“If one member suffers, all suffer together” (1 Cor. 12:26). The

-- 164 of 209 --

suffering of one member, however seemingly marginal, does in fact
affect the entire body.
The premise, that the suffering of one brings suffering to the
whole body, functions, I believe, as a basic presupposition of
restorative practices, though it is often cut loose from its moorings
in Christian theology. Seldom made explicit, it is nevertheless
crucial for understanding the core values of restorative practices, no
matter what the context.10

-- 165 of 209 --

Conflicts in the Church
Conflicts in the church are hardly new. We have only to recall the
apostle Paul’s intense frustration with the church at Corinth.
Loyalties that divided the church into factions were intolerable. He
reminded them repeatedly of their unity in Christ. “What I mean is
that each one of you says, ‘I belong to Paul,’ or ‘I belong to
Apollos,’ or ‘I belong to Cephas,’ or ‘I belong to Christ’ ” (1 Cor.
1:12). Paul sees distorted theology at the root of such division — “Is
Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in
the name of Paul?” (1:13) — which he seeks to correct. The
community’s central identity as members of Christ’s own body, and
therefore as members one of another, is his basic presupposition. An
appeal to our underlying unity in Christ perhaps remains the most
persuasive argument that might still inspire a congregation to listen
to one another with patience. The deeper the congregation’s
devotion to Christ, the greater will be its willingness to bear with
one another, even in those situations when it is weary with conflict
or stunned by crisis. What, apart from Jesus Christ himself, can
inspire the members to reach toward those with whom they
disagree?
In recent years, contemporary students of congregational
dynamics have been able to shed helpful light on the specific
features of such a factionalized community.11 In some conflicted
churches, secrets distort information, creating alienation for some
and a false sense of companionship for others, thereby raising the
level of anxiety system- wide. Keeping secrets seriously divides a
family or community. Those who are “in” on the secret are able to
communicate with one another far better than with anyone outside
the group, “about any issue, not just about the secret.”12 The most
important impact of secrets on the community’s emotional well-‐
being, however, is that “they exacerbate other pathological
processes unrelated to the content of the particular secret, because
secrets generally function to keep anxiety at higher energy levels. . .
. The formation of a . . . secret is always symptomatic of other things

-- 166 of 209 --

going on in the [community].”13 Other pathological processes
include key members cutting themselves off from the community
for a while, whose departure from the community intensifies the
anxiety of those who remain. Communication becomes indirect as
attempts are made to avoid the emotional minefields created by
taboo subjects. Congregational culture grows more conflict-‐
avoidant. Triangles form. The anxiety arising between any two
parties is absorbed by a third party who listens to both but is
powerless to resolve their differences unless or until she finds a way
to become a connecting bridge between them.14 True impasses, in
which members no longer recall the real issues, may evolve. The
conflict ceases to be about the issues and begins to be about persons
instead. Labeling, scapegoating, and diagnosing others prevail.15
Power is no longer shared but is used by one group at the expense of
another. Decision-making structures are altered to reinforce the
power of the ruling faction.
The sense of alienation and hopelessness that typically grows out
of long-term, unresolved conflict is among its most destructive fruit.
As persons shrink back from engaging in overt conflict, it becomes
more and more difficult to assess the complex dynamics at work.
Typically, many disparate conflicts have arisen over time with
various people involved. One person may see himself as the victim
of another’s hurtful action, while the other would identify him as the
offender, focusing not on that action, but on the one immediately
preceding it, to which she is simply responding. It is often
challenging for church leaders to identify a specific action that
might become the focus of a fruitful conversation. What is the
conflict about? How might a particular focus be found that will
open up channels of communication about what is at stake? If the
aims of a restorative paradigm are mutual understanding, self-‐
responsibility, and fruitful action (and not mutual blame, self-‐
justification, or finding a scapegoat), then in a certain sense it
doesn’t matter what the chosen focus is. What particular focus might
best assist the church in reversing negative spirals toward isolation
and help facilitate connection among its members?
Conflicts in a community are like mushrooms in a forest, which

-- 167 of 209 --

seem to sprout up at random. Though a professional mycologist
would recognize the many mushrooms as a single rhizome (the
horizontal root stem), the ordinary observer sees only a multitude of
individual mushrooms. When persons are members of one another,
as they are in the church, any problem usually conceals an
underlying root conflict that is larger and more complex than any
lone individual can perceive. How do the members of the
community conceive of the overall shape of the rhizome hidden
from view? The complex root system can be described adequately
only through multiple perspectives. An intentional restorative
process is designed to understand the meaning each person makes of
the root conflict, and not to determine “what really happened.”16 Just
as each of the four Gospel writers understood the meaning of Jesus’
life, death, and resurrection differently, so every member of the
community will make unique meaning out of the turmoil the church
is experiencing.
To set up a churchwide restorative process, it is necessary only to
choose a single manifestation of the complex underlying conflict,
trusting that any entry point will lead to the root. With the careful
listening of those who gather for a restorative circle, any particular
focus would enable a sustained meditation on the interrelated parts
of a single conflict, in both its unity and its complexity. By
intentionally choosing a single focus, in other words, the intricately
woven interdependence of the community will be disclosed. Though
the whole is hidden in any part (i.e., any particular mushroom will
lead to the hidden root system), it is helpful to choose a specific
focus that will likely be significant for the community as a whole.
Churches that embrace a restorative paradigm understand that
healthy open conflict is far less destructive than denied or
suppressed conflict; in fact, open conflict can bring a community
new vitality:
Productive conflict can include a feeling of change, expansion,
joy. It may at times have to involve anguish and pain too; but even
these are different from the feelings involved in destructive or
blocked conflict. Destructive conflict calls forth the conviction

-- 168 of 209 --

that one cannot possibly “win” or, more accurately, that nothing
can really change or enlarge. It often involves a feeling that one
must move away from one’s deeply felt motives, that one is losing
the connection with one’s most importantly held desires and
needs. . . . Adults have been well schooled in suppressing conflict
but not in conducting constructive conflict. Adults don’t seem to
know how to enter into it with integrity and respect and with some
degree of confidence and hope.17
Churches that adopt a restorative practice framework will not be
conflict-avoidant. These churches will teach their members how to
initiate constructive conflict with some degree of confidence and
hope.18 As members work through conflicts successfully, they will
increase not only their skill level but also their trust in the process.
Conflicts of many kinds and at various levels of intensity need
sensitive, differentiated responses. Consider this continuum of
increasing levels of conflict:19
When hurt occurs in the context of a solid relationship of trust, it
can usually be addressed by simple affective statements (at the far
left of the continuum). An example might be a parishioner saying to
his pastor, “I felt hurt that you didn’t return my phone call last week
when you heard that my daughter was seriously ill. I especially
needed your support at such a stressful time.” Such an honest
expression of one’s feelings and needs would likely evoke a
response that would help restore trust and contribute to mutual
understanding.20 As we move toward the right of the continuum, we
find conflicts of a more serious nature that require more stable
structures.21 An impromptu restorative conversation might be
undertaken by two or three people who understand that the purpose
of the conversation is to promote mutual understanding. Those who
have been instructed by Matthew 18 will recognize the progression:

-- 169 of 209 --

first, try to work things out directly with the other person involved.
If you are unable to resolve matters at that (lowest) level, then ask
one or two others to join you.
“If another member of the church sins against you, go and point
out the fault when the two of you are alone. If the member listens
to you, you have regained that one. But if you are not listened to,
take one or two others along with you, so that every word may be
confirmed by the evidence of two or three witnesses. If the
member refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church; and if the
offender refuses to listen even to the church, let such a one be to
you as a Gentile and a tax collector. Truly I tell you, whatever you
bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on
earth will be loosed in heaven. Again, truly I tell you, if two of
you agree on earth about anything you ask, it will be done for you
by my Father in heaven. For where two or three are gathered in
my name, I am there among them.” (Matt. 18:15-20 NRSV,
emphasis added)
Congregations need instruction in resolving harm at these lower
levels in order to prevent conflicts from escalating. At this level,
participants who have been trained to listen — note the key skill of
listening repeated four times — will generally be confident that
though the conversation may be difficult, it will be worthwhile in
the end. Those churches that have held circles for a wide variety of
purposes will have all the mechanisms in place, as well as a
considerable fund of trust, for tackling the more difficult large-group
or churchwide restorative circles.
Circles for decision making are quite different — both in intent
and in process — from a typical church meeting in which the pros
and cons of a possible course of action are debated and a “majority
rules” vote is taken. Restorative circles are not designed to be
forums for winning proponents, persuading others to one’s point of
view, or making an opposing party look bad. Such tactics only
increase ill feeling and lead to polarization. A restorative approach
encourages those the majority disagrees with to speak up, not so

-- 170 of 209 --

they can be defeated, but so that their needs can be fully heard and
taken to heart. A restorative church knows that if it operates within a
win/lose paradigm, the whole church will lose. Just as in a marriage
where only win/win arguments enable the couple to flourish, so also
in a church, members are careful not to try to “win” at someone
else’s expense. As we move further toward the far right-hand
column to large-group restorative processes or to a churchwide
formal restorative conference, clear structures and processes need to
be in place that will provide safety for more challenging
conversations. Though these conversations can sometimes be
painful, they often issue in newfound energy and even joy. As
members speak of their deepest convictions, they grow in respect
and understanding of one another. Their unity in Christ becomes
more visible as they see that those with whom they disagree are
taking their views to heart and considering them in a new light.
At the formal conference end of the continuum, it can be helpful
to invite an outside facilitator to oversee the process.22 Many
situations arise in the church where a pastor needs to be an active
participant in the circle, and not the facilitator. Including the pastor
as a member of the circle enables members to understand the pastor
as a human being with feelings and needs and not simply as the
person in authority. Dominic Barter tells the story of a kindergartner
who requested a restorative circle over an upsetting event at her
school. The principal participated in the circle as an equal partner to
help restore harmony.23
It is in the context of community conflict — when one member of
the church is sinning against another and refuses to hear the impact
it has on others — that Jesus explicitly promises to be in their midst.
The promise of Jesus’ presence is given to us precisely in those
situations in which we feel most threatened, when we have been
hurt and find ourselves unable to make our voice heard. When one
who “has sinned against us” refuses to listen to us, we are instructed
to ask one or two others to go with us to find a way to restore trust
(impromptu restorative conversation). Skill in listening is essential
for such a conversation to succeed. If the person refuses to hear the
impact of his actions on others, conversations that include still

-- 171 of 209 --

others may need to take place. Because any particular offense is
nested in larger complex processes, the perspective of others will
widen the scope, helping to shed light on the overarching context.
When the community’s clear intent is one of mutual understanding
and not blaming or scapegoating, the circle process can be liberating
and exciting. New information will emerge; hearts closed down and
hardened will open up and soften; and creative new directions will
spring up.
What if the person who has brought suffering to the body refuses
to listen to the whole church? Jesus says such a person is to be
treated as a Gentile or a tax collector. Churches through the ages
have taken Jesus to mean that such a person is to be utterly rejected,
perhaps even cast out from the community. Yet here we must ask
about Jesus’ own practice toward Gentiles and tax collectors. Does
he refuse to have anything to do with them? No, he seeks deepened
fellowship with them.24 He invites himself into the home of
Zacchaeus, the despised tax collector, for example, and engages in
serious theological conversation with the woman from Samaria.25
Against all the customs of his culture, Jesus listens to those that
others consider sinful and unworthy. Even at the formal conference
end of the continuum, when clear harm has been done, the goal is
not to cast out those who have harmed others, but to deepen
fellowship with them so that a true communion of mutual
understanding can grow.

-- 172 of 209 --

Guiding Principles of Restorative Practice
When strife or trauma has come to the community, the fundamental
questions informing a restorative approach would be:
1. Who has been hurt?
2. What are their needs?
3. Whose obligations are these?
4. Who has a stake in this situation?
5. What is the appropriate process to involve stakeholders to put
things right?26
The focus of the work is to identify and address the needs of every
person impacted by the incident, including those who have caused
harm. Recognizing our own need for mercy, we are to extend mercy
toward any who acknowledge their responsibility for their choices.
If a clear restorative process has already been established in the
church, parishioners will expect a restorative circle to be called, so
that the matter can be discussed in a safe and productive manner. It
is crucial that the person who has brought harm to the community
acknowledges the fact of her actions. The meaning of the action for
her, as well as for others, will come out in the restorative circle. Not
only will others come to understand her motivations for acting as
she did, but she will have an opportunity to hear the impact her
choices had on other members of the community.
Guiding principles at work in a restorative paradigm are listed
below:
1. The conflict or difficulty, whatever its dimensions, belongs to the
community in which it takes place. It needs to be owned by the
community and not taken over by outside agents (e.g., the
criminal justice system, social workers, lawyers or other
authorities, professionals, or agencies attempting to offer
support).27
2. Its purpose (and central focus) is to restore and heal relationships
through face-to-face participation of those affected.

-- 173 of 209 --

3. It is a voluntary process for everyone involved. No coercion of
any kind is used. People are invited to participate, not mandated to
do so.
4. Trained facilitators from within the community coordinate the
restorative processes.
5. Each person participating will have equal access to the processes
developed as well as informed consent upon which to make a
decision whether to participate or not.
6. Restorative circles end in an action plan to which everyone
agrees. Those directly affected together determine the outcome.
7. No observers are included in the process, only participants who
have a vital stake in the outcome.
8. Everyone present is given a chance to speak and be heard.
9. The greater the alignment with these principles, the more
restorative the outcome.28
Participants in the circle decide what strategies might best serve the
needs of the whole by discovering which specific actions will be
done, by whom, and by what date. Participants then make requests
of one another or suggest constructive actions that either directly
meet the identified needs or symbolically connect to them in a
meaningful way.

-- 174 of 209 --

Choosing a Planning Team
In any serious conflict in the church, it is important to create a
planning team or “reference committee.”29 Such a team is made up
of lay leaders who are familiar not only with the issues the
congregation is facing but also with the history of some of its long-‐
standing interpersonal impasses. These leaders need to be
sanctioned by the church governing body and widely respected by
the congregation. If church factions are polarized, it is important to
have proponents of each faction on the team. It would be unwise,
however, to choose extreme representatives of one party or another.
It is best to choose those more moderate in their opinions, especially
if they are skilled in listening to those with whom they disagree.
Their success in offering effective leadership will depend in large
part on their ability to work together as a team. The quality of their
dialogue “tends to affect the quality of the overall dialogue within
the congregation. . . . Their essential job is to advocate a fair process
and not a particular outcome.”30
The planning team will oversee a process that has three segments:
a precircle to support clarity about the specific act that will serve as
the focal point for conversation and to explain the whole process to
those who need to be included; a restorative circle that aims toward
mutual understanding, self-responsibility, and effective action; and a
postcircle to help the community assess the level of satisfaction with
the steps taken. Restorative circles can function at varying degrees
of complexity and varying levels of emotional intensity. In each
case, only those people directly or indirectly impacted by the act
should be involved. Because of the complex interdependent nature
of a church community or in the event of a serious crisis, situations
may arise in which a churchwide restorative circle is needed. This
kind of circle is represented on the restorative practice continuum at
the far right: Formal Restorative Conference. If the church is
familiar with a restorative approach, having worked frequently at
much lower levels of conflict or crisis, the planning team can go into
immediate action.

-- 175 of 209 --

Churches dealing with any specific action that has diminished the
community’s sense of well- being gather to talk about the harm that
has impacted them, by answering a series of prepared questions (that
will be contextualized for the specific situation). At the most
generalized level, each person will be asked to reflect on three
questions:
What do you want others to know about how you are now in
relation to [what happened]? What impact has this event had
on you? (Grounding in the present — this seeks to support
mutual understanding.)
What do you want others to know about what you were
looking for when you acted (or responded) as you did to the
event? (Investigating the past — this seeks to support self-‐
responsibility.)
What would you like to see happen next? Is there a specific
request or offer you want to make that would address the
needs of the community as you understand it? (Agreeing to
future action — this seeks to support effective movement
forward.)31
Each person in the circle will have an opportunity to speak and to be
heard. Questions that first ground the participants in the present help
build bridges of mutual understanding. Questions that investigate
the reasons people chose to respond as they did help each person to
take responsibility for his choices. And requests or offers of support
that are concrete and doable help promote effective action.
Situations that interface with legal processes (such as the sexual
misconduct of the pastor or the treasurer’s misappropriation of
church funds) will need clear guidelines that respect the rights of the
alleged offender and victims, but at the same time attend to the
congregation’s needs for healing and connection at a time of
potentially overwhelming stress.32

-- 176 of 209 --

Structuring a Churchwide Restorative Circle
A churchwide restorative circle can transform conflict in completely
unexpected ways.33 There is a natural flow to conflict that needs
assistance in reaching its full potential. Ideally, two facilitators (or
one, if necessary) help the group establish clear guidelines and keep
the process on track. The facilitators’ tasks are:
to help the community come to an agreement about
guidelines for the dialogue by explaining the overall aims of
the restorative circle;
to check whether each person who speaks is heard to her own
satisfaction;
to prepare each participant in a precircle process before the
circle meets (precircles will be explained below);
to schedule the date and time of the restorative circle;
to choose a quiet and symbolically meaningful place for the
circle, and to have drinks, tissues, pens, and paper available;
to set forth the process clearly for all participants; and
to greet all persons as they enter the space, initiate a simple
process for introductions to be made, and offer a clear
opening sentence that reminds them of the intention that
brought them all there.34
The group’s first task will be to develop process guidelines. These
typically include showing respect for each person by agreeing to
keep what is said within the group (agreement regarding
confidentiality), and by having only one person speak at a time
(agreement regarding respect and fairness) — sometimes facilitated
by the use of a “talking piece” or symbolic object that is held by the
person who is speaking.35
Setting chairs in a circle communicates a commitment to valuing
every person’s voice. As Kay Pranis comments, a circle
communicates, by its very shape, that “no person is more important
than anyone else.”36 The focus of the meeting should be described in

-- 177 of 209 --

neutral terms to avoid attributing blame to any particular person or
persons. Whatever happened is an event that cries out for
understanding. The aim of calling a circle is to facilitate a greater
sense of connection among the members of the community, giving
each member a keen sense of belonging. If a harmful event involves
an actual crime, the legal process might need to occur concomitantly
with the circle process. It is crucial in such cases to distinguish
between such procedures and the congregation’s urgent need for
care and healing. Fears about legal ramifications will sometimes
muzzle a congregation at the very time they most need to hear from
one another. If discord has arisen in the body, the group must have a
safe way to come together and process the emotions that are having
such an impact.
The core aim of a restorative circle is to facilitate connection
among its members through mutual understanding, self-‐
responsibility, and an action plan.37 Mutual understanding is
supported when each person has an opportunity to be heard about
the significance of a particular event, the meaning that it holds for
him now. After each person speaks, the facilitator asks one of the
members of the circle, “What did you hear that is important to
him?” That member replies with a summary of the essence of what
he heard. Then the facilitator turns to the original speaker and asks,
“Is that what you wanted understood?” By adding this simple step,
everyone in the circle receives immediate feedback about how he
has been heard. This gives each person an opportunity to restate
what he wants to be known by others until he is heard completely to
his satisfaction. This back-and-forth dialogue between speaker and
listener seems to slow down the process. In the end, it brings much
more ease to the process because little facilitates mutual
understanding more readily than the experience of being heard as
one hopes to be heard.
The intention of this process is to focus on the people present and
how they see and understand one another, in order to reestablish a
sense of connection. The facilitation helps the participants to gain
trust in the process as well as insight about other members of the
community who are affected by an important event in the church’s

-- 178 of 209 --

life. Sometimes the process may involve the gathering of the entire
community, and several circles may need to be held. Hearing from
others in this way helps to build bridges of mutual understanding as
each person begins to hear the others’ humanity.
Self- responsibility takes place when each person in the
community acknowledges and owns the choices she has made about
the act or event in question, by engaging this question: “What do
you want others to know about what you were looking for when you
acted as you did?” Every member of the congregation has
contributed to the ethos of the community by her actions (or
inaction). Each person is encouraged to reflect on what in particular
she was seeking in relation to the act. As each person hears from
others, she may be able to give more articulate voice to her own
motivations (i.e., what needs she was trying to meet through her
particular choices). Naming these before the community helps
persons to take responsibility for their own needs, a process that at
once decreases blame and increases a sense of empowerment.
Because the process is slow and reflective, giving people the time
and space to process their emotions and taking the time for full
reflective listening, a sturdy bridge among the participants is built.
Only after the interpersonal bridge is securely in place do the
facilitators move the process to the third step: the creation of an
action plan. With restorative circles, churches can avoid the
common mistake of rushing into action. After a trauma or tragedy,
many people will offer some version of the advice that was a
popular slogan in the 1960s: “Don’t mourn, organize!” While taking
action often brings with it a wonderful sense of empowerment, it
will not accomplish a fraction of what it is meant to accomplish if
the step of mourning together is sidestepped. When the members of
the community are reconnected with each other from the heart, a
palpable shift can be felt in the room. At that point, the third
question can be asked: “What would you like to see happen next? Is
there a specific request — or offer — that you want to make that
would address the needs of the community, as you understand
them?”
At this point in the conversation, creative strategies usually begin

-- 179 of 209 --

to flow, sometimes to overflow. The group is energized by the hard
work it has done in steps 1 and 2 and is eager to move forward
together in a constructive way. Any offering or request needs to be
concrete, specific, and doable within a particular time frame. The
action plan aims to take into consideration all the needs that have
been expressed. Here an exciting sense of collaboration often grows
palpably. A plan is agreed upon by all members of the circle and is
to be carried out within a specific period of time. At the end of the
whole process (after the action plan has been implemented), a
postcircle will be called to assess whether the action plan did in fact
meet the needs of the community as it had hoped. If not, a new
action plan can be created.
It is not the responsibility of the facilitators to resolve the conflict;
this is the work of the entire community. The facilitators enter the
circle process, along with everyone else, not knowing how things
will go. They do not have a specific end in mind. Holding fast to the
fundamental principles of the practice, facilitators work throughout
the entire process with the community, and in many instances are
themselves members of the community. They do not enter the circle
holding on to roles of authority but join the circle simply as those
members who will guard the integrity of the process and assist the
group in adhering to the agreed-upon principles. Because restorative
circles are completely voluntary, the persons who commit
themselves to the circle process are those willing to take
responsibility for the next steps. Anyone who does not wish to take
part is free to decline. In that case, however, the facilitators make it
clear that the circle will proceed without them. In this way, no one
has the power to sabotage the healing of the community by choosing
not to participate.

-- 180 of 209 --

Precircles
As mentioned, there are three distinct phases to the overall process
for a churchwide restorative conference: precircles, the restorative
circle itself, and the postcircle. The facilitators meet with each group
(or each individual, depending on the scope and the particulars of
the event to be discussed) represented in a precircle meeting. That is
to say, the facilitators meet with the authors of the act, the direct
recipients, and the larger community (those indirectly impacted) in
three different precircles. The facilitators’ goals in these precircles
are to forge an empathic connection with each person involved; to
gain clarity about the precise nature of the act by asking each person
“what happened” as that person sees it; to ask who needs to be
involved to resolve the conflict; and to gain each individual’s
informed consent. The facilitators lay out the purpose of the circle,
the precise questions that will be asked, and the underlying
principles that will be adhered to. The overall process is explained.
The facilitators end the precircles by asking each person whether
he would like to participate. Their aim is to adapt the form to the
local context and culture as much as possible so that it will truly
serve the people involved. As they help the congregants to articulate
what really matters to them about the incident, the facilitators show
forth a collaborative spirit that helps to form a sturdy bond of trust.
As more people decide to participate, it becomes more promising
that the circle(s) will reach its restorative aim.

-- 181 of 209 --

Postcircles
A postcircle is called by the facilitators at an agreed-upon time set
by the action plan. The participants in the restorative circle had
agreed to take certain actions that they believed would bring about
healing, harmony, or ease; help make amends; and provide
occasions for mutual support. And in the postcircle, they gather to
assess their level of satisfaction with the actions taken. Every person
has an opportunity to acknowledge the contributions of the others
and to express gratitude. At the same time, each person assesses
whether anything further is needed to bring about the agreed- upon
aims of the circle. What further actions might be taken that would
contribute to the healing, peace, or reconciliation of the community?
Perhaps the actions they took did not meet their needs in the ways
they had anticipated. Now they can propose new actions based on
newly discovered needs. When the group explores the meaning of
these actions for each participant, community connections are
further deepened. Each participant has an opportunity to delve more
deeply into the meaning the proposed actions carry for her
personally, as she is now newly aware of them. Can something
further be done to capture the essence of what is at stake? Have new
circumstances arisen that now need to be considered?
If the agreed-upon actions were not in fact carried out, the
postcircle offers an opportunity to explore what needs were met by
not following through on those actions. That is to say, what are the
reasons for anyone choosing not to follow through on the action
plan? What needs would not have been met by undertaking the
action? The postcircle provides an opportunity to fine-tune the
action plan, in other words, not to blame or shame those who did not
follow through on the agreement. Newly discovered needs may then
lead to a new action plan within a new time frame.38
As before, the facilitator will check with each speaker whether he
has been heard to his own satisfaction by asking another to repeat
the essence of what is important to the one who just spoke. This step
continues to be crucial because it closes the communication loop.

-- 182 of 209 --

Trust in the process is deepened as people discover that what
matters to them has been fully heard.
Churches not in the midst of crises would be wise to consider the
principles of restorative practice and agree to create a restorative
system in which to nest any particular restorative circle. A church
doesn’t have to be in the midst of conflict to become a restorative
congregation. Indeed, proactive circles that are not responding to
crisis can be established to deepen relational ties. Circles can be
developed as the church’s normal way of doing business. For
example, a church council meeting could be conducted, not
according to Robert’s Rules of Order, but rather according to a circle
process. Youth groups might agree to check in with each other (with
a talking piece) by describing the highs and lows of their week. An
upcoming issue that is not contentious could be discussed in
churchwide circle processes. By these means the church would
model in all their practices that everyone’s voice matters; that
processes are invitational, not coerced; and that those in power
positions are not seeking to assert power over others but want to
empower all members to participate in the crucial decisions of the
community. Decisions will still be made by those responsible to
make them (e.g., staff, council, pastors, etc.), but members will grow
in trust that their voices will be heard about issues that matter to
them. Restorative circles are inscribed as a way of life for the
community.
When institutional agreements are in place for how conflicts are
to be approached, a community is more readily prepared to use any
given conflict as an opportunity for growth. Physical space needs to
be set aside where circles can be conducted. Members of the
community need to be trained to facilitate circles at the lower end of
conflict intensity. The process for requesting a restorative circle
needs to be made accessible to all members, so that all persons are
equally empowered.39

-- 183 of 209 --

Conclusion
The purpose of this chapter has been to introduce the field of
restorative practices to the contemporary church as a way to
promote mutual understanding, self-responsibility, and effective
action in communities torn apart by conflict or shocked by trauma.
While restorative processes are deeply embedded in the theology
and history of the church — especially in the so-called historic
“peace” communions — they are rarely given the place they
deserve, at least in mainline denominations in the United States. Yet,
because forgiveness and reconciliation lie at the core of the gospel,
the church, for the sake of its basic integrity, needs to be tireless in
aligning its relational practices with its beliefs.
In his book The Tacit Dimension, Michael Polanyi writes:
To rely on a theory for understanding nature is to interiorize it.
For we are attending from the theory to things seen in its light,
and we are aware of the theory, while thus using it, in terms of the
spectacle that it serves to explain. This is why mathematical
theory can be learned only by practicing its application: its true
knowledge lies in our ability to use it. . . . A true knowledge of a
theory can be established only after it has been interiorized and
extensively used to interpret experience.40
Conceptual models, such as the one presented here, become tools
for knowing only when we indwell both the model and the situation
at hand. Does the model illuminate the situation? How? Does it fail
to account for certain factors? In what way? Does it open up new
avenues for further investigation?
I believe that restorative practices have a great deal to offer
churches that are struggling with entrenched conflict or reeling from
traumatic events in their lives. The model also offers clear and
simple guidelines for reaching across any of the normal barriers that
separate human beings in community. When differences become
barriers to understanding, restorative circles have much to commend
them. Whether the differences are racial, cultural, political, or

-- 184 of 209 --

religious does not seem to matter. Circles such as those described
here will facilitate mutual understanding, self-responsibility, and
new creative action. That is perhaps why they are used increasingly
in a wide variety of venues: in education, criminal justice, and social
service agencies. Once the basic principles and practices are
understood, circles can be adopted in an even wider variety of
contexts. Individual families might use these simple guidelines to
deepen relational ties among their members.41 Those trained in
facilitation in their churches will be able to use these uncomplicated
skills wherever they go; these skills will contribute substantively to
any community of which they are a part.
Churches that decide to adopt restorative practices for their
communities provide opportunities for their members to learn more
honest and caring ways to communicate. They give visible shape to
the church’s commitment to speak the truth in love, not as an
abstract ideal to strive for but as a growing skill that will empower
the community to take responsibility for its own conflicts. Working
through interpersonal pain is one way of trusting in God’s grace. In
honoring the interdependent needs of every member, in facilitating
mutual understanding, and in offering opportunities for real
accountability, the gospel of Jesus Christ can be lived out.
These practices have the potential to develop each member’s
capacity to see the human beings with whom she is in conflict as
precious members of the body of Christ, brothers and sisters made
in the image of God, not as opponents to be controlled or conquered.
The circle process enables each person to participate as a fully equal
and valued member of the community. All members are given an
opportunity to cocreate constructive solutions. In the process, every
member who participates will learn crucial skills in how to
undertake dialogue in a respectful way.
Every voice is valued as the whole body together seeks God’s
kingdom. “Again, truly I tell you, if two of you agree on earth about
anything you ask, it will be done for you by my Father in heaven.
For where two or three are gathered in my name, I am there among
them” (Matt. 18:19-20 NRSV). The fundamental interdependence of
the members of the body is essential to this understanding.

-- 185 of 209 --

Emphasis is squarely placed on the unity of the body of Christ, even
though each member plays a unique, indispensable role. We are
members of one another, and “if one member suffers, all suffer
together with it” (1 Cor. 12:26 NRSV). Jesus reminds his disciples
over and over again that even “the least of these” matter in the
kingdom of God. Restorative circles offer a structure in which the
members of the church can experience the truth that everyone does
in fact matter.
Restorative circles highlight the fact that all our choices are made
in the context of mutual accountability. As we listen to one another,
we gain a wider vision of how our words and actions have affected
others in the community. If we regret our choices, we are given an
opportunity to make amends. Since all members are treated with
basic respect, acknowledging regret does not humiliate a person. On
the contrary, it is a sign of the Holy Spirit’s work in our midst. As
churches offer safe places to strengthen frayed bonds of trust, and as
they call upon God to minister to the community in its pain, they
give opportunities for each person to express what has wounded the
person most. Restorative circles offer a safe structure, a clear
process, and a healing intention for members of the body to hear one
another’s stories in a public forum. Now the hurting parties can be
heard respectfully. It takes time to heal. Even more importantly, it
takes willingness. No one can make another willing to begin such a
healing journey, but without clear processes in place, no healing
journey can ever be begun. Such circles offer the church concrete
practices for working through churchwide impasses where mutual
understanding, genuine accountability, and basic trust are the core
needs of the community. Out of such honestly faced conflict, new
life and hope will, by the grace of God, spring up.
1. See the Web site for the Institute for Congregational Trauma and Growth at
http://www.ictg.org/about.html. Its mission is to provide “research, education and networking tools
for ministers, staffs and trained volunteers leading congregations and organizations after disaster.”
2. Transdisciplinary studies are “projects that both integrate academic researchers from different
unrelated disciplines and non-academic participants . . . to research a common goal and create new
knowledge and theory. Transdisciplinarity combines interdisciplinarity with a participatory
approach.” See definitions of “disciplinary,” “multidisciplinary,” “participatory,” “interdisciplinary,”
“transdisciplinary,” and “integrative” studies in Bärbel Tress, Gunther Tress, Gary Fry, and Paul

-- 186 of 209 --

Opdam, eds., From Landscape Research to Landscape Planning: Aspects of Integration, Education,
and Application (Dordrecht: Springer, 2006), 15-17.
3. Even in so-called secular venues, Christian values and norms are often either explicitly or
implicitly present. See, for example, Desmond Tutu, No Future without Forgiveness (New York:
Doubleday, 1999), which describes the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South
Africa. Howard Zehr, a practicing Mennonite, is one of the “founding fathers” of restorative justice
worldwide. See his books, The Little Book of Restorative Justice (Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books,
2002), and Changing Lenses: A New Focus for Crime and Justice (Scottdale, Pa.: Herald, 1990),
among others. See also the work of John-Paul Lederach, a theorist and practitioner of transforming
conflict at the level of international relations: The Journey toward Reconciliation (Scottdale, Pa.:
Herald, 1999); The Little Book of Conflict Transformation (Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 2003); and
The Moral Imagination: The Art and Soul of Building Peace (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2010), among others.
4. See http://www.iirp.edu/whatisrp.php. Note the use of the term “restorative practices” (in the
plural) in this definition. Some theorists prefer to speak of “restorative practice” (in the singular) to
indicate their understanding that RP is not a set of techniques or processes, but rather is an
overarching framework for understanding and strengthening relationship, a way of thinking and
being. Within that framework, many kinds of processes or practices may be usefully employed. I am
indebted to Mark Vander Vennen of FaithCARE for this point. See www.shalemnetwork.org.
5. http://www.iirp.edu/whatisrp.php.
6. Social Discipline Window, created by Paul McCold and Ted Wachtel, 2000.
http://www.iirp.edu/pdf/paradigm.pdf.
7. In his book Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life (Encinitas, Calif.: PuddleDancer
Press, 2003), Marshall Rosenberg argues that contribution and belonging are fundamental, universal
human needs.
8. In his article “Reconceiving Practice,” Craig Dykstra argues that a modern understanding of
“practices” is “ahistorical, individualistic, and technological, something done to and for others,
undergirded by a utilitarian ethic. By contrast, he argues that the practices of the Christian faith are
more adequately conceived as being cooperative and communal ‘complex traditions of interaction,’
something we do with others. We learn the practices of Christian faith by participating in them in the
community, through mentoring relationships with others who are competent ‘practitioners.’ By
entering into the practices of the faith, we develop new knowledge and insight that otherwise cannot
be gained.” Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, Pray without Ceasing: Revitalizing Pastoral Care
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995), xi. See Dykstra, “Reconceiving Practice,” in Shifting Boundaries:
Contextual Approaches to the Structure of Theological Education, ed. Barbara Wheeler and Edward
Farley (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1991).
9. Glen H. Stassen, Just Peacemaking: Transforming Initiatives for Justice and Peace (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 1992), 93-94.
10. Various cultures and religions have their own conceptualizations of the essential
interdependence of persons. Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh, as mentioned in chapter 2, speaks of
human “interbeing”; Bishop Desmond Tutu speaks of ubuntu; and many Christians understand
koinonia with God and one another as the telos of human life: partnership, communion, or mutual
indwelling. Consider this description of ubuntu by Tutu: “Ubuntu is very difficult to render into a
Western language. It speaks of the very essence of being human. . . . It is to say, ‘My humanity is

-- 187 of 209 --

caught up, is inextricably bound up, in yours.’ We belong in a bundle of life. We say, ‘A person is a
person through other persons.’ It is not, ‘I think therefore I am.’ It says rather: ‘I am human because I
belong. I participate. I share.’ ” Desmond Tutu, No Future without Forgiveness (New York:
Doubleday, 1999), 31.
11. See Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger and Theresa F. Latini, Transforming Church Conflict:
Compassionate Leadership in Action (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2013).
12. Edwin Friedman, Generation to Generation: Family Process in Church and Synagogue (New
York: Guilford Press, 1985), 52.
13. Friedman, Generation to Generation, 53.
14. “When any two parts of a system become uncomfortable with one another, they will ‘triangle
in’ or focus upon a third person, or issue, as a way of stabilizing their own relationship with one
another.” Friedman later reflects that though “the most triangled person in any set of relationships is
always the most vulnerable; when the laws of emotional triangles are understood . . . [the triangled
party] tends to become the most powerful.” Friedman, Generation to Generation, 35-39.
15. K. Brynolf Lyon, “Scapegoating in Congregational and Group Life: Practical Theological
Reflections on the Unbearable,” in Healing Wisdom: Depth Psychology and the Pastoral Ministry,
ed. Kathleen Greider, Deborah van Deusen Hunsinger, and Felicity Brock Kelcourse (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 2010), 141-56.
16. The single rhizome of the mushroom plant as an extended metaphor to describe conflict in
community was developed by Dominic Barter in his workshop “Building Compassionate Justice for
21st Century,” October 2008, in St. Paul, Minn.
17. Jean Baker Miller, Toward a New Psychology of Women (Boston: Beacon Press, 1976), 129.
18. Interpersonal skills in nonviolent communication can be and are being taught in a variety of
contexts, including Christian churches. See Rosenberg, Nonviolent Communication, and Hunsinger
and Latini, Transforming Church Conflict.
19. International Institute of Restorative Practices Canada, developed by Bruce Schenk, presented
at the IIRP International Conference, Bethlehem, Pa., October 2010.
20. Nonviolent communication teaches that expressing one’s feelings and needs, instead of
judgments, evaluations, or diagnoses, helps to restore connection among individuals and groups. See
Rosenberg, Nonviolent Communication.
21. See Conflict Intensity Chart: A Resource for Committees on Ministry, PC(USA), with its
description of five levels of increasing conflict, based on the work of Rev. Speed Leas, Moving Your
Church through Conflict (Bethesda, Md.: Alban Institute, 1985). Available online.
22. FaithCARE in Hamilton, Canada, for example, provides consultation for churches in crisis,
using a restorative practice framework. See www.shalemnetwork.org.
23. Barter, “Building Compassionate Justice for 21st Century.”
24. Lederach, The Journey toward Reconciliation, 134.
25. Though Samaritans were not technically Gentiles, “Jews have no dealings with Samaritans”
(John 4:9).
26. Zehr, The Little Book, 38.
27. Nils Christie argues this thesis in his groundbreaking article, “Conflicts as Property”: “My
suspicion is that criminology to some extent has amplified a process where conflicts have been taken
away from the parties directly involved and thereby have either disappeared or become other people’s

-- 188 of 209 --

property. In both cases a deplorable outcome.” “Conflicts as Property,” British Journal of
Criminology 17, no. 1 (January 1977): 1.
28. These principles represent my understanding of the teachings of Dominic Barter at the New
York Intensive Residential Training in Nonviolent Communication in Binghamton, N.Y., August
2008.
29. “Forming a Reference Committee in Congregational Change or Conflict,” in David R.
Brubaker, Promise and Peril: Understanding and Managing Change and Conflict in Congregations
(Herndon, Va.: Alban Institute, 2009), 147-50.
30. Brubaker, Promise and Peril, 149.
31. The forms of these questions are based on my understanding of Dominic Barter’s creative
work with restorative circles in Brazil. Formal restorative conferences (or circles) take on different
shapes depending on their institutional context and their specific purpose. For example, family group
conferencing might occur in the context of making foster-care decisions in family and youth social
services. The criminal justice system has formal procedures for helping courts to determine sentences
based on victim-impact statements developed by communities that have been harmed. Schools hold
restorative conferences to deal with delinquencies and disruptions in classes, either in a particular
classroom or, if the whole school has been impacted, schoolwide. In each instance, the questions
asked and considered by the participants will vary according to the specific needs of those involved,
but it is important to address the present, the past, and the future, giving everyone a chance to be
heard.
32. For restorative justice guidelines in victim/offender situations, see Terry O’Connell’s
groundbreaking work at www.realjustice.org.
33. For practical ideas and useful suggestions for setting up such circles, see Ron Kraybill, The
Little Book of Cool Tools for Hot Topics: Group Tools to Facilitate Meetings When Things Are Hot
(Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 2007).
34. I am drawing here on my understanding of the key elements required of facilitators as
presented by Dominic Barter in his workshop “Building Compassionate Justice for 21st Century.”
35. “The use of a talking piece allows for full expression of emotions, deeper listening, thoughtful
reflection, and an unhurried pace.” Kay Pranis, The Little Book of Circle Processes: A New/Old
Approach to Peacemaking (Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 2005), 12.
36. Pranis, The Little Book, 8.
37. I am indebted to Dominic Barter’s oral presentations in which he teaches the processes,
principles, and structures of restorative circles. Barter, a certified trainer in nonviolent
communication, is an internationally recognized facilitator and teacher of restorative practices. See
his Web site for information on his work in Brazil and his teaching throughout the world. My
understanding of his teachings has been contextualized specifically for the church.
http://www.restorativecircles.org/.
38. The aims and procedures of both pre- and postcircles represent my understanding of Dominic
Barter’s teachings as presented in his workshop “Building Compassionate Justice for 21st Century.”
39. The importance of creating a community-wide agreement to a restorative system is a major
point of emphasis in Barter’s teaching. Without this institutional understanding and agreement in
place, any restorative circle would have little impact on the congregational culture as a whole.
40. Michael Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1967), 17-21.
41. Kay Pranis, The Little Book of Circle Processes (Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 2005), 65-66.

-- 189 of 209 --

APPENDIX 1
Criteria for PTSD
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual–5
The American Psychiatric Association’s latest edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5), released in 2014,
specifies eight criteria for diagnosing PTSD. Of course, ministers
and pastoral caregivers are not responsible for making medical
diagnoses. Nevertheless, someone suffering from a traumatic
response to stress can understand a great deal by becoming familiar
with these criteria.
1. The person is exposed to death, threatened death, or serious injury
or sexual violence (or is a witness of such).
2. The person experiences recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive
memories, nightmares, or flashbacks.
3. The person tries to avoid trauma- related thoughts or feelings or
possible external reminders of the trauma.
4. The person has negative alterations in thought and mood, that is,
two of the following symptoms: persistent and distorted negative
beliefs and expectations about oneself or the world; persistent
emotions such as fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame; a sense of
alienation from others; or diminished interest in (pretraumatic)
significant activities.
5. The person experiences trauma- related reactivity (two required:
hypervigilance, aggressive or reckless behavior, startle response,
sleep disturbances).
6. The symptoms persist for more than a month.
7. The symptoms cause significant distress or functional
impairment.
8. These disturbances are not due to medication, illness, or the use
of substances.

-- 190 of 209 --

Two other provisos are mentioned:
1. Sometimes dissociative symptoms (depersonalization and
derealization) are present and sometimes not. Depersonalization:
experience of being an outside observer of or being detached from
oneself (e.g., feeling as if “this is not happening to me” or one
were in a dream). Derealization: experience of unreality, distance,
or distortion (e.g., “things are not real”).
2. Sometimes the full diagnosis is not warranted until at least six
months after the event, although the onset of some symptoms may
occur immediately.
This page is an abbreviated synopsis of the information found at
http://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/pages/dsm5_criteria_ptsd.asp,
accessed August 1, 2013.

-- 191 of 209 --

APPENDIX 2
Professional Quality of Life Scale
Compassion Satisfaction and Fatigue Subscales
— Revision IV
[Helping] people puts you in direct contact with their lives. As you
probably have experienced, your compassion for those you [help]
has both positive and negative aspects. We would like to ask you
questions about your experiences, both positive and negative, as a
[helper]. Consider each of the following questions about you and
your current situation. Select the number that honestly reflects how
frequently you experienced these characteristics in the last 30 days.
0 = Never
1 = Rarely
2 = A Few Times
3 = Somewhat Often
4 = Often
5 = Very Often
1. I am happy.
2. I am preoccupied with more than one person I [help].
3. I get satisfaction from being able to [help] people.
4. I feel connected to others.
5. I jump or am startled by unexpected sounds.
6. I feel invigorated after working with those I [help].
7. I find it difficult to separate my personal life from my life as a
[helper].
8. I am losing sleep over traumatic experiences of a person I [help].
9. I think that I might have been “infected” by the traumatic stress of
those I [help].
10. I feel trapped by my work as a [helper].

-- 192 of 209 --

11. Because of my [helping], I have felt “on edge” about various
things.
12. I like my work as a [helper].
13. I feel depressed as a result of my work as a [helper].
14. I feel as though I am experiencing the trauma of someone I have
[helped].
15. I have beliefs that sustain me.
16. I am pleased with how I am able to keep up with [helping]
techniques and protocols.
17. I am the person I always wanted to be.
18. My work makes me feel satisfied.
19. Because of my work as a [helper], I feel exhausted.
20. I have happy thoughts and feelings about those I [help] and how
I could help them.
21. I feel overwhelmed by the amount of work or the size of my
case[work]load I have to deal with.
22. I believe I can make a difference through my work.
23. I avoid certain activities or situations because they remind me of
frightening experiences of the people I [help].
24. I am proud of what I can do to [help].
25. As a result of my [helping], I have intrusive, frightening
thoughts.
26. I feel “bogged down” by the system.
27. I have thoughts that I am a “success” as a [helper].
28. I can’t recall important parts of my work with trauma victims.
29. I am a very sensitive person.
30. I am happy that I chose to do this work.
You may substitute the appropriate target group for [helper] if that
is not the best term. For example, if you are working with teachers,
replace [helper] with “teacher.” Word changes may be made to any
word in italicized square brackets to make the measure read more
smoothly for a particular target group.

-- 193 of 209 --

Self- Scoring Directions, If Used as a Self-Test
1. Be certain you respond to all items.
2. On some items the scores need to be reversed. Next to your
response write the reverse of that score (i.e., 0 = 0, 1 = 5, 2 = 4, 3
= 3). Reverse the scores on these 5 items: 1, 4, 15, 17 and 29.
Please note that the value 0 is not reversed, as its value is always
null.
3. Mark the items for scoring:
a. Put an X by the 10 items that form the Compassion Satisfaction
Scale: 3, 6, 12, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 27, 30.
b. Put a check by the 10 items on the Burnout Scale: 1, 4, 8, 10, 15, 17,
19, 21, 26, 29.
c. Circle the 10 items on the Trauma/Compassion Fatigue Scale: 2, 5, 7,
9, 11, 13, 14, 23, 25, 28.
4. Add the numbers you wrote next to the items for each set of items
and compare with the theoretical scores.
Your Scores on the ProQOL: Professional Quality of Life
Screening
Based on your responses, your personal scores are below. If you
have any concerns, you should discuss them with a physical or
mental health care professional.
Compassion Satisfaction
Compassion satisfaction is about the pleasure you derive from being
able to do your work well. For example, you may feel like it is a
pleasure to help others through your work. You may feel positively
about your colleagues or your ability to contribute to the work
setting or even the greater good of society. Higher scores on this
scale represent a greater satisfaction related to your ability to be an
effective caregiver in your job.
The average score is 37 (SO 7; alpha scale reliability .87). About
25% of people score higher than 42 and about 25% of people score
below 33. If you are in the higher range, you probably derive a good

-- 194 of 209 --

deal of professional satisfaction from your position. If your scores
are below 33, you may either find problems with your job, or there
may be some other reason — for example, you might derive your
satisfaction from activities other than your job.
Burnout
Most people have an intuitive idea of what burnout is. From the
research perspective, burnout is associated with feelings of
hopelessness and difficulties in dealing with work or in doing your
job effectively. These negative feelings usually have a gradual onset.
They can reflect the feeling that your efforts make no difference, or
they can be associated with a very high workload or a non-‐
supportive work environment. Higher scores on this scale mean that
you are at higher risk for burnout.
The average score on the burnout scale is 22 (SO 6.0; alpha scale
reliability .72). About 25% of people score above 27 and about 25%
of people score below 18. If your score is below 18, this probably
reflects positive feelings about your ability to be effective in your
work. If you score above 27 you may wish to think about what at
work makes you feel like you are not effective in your position.
Your score may reflect your mood; perhaps you were having a “bad
day” or are in need of some time off. If the high score persists or if it
is reflective of other worries, it may be a cause for concern.
Compassion Fatigue/Secondary Trauma
Compassion fatigue (CF), also called secondary trauma (STS) and
related to Vicarious Trauma (VT), is about your work-related,
secondary exposure to extremely stressful events. For example, you
may repeatedly hear stories about the traumatic things that happen
to other people, commonly called VT. If your work puts you directly
in the path of danger, such as being a soldier or humanitarian aid
worker, this is not secondary exposure; your exposure is primary.
However, if you are exposed to others’ traumatic events as a result
of your work, such as in an emergency room or working with child
protective services, this is secondary exposure. The symptoms of

-- 195 of 209 --

CF/STS are usually rapid in onset and associated with a particular
event. They may include being afraid, having difficulty sleeping,
having images of the upsetting event pop into your mind, or
avoiding things that remind you of the event.
The average score on this scale is 13 (SO 6; alpha scale reliability
.80). About 25% of people score below 8 and about 25% of people
score above 17. If your score is above 17, you may want to take
some time to think about what at work may be frightening to you or
if there is some other reason for the elevated score. While higher
scores do not mean that you do have a problem, they are an
indication that you may want to examine how you feel about your
work and your work environment. You may wish to discuss this with
your supervisor, a colleague, or a health care professional.
Disclaimer: This information is presented for educational purposes
only. It is not a substitute for informed medical advice or training.
Do not use this information to diagnose or treat a health problem
without consulting a qualified health or mental health care provider.
If you have concerns, contact your health care provider, mental
health professional, or your community health center.
For more information on the ProQOL, go to
http://www.isu.edu/~bhstamm

-- 196 of 209 --

© B. Hudnall Stamm, 1997-2005. Professional Quality of Life: Compassion Satisfaction
and Fatigue Subscales, R-IV (ProQOL). http://www.isu.edu/~bhstamm.

-- 197 of 209 --

Index Abandonment, 41, 85, 86, 90
Abuse, 10, 12, 27, 42-46, 48-51, 53, 57-61, 63, 65, 66, 74
child abuse, xi, xiii, 45, 46, 52, 61, 70
incestuous abuse, 43
physical abuse, 43
psychological abuse, 43, 48
sexual abuse, 2, 3, 9, 10, 27, 43, 46-48, 70
substance abuse, 8
Abuser, 44, 49, 58, 59, 63-65
inner abuser, 57
outer abuser, 57
Acting out, 116-18, 121
Acute Stress Disorder, 4
Africa, 15, 20, 35, 70, 96, 104, 124
African American, 20, 70
Agoraphobia, 4
Alert, 6-8, 30
Allen, Jon G., 11, 16
America, 3, 4, 11, 19, 20, 22, 70, 96, 103, 104, 106, 149
American Psychiatric Association, 3, 149
Anderson, Ray S., 102
Andreasen, N. C., 4
Anthropology, 111
Anxiety, 4, 8, 11, 12, 19, 47, 50-52, 56, 57, 73, 80, 102, 123, 130
Anxiety disorder, 4
Apollos, 130
Apology, 51, 65
Arnold, Johann Christoph, 69
Asia, 9, 23, 104
Assault, xi, 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 19, 24
Atone, 1, 90
Augsburger, David W., 9, 15, 49-57, 59
Augustine, 119
Aukerman, Dale, 94
Autonomic nervous system, 6
Barter, Dominic, ix, 132, 135, 137, 139, 140, 141, 145, 146
Barth, Karl, 45, 78, 80, 81, 92, 111, 112, 118

-- 198 of 209 --

Bass, Ellen, 10, 12, 47, 48, 60-63
Bennett, Phillip, 53
Berry, Wendell, 14, 94, 97
Betrayal, xi, 42, 90
Biblical studies, xii
Billman, Kathleen, 91, 94
Bisexual, 28
Blink, A. J. van den, 8, 70
Bochenek, M., 28
Body/bodies, xii, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8-10, 12, 15, 17, 18, 36, 46-48, 53, 57, 61, 71, 74-76, 80, 86,
87, 102, 121-23, 128-30, 136, 138, 141, 147, 148
Bohn, Carole R., 45
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich, 112, 116, 117
Bowen, Murray, 49, 50
Brainwashing, 43
Brown, Joanne Carlson, 45
Browning, Don, 36
Brubaker, David R., 138
Brueggemann, Walter, 20
Bryson, Kelly, 108
Buber, Martin, 34, 35
Buddhist, 29, 35, 111, 129
Burnout, xiv, xv, 28, 29, 30, 116-18, 121, 153, 154
Cabrera, Martha, 16
Calhoun, L. G., 40
Calvin, John, 44, 45
Cane, Patricia Mathes, 2
Caregiver, xiii, xiv, xv, 2, 5, 12, 29, 53, 94-96, 149, 153
Cephas, 130
Chaplain, 29, 30, 95
Chiasmus, 87
Child, children, vii, x, xi, xiii, 2, 9, 10, 13, 16, 23, 27, 31, 32, 42-45, 47, 48-50, 52, 53, 54-
56, 58, 59, 61-63, 65, 68, 70, 83, 84, 90, 103, 108, 117, 122, 154
Childhood, xiii, 32, 42, 46, 59, 93
Christ, xii, xiii, xiv, xv, 1, 2, 13-15, 18, 35, 36, 38-40, 45, 59, 62, 64-68, 80, 85, 90, 91, 99-
103, 111, 118, 121, 122, 127-30, 135, 147, 148
Christian, xii, xiii, 1, 23, 35-42, 44, 49, 53, 61, 62, 64-70, 78, 80, 82, 91, 101, 103, 110,
112, 118, 121, 124, 127, 128, 129, 133
Christie, Nils, 137
Christological/Christology, xiv, 2, 40, 79
Church, ix, x, xii, xiii, xiv, xv, 2, 3, 13, 18-20, 27, 28, 30, 36-41, 45, 48, 52, 62, 66-68, 70,
80, 81, 84, 85, 89-92, 97, 100-104, 111-14, 116-18, 121-24, 128-43, 145-47
Church-wide restorative circle, 134, 138, 140
Circle process, 133, 135, 140, 141, 143, 145, 147
Cognitive assessment, 105
Cognitive-behavioral therapy, 105

-- 199 of 209 --

Coles, Robert, 69
Common shock, 4, 18, 22-26, 28-32, 39
Communion, xiv, 101, 102, 118, 129, 136, 146
Community, ix, xi, xiii, xv, 2, 19, 20, 24, 32-34, 36-39, 57, 60, 68, 73, 80, 95-98, 101-4,
106, 112, 116, 123, 124-28, 130-32, 135-48, 155
Compassion, 20, 21, 25, 29-31, 36, 38-41, 59-63, 67, 70-73, 77, 79, 81, 82, 85, 99, 118,
119, 128, 151, 153, 155
Compassionate, 11, 18, 20, 24-26, 30, 35, 38, 39, 74, 104, 109, 112, 122, 130, 132, 135,
140, 145
Compassionate communication, 11, 104, 110
Compassion fatigue, 28-30, 71, 153, 154
Compassion satisfaction, xv, 30, 71, 151, 153, 155
Congregation, 18, 19, 36, 114, 115, 117, 123, 124, 130, 134, 138, 140, 141, 142, 145
Congregational trauma, xiv, 19, 123
Conscious, 6, 8, 9, 23, 30, 31, 47, 52, 53, 54, 58, 60, 68, 72, 73, 105, 110, 117, 118
Connor, Jane, 108
Cooper-White, Pamela, 30, 67, 70
Counseling, xiv, 14, 43, 65, 67, 68, 116, 125
Criminal, 1, 2, 24
Criminal justice, xii-xiv, 125, 137, 139, 147
Critical Incident Stress Debriefing, 98
Cross, xii, 13, 15, 16, 19, 89, 90, 98
Cry, cries, crying, xiv, 12, 16, 17, 30, 37, 41, 67, 68, 70, 82, 83, 85, 88-96, 119, 120, 141
Cult, 43
Culture, 28, 63, 70, 73, 96, 106, 129, 130, 136, 144, 146
Cutoff, 51-52
Cutting off, 45, 50-53, 57
Cynicism, 29, 83, 102, 117, 124
Davis, Laura, 10, 12, 47, 48, 60-63
Death, xi-xiv, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12-16, 22, 31, 33, 41, 45, 47, 60, 71, 79, 85-88, 90, 93, 96, 97, 99,
105, 106, 132, 149
Depression, 8, 10, 41, 47, 55, 60, 113, 117
Depressive position, 55, 60
Deprivation, 14, 46
Depth psychology, 131
Despair, xiv, xv, 13, 17, 23, 24, 33-35, 37, 41, 60, 61, 79, 81-83, 99
Diagnosing, 109, 113, 131, 149
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5), viii, xv, 3, 149
Disability, xi, 24
Discrimination, 28
Disease, xi
Disempowered, 27, 28, 31
Disorientation, 8
Dissociate, 6, 7, 50, 54, 59
Distress, xii, xiv, xv, 3, 4, 7, 11, 14, 17, 25, 28, 40, 56, 71, 84, 87, 95, 117, 149
Divine energy, 110, 111

-- 200 of 209 --

Divorce, xi
Dream, 6, 10, 71, 83, 89, 150
Dying, 13, 29, 30, 47, 60, 99
Dykstra, Craig, 127
Dysfunction, 29, 50
Education, xii, xiv, 36, 103, 123-25, 127, 147, 154
Emotion, 7, 9, 12, 20, 24, 55, 59, 60, 63, 76, 97, 105, 118, 123, 141, 142, 149
Emotional fusion, 50-52
Emotional intelligence, 105
Empathic listening, xiv
Empathic reception, 73, 104
Empathic stress reaction, 28-30
Empathy, vii, xiv, 1, 59, 70, 73, 74, 76-81, 103, 104, 109, 114, 115, 119
Empower, xiii, 8, 12, 23, 26, 27, 31, 34, 57, 102, 109, 142, 145-47
Ethics, xiii, 66, 127
Evil, xi, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 39, 59, 61, 71, 85, 90, 91, 94, 99
Faith, x, xii-xiv, 13, 15, 17, 21, 30, 37, 38, 41-43, 73, 79, 83, 89, 90, 93, 98, 99, 102, 114-
16, 119, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128, 129, 135
Family, 2, 4, 23, 24, 29-34, 39, 40, 45, 48-50, 51-53, 56-58, 63, 65, 66, 70, 75, 81, 83, 84,
96, 97, 113, 117, 130, 139
Family of origin, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 117
Family system, xiii, 45, 48-50, 52, 56, 57
Fantasy, 61
Fatigue, xiv, xv, 28, 29, 30, 71, 151, 153-55
Feeling, 4-8, 11, 12, 24-27, 29, 31, 34, 37, 42, 44, 50, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 60, 63, 67, 73-78,
104, 105, 107, 108, 110, 111, 114-20, 123, 132-35, 149, 150, 152-54
Fellowship, xiv, 68, 101-3, 109, 111, 112, 118, 121, 136
Feminist, 2, 44, 45
Fight, 6, 93, 105
Figley, Charles, 29
Flashback, 7, 149
Flight, 6, 95, 105
Forgive, forgiveness, xiii, 14-16, 42, 45-57, 59, 60, 62-69, 73, 80, 85, 114, 124, 129, 146
Fortune, Marie, 42, 43, 65, 66
Frankl, Viktor, 106
Freeze, 6, 105
Freud, Anna, 69
Freud, Sigmund, 9, 74
Friedman, Edwin H., 52, 57, 113, 130, 131
Gay, 28
Gendlin, Eugene, 75
Generation, xi, 28, 35, 48, 52, 53, 57, 96, 113, 130, 131
Genocide, xi
Gilligan, James, 9
Gizelle, 10, 46, 47, 48, 60-63, 67, 68

-- 201 of 209 --

Glaz, Maxine, 70
Globalization, 20
God, xii-xv, 2, 12-21, 35-45, 59, 62, 64-69, 78-96, 99, 101-3, 110-12, 118-22, 128, 129,
147, 148
God’s kingdom, xiv, 79, 80, 103, 121, 147
Goleman, Daniel, 105
Gonzales, Robert, ix, 76, 106
Gospel, xii, xiii, xv, 1-3, 13, 14, 16, 18, 44, 59, 63, 64, 66, 69, 78, 80, 81, 103, 111, 118,
124, 132, 146, 147
Grace, xii, xiii, xv, 1, 8, 14, 18, 20, 36, 37, 39, 45, 48, 49, 58, 59, 62, 64-67, 79, 86, 87, 91,
95, 97, 101, 119, 121, 147, 148
Greider, Kathleen, 131
Grief, 7, 10, 11, 13, 15, 20, 25, 37, 46, 50, 52, 55, 59, 60, 78, 79, 81, 82, 98, 99, 108, 120,
122
Guilt, 10, 15, 45, 49, 50, 54-56, 61, 63, 64, 67, 90, 109, 149
Hallie, Philip, 71
Hanh, Thich Nhat, 29, 35, 129
Happiness, 29
Hart, Onno van der, 12
Hassan, Steven, 43
Healing, vii, xi-xiii, 2, 3, 5, 9-20, 23, 27, 35, 42, 43, 45-49, 51, 53, 54, 59, 60, 62-68, 71,
72, 74, 82, 83, 94, 102, 103, 108, 111, 113, 122, 131, 140, 141, 143, 144, 148
Herman, Judith, 3-7
HIV-AIDS, 71
Holmgren, Margaret R., 66, 67
Holocaust, 2, 35, 97
Holy Spirit, 40, 93, 101, 148
Holy Week, 90, 98
Honest expression, 104, 114, 133
Hope, xiv, 1, 2, 11, 12, 14-16, 20, 21, 23-25, 28, 30, 33, 34-38, 40, 62-65, 73, 79, 81-85,
88, 89, 91, 94, 99, 102, 103, 106, 112, 115, 119, 132, 133, 142, 143, 148
reasonable hope, 33, 34-38, 40
vicarious hope, 35, 37
Hopelessness, xiii, 28, 34, 83, 84, 131, 153
Horney, Karen, 8
Horror, xii, 2-4, 6, 10, 11, 14, 20, 23, 29, 40, 60, 78, 98, 149
Hough, Joseph C., Jr., 36
Hunsinger, Deborah van Deusen, 14, 15, 17, 65, 73, 98, 102, 122, 127, 130, 131
Hunsinger, George, ix, 21, 72, 78, 118
Hunter, Mic, 43
Hutus, 103, 110
Hyperarousal, 4, 5, 7
Hypnotic, 43
Immigration, xi, 2
Imprisonment, xi, 2, 16

-- 202 of 209 --

Incest, xi, 43, 66
Individuation, 53, 58
Infidelity, xi
Innocence, 87, 92, 93, 98
Institutes of the Christian Religion (Calvin), 44
Interdependence, xv, 30, 35, 129, 132, 148
Interdisciplinary, xii, 14, 65, 124
Interfaith, 19
Internalize, internalization, internalizing, 28, 49, 53, 54, 56, 57, 59, 70, 71, 129
International Institute of Restorative Practices, ix, 124, 133
Interpersonal, xi, xv, 24, 32, 44, 53, 57, 73, 102, 104, 118, 133, 138, 142, 147
Intimacy, 17, 51, 87, 88, 117, 118
Intrapersonal, 53
Intrapsychic, 53, 54, 58
Introject, introjection, 53, 54, 57
Intrusion, 5, 6, 8, 12
Israel, 84, 86, 89, 90, 94, 110
Jackson, W., 97
Jaeger-Lane, Marietta, 16
Janet, Pierre, 7
Jeremiah, 94
Jesus, xii, xiii, xv, 1, 2, 13-15, 18, 22, 39, 40, 45, 62, 64, 65, 68, 79-81, 83, 85, 89-91, 97,
98, 101, 103, 111, 114, 118, 121, 127, 130, 132, 135, 136, 147, 148
Jews, Jewish, 35, 103, 128, 136
Job, 91-95, 138, 153, 154
Johnson, Cedric C., 20
Jones, Gregory L., 64
Jones, Serene, 1, 8
Judgment, 11, 14, 15, 19, 43, 56, 86, 94, 104, 105, 109, 113-15, 117-20, 133
Judiciary, 16
Julius, 32
Justice, xii, xiv, xv, 8, 9, 14, 19, 23, 35, 39, 41, 65, 80, 83, 91, 93, 121, 124, 125, 128, 132,
135, 137, 139, 140, 145, 147
restorative justice, 9, 19, 23, 124, 140
Kaplan, H. I., 4
Kelcourse, Felicity Brock, 131
Killian, Dian, 108
Kingdom of God, 78, 81, 111, 118, 121, 148
Klein, Melanie, 49, 53, 54
Koinonia, vii, xiv, 100-103, 111, 113, 116, 118, 120-22, 129
Kolk, Bessel A. van der, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12
Kornfeld, Margaret Z., 43, 116, 117
Kraybill, Ron, 140
Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth, 60
Labeling, 109, 131

-- 203 of 209 --

Lament, lamentation, vii, 67, 82-94, 96, 97, 99, 100
Latini, Theresa F., ix, 111, 122, 130, 133
Leas, Rev. Speed, 133
Lederach, John-Paul, 124, 136
Lesbian, 28
Levine, Peter, 4, 5
Listen, listening, xiv, 4, 11, 17, 24, 25, 36, 40, 47, 59, 60, 69, 70, 73, 74, 77, 83, 98, 103,
111-14, 116, 119, 120, 130, 132, 134-36, 138, 141, 148
Livingstone, David, 6
Lyon, K. Brynolf, 131
MacNair, Robert, 14, 23
Mandela, Nelson, 10
Marriage, 117, 121, 134
Martin, Del, 3
Martyn, Dorothy, 56, 59, 62, 117
Maslow, Abraham, 106
McCold, Paul, 125, 126
McFarlane, Alexander C., 4, 5, 12
Mechthild of Magdeburg, 18
Memory/memories, xii, 7, 12, 42, 46, 60, 96, 97, 149
explicit memory, 7
implicit memory, 7
intrusive memory, 7, 149
narrative memory, 7
normal memory, 7
Mhlauli, Babalwa, 15
Migliore, Daniel, 91, 94
Miller, Alice, 63
Miller, Jean Baker, 132
Miller, Patrick, 86, 89
Mind, x, xii, 2, 4-8, 10, 13, 22, 26, 35, 42, 43, 54, 69, 72, 74, 76, 95, 98, 117, 118, 143, 154
Mind control, 43
Mindfulness meditation, 105
Minister, ministering, 1, 18, 19, 29, 36, 40, 41, 66, 116, 117, 119, 123, 148, 149
Ministry, xii, 8, 16, 39, 40, 71, 79, 91, 102, 114, 116, 119, 131, 133
Misconduct, xiv, 116, 117, 123, 139
Monk, 29, 129
Monk, Gerald, 28
Mourning, xiv, 11, 21, 37, 52, 59, 82, 95, 142
Murder, xi, 46, 98
Mutilation, 8
Mystery, 13, 18, 20, 22, 67, 81, 93, 94, 99, 100
National Child Traumatic Stress Network, 13
Nazi, 71, 78, 106
Neural, neuron, neurologist, 8

-- 204 of 209 --

Nightmare, 7, 10, 31, 46, 47, 71, 72, 78, 149
Nonviolent communication (NVC), ix, xiv, 11, 73, 74, 75-78, 103-8, 110-14, 118, 120, 121,
122, 127, 133, 137, 141
Nuclear family system, 52
Numb, numbing, numbness, 4, 6, 8, 12, 24, 29, 60, 99
Object relations, 49, 53
Observation, 23, 56, 62, 68, 77, 104
Obsession, 7, 8
OFNR (Observation, Feeling, Need, Request), 77, 110
Olbrych, Jennie, 13
Old, Hughes Oliphant, 90
Oppression, xi, 71
Outrage, 9, 11, 42, 44, 60, 62, 118
Pain, xii, xiv, 1-3, 5, 6, 8-10, 12, 17-25, 29-31, 37, 39, 41, 42, 46-53, 55, 57, 59, 67-71, 74-
78, 86-88, 91, 94, 97-99, 106, 108, 115, 117, 118, 122, 123, 127, 132, 135, 147, 148
Palestinian, 103, 110
Panic, 4, 7, 29
Panic disorder, 4
Paranoid, 54, 56
Parenting, xiii, 59
Parents, x, 15, 31, 32, 42-45, 48-50, 52-54, 56, 57, 63, 68, 117, 122
Parker, Rebecca, 45
Partnership, xiv, 102, 129
Pastor, xiii, 19, 20, 30, 66, 69, 82, 95, 102, 113, 114, 116-18, 123, 133, 135, 139, 145
Pastoral burnout, xiv, 116, 121
Pastoral care, vii, xiii, xiv, 1-3, 5, 8, 11, 14, 15, 17-20, 36, 70, 73, 91, 94, 96, 100, 102-4,
113, 127, 149
Pastoral counseling, 14, 65, 67, 68
Pastoral counselor, 42, 67-70, 98
Pastoral theology, xi, xii, xv, 2, 18, 19, 40, 70
Patriarchy, 45
Paul, apostle, xv, 35, 129
Peace, xii, 9, 23, 48, 54, 69, 72, 76, 80, 84, 97, 103, 121, 124, 128, 144, 146
peacebuilding, 9, 23
peacemaking, 53, 103, 128, 141
Perpetrator, 14-16, 22, 23, 27, 57, 58, 65, 66
Peterson, Eugene, 94
Physiological responses, 6
Planning team, 138, 139
Play, 9, 31, 47, 98, 109, 117, 148
Polanyi, Michael, 146
Political science, xii
Postcircle, 138, 143-45
Post-traumatic distress, xii
Post-traumatic growth, xiii, 13, 40, 41

-- 205 of 209 --

Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), viii, 3-6, 16, 23, 24, 149, 150
Powerlessness, 8, 28, 31, 40
Pranis, Kay, 141, 147
Pray, 14, 17, 62, 64, 73, 84, 102, 120, 121, 127
Prayer, vii, x, xii, xiv, 2, 17, 18, 37, 38, 68, 79, 80, 83, 84, 86-94, 96, 97, 103, 112, 116,
118-21, 128
Preaching, xii, 66, 68, 103, 113, 124
Precircle, 138, 140, 143, 144
Premature forgiveness, 65, 67
Presbyterian Disaster Assistance, 19
Princeton Theological Seminary, x, 20, 98
Professional Quality of Life Scale (ProQOL R- IV), 71, 153, 155
Psalms, 17, 37, 85, 86, 89, 90, 93
Psychiatrist, 3, 14, 15
Psychology, xi, xii, 14, 43, 53, 54, 131, 132
Psychopathology, 74
Psychotherapy, psychotherapist, xii, 16, 46, 56, 59, 68, 69
Purves, Andrew, 2, 39, 40, 79, 119
Rabin, Yitzhak, 97
Racism, xi, 35, 91
Rage, 7-10, 17, 31, 37, 42, 59, 60, 61, 74, 77, 82, 108, 123
Ramsay, J. Nancy, 70
Rape, xi, 3, 23, 46, 47, 61
Rational, xi, 5, 13, 15, 18, 91, 105
Reconcile, reconciliation, xv, 15, 16, 48, 51-53, 55, 56-58, 61, 62, 63, 65-68, 115, 124, 136,
144, 146
Recover, 17, 42, 46, 47, 67
Redemption, 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 39, 65, 81
Reference committee, 138
Relational, 18, 29, 32, 34, 48, 52, 56, 124-26, 145-47
Relationship, ix, 3, 8, 24, 26, 34, 35, 42, 44, 45, 48-55, 57-59, 62, 64, 65, 67, 81, 87, 91,
102, 107, 113, 115, 125, 127, 131, 133, 137
Religion, 13, 44, 56, 111, 129
Religious belief, 111
Renewal, 59, 97
Reparenting, 59
Repentance, 15, 28, 59, 65-67, 93
Repetition compulsion, 9, 52
Request, 32, 74, 77, 80, 86, 104, 108, 112, 120, 121, 125, 138, 139, 142, 143, 146
Resilient, 20
Restitution, 65, 67
Restorative church, vii, xiv, 123, 125, 127, 129, 131, 133-35, 137, 139, 141, 143, 145, 147
Restorative circle, 132, 134, 135, 137-48
Restorative conference, 133, 135, 139, 143
Restorative practice (RP), ix, x, xii, xiv, 28, 123-25, 129, 133, 135, 136, 139, 141, 145-47
Resurrection, 15, 85, 101, 121, 132

-- 206 of 209 --

Retribution, 16, 67
Revenge, 8-10, 67, 93
Rienstra, Marchiene Vroon, 17
Risk, 12, 29, 83, 106, 154
Ritual, 8, 9, 16, 20, 26, 33, 37
Rosenberg, Ethel, 132
Rosenberg, Marshall, 11, 73, 103, 110, 120, 127
Rothschild, Babette, 6, 12
Russia, 104
Rwanda, 103
Sacrament, xii, 68, 103
Sadock, B. J., 4
Saliers, Don, 38
Schenk, Bruce, 133
Schizoid, 54, 56
Scripture, xv, 16, 39, 68, 84, 85, 91, 112, 116, 128
Secret, 31, 32, 40, 57, 61, 91, 95, 96, 108, 112, 117, 130
Self-empathy, vii, xiv, 1, 70, 73, 74, 76-81, 104, 115
Self-esteem, 43, 67, 117
Sexual, 2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 27, 28, 43, 46, 48, 70, 109, 116-18, 123, 139, 149
Shame, shameful, 1, 3, 7, 8, 11, 20, 21, 29, 30, 37, 50, 63, 67, 70, 78, 90, 106, 107, 109,
110, 113, 118, 123, 145, 149
Shengold, Leonard, 46
Shock, 2, 4, 6, 18, 22-27, 29-32, 39, 60, 123, 146
Simon, Caroline, 78
Sin, xiii, 13-15, 40, 42-45, 48, 49, 57, 59, 61, 62, 64, 66, 77, 80, 81, 85, 90-92, 134-36
Snorton, Teresa E., 70
Social capital, 125
Social Discipline Window, 125, 126
Social work, xii, xiv, 125, 137
Sociology, xii
Son of God, 90
Son of Man, 90
Sorrow, 1, 11, 13, 17, 36, 51, 60, 67, 73, 77, 81, 84, 86-88, 90, 95-97
Soul, xii, 1, 6, 9, 17, 18, 41, 46, 57, 63, 69, 71, 76, 80, 82, 86, 88, 93, 101, 106, 124
Soul murder, 46
Spirit, ix, 2, 16, 22, 35, 40, 41, 62, 70, 71, 82, 85, 93, 101, 102, 119, 128, 144, 148
Spiritual, spirituality, vii, x, xiii, xiv, 1, 2, 8, 13, 14, 19, 29, 38-40, 49, 70, 73, 78-80, 82,
93, 101, 102, 106, 110, 111, 113, 116, 119, 121
Stamm, B. Hudnall, 30, 71, 155
Stassen, Glen H., 128
Stevenson-Moessner, Jeanne, 70
Stolorow, Robert, 18
Stress, stressful, xiv, 3-5, 7, 10, 12, 22-24, 27-30, 51, 98, 113, 116, 117, 133, 140, 149, 151,
154
Suffering, xi-xv, 1, 3, 8-10, 13-15, 21, 23, 24, 27, 29, 30, 33-35, 38-43, 46, 52, 58, 61, 71,

-- 207 of 209 --

72, 77, 79, 81-84, 87, 88, 90, 91, 94-96, 99, 100, 116, 119, 129, 136, 149
suffering of Christ, xiii, 90
Suicide, xi, 47, 48, 60, 61
Support, ix, 2, 9, 13, 19, 22, 33-36, 49, 60, 62, 67, 75, 106, 120, 125, 126, 133, 137-39,
141, 144
Survivor, xiii, 1, 8, 10, 12, 47, 49, 50, 63
Susie, 16
Sutton, Jeannette, 19
Swinton, John, 20, 21
Symptoms, xiii, xv, 4-6, 22-24, 28-30, 33, 46, 48, 130, 149, 150, 154
Synagogue, 52, 113, 130
Syndromes, 28, 33
Taboo, 50, 57, 130
Tall, Deborah, 97
Tedeshi, R. G., 40
Telos, xiv, 14, 121, 129
Terrorism, xi
Theology, ix, xii, xiii, xiv, 1, 2, 14, 22, 40, 64, 65, 78, 86, 102, 112, 118, 119, 124, 129,
130, 146
Therapist, xiii, 15, 16, 23, 29, 33-35, 39, 50, 59, 62, 68, 119, 120
Therapy, 4, 42, 47, 59, 60, 63, 67, 105
Torture, xi, 1, 2, 22, 71-74, 77, 79, 81, 90
Transdisciplinary studies, ix, 124
Transgender, 28
Trauma, traumatic, vii, ix, xi, xii, xiv, xv, 1-16, 18-25, 28-31, 35, 39-41, 46, 48, 58, 61, 63,
68, 70, 72, 98, 116, 122-24, 136, 142, 146, 147, 149, 151, 152, 154
intergenerational trauma, xi
interpersonal trauma, xi
secondary traumatic stress, 29, 30
traumatic event, 4, 6, 7, 19, 46, 147, 154
traumatic loss, 1, 2
traumatic response, 149
vicarious traumatic stress, xiv, 28, 29
Treatment, xii, 6, 12, 24, 66, 72
Trible, Phyllis, 2
Trust, xi, xiii, 2, 11-14, 16, 19, 20, 26, 31-33, 36-38, 41, 43-45, 56, 59, 62, 67, 73, 75, 76,
79, 80, 84, 86, 88, 89, 103, 105, 109, 117, 132-35, 142, 144, 145, 147, 148
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, 15, 124
Tsuris, 39
Tutsis, 103, 110
Tutu, Desmond, 15, 16, 34, 35, 124, 129
Ubuntu, 34, 35, 129
Ulanov, Ann Belford, ix, 9, 10, 15
Unconscious, unconsciously, 9, 52, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59
Vennen, Mark Vander, ix, 125

-- 208 of 209 --

Veterans, 3, 10, 71, 72
Vicarious trauma, 116, 154
Vicarious traumatic stress, xiv, 28, 29
Victim, xv, 6, 8, 9, 14, 16, 19, 22, 23, 28, 32, 33, 43, 45, 57-59, 65, 67, 72, 131, 139, 140,
152
Vietnam, 3, 10, 71
Violence, xi, 2, 4, 9, 10, 19, 22-24, 26, 28, 30, 43, 45, 63, 65-67, 70, 92, 103, 116, 149
domestic violence, xi, 2, 3
structural violence, 9, 28, 29, 35
Vitek, W., 97
Volkan, Vamik, 19
Vulnerable, 4, 13, 19, 23, 28, 35, 82, 83, 85, 95, 118, 121, 131
Wachtel, Ted, 125, 126
War, ix, 2, 3, 10, 22, 35, 43, 54, 61, 71, 72
Webster, John, 78, 118
Weibe, Katherine, 19, 21
Weingarten, Kaethe, xiii, 4, 18, 22-41
Weisaeth, Lars, 4, 5, 7, 12
Well-being, 29, 103, 126, 130, 139
Wheeler, Barbara G., 36, 127
Whyte, David, 98, 99
Wilde, Oscar, 95, 96
Wilmer, Harry A., 10, 71, 72
Wisdom, xii, 11, 13, 27, 35, 66, 80, 114, 131
Witness/witnessing, vii, xiii-xv, 2, 4, 12, 13, 18, 22-36, 38, 40, 41, 82, 92, 93, 98, 102, 103,
112, 134, 149
compassionate witness, vii, 21, 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30, 36, 40
empowered/disempowered witness, xiii, 31
loving witness, 18
Wolterstorff, Nicholas, 41, 90, 91, 99
Workaholism, 8
Worship, 2, 20, 21, 68, 79, 81, 90, 103, 116
Yehuda, Rachel, 5
Yiddish, 39
Yoder, Carolyn, 5, 8
Zehr, Howard, 9, 14, 19, 20, 23, 124, 136

-- 209 of 209 --

