What the. [INAUDIBLE] is going on? All right, guys, we will go ahead and get started tonight. Sorry about the snafu with your class on Tuesday. Doctor Campbell called me at 520, and I was like, literally, no way. My lecture is going to be ready in 40 minutes. He's like, I think you can wing it. I was like, you know. So you did try. You did try. Um, welcome to Crisis counseling and Abuse. Happy new year. It's good to see you guys. All right. Um, we are going to go through the syllabus tonight. Um, and, uh, I know the syllabus says chapters one through three. I think I was being really ambitious with talking about that when I was reading these chapters over the winter break. Um, so most likely we'll get through chapters one and two tonight. Um, and kind of spread out some of these things a little bit more. Um, if you don't know me by now, here's a reminder. Um, some of my background, um, and why I am teaching this class is, uh, my masters and PhD in counselor education. Um, however, um, I also was a child and adolescent counselor and schools and work with clients with, um, safety plans. Um, often, um, I have had clients who in school settings have tried to stab themselves in front of me. Um, I've removed scissors, um, from the hands of my clients before. Um, so I've been active in crisis situations within a school. Um, I've worked in alternative ed, um, in multiple roles. Um, and then I also worked on as an on call places stabilization counselor, um, working with clients ages 5 to 18, um, within the same school district area that I worked in, in a rural area, Virginia. Um, because if you don't know much about rural health in, um, rural mental health, um, it's it's pretty nonexistent, actually, in a lot of cases. Um, and children with mental health disorders within rural communities are more likely to experience an inpatient psychiatric hospitalization than those in urban settings, really, because they don't get support services beforehand. So in my role as a crisis stabilization counselor, I either went into a home for a minimum of a three hour session. It could be maximum an eight hour session. My longest session in a home is six hours when the child was in crisis. Um, but it's either to prevent a psychiatric hospitalization or to help a child transition back into their home after a psychiatric hospitalization. Um, and I did not place it in the same school setting, um, that I work with orphans. I work in the schools. And then I went into homes after work. Um, so that's some of my background and experience, um, with crisis, I also would say, uh, we'll talk about sometimes even crisis situations that you may experience, like in private practice. Um, I hope to not have a repeat. But last spring when I taught this class, I had two clients that go into crisis over the semester. Um, both of them were on Wednesdays. And so I actually did two safety plans back to back. And then I taught this class on Thursday and talked about suicide assessments. And I was like, it's not an if you'll do wanted to one, you'll do one. Um, and in both of those situations, one of my clients, I was able to walk around, walk with and support and her safety plan really worked. Um, and she really was in a much better place. 3 to 4 months later, um, the other one went down, and I eventually had to advise her mom to actually take her to the emergency room. And she was put into a ten day psychiatric hold, um, because we could not ensure safety. Um, and so I've seen it also go both ways. Um, as far as crisis work, noting that this class is, um, probably the most triggering class I teach, we're going to talk about a lot of heavy content. Um, and some of you also may have personal lived experiences with some of that content that also makes it difficult. And I say like, if you need to take a break, take a break. I also would rather you know what your triggers are and find them out in here than find them face to face with a client. Um, what I do ask. And tonight we're going over some of the basics. But, um, especially knowing my mobility, um, not having to go find you somewhere. In these flaws is that, um, in future classes, I will have the counseling lab open for people to take a break in. There's also this couch area here. So there's the two doors right here. Those will be open and there's the couch sitting. Everything that you need to take a break so that I can come check on you, that I know where to find you. I know some people need to. Kind of like a breath of fresh air. So you go out the back door. So I'm not, like, going down the stairs trying to find you in the parking lot somewhere. But just so that I know where to seek you out, um, you know, the counseling lab, this space, or if you need to go outside, take a break. Um, sometimes people need a splash of water on their face. Bathrooms are fine to, um, knock on the male, or I'll go in the female and check for kind of regional areas, um, so that I can do a chicken. Um. We'll go over some of the strategies that other students have done in the past. Um, and I will also try to have like different times grounding within this class. But it is just there's just no going around it. It's heavy content. It's content. You have to know. It's just required. Um, but it's also not something to just, like, push through. If you find yourself being triggered as well. All right. Um, and crisis events and trauma are also nothing new. And while the world seems chaotic at the moment, um, there have been crisis events and trauma histories throughout anyone's lifespan, even. And it's documented well in the Bible. Um, and so we have two textbooks for this class and we'll go through. Um, one is the Pearson Crisis Intervention and Prevention. Um, but we'll also go through their immune variable, um, and talk about, um, this is the pastoral counseling, both trauma gospel and pastoral care. Um, because you'll find, um, in this book, Tammy does a good job of kind of balancing both is people in crisis often may cleave to their faith or find faith. Um, but some will also reject their faith. And so how do you navigate that and meet someone where they're at without imposing your own values and belief systems on somebody? Um, but also know that faith and spirituality, Christian or otherwise, can be a huge resource for someone who is in crisis. All right. Um, I also will just kind of share with them some of my personal perspective. This is, um, I don't know if any of you followed. K.J. Ramsey writes on Instagram. She is a marriage and family counselor. Um, and she does a lot of within Christian and counseling. Um, also just about like, um, she has a lot of health issues around that. Um, but part of this class is really, um, and this chapter two of this book talks about is how you can compassionately witness, um, and how do we sit with somebody within a crisis in that I am not okay. I do believe in sacred speech and help is a whole prayer. Um, and how do we sit with people in the hardest moments? Um, and she also has said for me, whether most Christians get it or not, therapy is the embodied theological work of witnessing the gaze of God towards humans who are worthy of love. Therapy is one sacred space where we get to be, see where we get to be so adequately seen, and see that we can't help but extend the solitary shalom of God into our relationships and our world. Um, and I have done a lot of crisis work in an office. I've also done crisis work in a hallway. Um, and there is a sacred of just being able to sit with somebody and sit in that sacred place and say, you recognize our humanity and you'll sit with them. All right. Thinking on your feelings, uh, about starting this new semester, what are some of your thoughts that come up with this class? Uh uh uh. Um. This is the, like, in the Philippines. Oh. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Some people may express concern for you as you read some of the content, but as you're walking around with a book like this, um, and a lot of people just don't even know, like, don't expect that, like, oh, you actually learn about these things because it's a lot of the topics we're covering are people conversation that people avoid. Right. And that they don't ask. Um, I was like I said, reading this book over Christmas break, myself and my brother in law picked it up, and he's like, nobody's ever told me any of these things. He's like, I don't know how prevalent this stuff was. Um, he was reading specifically the chapter on domestic violence, and he was like, I had no idea, like any of this. And he's like, we talk about things, but he's like, I don't know, like the facts about it. Um, he's like, I wasn't raised in a home with that. And so just kind of the history and it's like, it makes sense that you're reading about this. But he's like, I didn't really like, conceptualize that this would be something that you would actually teach people about. Um, and so, yeah, we're going to have a lot of conversations in the class that, like, you have most people avoid. It's not something that typically comes up, um, in general conversation. When I was thinking about that is how different we are, because some of the people of take stress from work in a different way. Some of them kind of get pushed through that into them from death. And some of the people being in the crisis that, uh, really give hope. And that's actually, uh, the longest at me. Um, I think it's, I think it's I'm more understand that how strong I am. Um, and, uh, and I definitely to work with the crisis managers because in that situation, everyone has different strengths, everyone's different needs. And I would also say if you had asked me or shown me some of the crisis events that I would experience in the last ten years of counselor, my like, for sure, as a psychology major in undergrad, I probably would have changed. Right. So if you actually have a lot of fear about your ability to sit with somebody in crisis, it's also skill building. Um, and it's not an all at one thing. And that's where supervision is so important in seeking out support when you need it. But it's not just necessarily that, like, you either have it or you don't. You build it up over time as well. Um, in this class, being one of the areas to like, practice it with, you know, you you're going. Yeah. So we're both very energized by this content. Um, because I feel like, you know, there's a lot of capacity to make big changes in people's lives when they're in crisis. Point another direction, right? So, you know, like, felt more energized. Pretty responsive. Right? That's right. So, so so this is one of the first class I know a lot of, um, especially the first semester were really our first year designed around foundational knowledge. Um, but then starting towards the second year, we start with like specific work in different populations. And that's being the first class offices. This class is actually not a required class. Um, this class of the class we've designed as one of your electives, um, requires that you do have some training on suicide assessment and psychological first aid. Um, but for like, my program, those were just embedded. We had one class on suicide assessment, and that was in my whole program. Um, because this is not and actually required classes as a class, we just find that it's really important for you to have. And we expanded on that area. Um, substance use a child and adolescent family and couples counseling are like those. And those are population in psycho form. Um, or what does that we have like have specific but they are not take our preferred classes. Other thoughts about this class or just the one about the semester and the content. How many? Just by show of hands. Oh, sorry. I was just going to say, um. That's okay. I definitely am. I haven't I have worked in the correctional facility, so I had a lot of crisis situations in healthcare. Um, what? The same say, if you want to say senior self-care is a must. What's something that works for you as far as self-care? Um, I really like music. And I look back and I decompress many times. What kind of music? Um, for me, right now, it's like jazz or like. Trying to stay away from really energizing. Music. So that's a good thing. And we're going to get into, like, self-care for counselors and, um, a big proponent of preventative self-care and proactive self-care, actually, that especially when you know you're going into intense situations, how do you prepare yourself before? Because if we think of a scale of 1 to 10 and ten being a panic attack and one being completely calm, if you're going into work with all your life baggage and you're already at a six, then you have a client going to crisis and you're at a 7 or 8. However, if you know you're at a six and you do your preventative coping strategies, that maybe brings you down not to a one, but a 3 or 4, and then you have a client go in a crisis and it brings you up to 5 or 6. You're more likely to stay in a clinical headspace to support your clients and to work through that. Um, music is a great coping strategy, but one of the things I talk, even with my clients with panic attacks, is your heart rate will actually match the beat of the music that you listen to. And so, like, for me, music is, I learned actually working in a high stress like crisis juvenile um, um, school setting is I had to listen to worship music on the way to work because my go to was actually like alternative rock. And but if I would go in like that, I would. Between the music and my cup of coffee, I would already go in with my heart pounding. Um, and so I actually needed work levels and giving up the coffee. I needed music that kept me at a lower equilibrium so that I could go in already at a calm state. But if I came in even just agitated from traffic, music and coffee really, that I was more likely to not be able to stay calm in crisis. Now, at the end of the day, on the way home, I could listen to alt rock, right, and have a cathartic release. So it's not like I to give up my favorite music, but I just had to know when was it like actually a coping skill and when was it helpful? The comfy, quiet music on the way in, loud music on the way home and figuring that out for you? I've done the opposite, like going into jail. That really, um, but uh, like, I would listen to more to get myself, um, I can't really show you that I need to go to, uh, ready energized. So I'm listening to music, like, get myself ready, like I was already going to work and play a little conservative. So they are kind of what works for you. Yeah. Yeah, I work for me going in. And then I was thinking I would need something more complex to get up to whatever works and whatever. And we all have different coping strategies. So that's a perfect example kind of how can you reverse. So one of the previous thought I had was working with survivors of sex trafficking and into the day, but through some of their stories and there were times it's like driving home. Loneliness is having to silence to drive home and just. Remember? Yeah. And sometimes having that, um, really is a good thing. Uh, like I said, when I did crisis stabilization, I typically would work at the school all day, and I get off, I would go get a, um, agency vehicle and then I go to a three hour in-home session. So that's like a long counseling day, right? Um, especially if you go anything. And so my mom always had this thing, like, especially because I was going into stranger's homes, like, I didn't know the family that I was going into for a crisis call. She would just be like, please text me or call me when, like, you get home from your session. And so most of the time I would call her because I know she'd like to hear my voice, but sometimes I would text her and say, like, I'm home and fine. I just need like silence for the rest of the day, like I did. And another mom would be like, are you okay? Where are you? Fine. I'm like, I'm really, I'm fine. I just know I need kind of like, actually some solitude and to chill for a bit. And it just would not be helpful for me to talk to anybody else right now. Um, and so. As and when you need space to. We're thinking through just kind of show of hands who has maybe some nervousness about some of the content that we're going to cover this semester. That's totally normal. So I said, we're going to talk about a lot of heavy topics over there. And some of you may say, like, I'm totally confident as we get through it. And we have like these conversations you may find difficult space, um, and you may find it more difficult to process and. Nothing wrong with that. All right. This is our class schedule. Um, from the syllabus. Um, the Friday, February 13th class. We will not be meeting for that class. You have timed those time allotted for you to do the psychological first aid training and give you time for the suicide assessment videos. Um, it's kind of makeshift because the suicide assessment videos are, I believe, 8.5 hours of video. You look at that. And the psychological first aid training is five hours. So we do give you a class back of time to just kind of offset that. Um, you are not required to do those assignments during that four hour slot. Um. But if you choose to. You can, but you can do those assignments at any point in time. Um, before the due date, um, the psychological first aid is due March 5th. Um, just for certificates. Um, the suicide assessment training. We will actually discuss those in the next class for the that. So you do need to watch those before, um, class two. Um, but the other Thursday classes is when we will meet. Um, this semester will meet seven times. And those who say they are afraid to commit. So the psychological the suicide assessment trainings if you are. Because if you put just put that website in, it's going to come up as a paid training. However, northwest has a subscription. And so if you go through the northwest library to the databases, uh, we can pull that up when I get to the assignment, find the psychotherapy and then search for the suicide assessments. You get them for free as a northwest student. But if you just go to psychotherapy dot net and look for those videos, they do cost. But northwest pays for a subscription, so they are free and the PFA is also free. Uh, channel network one. Um, so you can feel they have you done in the future and you can you can take them at your own pace. So the suicide assessment trainings, they're broken up into three different parts. I believe the longest one is three hours. And then there's a 2.5 hour. One hour and a half one. Um, I would suggest watching them sequentially because he kind of builds on different skills through the three parts. So I wouldn't like to start with part three. Um, but you can break them up. You can pause the video. So if you only have an hour to watch, uh, the first one, like the intro, he does like two different clients. So if you only have time and say, I want to watch the first client and then go do something and or if you just need a break, you can pause it at any point in time and then go through it. Um, the second part, um, the, uh, psychological first aid is a five hour budget. I do believe it has, at least when I took it, they redeveloped it last year. But when I took it, you could, like, pause and say, um, and you didn't have to do the whole thing in five hours straight. The thing I will say about the psychological first aid training is that one has and it's free, but it has a quiz to get the certificate. And you have to at least get an 80% on the quiz to get the certificate. And I have had students reach out to me in the past and say, I didn't get an 80%. I give you a zero for the assignment then. All right. You need to be able to pass the quiz and pay attention to the module to get the certificate and upload the certificate to the class. So it is something and I have had students that you think like, oh, I'll just let this play itself through and I'll, I should know all these questions I have had students fill. And. Yeah. All right. Uh, we talked about what we're going to do. Syllabus review. So a few things, like my policies here, academic honesty tone in your own work. Um, so your sources using AP seventh edition. Uh, assignments are due at class time, 6 p.m. and may be turned up for a week late with the 10% reduction attendance. You can only miss one class, especially with us only meeting seven times. We cover a lot of content in this class. If you do get sick, please don't come to class though. Um, all classes are going to be recorded and available on discovery. Um, and if you're sick, I can provide a make up assignment. But this is only a really, it's not a skills class, but we do practice a lot with skills within those. And like, just practice, um, increases. Um, classes skill specifically. Um, check your northwest email on a regular basis. Um, I will say typically the policy is a 48 hour response. Um, in some of the third year's already know this. Um, I do ask for patience this semester with me. Um. Uh, actually, um, just might as well go with this. Um, for the last year, um, I said the third year are where this I have had, like, some significant eye issues. Um, I was actually, like, blind last March for most of the month. Um, and so, um, while my vision has marked. Improved greatly. Um, I still have some struggles with it. And so I, um, actually will be out of the office next week for an eye procedure on my left eye, and I will be out for the week. Um, and then again a week in March. Um, I have arranged the classes this semester so that I hopefully do not miss any classes. Um, with that, however, um, you may not get an immediate response to email. If it's anything to do with this course, email me and whenever I'm able to check email, I will, um, respond to it. If it's anything to do with the program and like your progress in the program for this semester. Um, copy Doctor Carrigan on those emails just so that she can keep track. Um, going through this, doctor Carrigan will be assisting me with on ground students. Doctor Glasco will be taking online students, um, to kind of help me with the program, I think. Responsibilities. Um, also, we will have, um, she may pop in here at some point, but we have an adjunct, um, that has worked with us for several years. Um, doctor Heather Taylor, um, she has worked in group work for some, um, one time, um, she is going to be a Ta for this class. Um, and she will be grading all the paper assignments for me, um, because after my procedure, I'm most likely will not be able to, like, grade papers. Um, and if for some reason I have some kind of consultation with my eyes, she will take over the class. Um, if maybe not expecting that and not hoping for that. Um, but that is like kind of the backup plan if needed. Um, so if you get an email from Doctor Taylor and are like, who is this person she's out to? Um, and she'll be doing the paper grading for the this class. Any questions about that? All right. Okay. Then just go through these assignments and do the policies. For you. So we have one exam in this course. Um. If you've them through or just even going through the book, you'll find that like really the first six chapters of this book are kind of an overview. And really the one thing I will say that to me is a funky layout is that to me it's really one through four. Then it goes into a little bit of grief work in chapter five, and then goes back to suicide assessment in chapter six. Um, and then the later chapters are more specifics, and we really with me only seven times a week, really don't have time for two exams in this class. So there's just one midterm exam that'll be 60 questions and it'll be chapters one through four and six, not chapter five on that exam. Which chapter five we are covering after the exam. So if you've read it sequentially you may have read it already, but um, that chapter will not be on the exam. Then we will also be doing a crisis assessment intervention. Um, based on a documentary, um, with Nancy Ross. Um, the documentary is the one that you cannot see. We will watch a documentary in class and have a class discussion on it as well. You are welcome to watch it on your own time, but you will read it in individual paper. They'll be 4 to 6 pages where you summarize her history, current issues, legal and ethical considerations, multicultural and spiritual considerations, client strength, um, a diagnosis, um, and then a basic treatment plan. Identify resources and referrals and any counter transference that you may have or questions that you would bring up in supervision. This is a key assessment. So this assignment requires at least an 80% to pass the class as well. Um, and so we will watch the ones we cannot see in class. Um, I believe I will schedule for class three. Um, and then the paper will be doing class five. Any questions about that assignment? All right. The next class, um, is when you'll have to watch the parts one and two of assessment intervention, uh, with suicidal clients. And let me see if I pop it open here. So take you to the organization. But if you go to. The databases. You got psychotherapy about that? And then you have a, um, assessment one, two and three here. Um, the DBT ones are interesting as well, but the these three are the required ones. Uh, so this one is 3.5 hours. This one is two hours and 17 minutes. And then this one is two hours. And you do not have to sit and watch them all sequentially. Um, like I said, you can pause. Uh, I believe each of them have two clients apiece. Um, uh, different methods of going through to suicide assessments from that. You are going to write a reflection 2 to 3 pages. Um. And these? These are possible reflection prompts in 2 to 3 pages. I do not expect you to answer every single one of these questions. And so possible reflection prompts. You can choose what you focus on. Um, I do just want to see that like you watched all three parts of the video. So if you only reflect on part one. Of the three videos. That's what you would lose points for. I do want you to show me the and like reflect on the training as a whole, um, in the different parts of it. Um, but you do not have to answer every single one of these questions. Any questions about that assignment? Give me a break. Like 1 or 2 or 3 or 2. It can be a narrative. It's up to you. It's like easiest for you to work with. If it's easiest to like, reflect on each video because like, you could watch a video and then do your reflection on that part, then watch part two and do your reflection on that. If that's easier for you, that's up to you. To decide. Yes. You know, because I know where your, um, viewing is coming from. The only time you would need a citation in this kind of reflection is if you were citing, like, another article, which I don't know. And the important thing about this is that we will be covering suicide assessment in our next class and practicing. And so like being aware of like his method. Um, as we go through it is really vital. Um, before the next class. Then you have the psychological first aid module that is linked here as well. Um, the National Trial Traumatic network. And so you just click this button. It's also available in Spanish. Um, you have to create an account, but it is a free training. Then after the dinner break, we will form groups for the institutional disaster response presentation. Um, and I believe chapters ten and 11. Uh, 12 and 13. Um, this is really about how community disasters and how counselors are, um, respond to them. And so you'll be providing a synopsis of the Crisis to disaster event. When I form unique groups. Um, every group will have to choose a different, um, kind of crisis event. So, um, we're not going to have like, five natural disaster presentations. School shootings have been one hurricane. Um, I have had fires done. Um. Wonder, did the Travis Scott concert, um, event? I think, um, another group did the condo that, um, fell in Miami. Um, and how families were supported afterwards. Um, but really we're looking at, um, an event from like chapter 12 and 13 analyzing how the crisis was managed, um, afterwards and the long term impact for survivors. And really, what would be the counselors role in supporting communities after a crisis event? Um, another group I you had last year, they did, um, the fires in Maui, and they actually did. They interviewed a counselor in Maui, um, over zoom, and they had videos from her in their presentation, and that was really good. So there's a lot of creative, um, elements with this one. This one. Well, you will need to cite a model. Um, it's not necessarily all peer reviewed sources. Um, you can use media sources, um, to back up videos. Um, like, for personal interviews, I've had a couple of people who've actually either found counselors or even found survivors and interviewed them and put videos into it, or they have found videos already on YouTube that, um, have been survivors who have been interviewed. Uh, always has it been that they've done the interview? Um, and we'll have those presentations in class. This assignment does have also a 2 to 3 page reflection. You'll find this class actually has a lot of reflections, but it's really just as a way, um, to kind of like process some of the things we're talking about. However, this reflection will be done in class, so you don't need to write the reflection beforehand. We will take a break again, because I know we'll cover a lot of heavy topics, and I will give you time in class to complete that reflection. Uh, um, then we're also going to and this is a new assignment that I've added to this class. Um, because I do just really stressed the importance of, of care, um, in practice and reflection is I'm going to ask you to choose one self-care activity that you feel like you can complete consecutively for 14 days. Um, and that can be meditation, walking, yoga, creative activities, time in nature, whatever you would like it to be. Um, you all identify an activity in class five. Um, and then I will ask that you keep a handwritten reflection, um, to turn into class, what self-care activity you did, approximately how long you engaged in the activity, how you felt before, how you feel after. Um, any thoughts or emotions or observations that sit out? Um, you will bring that reflection to class seven. Um, and we will have a class discussion. Um, you will not be required to read your journal out loud or disclose personal details beyond your comfort level. Um, so while these I'm going to assume we'll have a class discussion about. It's up to you what you feel comfortable sharing. Yeah. Um. So as we're going back two weeks, then you're expected to write in a journal, handwritten, right under your sister, write a 2 or 3 page reflection. It doesn't necessarily have to be like every single day you reflect a little bit of something. But one thing I would like you to consider, like, how do you feel before and after, kind of like at the beginning or end of it? Uh, you may again write part of the reflection for all the reflections. It's like how what is the best way for you to reflect? So if it is helpful for you to reflect after the first seven days and write the first half of your reflection and then write the second one, it's kind of where I'm why I'm making these handwritten reflections is whatever is the best way for you to process. I don't want you to be worried about, like, did I spell this word right? Did I say something? I really just want you to, like, record your thoughts, um, for the handwritten reflections. And so whatever, however that comes out for you. That's what I want you to focus on. And then. With my. Brother. Intuitively, he seems like a lot of journal, but it hurts smaller, you know? Anyway, so I'm imagining like if I can like, yes, I in like an eight and a half by 11 page of paper. So say you do have. A journal that's like this size computer piece of paper. Like add an extra page. I'm not requiring it to be in an eight and a half by 11. But if you know, you're like, I'm thinking I have like some pocket journals that I use. Like that would be a really small journal of if you handed me like a pocket journal patient. Like those two pages would be like, I need a little bit more reflecting going on here. So, um, but you can if you do, just like have a journal, this page, you can add an extra page to it. Um, if you felt before the activity, the activity before you start the consecutive days or before you do it on that day, each day, however you want to reflect on it. And then also, if you do have your own personal journal, we're bringing it to you. We get a copy of it. So it does maybe come in to be turned into me. I don't have like a submission assignment or it um, and so you do need to have it. Probably it could be if you're fine with tearing it out of your personal journal, then I think I will accept it. Like, if you're writing in your personal journal and you just want to go make a copy of the pages and turn in a copy of the page, it'll take a copy of the pages. So if you want a narrative or. Whatever, it's like the best way for you to reflect. Any other questions? And really, because for me, reflections are again like you taking the time to really like process your emotions on it. And I will say I'm biased that I went to a presentation on somebody's research. It wasn't published, but the most likely that a counseling student is to use I on an assignment is a reflection assignment, because they don't feel it as important. And reflecting on processing is important as a counselor. So this is my way to say like, nope, we're going to do handwritten reflections because like, really the process is I want you to reflect. I want you to just think. So I'm not grading the timer. I'm not grading how you reflect where it's narrative or bullet point 2 to 3 pages and taking the time to like, sit with your emotions and put it on paper. Um, I will also say in this case, if English is not, um, your native language and you would prefer to reflect in your native language, I will accept that as well. Yeah. Um, so it's not me grading your, like, reflections. It's just getting you to reflect. I don't do that. Right back. No no, no. Like. Just like a APA paper. Just like that would be four pages. Yeah. I know. So loosey goosey guys don't know what to do with that. Yeah. So that's reflection, I think. No. And also we have is we also do a 2 or 3 page reflection paper. That's another in class reflection. Um, because we will be going through this, um, about integrating faith and spirituality with trauma counseling and crisis counseling. Um, and so we'll have a discussion about it. And I'll also give you time to complete a reflection in class. So the institutional disaster reflection and the faith integration reflection are in class assignments. Um the psychotherapy net reflection and the self-care reflection are done outside of class. But there are four reflections for this class. And again looking through, they do all have kind of a little bit different of what they're looking for. Um, so just be mindful of that. They're all 2 to 3 pages. And two of them are handwritten. Three of them are handwritten in the psychotherapy. The psychotherapy note one is the only one that is typed here. This one was the only touch. Real question. Any questions about the assignments for this class? All right. And then here is kind of just like the breakdown. And as we get closer to the case study assessment, that being the key assessment for this course, we will cover that. And like I said we will watch the documentary as an in-class activity. Um, and have a class discussion on it before you read that paper. Uh it will. So. That's Mr. Wallace. And getting into chapter one now and again. Just another disclaimer. Some of this material may cause discomfort and anxiety whenever you experience from yourself. It is imperative that students learn how to tolerate and work with intense ethics, including their own. It is expected that students will struggle to learn and seek help if needed. Students should carefully assess if they are currently able to face the emotional challenge of this material at this point in time. I will say, um, and I know the majority of you are preparing to enter practicum because I have had a few students over the years, but like this class actually makes them decide like, hey, I need to go on the career track. Um, because they just need to do some personal work on their own. And like, there's no shame in that. Like, if you know that, like, hey, from the content of this class or even other content of the semester, maybe I do need a year. That's cool. Like we can have a discussion about it. Um, and move the career. Um, some of it is just going to be uncomfortable. And it's like, that doesn't necessarily mean you can't do the work. And again, like I said, sometimes it is like skill building and building your tolerance as well. Okay. So some strategies that students have reported that have helped them in the past and kind of managing this process, they have struggled, is trying not to work on course, um, activities directly before going to bed. Um, especially like some of the reading, um, if you find yourself compelled to read and unable to stop reading about the topic, force yourself to take breaks and other things that may be like, you're like, well, the midterms coming up. So I have to be reading right before bed because this is over time. Always take some breaks and like, take care of yourself. Engage in self-care even before the assignment. Um, if you are avoidant of the material, read a bit at a time and reward yourself when completing portions of the reading. Um. Some students find that writing the personal reactions to the material helpful, and so I've actually heard some students. Typically this class has two reflections. I have increased its offer this year. Um, um, by adding the in-class reflections. Uh, I've had students that have said, like, actually, I began journaling like more because of the reflection assignments. And so, like, they don't have to be turned into me, but it can be helpful to just like, reflect and journal, um, you know, when it's up for grade. Um, also like speaking with your own counselor again, if you haven't started already is you do have to have your ten individual counseling sessions completed before the start of internship. Um, and so especially if you haven't found a counselor yet, haven't started that process. And I'll just say with that, we have had students in the past that don't think we will not hold that policy. Um, and so they start internship one and they have not gotten their hours done. We will not let you count direct hours until those ten sessions are done. Um, and so if you have not started the process of getting a counselor, um, or working on that, you need to get that ball rolling. Um, just because we're starting to get into, like, you still have time because you do have the summer as well. Um, but we will not let you count internship hours. Um, and also do make sure that they are in LMC. Ela. MCAs do not count either. Um, they need to be a fully licensed counselor. All right. So chapter one, some of the basics of crisis intervention, which is this is a really important overview chapter. It's a really long chapter, but it does go into a lot of the history and a lot of the fundamentals of really, um, how crisis counseling does differ greatly, um, from traditional counseling. So just to start off with what is a crisis? How would you define a crisis? But looking ahead in the PowerPoint event, it's an event. Any kind of event, you know, is the one who is, um. Oh. Um, event who is the the event which is affected the person and the contact point made today. So tragic event sort of impacts the person. Uh, just to have that, like something that would disrupt or distract their life. Right? So it's disruptive and frustrating. Look, Rachel, I want to say something unexpected typically. And they're both, you know, like very high stress but high level of stress. And is it typically like the same for every person you know. Right. So like the same crisis event can have a situation, have a stress reaction. But that doesn't mean the stress reaction is the same for every person. I know a lot of people think it was the first thing that was perceived to be like here, but, uh, not even resources. Mhm. Yeah. So it puts a strain on your current and it overwhelms your system. So again um crisis events. And that's where they can be perceived differently. Um some people who have kind of like repeated crisis events may experience something. And they actually say that that's like low level. It doesn't really where someone who may not have experienced as many crisis episodes would be overwhelmed by the situation because they haven't kind of built up, um, coping or tolerance to different stress levels. I was going to ask you to consider that, like, teams are much more effective, I think, because they have built up skills as much small. Right? Uh, it depends on the teen and it depends on, like, the environment they were raised in. Um, so again, some kids experience a lot of like stressful situations early on. Um, and so maybe they've got a tolerance. Maybe they also have parents who like built in coping skills as they were raising them so they were able to meet stressors. Um, but it can really depend on the kid. We actually learned that like, uh uh, in my work, I actually deal with like, a lot of panic attacks in teens right now. Social anxiety, um, nationally is actually high. And I see that in, like, my private practice work that I work with a lot of socially interesting. And where did all of their symptoms start with? Covid. Right. Um, and actually typically all of them, all their parents report that they were a little socially anxious before Covid, but then not having to engage in school and everything actually made them more socially anxious. So it wasn't something that like, oh, it disappeared, but it was like magnified. There's actually also some research about, um, OCD tendencies that people who were kind of like on the verge of an OCD diagnosis that like Covid, where now like everybody's meticulously hand-washing or wearing masks. It kind of pushed some people over to now, like they meet the criteria because they were actually rewarded for these tendencies that they had for all for a long time. And so they went from borderline to actually mild symptoms. And so we also can see that happen with crisis events and crisis episodes, um, where maybe somebody was already on the edge, maybe they had a little bit of anxiety, but now they have this crisis episode that made it into a full blown anxiety disorder or panic disorder. Right. So for me, what I think of, uh, of a crisis is it's typically an event that changes you and that there's no going back from. And I would imagine, um, that each of you can think of some event in your life that kind of was a pivotal moment that you feel like your life changed after that moment happened. And sometimes it's the death of a loved one. It could be a car accident. Um, but it's just this moment that kind of seems this, like, climactic moment, like this crisis event happened. And the way you viewed the world was a little bit different. You it. Um, when you look at it as a crisis and you're saying, like, the length of time to die for people like, you know, how would you classify like an event. Mhm. So I would consider a pandemic to be a crisis event. And the way things were happening and that there was a lot of fear around it. Um, I actually will say when we pick institutional disaster presentations, I do not let Covid be one of the institutional disasters, because I think that's what it became, an institutional disaster. Um, but if we look at how Washington or New York or Florida like, because it was so widespread, the response was so different. Also, if you have somebody in your family who died from Covid, um, versus maybe you didn't have someone in your family, the way you experienced that event could be very different. Um, for me, like, uh, I was in Hawaii, actually, for, um, most of the pandemic because I went to Hawaii for spring break, because my mom had just gotten transferred to work there, and then everything shut down. And like, we wonder, Marshall also like to take my mom to work and to get back, I had to go through a National Guard checkpoint every day. Um, I had to give a reason. I had to go through a National Guard checkpoint to go to the grocery store and have a good reason to be out of the house. Um, I had to leave to go finish dealing with school and come back. I was under quarantine, and I had a police officer at the door and calling me every day to make sure I was still under quarantine. And so, like my experience with Covid, I would say was a crisis event because there were actually things that were very much like hindered. Um, we weren't allowed to be outside after 7 p.m. Um, there were very like strict rules that like I followed for several months. Um, being on like, a lockdown island. Um, you weren't allowed on the beach even for exercise. Um, so a lot of different things that like my experience kind of over. But there were places that it was a crisis event and like depending on like the lockdown experience, but it could vary so greatly. Like I said, that's why I don't even allow it to be like the institutional disaster, because you could look at every single United States and find a different response level to it. But as far as there's no going back, there are several things in our society that I don't think are going to go back post-Covid, like in things that have changed. And I still to this day, like see way more people like wear masks in airports than I did pre-COVID. Right? I see more hand sanitizer available in places. Well it's reduced. There are more remote work options. Um, so there have things that have like shifted, um, even if we've largely gone back, um, I mean, my first year here, we still we're doing hybrid work. So that's why this TV exists was because, um, with the restrictions, only half the class could be in here and the other half. So it would switch. You would be in person for four classes, and the other half would be online, and then you would switch every other class. Um, because we could not have 36 people in this room, we had to be up 50% capacity. And so that's why those students exist and are really used as much. But that's the purpose of things that are important. Uh, before I came in, Doctor Campbell will talk about the virtual partition here, but like a clear partition for him and teaching from off. And he had, like to say, in a box. Which if you've had him, you know, he's a walker, so he does not like sitting in the box. Um, so the actual definition of crisis is an event that may or may not be perceived as a disruption in life. So, um, one of the key markers is some people will experience a crisis event and they will not view it as a crisis. That doesn't mean it's still not a crisis. Um, depending on like the perception that somebody has, typically, if we think of it as like a trilogy trilogy definition, there are three essential elements. You need a precipitating event, a perception of the event that leaves a subjective distress, um, and then diminished functioning when the distress is not alleviated by customary coping mechanisms or other resources. Um, the important part is, is this part, um, where some people get confused of like may or may not be perceived is diminished, functioning may not be perceived by the person. Um, and that's typically when we see somebody and kind of a fight, fight or freeze response that someone may freeze up and not really recognize that they're in a crisis event, they may be in a freeze mode, they may be fine, they may just be trying to get out there. Um, but somebody outside of that person can recognize, like, hey, they had diminished functioning, like they're not talking or they're ignoring, um, it's not, um, a stress response, but another, um, when it comes up, responding there may be trying to like, fix things or like take care of other people versus not ignoring the crisis episode. And so we look for a diminished functioning when the distress is not alleviated. Um, the crisis is perceived as disruptive to one's life. Um, and the crisis may be experienced as a traumatic event. Some crisis events happen, um, but they do not cause trauma. And a lot of times we think those two go hand-in-hand, is that we and really what we look for is how do you person views it. So it may be immediately traumatic. And I'll give an example that if somebody has a crisis event and they perceive it, um, that not speaking from personal experience at all, like they're driving down the road and they hit a curb and blow tire like it can be a crisis event in that moment. Um, and that happened when I was 19. Um, but now, if you ask me about that, when I say, like, it causes trauma, you know, like I hit a curb. I actually have met several people who have had the same problems, kind of like in a turn went through like, um, the gas station I pulled into the woman who was running the gas station. She's like, people have that curve all the time. And so while it was a crisis episode and I was like, man, I got a tire. I had four other people in the car, and I was kind of stressed about, like, what could have happened with other people in the car. Um, now I'm so far removed from the event that I would say, like there was a really traumatic event for me. It was a crisis event at the moment, but it did not cause me like long term trauma. And sometimes we think that every crisis event is going to cause long term trauma. We don't really get to say what will or will not cause trauma for somebody, but the human beings are resilient and there are. So not every single crisis event will have long term implications. Some do, and we don't get to make the call which ones do and do not. Um, but there is a separation that it doesn't have to be long term experience. And, and typically that's where the DSM does have PTSD, but it also has um, acute stress disorder. Does anyone know what the difference is between acute stress disorder and PTSD? If it's water. For a bit and then it is heated up and. You have to continue. So PTSD, you actually can't be diagnosed for something that happened like a week ago. Okay. PTSD actually has to be three months afterwards. Acute stress disorder is when people experience symptoms immediately after, which will mimic PTSD and be very similar. But it's when we say like, oh, they're still having these symptoms months and months later that we look at it being as post-traumatic stress disorder. Acute stress disorder would be those immediate events that, yes, you have a crisis response. Yes. Your body was overwhelmed, had diminished functioning. Um, but if you're not experiencing those same symptoms a few months later, it doesn't meet the criteria for PTSD. You just have to have, um, example, because that's very unique. I have not have an accident, but it's caused a problem set up. The DoD is effectively about maybe four years already. I don't trust anybody to write like this completely because I can't. That means with PTSD, it doesn't necessarily mean it's PTSD. So you have to still meet the criteria of PTSD. It can be that like an anxiety disorder or just one disorder. Um, based on that, it doesn't necessarily mean it's post-traumatic stress. Um, and also there is qualification. Some people do actually meet the criteria of post-traumatic stress. In that case, a stress incident typically meets an anxiety disorder. Um, versus like there's some arguments, actually, that that should be removed from, like, PTSD. Like there's just post-traumatic stress, but it doesn't meet the criteria of a disorder. Um, because all of us can have that, like this post-traumatic stress or that maybe you drive a little bit differently or cancer in the car, but do you meet the full criteria of PTSD? I'm not your counselor to diagnose you with, but that's where you have to meet the full symptom criteria. But people can experience post-traumatic stress after an incident. That doesn't mean you read the full criteria for disorder. Um, and that will be like an okay personality type or attachment style to experience. Um, yeah. Um, so I don't know. This is my first time teaching through this, but we just switched because, um, I bumped into the 2020, fortunately. Um. Last book I took top from, um, crisis counseling by Owens and Parsons. Um, it actually told the crisis prone person. Um, and specifically, like, um, histrionic personality disorder and borderline personality disorder are more likely to experience more crisis events. Um, so what is stress in Western culture? Stress is described used to describe an emotional phenomena ranging from feeling mild irritation and frustration to being frozen with fear. So it's a pretty ambiguous term as to what some people can consider to be stress. Um. The term stress was introduced into medical literature, um, to describe nonspecific responses in the human body to demands that are placed on it. So basically, we just recognize in medical literature that like people have stuff going on that we couldn't really explain by anything else. Um, and so that's where the term came from. Um, so you distinguish between two types of distress, um, changes that are perceived negatively and you stress which is changes that are perceived positively. Um, which I would say most of the time we just like drop the you stress and you use like the more of the distress and that comes from like even that we can put our bodies under stress. Like, um, one example I can think of is like people, like Olympic athletes feel like they're this positive goal. They're like they are training for something or have this like weightlifting one or swimming and stuff, that they're actually voluntarily putting their bodies under stress, but they have this like positive outcome to like get stronger, be successful. Um, but most of the time we'll just use the term stress, like for stress because they're trying to meet these goals. But actually there are two different definitions of negative, um, changes and positive changes. The shift tends to cause more biological damage. Um, the stress causes than usual, the latter seeming to contribute to well-being. So you stress. One of the reasons you don't typically focus on it is unless it is maladaptive, is like an athlete who chooses to engage in these stressful conditions in order to improve their body. They see these like positive outcomes towards their well-being. Right? Distress when we look at it from a negative perspective. Um, that's when we actually have a lot of more negative connotation to our body as well, that high stress environments to increase the likelihood of having a heart attack. Stress is called a silent killer. Um, because people who experience a lot of distress over time actually tend to have weaker immune systems and more health complications, and are more likely to have, um, compromised immunity and even in this position, for disorders. Mhm. So crisis versus um stress because they are often like used interchangeably in literature with uncertainty. Six first attempt to distinguish between the two concepts, saying that stress is a continuous variable and can be measured by a degree, whereas crisis is a dichotomous variable. You're either in crisis or not in crisis, where stress can be mild, moderate, or hot. Um, so if it's helpful, crisis is an event. Either there's a crisis of or not. Not a crisis. Stress is a process that can exist over time. And there may be. Like a day or two where you're just like, I didn't have a care in the world on this day, but most of you would say, like there was some kind of environmental stressor at some point in your day to day, right? So did anyone just, like, sell here without saying a single word? No. Right. Or just making sure you get to class on time. Right. So stress being a continuous variable. It's rare that we just have like a lot of stress. And like stress is normal in actually like a low to moderate. Um, most stress actually helps us to be able to handle crisis events later. People actually that typically have low stress lifestyles, um, and don't actually push themselves even in that use stress environment when they end up having a crisis event, because it's not as if it's a when they're less likely to be resilient and overcoming it. All right. So how do we measure to stress because of having continuous variable. Um, is an effective technique is assessing stress levels and changes to stress through scaling. Um, so that could be like the 1 to 10 that I said, like the panic disorders is like a 1 to 10 one being low stress, ten being high stress. Where you at um, and kind of making it available. Um, and this helps you with your clients who may have high stress environments to actually be able to monitor that increases and decreases in stress. Um, and that could be any variable in their life and then compared to their present distress and their baseline. So if they say that they're really like at an eight right now, um, if someone's coming into you thing like, um, if there is a high amount of stress and want to learn to manage my stress. A really good scaling question is like, um, scale of 1 to 10, where are you at right now? And even saying like, actually our goal, because when I ask this question about like anxiety, um, and being one is calm, ten is a panic attack. A lot of my clients, what will they say their goal is to get to? 0001. Right. That's the goal. Um, really is counselors, crisis counselors, or in traditional counseling. We want to be realistic. And one of the things is to say is like one is an unrealistic goal, that every day in your life is going to be calm. Right now, you're telling me that most days you're at an 8 or 9, and that's putting a lot of stress on your nervous system to be in the fight, flight, or freeze response every single day. You're having panic attacks every day. And so actually, like our first goal is to get to like a six. Um, my long term goal for you is to get to the 3 or 4, because 3 or 4 is actually normal everyday stressors. I consider 5 to 6 being like moderate anxiety. Um, a seven is kind of my cutoff where you're making reasonable decisions. Eight, nine, ten is extreme anxiety, extreme panic. Um, but you have right before a panic attack at ten. And so I never want you really above the seven. But our first goal is to get to like where you're in a normal range of a six, but long term we want a 3 or 4. One is a perfect good. And not every day can be a perfect day. And so how do we live with that as well? We can recognize it. Um, and so this is just really important to start with that because people can come in and they can tell you, like I'm so stressed out, but we just have to like perception can be so different as to like what stresses somebody else that you need to know. What does it look like for them as far as stress? Why are they raising themselves right? And what would a seven look like? Not a one, but what would a seven look like 4 to 6 look like. So they can see that progress for themselves to do a really very logical delineation like stress or something that like relieve stress specifically for. Example with anxiety when you get stressed about being anxious. Um, but this would be a logical given that any other person it's really it's your the amount you're kind of revving up the nervous system. So whether you're doing that through stress or you're doing other things, um, stress more so because it's kind of like negative. And you're usually pushing yourself to do something because stress is a motivator. Um, and so a lot of times also, I tell my clients to avoid stressful situations. If they didn't have stress, they probably would have been motivated to like, study. And I think we talk a lot with, um, human growth and development last semester. Stress is good to a certain point, but then that as you experience more stress, your functioning increased like no more motivated to complete a paper or to go grocery shopping or all these things. However, at a certain point, if you don't rest, if you don't engage in self-care, then it stops, um, improving your functioning and you actually see a decrease in functioning and you're more likely to have a negative impact on, like, your body and your well-being. About this feeling. I know this counselor has been doing, um, assessment before because person coming to the point, which is like every time, uh, about the scaling with the, with the trying to figure it out. That's what you said about what is the best for them. This is seven. Um, it depends on the counselor's purpose. And that's like specific interventions. So, um, for me, like, I had a client that we were tracking, like hindsight levels. And so she took the best depression inventory every four weeks and we could actually see, like, her, it was going down. I typically just ask the scaling questions with some do monitor it on a regular basis. And if you're really just looking for trends there to see if like there's any progress towards the goal using an assessment. But I would say the majority of counselors really just ask clients or they do like somewhat check ins throughout, but it depends on the counselor's, um, intervention. So traumatic event according to the DSM, um is just traumatic event was a threatened or actual death or serious injury or threat to the well-being of oneself or to another person. The crisis event created trauma and some people, but not all people. The crisis was an event. Trauma was a reaction to the event. So again, the crisis event can happen to multiple people. That doesn't mean that it was a traumatic event for all the people in the same room. Okay. And it has to be threatened or actual. It doesn't. So some of the older DSM things that there actually had to be an actual threat, but some in the updates, it is that it actually can be a perceived threat as well, can be just as traumatic as an actual threat. Um, and so that is a change that this happened over time. But the traumatic event then has the crisis episode. Not everyone who experiences the same process event will have a traumatic response to it. Right. And then responses to trauma is that people experience the traumatic event, can respond with intense feelings of fear and helplessness. Um, most people respond with a normal range of reactions to abnormal events where their individual baseline is really not disrupted to the point that it causes impairment of dysfunction. Again, they may have a slight increase in stress, but they don't have the impaired functioning. Others become significantly restricted, impaired, and can develop illnesses such as acute stress disorder or post-traumatic stress disorder. The risk for psychological disturbance tends to increase with the magnitude or intensity of the traumatic stressor, and with the degree to which the event was human caused and intended to harm. So it also being implicated that if some people like rationalize, okay, this happened and it was a traumatic event, but it was accidental, like car accidents, right. Um, some people can say like, oh, but like this was intentional. Like, and I'm just giving examples to go. And someone saying like, oh, the person who hit me was a drunk driver. And so like, they took a stance that they could have caused harm. Right. And so like just that perception, even two people in the same car can go like, oh, it's an accident. If one person perceives as an accident and the other person says, like, no, this person took an action to get in the car while drinking. And the way they perceive that traumatic event can be two different ways, that makes sense. All right. So when we actually think not just the magnitude and intensity of the traumatic stressor, but if the event was human caused and if they feel like there was an intention, again, a perceived intention to cause harm, it can impact someone's ability, um, to respond to this, um, stress that. Some of the responses, it can vary um, in a wide range from physical, behavioral, cognitive, emotional or spiritual responses. Um, throughout. And again, we have no prediction of how somebody is going to respond. We know typical responses, but that they can vary greatly as to how someone has experienced it. So this can be you may have a client that went through a very similar traumatic event that you may have experienced yourself as well, and it's important not to make assumptions as to like what they may be feeling or what they may have gone through. But just like, tell me about your experience. Tell me what's going on for you. Um, I would say in some of the cases for clients I've had, um, that they've worked with other counselors that I've known is also not even just like reading their file and making assumptions that I know certain things about them from their file. Um, but just like, tell me what's going on for you. Tell me what's. What's this like for you? Um, even if I got knowledge from other counselors. Uh, so, like how they present? Hearing it from them, what it's like for them is really important. Uh, because everyone's experience can be different. All right. So. So, um, responses to trauma. Some key terms to know is acute stress disorder and PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, which we've already talked to briefly about, um, coping, adoption and resilience. Um, and knowing the difference between those. So the pathologized response to trauma, um, are the two, um, disorders that we mainly work with is acute stress disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. And really, it's because like insurance companies require there to be a disorder for treatment. Um, and that's the main part of it. And like I said, that's where there's been arguments of whether or not the deal could be dropped from PTSD. Um, and insurance companies say if it's not a disorder, they won't cover. And so that's where like, the deal has remained. Um, this can include hyper arousal, hypervigilance, difficulty concentrating, exaggerated startle responses, sleep disturbances, re-experiencing the trauma and negative cognition and mood avoidance, inability recall components. But the big thing I want you to see is the disorders are actually the same. Really is just the time difference between acute stress disorder and post-traumatic stress. That's the only difference. But the symptom criteria is the same between those two. All right then what is coping. And coping is defined as any behavioral cognitive action that is taken to manage stress. All right. And so response to stress falls into three broad categories problem focused coping emotional focus coping or avoidance focus coping um problem focused coping is direct behavioral actions to change or modify aspects of the environment that are thought to be causes of stress. What would be an example of that? What are some problem focused coping strategies that some of you guys have? If you live in Brooklyn people, what can people get? Okay so blocking negative on. What else can be a problem focused coping strategy. And we are walking away from the situation. That can also be like an avoidance focused one too. So some of them like double dip here. I would say. How many of you while driving or have noticed someone else while driving though, like you get into a lot of traffic or on a bridge and they turn down the music in their car? Right. That's a problem. Focus. Coping. Right. Like you're overstimulated by everything that's going on, traffic being on the bridge. And so you're like, I'm going to remove this stimulus so you have control over you don't have control of the other cars. You have control over the radio. And you may turn down the radio. That's a problem focused coping strategy. And the other company. You come here. Mhm. So like you were saying like I put on jazz music. It's like office. Yeah. I so like reducing the noise around you. Noise cancellation. Noise cancellation headphones. Right? How many of you like took a day? I hope you did. Anyway, over the break. And we're just like, I'm going to do nothing today, right? That's problem. Focus coping. You know, with all our problems last semester. And you're going to be like, I'm going to take a day and do nothing to me. Right. And not focus on anything else. All right. Emotion focused coping, reducing affective arousal so that the stressful situation may be tolerated in general and generally involves cognitive processes that change the meaning of the stressor or create emotional distance from it. What are some emotional focus coping. I think journaling let it out. Okay, so like processing it, letting out, releasing earlier, thinking you're talking to somebody. Yeah okay. Because it's like with we're like just venting about it to your friend or anybody. Um, partner. Um, parents does it change the situation. Not typically, but do you feel better at preventing. Yeah. So that's where it's an emotion focus coping right is it's helping you deal with it, even if it doesn't change the problem when owning a house, cleaning the house. Okay, I would say that's more into the problem focused coping. But then it goes to the emotion focus. Yeah I was gonna say like deep breathing, but I'm curious about small problems okay. As well. It depends. So the thing with the problem focusing is it's the direct behavioral actions that change the environment. I would that's where I said awareness to me is problem. Focus is because she's changing her environment to cope better. Yours. Deep breathing doesn't actually change the environment. Ellie is deeper. Our venting does not change the environment. Um, so that's where that's more of an emotion focused coping. Um, because those didn't actually change the situation. Um, once Annie is where I said hers can be like with the headphones be problem. Focus is she is changing her environment by putting headphones on. That did change something in the environment. Um, but it's also the avoidant one as well, because we're kind of struggling out, but emotion focused versus the physical. The problem focused one is actually you change something in the environment. Emotional focus helps you cope with that. But the environment did not change. You're just ability to cope with that changed. So would it be something that's more internal with emotion? It's like something that is inside of you that's changing you processing. Uh, but yeah, you can release in some way. Um, giovanna's um, example journaling is so she really is not typically you can see the environment change with this new piece of paper. She really does change the environment. Um, but that would still be like emotion focus. Art therapy would come under emotion focus because not really changing the environment, even if you're adding something to it. Um, through all right, avoidance focus, coping responses such as distraction and diversion are employed to avoid the stressor and the emotions that would be associated with it. What are some examples of avoidance focus coping. Can we be watching TV shows on TV? That's a big one. Yeah. So when watching the scrolling doomscrolling, um, everyone's hands are going up. Uh, you read or they like getting engrossed in a book? Yeah. Jesse. Food. Okay. Video game. Video games. Matthew. Work. Work. Okay. Yeah. Having other things to do. Something you said? Excessive napping. Yeah. What would you consider excessive napping? Anything longer than three hours or longer? So what about shopping here? And that is if you don't do that. But it's the shopping. Yes. Yeah. So in this case, the book to me talks more about like what I would actually consider, um, proactive coping from these three like areas. But we have to actually consider is that like coping skills can either be positive proactive or they can be maladaptive. All right. Um, and so you can say that like, hey, actually every once in a while, like binge watching a show because you like it, like that's a good coping strategy. Now if you say, like, I'm not going to work or I miss class because, like, I was binge watching the show, that's when it's maladaptive coping. Right. Uh, wondering your example of the headphones. If you say, like, hey, to be more productive, I've got to put on these headphones because there is no, I'm not going to get work done. There's too much stimulation going around. But if you're putting the headphones cause you're like, I don't want to talk to anybody in this office ever. Right. Not to be more productive, but like, I am actually avoiding conversation in connection with others. That's when we would go with my doctor. So a lot of times actually, like when I do an intake, especially when I have high risk clients and I ask them about their coping skills and they tell me like, oh, I listen to music or uh, um, watch this TV show, or I do this. I actually it's like, what does that look like for you? Um, because most of our coping skills can be really helpful, but they can also be maladaptive. Um, I would say another one that is a big avoidance strategy is alcohol and drug use to cope with trauma as well. Um, that is a big one. And so not sometimes we talk about coping skills. Coping skills are not always positive or proactive. They can be maladaptive as well, especially anything. It's just a 30 minute power nap. There's actually research to support that. But if you're like, oh, I need a 3 to 4 hour nap every day that is, um, impacting functioning just because of what you say. Like, I guess another point is. I would say that, like, you know, like you could say estimation. But. Um, I wouldn't say worse. And so I would say, because in general, I do actually feel like as a society, we're kind of like a little bit overstimulated in most cases. I mean, just if you watch a Disney movie like lady and the tramp done in the 1950s, which is like a Disney movie that's been released in the last ten years, you can just like, see the stimulation. And just like our media sources and like the media content and so, so avoidance coping is actually our body's like, um, trying to actually regulate itself. Um, and so I wouldn't say that that is negative. More likely it can be any of these in excess can be maladaptive. Um, but I actually feel like, um. If we switched it, um, the word that the book used and made it mindful coping strategies, I would say the avoidance, just that term has more of a negative connotation of like being more mindful or like taking moments of breaks. But I actually feel like sometimes. Uh, if you have, if you haven't done this for, like putting your phone in another room for like an hour and like putting on silent and not putting any electronics in your home and just see what kind of feelings come up for you with that. Um, because that really shouldn't be avoided. Focus. But I would say for most of us there could be like a stress response or going like, well, what if somebody tries to reach me in the next 20 minutes? Well, what if I miss something like if I don't have that? And so overall, I just feel like as a society we kind of like overstimulated to be like connected. And so it's normal for our bodies to be overwhelmed by that. Would be fair to say consultancy services would fit in all three categories. Um. I would say it's probably in problem focus and avoidance for the most part. Um, it could be emotion focus if, like, you have a drinking buddy and you're kind of unloading on it, but like, if you don't really remember it the next day, um, some of them do have the capacity to overlap, but I would say it's really just like how how that person manages that coping and what they're getting from it. Um, that um, so for online, for instance, if they use this phrase like, um, I was like, I just finally got a glass of wine and I had a really rough day. We can live with that very lightly, but I imagine that would be looked at differently. Like you have a five point, you know, like the art is any kind of internal document. Um, no. So when we get into the substance use counseling, we'll talk about like the criteria for substance use disorder. And like one of the criteria is that you have try to reduce use and have been unable to. So for some people like, uh, is um, if one glass of wine does really make you sick, um, but like, you still continue to drink even though, like, you know, you're all these negative consequences. That's where kind of it goes from. But there's actually you have to, like, try reducing your use and being unable to like one of the criteria for substance use disorder. Um, what's considered like moderate is the CDC like recommended is one drink a day for women and two drinks a day for men. And so in a week, it's actually considered when somebody has seven, you know, seven or more drinks in a week for men, 14 or more drinks in a week, um, is where it's considered, um, an elevated use. Um, and again, it's everybody's their perception or somebody else's perception of diminished functioning because you can have people who have substance use disorder, those like, I don't have a problem, I don't have a problem. And you talk to anybody in their family and they'll be like, the drinking is a problem. Um, so it's the diminished functioning by them or somebody else in the perception. All right. Also countries like Spain and Italy, they think the wine, they really like the wine. And that's where you look for bound up the functioning like with the culture. Um, and later we go in depth into like what is the criteria? Um, but the criteria for any mental health disorder in the DSM is that it bothers you or somebody else. So I actually tell clients that all the time of like, when they're like, well, I think the one I get with and I think I may have ADHD and I'm like, you can pay for an assessment to like, see that, but like, is this bothering you? Like, is it impeding your functioning or other people saying it's impeding your functioning because you actually don't meet the criteria for disorder unless it is bothering you or somebody else? So culturally, if we think of like Italy or Spain, where like a glass of wine with dinner is very normal and surfaces families in the US that it's very normal as well. It's not a stress reliever, it's just typical to have a glass of wine with dinner. It actually has to be go. It bothers you or somebody else in your family for it to meet the criteria for disorder or like you're experiencing negative consequences, um, from it. But if you don't, if it's not impacting you negatively and it's not impacting anyone around you negatively, even if you have all the symptom criteria, you don't actually have criteria for the disorder. Right. So adoption is an outcome of stress or crisis, the degree to which functioning has changed over an extended period and may be measured by the fit between the individual or family and the environment. So adoption is really dependent on the supports you have around you. All right. Um, in some families, functional behaviors such as rules, rules, boundaries and interpersonal communication patterns can make them better equipped, um, to challenges and future stressors. Some individuals and families, though, there's an imbalance which can continue between stress demands and the capability to meet those demands. You may find that like, there's kind of like a scapegoat in the family or a parent of a child who takes on a lot of the stressors made to protect other people. Whereas when we look for functioning with the family, we would like to see that like kind of there's a balance between versus it being like taken on by one person to adapt. Resilience is defined as the dynamic to contribute positive adoption following exposure to experiences that have the potential to disrupt functioning. So some of the fundamental adaptive systems, um, that make humans more resilient is beginning in early childhood adoption. And the likelihood of resilience seems to depend on the quality of relationships with attachment figures. We talked about that in human growth and development, that early attachment styles actually impacts long term outcomes. Um, because if at an early age you didn't trust the adults around you to take care of you, it's going to impact your resiliency later in life. Social groups and networks bless groups, um, and networks provide resources such as information and support that are important in dealing with adversity. So there are other people around you that kind of know what's going on. You're not experiencing something in isolation. You have friends, family members, coworkers, um, and then larger systems such as religious and spiritual connections promote attachment like relationships and social support, as well as opportunities to practice self-regulation through like prayer and meditation. Um, I would say this also can be, um, water systems such as food banks, um, community centers, career centers that may provide additional like supports. Um, broadly, um, people who are resilient seem to be better at applying cognitive skills during times of high stress or threat of harm, um, than those who are less, well, adaptive. And so they typically kind of like brainstorm or problem solve as well. Um, and typically have like a higher internal locus of control that they have some agency over what's happening to them versus those that may rely more on external locus control, that like, they don't really have power to change. Workshop. Um, Stanford's all right. We're going to stop right here, um, in chapter one and go ahead and take our dinner break, and we will come back at 805.