Pretty much know my Northwest's schedule. Like it's pretty solid as far as like the weeks and stuff, but I know I can take or can't take. And I work with banana, banana doctor Campbell's, um, coordinator to just say like, hey, they can be affected. So we can kind of work on that if you're able to schedule. That in two minutes. And I don't have any. Uh, working with, uh, with them and, um, yeah. Um, so you can go through email and hit the like button and like, put the time, you know, interesting. I like to do it because we can sit in this whole block that is in our hands for sure. So, um, but if you look at the picture at the bottom, that would mean if you put the button on. The floor. And if I have my calendar up today on the side. Yeah. Like, I know I. Was last year I was like mid-March. Oh. Excuse me. Give me a. Break. Yeah yeah yeah. Oh it's okay. I mean well they might have. You. Know. Oh, yeah. Uh uh, or the TV show on the PowerPoint. There's I guess. What? It is now that. We didn't. Know anything about it, but, like, you know. Like. It's a sign of. Dominance. No, no. All right, guys, we're going to go ahead and get started. I just, um, I think we are quite a bit too hot for tonight, right? Um, so we will be going through chapter seven and eight. Um, if you look online, there is the class three PowerPoint, which is what I got up here. And then there is chapter seven and eight. When I first built those PowerPoints and they were like 50 slides, I knew I would have time to get through all of them. However, they you guys may want some of that information as far as like preparing for your case study assignments, today's midterm is the only exam we have. So like those chapter PowerPoints will not be on a final exam. There is no final exam in this class. Um, but I thought you may want some of that extra information. Um, as you do your case report, the class three is where I've condensed that information and what I'm going to focus on in my lecture this evening. Um, the plan for tonight. Now, everyone has been asking. We are going to cover the brief synopsis points of chapter seven and eight from the first half an hour of the class. Then we're going to watch the Nancy documentary that will be used for the case study and start to take some notes. And what I'm hoping in this 730 to 8 time is will process like what we learned, what you need to take into account um, and Nancy's case and really also being a little bit of review about like suicide risk assessments and things that you will need to take into account on the midterm. Um, but also in your case study, as far as actually formatting that paper and what should be in each section. We will talk about that next class. We're really just gathering information about Nancy in this class. And then we'll talk about the paper next class okay. So that process time we're going to really just focus on what are we learned about Nancy. How can we apply what we know from the book to Nancy in a 30 minute process? Um, so a little bit of that will be in review. Then if you need to have dinner or a last minute study session, you will have from 8 to 830 to do so. And then the exam will be from 830. And you'll have 90 minutes to complete a 60 question exam. Um, I did note an error in the syllabus. It does say that the exam is 60 questions but down lower. It says that the exam is worth 75 points. I don't know why I put that. Every point is every question is worth one point. That's how all my exams are structured, um, to be. So I'm not exactly sure why I put 75 points in there for a 60 question exam, and I was not going to do the math to figure out what that point differential was. Um, a 1.25 maybe, I don't know, but we would think. And so it's just 60. Um, it's just worth 60 points of the final. Any questions about this? All right. The syllabus also says we'll be covering chapters eight and nine tonight. We are doing seven and eight. And we will get to nine as well. Um, but because chapter nine is on sexual violence, I also did not want to rush that chapter either. Uh, with all these things we've got going on tonight. All right. So chapter seven talks about substance use in society. And really just like considering some of the main facts, um, is about 50% of Americans consume alcohol, about 21% of Americans consume tobacco products. Um, over 20% of Americans age 12 and older, um, utilize illicit drugs. Um. However, of that, 20.4 million people who reported needing treatment, only 2.3 million received treatment. And again, this is actually part of this number. Um, but say that 57 20.4 of that 57 million actually say I need treatment for my drug use, but only 2.3 million receive services for it. Um, so substances um, can happen in substance use can happen after a crisis. It can be a way that people cope with crisis and cope with events that have happened in their life. It also can increase their risk that they're more likely to experience a crisis because alcohol is a depressant. So we see the impact, um, substance use in our society and on crisis events. Um, it can be a response, but it also can be something that led to a crisis in the first place. Um, and so that does make it an increased risk factor. Um, when we look at crisis situations and if somebody is currently under the influence or has use or how they're coping after a crisis event. So with that, typically we want to assess, infuse, um, we book talk about these four assessments being the main one. I will say like, um, my degree is actually clinical mental health counseling with an addiction social thing. I did an addictions counseling track in my program. Um, and also my internship had to be in substance use. And in my work I have used the audit, the, um, the page. Um, I have not used the math. Um, assessments of these assessments are widely used in community mental health centers, in that I worked at three separate centers. Um, and I used one of each of those audits I see and coach in my work. And so you typically will see those utilized as a screening tool. Um, but I would say even if you're not, um, doing substance use treatment, my supervisor, um, when I was doing just intakes, um, for clients and determining where they should get services, um, at our community mental health center, she was like, you should always assess which, um, substance use disorder? Always. Every single time. And really, even if you don't have one of those questionnaires in front of you, you are not part of the intake. You want to ask about intensity, frequency and duration. If they answer yes. And typically, um, a lot of intakes will ask for alcohol and drug use and smoking. Um, with smoking I will always say like tobacco, tobacco or um, marijuana use. Um, and a lot of times will initially tell me no to smoking. But then when I ask what marijuana use, they'll be like, oh yes, I do smoke marijuana. And so like also just making sure you get an accurate assessment there as well. But these three things are the main things is like how um, much are you using? How often are you using, how long have you been using would be the three questions that if I did not have an assessment in front of me to like go through those questions, I would still ask around these three areas. All right. Um, with substance use disorder, as far as a diagnosis, um, I spent a lot of this, um, because we'll cover this a lot in the substance use counseling class, um, that you guys take in your second summer, we talk about how to assess for substance use, how to diagnose it, and we also cover motivational interviewing and using that as a treatment model and substance use, as well as the harm reduction model. Um, so a lot of these things I'm briefly going to cover here because you get a whole class in substance use counseling improvement, and we'll go more in-depth in that class. Um, but the big thing is, uh, the DSM does have criteria, um, for meeting, um, a substance use disorder. With that, at least two of the following criteria must be met for an individual to be diagnosed with something of these 11. All right. And then severity is determined by the number of presenting criteria. So mild is 2 to 3. Moderate is 4 to 5 severe is six or more. And then the book also talked about with substance use is that you typically are evaluating someone's readiness to change. Does anyone remember the readiness to change the theoretical model from, for trust in, or for some serious textbook? Yep. So, um, the stages of change are widely used in substance use counseling. I also, again, because I did in addictions counseling program that was actually very heavily rooted in motivational interviewing, the theoretical model. I would say I probably use the stages of change with every single client that I work with and going, why do they are they here? Do they think they have a problem or they not have a problem? Just like this, a lot of times place to make good points and a lot of my teenagers are mandated by their parents to come see me. So like, do they think a problem, they have a problem or does a judge think they have a problem? Do their parents think they have a problem? Um, but they don't. In contemplation, they're kind of considering whether or not they have a problem. Um, and maybe deciding whether or not they want to change preparation. They're, um, making plans and they're having options to prepare to change. They haven't actually changed. Um, so usually this is the one that, um, most people get stuck on. And what I liken it to the most is the preparation stage can kind of be like when you're preparing to go on a diet and you go to the grocery store and buy a lot of fruits and vegetables, does that necessarily mean you're going to eat all those fruits and vegetables? No. Right. So that's the preparation, right? You're preparing to make a change by like changing your entire like going in, but you haven't actually made the change it. You can go to the grocery store. And then on the way home stop at McDonald's. Right. You're preparing to make the change, but you haven't actually done any change. Action is that you are committed to make a change in. You actually is taking steps. You bought the food and now you made a salad for your lunch instead of getting fast food, right? So you're actually taking actual steps. And then maintenance is that you have to be in that stage for them, um, out of action stage for six months before you go into maintenance. So maintenance is six months or longer. Um, and sometimes I will say people like to jump this, um, when I do intensive outpatient treatment, um, people have to be in that program for three months of sobriety, minimum, uh, usually after they hit like 30 days would be like like I'm in maintenance stage, like, not quite, not quite. You are, like, making good progress. You're making a change. You've been sober for 30 days, but it's six months until you're in maintenance. So, Jenny, when you graduate from our program at three months, you still have work to do and you're still in early recovery before we consider, um, maintenance. Right then. Motivational interviewing is an evidence based approach that builds on the true theoretical model. I would say motivational interviewing comes under person centered therapy. Um, a big one that, uh, Doctor Lundquist do. The aura's with you guys in counseling skills. That comes from motivational interviewing. Um, open ended questions, affirmations, reflections and summaries. Um, and also, they develop like, a central process, um, that you should engage the client again, rapport building focus for the client, um, instead. And what Miller specifically would say is that a lot of counselors start with engaging build rapport, and then they jump to planning because they're like, oh, we've got to fix this substance use issue. We've got to work on this. And they don't try to focus on what the problem is or evoke change from the client first. And so they just kind of get in this, um, resistance struggle. Um, and so really making sure that you're not skipping these two steps in between developing your report and trying to get commitment to change from your client, then it's also important to consider treatment, admission and placement of their different levels of treatment for different levels of substance use and what the client needs. And I know I have a couple of people in here at least, who have done some substance use treatment. What are the two, um, classification, uh, drugs that you have to actually be really worried about someone detoxing from, you know. See when you get one. Alcohol. One. Benzos. Then those alcohol. Benzos. Um, so opioids, um, they do have a thing, but not detox. What people usually is an overdose of opioids, but not a detox issue. Um, opioids. People think that dying, but really they're having severe flu like symptoms and they will survive the opioid withdrawal without medication management. It just feels awful. Um, but for the most part, for most people, it is severe flu like symptoms. When they're detoxing, they die from overdoses to opioids. And most of the time when people are, what happens with a lot of opioid use is that they actually will detox and their tolerance will reset, and then they relapse and they go back to their original use. And that's where the overdose happens, because their body actually didn't have the capacity for the tolerance that they had let go of in the detox period. So that's like the danger with opioids is actually that somebody will relapse, um, after detoxing and after the tolerance, it's reasonable to reset the ones that we have to be really careful in that where you're most likely to send a client to rehab for detoxification is alcohol and benzos. Um, because a lot of times people cannot detox, um, safely on their own and they actually need to be staggered off of those drugs. All right. And so relapse and crisis is another thing is unfortunately with substance use treatment relapse is often part of it. And the stages of change actually does have relapse as part, um, of decisions that, um, a client can relapse at any time, and it's expected that it probably will happen. And again, how do they do that safely? They can also have a lot of struggle in life. Those are trigger points. Um, and especially if you had someone that like alcohol or any other drug was their main way of coping. And then they have another adverse life event, it can make relapse more likely to happen. Uh, and just having these two things as you can have a lapse in a relapse. So left is a single episode. Some people do. Just like they're out in the vent, and they use one time to have a beer at a barbecue. All right. A relapse is a return to sustained use as well. Um, also, some folks will call this a slip versus relapse in other terminology. All right. Then safety and self-care. It is important for counselors just to be aware of the risks that we have in our jobs and to make sure that we're safely, um, taking care of ourselves and to gauge the risk, especially if somebody we do feel like someone is under a substance. Um, the importance of the substance, being able to screen for that, um, that we have safety precautions and knowing the protocols of an agency we're working at. Um, and also needing to be aware of dangers when working. When I was doing my substance use groups, we did occasionally have somebody come under the influence. Um, and my supervisor would have to take their keys and say, like, you got to call somebody to pick you up, but I cannot let you get in your car. You can take the bus. Um, or you can have someone come pick you up. But we cannot give you your keys right now, and we cannot release you. And sometimes to be like, well, I'm just going to walk out of here and I'm not going to because I'm like, we're going to call the police, which means there's going to be a call to your probation officer. I don't think it's a threat to the public for us to let you leave under the influence of, after we've done a breathalyzer or a drug screening. All right, then, getting into chapter eight with intimate partner violence in domestic violence, um, intimate partner violence can involve physical, sexual and emotional aggression, violence or stopping by hurt or former intimate partner. Um, it's an inclusive term and can, um, really describe all kinds of, um, couples situations. Um, clueing same sex couples, opposite sex couples, or currently were formerly in a relationship. And that's why you typically do see intimate partner violence now use instead of domestic violence all the time, because there can be intimate partner violence that happens after the relationship ends, and they're no longer currently living in the same home. And so that's why this term has really taken over the previous time of domestic violence. The most is still and also for violence is happening in the home that is more commonly seen in research. IPV encompass a wider scope. Right. Um, intimate partner violence. Um, the book talk about like several different like models and theories towards, um, intimate partner violence in domestic violence. I would say the cycle of violence is the most commonly like utilized one. Um, and uh, my very first group that I had as an intern was actually an intimate partner violence group. Uh, I was part of two groups, um, a perpetrator group and a victim group. Um, and I remember sitting in the police and talking about this process with the clients at the time, um, really that there's three phases, there's the tension building, then there's the explosion or battery incident, and then there's a honeymoon phase of kind of loving behavior. Um, and depending on the relationship, there's no like set of like, oh, this is how much each stage lasts. It's really relationship dependent about how long. And sometimes even people say, like, sometimes there are really long periods and then they're really short periods. Um, but the cycle itself does perpetuate over and over again, um, and goes on and on over a love, hope and here cycle of going through. And one of the risks that we have with, um, intimate partner violence and specifically domestic violence is it does usually take a woman seven times to permanently leave, um, before she leaves or she's killed in that relationship. That's like the two steps that we have. And it's really because a lot of times, this honeymoon phase gives a lot of hope that, like, maybe there's going to be a change, maybe there's going to be a difference. Also, a lot of women, when they do leave domestic violence situations, experience a decrease in their sex work status. Um, I believe I mentioned this in human growth and development, but I work with a family with the two brothers, um, that their mom had left a domestic violence situation. Her husband was in jail for abusing her and the boys, and they were living in a homeless shelter. They had lost their home because she had been a stay at home mom, and he had been the, um, income earner for their family. And so she would tell you, she's like, um, doing what I can to, like, protect my kids. And I know this was a really bad situation, but, like, this is hard. Um, and so being able to access resources for them as far as clothing and food, um, offerings, um, but at the end of the school year, they did find a family friend that they were able to live with and leave the shelter. Um, but there also can be that. Lack of resources that also keeps women in these situations too. So some common crisis issues that counselors need to be aware of is attending to any physical injuries that are present at that time, establishing immediate safety and reporting intimate partner violence to the police. Um, so with these attending physical injuries, just noting, like if you see anything going on physically, um, is there a way to establish immediate safety with reporting to the police? What are some of the ways counselors have to consider that peace or. They have their immigrants and their immigrants. I think whether or not we make a call as far as like mandated reporting and our obligation to report to the police, and we don't have a need for visas or. If we see any physical markings, um, if it's if they're one of those vulnerable populations. Yeah. You know, like, when are we mandated to report intimate partner violence? It's a failure of faith, and I remember reading in the textbook that you should be asking the client because you don't reach confidentiality. Mhm. Um, so trying to balance confidentiality with also reporting, is that the best decision for the client and actually for nature and the environment. And then also considering the population. Mhm. With uh. Mhm. Uh or other things that you would do like. Mhm. Correct. So we are not necessarily um required to report all intimate partner violence unless the victim is a vulnerable population. Or in the case that it could be a couple, um, that has kids and whether or not the kids are being exposed to violence within the home. Um, and so that way, because if it's causing emotional harm, even if the violence isn't happening to the child, if it's considered emotional harm to the child, that does come under mandated reporting. Um, because you can look at the laws for Washington, it's behavioral, emotional, physical, sexual, um, are like some of the categories under there. An emotional harm is considered a category, um, with media reporting. So if the kids are exposed, but uh, if the kids are not necessarily around for don't see it, it's actually working with the victim as to whether or not they want to report it. And so we are not mandated to break confidentiality. We're not permitted to call the police. And, uh, we're can say like, hey, I can support with you with this. I can call the police with you right here. How do we ensure your safety? But we are not mandated to report intimate partner violence. Unless it's a vulnerable population that we do not feel like can advocate for themselves. Um, or we do feel like there's an issue with children being present in the home as well. Right. So some of the risk factors we have to consider with intimate partner violence is women of color are more likely, um, to experience in their home. 54% of black women, 44% of Hispanic women, compared to 35% of white women. I would say all of those numbers are too high. Um, then I see us factors as well. The book talked about this. Um, people from lower osseous are considered more likely to experience, um, intimate partner violence. However, there's some, um, debate around this is whether or not intimate partner violence actually happens across all class levels, and that people who have a higher ex have access to more resources, have more family supports. Um, and so they may be able to leave it without reporting it or without, um, utilizing a domestic violence shelter or something like that. And so it's actually considered, well, a lot of the focal point in a lot of the safety net measures need to be there for low cost families. That intimate partner violence actually happens across all systems. And so we tend to make assumptions that, um, immigrants that as you mentioned this as well, that people, if they're already afraid of their immigration status, then I don't want to call the police center, um, and have them involved in and, uh, especially for undocumented religion and spiritual beliefs can happen as well, that, um, people can feel like I should be obedient to my husband. Um, and I remember one of the first talks that I went to that was talking about domestic violence. The speaker, um, talked about that her mom was in an IPV situation and actually did leave her dad and went to her pastor's house, knock on the door at night with her and her sister. And her pastor said, you need to go back home to your husband. Um, and she said the next two years, her mom did not go back, but they lived on the playground at a park, and she slept on a slide for the next two years. Um, so again, X levels and resources. Um, but also like religious and spiritual beliefs as far as, like staying in the home. And that divorce is a sin can also lead people to say LGBTQ couples, um, have reported higher incidences of intimate partner violence, uh, and also more stigma as far as receiving support as well. Um, then a risk factor and it's not um, it is more likely that women will experience violence, but there is female to male violence as well. And one of the things that we do consider is that typically a lot of domestic violence shelters do not let men on the premises, um, for safety towards the women. And so men who are experiencing intimate partner violence may also have a lack of resources, um, within their community because it is a majority female problem. So this locks resources for the. Males who do experience with that problem as well. Um, then as far as disability status, elderly populations and young adults. Um, disability status and elderly adults, again, that's access to resources being able to leave. Um, if you're dependent on your partner for transportation or income and all these things, and because of a disability or other thing, how do you navigate those challenges? Also, do you have access to resources and are able to get them? And then young adults, um, do just have a higher level of IPV. A lot of times it's considered like they're more likely to have heavier substance use. Um, also prefrontal judgment not being fully developed, more quick to act and respond to situations. Um, and people thinking like, oh, he was drunk or he was doing like making light of it versus actually considering the harm that it was. And what's the like stage of development that young adults are and. What you can see. That's young teenagers. So after identity. Youth. Intimacy versus isolation. So like if you're actually also dealing with this problem of like, uh, want a partner? I want to get married. Right. Um, even if things are bad in their unhealthy situations, you may like to. Like, all my friends are getting married. All my friends are having kids. And so that also just a social construct. Uh oh. This is what I should be doing. And I don't want to be single. Right? Um, having an impact in any of the population experience is more, um, there's a lot of different, um, pieces of it, um, to go through again, a lot of it sometimes is believe is like lack of educational resources that there are actually like a lot of things about how you can support the older heterosexual couples. But even like, um, I have a friend who does some of this stuff, um, on LGBT and she's like, try to find premarital 1047 year old couples. It's very common, almost non-existent. So like a lot of the hundreds of communication that are open to couples are like heterosexual people as well. Um, and so there's a lot of cultural factors and things like what goes into that. Um, and not also a lot of responsibilities. My research is also north of a lot of marriage, and family research in general, focused on married white couples of high status, like most of the church was all people who could go to the black community. And so that tended to be white, heterosexual couples of high ethics. And so actually, a lot of our field is trying to do a lot of research and catch up on a culture of color on second marriages, because most of the research, the people who participate and just tend to lend itself to higher and higher rates, you know, so I would say that's an area that I feel is really actually trying to like fill in the gaps in, like, why is this and what are these forms that were um, seen in general, um, trending um, in the for a long time. We also think as far as the clarity, um, equality for LGBTQ people because, um, it amounts to a lot of that research is coming out now that there's also the right to life as well. So a lot of factors we eventually we will have some differences there. But a lot of couples research in general for any couple outside of a white as high as the US couple, is actually still trying to catch up in our field as far as background and like what contributes to what good, solid, uh, partnerships. Yeah. Is there any statistic or number or anything of that experience? I think one of the terms of the book gave an actual number to that. I don't want to say that, but I think it's like 1 in 4. Um, I don't know if that's right. I mean, we'll just get a little check and see if there's an actual stat. I know it's like disproportionate in the other reverse. Um, but I have to see if I can actually find a number on it. It's one of those things that because there's such a lack of resources, it's also something that's hard to measure. Um, for that population, um, how many? Because, like, if you don't have access to treatment, like, how are we tracking treatment? Right. Yeah. Right. So thinking of a counselor's response to this is that we do have the opportunity to make a difference in lives. And, and this can be looking at how we assess how we respond to IPV disclosure, implementing effective harm reduction, safety planning and intentional referrals to shelters, and helping clients navigate the emotional ramifications that a lot of times, the decision to leave is not followed by easier decisions after that. But there are going to be multiple hard decisions and material for things to adjust with. Um, so for screening, looking at that, most people say like, I think it should be screened universally. Um, but there is a barrier that there's a lack of knowledge and training on how to ask this. Um, um, but also, uh, people can have like, mistrust. And so how do you also source, like, support and safety? Um, but looking at your assessment, uh, considering we saw suicide, homophobia and levels of threat perceived by the victim, what is really understood is that counselors should never ask about abuse in front of the partner, uh, when they suspect IPV, um, and counselors should be careful not to, um, recommend ending a relationship as the only way to establish safety. Um, because, again, if you say that this is the only way to show you that this may put a barrier or someone says, I can't leave. Um, and so taking more of a harm reduction model, if somebody wants to leave, they will ask you, like, can you help me leave? Um, versus you saying like, this is the only option for them. Um, so our response to IPV should one three to validate the victims experience, document, um, make notes, um, take pictures, um, of physical injury and then provide the victim with the resources available to them. Uh, validate document resources. Um, and really essentially, like I would say, for any counselor in any area is a, you should know, like the emergency services that are available in your area. Um, and be able to say like, hey, here's the closest domestic violence shelter wherever you end up working so you have access to it. Um, another thing to be aware of is there is a national domestic violence hotline, um, that is available and having this number and the website. Um, that a bare minimum, this resource, no matter where you go in the field. Um, these two things would be available for a potential client. Um, so I feel like the answer's already been provided, but I just want to know if somebody is, like, seriously, that person in my line of work? Like, if they don't want to make a change, potentially, it would not. Be like the so choice whether that was, you know, another opportunity that um, I would say this depends on what kind of role you are in. Um, in most cases, as far as like this kind of documentation, if I had a client that like, showed me a bruise and they were like considering whether or not to report or not, I would be encouraging them that they should take pictures for the court documentation. Um, with that, and now if you're in a role as a crisis counselor, sometimes crisis counselors are in the role to like, take pictures and document. You would be trained in that specific and what you need to be looking for and what you need to take into account. If you are working with a client, like at a mental health or private practice and they show you like a bruise, I would say make sure you take a picture of that with the time stamp on it. Um, for your documentation records especially, you can like maybe right now you don't want to report, but you change your mind like 2 or 3 days from now, you would have that documentation. You wouldn't have, like a faded bruise or bruise that's gone, um, that you no longer have the documentation. So advocating for your client to like, document for themselves. So safety. If they do decide to leave, is developing a safety plan with the overall goal of keeping the client safe. Now, it is important to emphasize that we cannot guarantee 100% certainty, right? You can't. We're not with our clients 24 seven. And so try to do our best, um, to keep the client as safe as possible. Um, we usually the safety plan should be tailored uniquely to the client's situation and determine appropriate support for the client's location. But for, like, physical safety, like shelters and whether or not law enforcement should be contacted. Some people don't want to go to a shelter. Do they have a family member that they can go stay with? Um, do they try, um, turn off their location? Like, are they sharing their location with their partner, and do they need to turn that off? Uh, but going through the steps of, like, how can we keep you safe for right now? Does law enforcement need to be involved in that? There's a local shelter, but also going like, I cannot guarantee your safety in this moment. Right. And that always if you're worried about your safety calling 911. Right. Harm reduction planning is when the client does not plan to leave the relationship. And so how can we reduce harm as much as possible? Um, and reduce the amount of harm that but the main body of user um, and be able to integrate strategies to assist in alleviate pain from abuse. But also sometimes having the conversation with uh is like how we can do harm reduction approaches, but then we can ensure safety and you're in that. And so how do we reduce harm? How do we mitigate. But eventually like acknowledging that the honeymoon phase will end, right. If something doesn't change in this dynamic. However, if we go back to we can question us suggesting that like they should leave or they absolutely have to leave to ensure safety is not going to make it more likely the client will leave, it's more likely that they're just going to say what you want them to say, and then they're going to leave and stay in that relationship. And so how do we reduce harm? How do we make sure, like there are no guns in the house or um, um, sharp objects are put away, things like that. Whatever you can do to make the house as safe as possible if you're going to choose to remain there. Right. With the shelters, there are opportunities and challenges just to really be aware of how they can provide a safe haven and a lot of resources. However, they can also be really overcrowded. Um, the families that I've worked with, I've been a shelter we'll talk about, just like not getting a good night's sleep. The mattresses are uncomfortable, or they're just always somebody crying, things like that. And so knowing that there also can be just a lot of stressors within a shelter, even if they feel like safer in that environment. Um, and so balancing and sometimes also preparing your clients for like what to expect. Um, while this may be a better situation than what they have, it's not going to be a perfect situation. May be actually really difficult to start with. All right. And then addressing the emotional impact of IPV is of the physical consequences. You may have clients that actually do have some physical deformities, even if they have to live with. Um. I worked with a high schooler at one point. That first step that had dropped those large like size ten cans on her toes and her toes had been broken and they were still deformed. Um, she had to, like, wear wide toed shoes. She would not wear sandals to school. Um, and so there was a lot of, like, grief around that, even though she was now in foster care, not in that situation, but that was going to be a physical consequence. Um, that she experienced from domestic violence, um, with her stepdad. Which then also can lead to, um, even if you don't have physical consequences like that. Um, high rates of depression, low self-esteem. Um, and overcoming that. And then also many of severe domestic violence. Um, victims do experience symptoms of PTSD. Um, so for some, they do have like, near life threatening situations of abuse that are coming. So they may have and we'll talk about this and the chirping around about acute stress disorder, PTSD and also just may be triggered by things happening in life. Um, let me remind them of situations that have happened in their homes. I don't want to repeat mentioned made good fortune, but I think, like very few things, I hear a story from someone who's alive. Right. Um, for perpetrators, one of the book used the term batterer. Um, there are interventions that have three primary goals ensuring the safety of victims, stopping future acts of pertinent violence, and then increasing offenders accountability for their behavior. Um, a lot of the challenges with those programs are that the court mandated a lot, and they have a cost financially. Um, and some can refuse treatment even when it's offered, especially like they're not court mandated. Um, and so there is also like a high recidivism rate, um, for even people who go to these training, um, perpetrator, um, programs. Um, the group that I was in, the counselor that I was working with, she said some of these guys have been through this program like 2 or 3 times at this point. Um, and have gone through it multiple times. And just, like, trying to get there and she's like, I just hope at some point, like this information will stick that like they've got to find a new communication pattern, new communication style. All right. So that is chapter seven and eight. And what we're going to do next with said is. We're going to be watching, um, the ones we cannot see which is necessary. And it's just about an hour. Um, and it is really heavy. And I'm going to say that, like, she talks a lot, um, about her just like past experience where she's at now. Um, and so if you feel like you need to go stand up at the back, um, what I would encourage you to do is like to take notes during this of what you learn about Nancy. Um, because really take into account this is a 59 minute documentary, and she's sitting in a chair and she's, like, telling her story just similar to how somebody would, um, be for an intake. And with an intake, most likely you're not going to have a recorded video to, like, watch over and over again, right? And so really, just like from your first watch, what can you learn? What can you gain? Know you don't have the opportunity to, like ask her questions or follow up questions. You're just getting her story as it's being presented. Um, but still try to take as many notes as you can. You do have the option. The link is in the syllabus to rewatch this if you need to to write the paper. But also I just really want you to practice it. Sometimes you just have that one intake with somebody to like gather the information you need. And so like taking notes and um, saying what you need to mark as far as and again, some of the things we've talked about already in this class is first, rapport building, which you don't have the opportunity with Nancy in this case, but how you would rate her suicide risk. What are preventative factors, protective factors, whatever triggers that we would want to be watching for, would we consider her to be low, moderate or high risk? Do we see any indications of substance use? Do we see any indications of IPV or domestic violence? Is there anything also you see related to like crisis counseling in your work with her? Right. Launch. This. Is. More. Yeah. I. So. He. I. You know. You. But that. He thinks. Who? Sorry. Once you get. But. Three. I would. Yeah. Yeah. You can. Yeah. We. So. And. All right. The. To. But. So. I. So. He. He. Even. I. Think in terms of. The. I am. Thank you. Mike. Okay. I just. I. Know, it's a lot to take in what's going on. And so that's why we're going to just like take some time to process it. Uh, so if you need to a couple seconds here to like go through the legends, that's what you get. And then sometimes like the unloading of a story and like a lot to take in. Um, and so that really is representative of like the amount of information you can get in, like the first 90 minutes till you meet somebody. Um, and so being able to sit with having this is part of our work and being able to like, hear these stories. Um, as far as, like, processing and like, considering what we're going to do now is I'm not going to count off. I just want you guys to get kind of in groups of 4 to 5, and we're just going to have a discussion about it in your small groups. Um, I want to put some things on the board as far as to consider, again, more so, like processing things that you're taking into account when we actually discuss, like the paper in class for, um, and what needs to be taken into account as far as like formatting and like style of writing we'll discuss in next class. Okay. So really we're just taking what information are we gathering and how are we like receiving that from a counselor standpoint. All right. So groups of 4 to 5 and I'll put some things on the board. So you. Yeah. Oh. Okay. Think about. It. I feel like no other. Yeah. Wow. My. Lord. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, it does. It does feel like. I remember what? It was like I used to. Yeah. You know what? It is. That's right. Yeah. I do like, you know. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. How'd you do that? Yeah. Yeah. You know, getting in the way of the groups. Just considering. Again, you can process overview. Um, but if you think about, like, some of the things we went so far, I kind of have this is the line of, like, on the midterm, not on the top. There is like, additionally ethics you need to consider working with Nancy. What are some of the things that you would have to consider within suicide? Um, risk assessment, suicidal ideation, which should be low, moderate or high. And again, you may want to review what is considered. There's a page of like give you the fact there's a pretty low moderate or high. What would be her risk or warnings. That would be some of the strengths. There was one of the most talked about that you want to be looking for. And then from like what we talked today, what would be some of the considerations that would be making Spurs IPV or substance use disorder that. And you guys just have just about 17 minutes to have this discussion. I know that's a lot to fit in. Yeah. Okay. So. She was raised with. Yeah. Yeah. That's actually brings a lot of for my mom doesn't want it. Yeah. Yeah. I don't even. Okay. Yeah. So. Um. Yeah. What are you doing? Yeah. And I think, uh, you. Know, I think we're talking about, like. That, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. And then she comes because of that. So um because in. Our service they have a lot of charge in. Charge that. So with that being said, I think she becomes. Yeah, I was there. She goes around the table and it was it was amazing to see, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's. When I was like. That started to happen as you are going to want to. Thank you to our family. Oh my goodness. You see it's not going to be here. Yes. Yes. What are you. Talking about? Uh oh. No no no. No, no. I'm abusing. Drugs? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Alcohol. Yeah, I don't know. Yeah. Or drinking alcohol. Yeah. I mean, I was in Serbia. If you don't like you just like. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. And that rather than. Like. That. All right, all right. She's not. My wife. I hear you. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. Oh. Yeah. That was. We didn't even help with that. We don't have any, but, uh. Yeah. Yeah. That's good. That's good. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. That's right. No. You know that I had an opportunity yesterday when? She came to us and I. You. Know. What about what she said? How do you want to get. It done. But never I. Would. Never, ever want to find out what that was. That I. Remember the one that I. had some. Of those like you or do it yourself, right. Yeah. It's a lot of. Money. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, like, I believe in the very beginning when she. Left, she was. Saying she was right. Yeah. Nice. Yeah. This young. Man who. Was. And how she didn't. Help him. Yeah. What she you know, she did I did she hasn't she. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. And and so. And then moving up there. By the mileage to. Work. Yeah. Yeah yeah. And I was like let me have some help. You. Know do. You know. I think it happened before. And she just to mention that it was like yeah, she was he went there. And uh, it, it was fairly you. Know. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. And I feel like. I, you know, I don't know. Yeah. Yeah I do, but yeah. And I was going like I said but you. So he was like, yeah. So yeah, in the Premier in a car. So I went died. He was paralyzed more and more. You. Know. And so she was going to call it. And so that. She briefly what happened. Yeah. That one over there. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. That's right. Yeah. That's right. That's very, uh, you know, whatever he says or you know. Yeah. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah, I know what I'm saying. That. You didn't. You send them back to drugs. First of all. Lorenzo. Um, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I literally, I was, I. Was like, well, wow, that was a lot of drugs for like, that's what I would like to, um. Do you know, what they should do is like, you know. Yeah, sure. Yeah. That's how they can make a money and. I'm sure, you know. Yeah. Because, you know, I need another one. So I knew there was a linebacker that was good. That's definitely. Yeah. Um. Yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah, yeah. But, you know, probably more than it was before. Yeah. But I don't think, you know, I don't know about you, but you have said that prostitution for a lot of you that you decided died. Yeah, yeah. Overdose stopped by the house and, you know. Yeah. How about arrested? What? Or how are you guys? Ready? Yeah. You know, it's a real ten year business. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was great story behind him. Yeah, I know you guys overdose. Yeah, yeah. Later. Uh, probably also, uh, business processes at that point. Yeah. Um, you know. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. She cried the hospital depression November. But then she started going to let you know he started happening right now like that. Like. I. Was like yeah. Oh yeah. He's. All healthy now in hospital. But I could see it's a family, you know. Um. It's, um, um, um, you know. Yeah. All right, I don't. Even, like. Say Vanderbilt University, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. So. This is. Funny because, you know. You okay? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Let's do that. And she said I didn't want to be here. Yeah. And I just. Grabbed the phone. Yeah. I don't think that's crazy now. It's like, yeah, that's a good idea. Yeah. And I think she got. It right. I don't know. Oh, I'm in here. Yeah, I was in the window when it was like that. And then the rest of the morning started screaming. What is the. Purpose. Of that. That is that. Is so funny. Yeah. And the whole time. Myself. Are you talking? I was I was like, what the [INAUDIBLE]? I don't know what. Whatever. Yeah. Now, let me ask you something. Oh my God. Yeah, yeah, yeah. She's telling the story. You know, avoid it. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. I mean, I don't think, uh, I. Think here's a little bit. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, it's probably fine. Yeah yeah yeah, yeah. Okay, good. We're going to have to pause there, and then we will come back to Nancy in class for, um, to production. Yeah. It is time for your dinner break. I do know that this was like a really heavy documentary, watching again what we've talked about also with, like, the self-care piece. So here's what I'm also offering. That's honest to. So I'm not going to be walking around certain people because that is during the next 30 minutes. We're doing a break before we come back at 830 for the exam. I would like to really encourage you to engage in at least five minutes of self-care. Okay. You can go get plans and paper from my office. It can be a meditation. It can be a walk. It can be, um, writing a reflection. And I will be sitting at the back table during the exam, what you are going to put down and just what you did for your five minutes. And I will offer five points. Oh, cool. All right. So but I insisted that you do five minutes or so. Yeah. All right. See you at 830.