Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. But there's been. Like, you could definitely like, you know, like where, like I'm like. I'm very. Happy about that. And I'm like, yeah, I. Agree with you. Yeah. That's good. You really like. Yeah. I feel like, you know. Yeah. I mean. I definitely think people are like. Oh. I didn't like that. Oh, I can hear that. Like, um. Uh, I feel like. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. There's a lot going. On there. Yeah. No wonder. If. Anybody can do that better knowing so. Yeah. Yeah I mean I think I. Think there's a good. Reason. What do you think about the, uh, the that people want to hear someone say I. Want to make sure that, you know, uh, maybe something. Wasn't right. Yeah. I didn't buy it. Uh, I tried to buy it. I could see, like. Yeah, I couldn't either. Um. I mean, I would like, I highly recommend. I want to read it, you know? So. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, like. Oh my God. Oh, luckily. There you go. Yeah. Well, these are all right now, so, like. Yeah. I was so weird. Like I said, I was going to be, uh. Sure. You know, I, I guess. My wife gave me this to give away, like, Filipino. I mean, I think I know the the American, like, if you're. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Oh. Okay. You can. Go ahead and make up for. It. Um, I wouldn't say I took a John so much private class in college. Undergrad class that. That man is amazing. Yeah, he's, like, the happiest person I've ever met. He's really good. Yeah. Uh, although I know not everyone likes the style. Um, but I wanted to be helpful sometimes, you know, like, this becomes a very strong point of, um, versus, like, six or something. Yeah. Um. Yeah. It's different. Uh. I don't agree. Like, you probably would have some different questions and things like that, but overall like, like, um, yeah. Like when I have the reflection to like. So I think that's okay. You don't have to be number one. What do you feel like? You really have a different flavor. Oh, it's just I feel really good about coming here to see how you doing? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I feel like my cancer cells can be different, but I still like is that, you know, like, that's, you know, he's counseling now, like. How's that? Yeah. It's, you know that like I said it's going to probably I don't know. Yeah. Really like usually just posted. He's not very much on the first person you know like an article like that that you that I'm going to counselor like faculty that's there, you know. And he and I was blown away and I was like, oh, I made it this way. But he's program director. So yeah, but I guess he's had lunch. And as I said, you know. Yeah, yeah, winter time can be at 9:00. But I don't know, he still does a lot, you know. All right guys we're going to go ahead and get that started talking about our essential crisis intervention skills. Um so really just thinking through that micro skills are a big part of the work we do and how we, um, work with people and how we approach a situation. Um, I, we are all specifically has a microscope hierarchy and the first base of the pyramid. Um, and then you see the microscope hierarchy and the doctor, one pushes Ivy's hierarchy and something skills in the other triangle don't. And it's got a lot of pieces in it. Um, but the bottom part is basically that if we think of our skills and go through is that they get more complex, the higher you get the pyramid. And the first base level is your attending behaviors. Right towards the top is more confrontational skills reflecting, um, meaning, um, sort of. The next step is your open ended questions, your affirmations, reflections and summaries here. But that's where, um, Harvey's microscope hierarchy is that really the the attending behaviors will set the tone for like, you to be able to use more advanced skills. And so it's not something to just ignore. Um, as well. Um, but that you get more advanced the more you go through. So if we think through these pieces, we have the attending school function and the solar framework, and we're going to start with the eye contact, body position, vocal tone and silence to start off with, um, so who's that eye contact and body position and those with one hand. Um, yes. It's well, so we, um, talked about eye contact and body posture essentially with eye contact. Um, it is the one thing. And how I think of it, it's kind of, uh, uh, at least, uh, inviting, not staring the client down. Um, especially in the case of an aggressive client, you're going to be, um, giving them eye contact that is appropriate to, um, how they are presenting, uh, and some cultural norms. Um, this might be mindful of that in certain cases. And there's a case, um, that we read about where there was a, um, a sexual assault, um, a client who, uh, went through sexual assault the night before and, uh, was staring at the floor the entire time. And that situation, it would not have been appropriate to say, please look at me while I'm talking to you. Or it was more that was. Said it would be a defense mechanism as their posture. So just be mindful of that when it comes to eye contact. Um. I'm thinking yeah. Especially with an aggressive client, not breaking eye contact is can be a sign of aggression. Um, or just a challenging there. Um, asserting dominance is just the phrase that comes to mind. Um, and body posture. Body position. Um, I. In an open, uh, inviting stance or that, um, I cannot read very well from here, but, uh, essentially. Hold it. You. Thank you. Um, essentially, it's similar to eye contact just by not creating a, uh, an aggressive environment, a treatment that challenges their, um, their presence. So an open posture, um, relaxed, not feeling very tense. And, uh, another thing was that we noticed that there's a lot of them with, uh, what the book stated was maintain some distance. If, uh, it is an aggressive, aggressive, uh, potentially aggressive client and situation. Um, in general, we want to be super far away, but not in their face, um, for less aggressive clients barriers between. So people that like to hear John like this, we've got a couple of barriers um, that automatically that's like a physical barrier, but that places like conversational barrier to play. And so there's a lot of different aspects that come into play with positioning and eye contact. But essentially we're trying to create an environment that doesn't escalate the situation and nobody is. It's held in silence. Okay, so vocal tone. Uh, first of all, you want to be. You want to be aware of your emotional state and how that can, uh, reflect on under vocal tone. So, for instance, if you're dealing with, uh, with a time of dating crisis and if you're really agitated by the situation. Uh, that can be reflected in your, uh, vocal tone. Um, uh, in general, you want to use a calm and soothing voice, especially, uh, in times of distress. And one thing to use to use the verbal underlining. So you basically get to, um, emphasize a word in a sentence. So I think in the book says, um, instead of saying like, oh, you're very upset with your husband, you can emphasize the very, for example, and you can say, oh, you're very upset, which isn't a husband. Um, and then for silence, um, the book talks about how especially for us, um, the was our careers. Um, you know, what? We're, like, not comfortable with silence. So we might want, uh, through all the gaps, um, in the session. Um, and that's not always helpful. Um, especially when a client is going through crisis. It's important to have, like, give them some space to process and elaborate, um, their thoughts and feelings. Um, yeah. So silence can give space for emotions to arise. Um, let the client clarify and elaborate. Um, and when you use silence in appropriate, appropriate times, um, it can mean that you're being accepting and empathetic with the client. Um. Uh, before we go on to some of the higher order skills, um, the bird talked about the solar removal. Anyone naming the parts of that without looking at the PowerPoint and. Through your body. Square your body. What does that mean? Right. Is that your shoulders? So giving them your the physical attention. So if you could be on your computer, you could be looking at somebody. Right. But actually facing them. Um, you know, doing this or you know them in order, but you can remember any of them. Posture. Open posture. Some people think, uh, but what open posture. Be. Have. So not just squarely facing somebody, but like, if you have your arms crossed when you're talking with somebody with coming with posture. It is actually eye contact. Oh. Thank you. Uh huh. What? I mean, for for. And you know they are. What? Know. Again. For all those, it was my fault. Okay. So now. That squirrely faced. The client adopts an open posture and lean slightly. Make eye contact and stay relaxed. All right. Um, and honestly, you know, like, remember these acronyms, but it's really just kind of getting used to, like, the framework of, like, how you should be. I would say crisis situation or not, this is good for just like individual and group counseling as well. Right. So you maintain eye contact, you squarely face the client that you can lean slightly towards the client as they're talking to show interest, or you're making eye contact and that you are staying relaxed in the situation that like a client is not unloading something heavy on to you and you're tensing up, you're like, oh, what do I do with this? Right. Like you remain calm as well. Um, and so it's just something to, like, continuously practice, um, with all the other skills. And so we'll go back to those the higher level. Who's got open and closed questions over. All the different and. Uh, you know. Just trying to get some more open and closed questions. Um, there's a value to both of them, as we've talked about before, but with closed ended questions after. It's good for getting specific information, um, for like an assessment and a crisis evaluation. When you're thinking about suicide ideation or you think about homicide ideation, things like this, like doctor E mentioned in a little bit earlier, you want to ask specific and you want a yes or no kind of question. Um, have you had thoughts about, you know, killing yourself? How are you thinking of doing it? Like, um, stuff like that. And then, um, actually the how would be more of the open ended question, um, where you can use that for building rapport, um, getting the broad story of your client that they can openly share something that you might not have thought to ask for. Um, those are questions like what, how, where who, um, enriches and deepens your conversation? Um, often you might use that at the beginning of your session. We're talking about the crisis situations and when you might create, uh, a safety plan. And we had talked about, you know, you might actually use both closed and then an open ended question, uh, when we launched the, uh, the suicide, uh, prevention and assessment, um, video, um, he was really collaborative with the client. He left it pretty open. Like, what about those alternatives to suicide? A big open question. What might you do? But if they're having, like, um, difficulty coming up with, I think he showed. Well, what about that? You know, could you do that while you do that? So that's what we came up with for open it closed that question. Um. And just with that, noting the you will typically use more closed ended questions in crisis assessments because sometimes you need a yes or no response to suicide intent harm to, uh, self harm to others. Um, and so you have to be very direct and you need that in your documentation that you ask this question. And their answer was yes. So their answer was no. Um, and getting that response. And so you typically will use more close. And the question what is the only open ended type of question that we avoid. Why. Questions. Because they do insinuate a judgment inherently. Um, why would you do that. So we do avoid why even with our open ended questions. All right. Paraphrasing. Yeah. Yeah. All right. So we had paraphrasing, um, something we discussed about what the difference between summarizing and reasoning and something that we use to distinguish is paraphrasing can be used as an opportunity to get closer with the client and further build rapport, because summarizing can be more like very basic, just just the details. Whereas paraphrasing you're using their language, you are trying to incorporate empathy. Um, it's not in the right word or particular order, but we also have. Teaches the client useful language. So if they're saying, uh, they're having a hard time identifying their emotions, you could use their reasoning as a tool to be given that language, which can be super empowering. Number two, we have an alternative to the right question. So we can also be used to soften language. And of course establish collaboration and rapport. So when you are paraphrasing it shows that you are actively listening. And it shows that you are caring about what you have to say with how you work with the words you choose. Um, because that's really important. We can use it as a lead to solutions. So let's say the topic is getting, um, maybe as your clinic contract that you want to facilitate to a different direction. Um, please have reason to like a stepping stone, uh, which you need to empathize. Of course you. Know. Uh, the real thing, paraphrasing is a good a check in, because a lot of times with crisis intervention, you are gathering content. Um, so paraphrasing is sometimes also called reflection of content. And you're really just also like fact checking that you're like documenting like as you go summarizing, let them explain what it is. But paraphrasing is also part of the skill, is that you are fact checking that you're getting the correct information, um, in the moment for your documentation, um, reflecting feeling. You. But when you get there, you know. So for collection of feelings, uh, we've covered a few of the purposes for why this is helpful. Uh, which is for validating, building rapport, for using shame, normalizing and de-escalation. Um, and then the skills, um, that's matching their emotionality levels. And we kind of related to the measurement of the cultural context, um, where they might feel comfortable. Uh, and then very quietly goes in their language and is staying composed in the spirit world. Uh, and, uh, a step by step guide is use intro phrases. Sounds like, um, out of feeling at context. Or your phrase is mix of emotions and check for accuracy. Is that the case? Um, and then for crisis situations. Um, so, so the purpose is like a validation and, um, it to build rapport and help a client under. You'll understand really quickly, um, to get that report so that you can gain their cooperation before moving on to, um, like safety planning or problem solving. And feeling again, we're just like noting kind of that little bit underlying noting the emotions. A lot of times when people are in crisis, they are really emotional. And so you're also validating that by like saying, I see this, right? Um, even if they're not verbalizing themselves. Summarizing. That. All right. So summarizing, um, is a little different from a paraphrasing. It's about putting together the key themes, feelings and issues that the client has presented. Um, so some of the purposes are it helps modulate their anxiety because clients can sometimes in crisis kind of start to ramble off a lot of things. Um, and so kind of helps provide structure and direction and kind of slows down and helps them organize their thoughts more. Um, and, but at the same time helps the counselor understand better what the client's presenting. Um, and also, yeah, helps provide more focus to, um, and moving forward. So there's three types of summarizing. The first is there's focusing summarizing which it sets the stage for the session. So it's when you come in I guess I feel like it maybe less common in crisis counseling, because it's sometimes about starting the session by recapping how the last session went, um, and kind of becoming that set the stage for the session. And then there's signal summarizing, which is where you kind of reflect what the client says so that you can, um, make sure it's accurate and kind of move to the next topic. Um, to keep the session forward and then planning. Yeah. The planning summarizing is where at the end of a session it provides closure and just kind of reiterates either the main points you covered. Um, it can include your plan, um, and kind of directives for the client and the third. It also again, just kind of reiterates the key things to them of what they're thinking about. And focusing sometimes crisis is just like a one session and done. Sometimes it is multiple sessions where you would have like an intro. I've worked in process counseling, and sometimes I would have 2 or 3 sessions with a crisis client, um, where like I would summarize, planning can also not just be like when we think of safety planning and like creating a safety plan like this is for you, but you also may be working with the client that they've gone through a crisis situation that involve like multiple parties. They may have gotten information from like the police and from an EMT in a crisis. And it's kind of like all over the place. And sometimes crisis counselors come in almost as case managers, and part of the planning would be helping the client, like, understand like you need to do this, this and this with these multiple different agencies as well, and helping them navigate that. Sometimes it will fall under a social worker, but sometimes counselors can be involved in that as well. All right. So again for exam purposes like the PowerPoint is here. Um de-escalation. So one of the things that we also have to be mindful of is not just like using these skills, which can help de-escalate in the first place, but then we may be working with really agitated clients, um, who are aggressive in session. And so our biggest piece is one, our physical space should be designed for safety in mind. And I would say probably every single one of your practicum and internship sites should have some form of safety plan in place. Um, staff should be appropriate for the job. Staff with the adequately trained and adequate number of trained staff must be available and objective skills used to assess the agitation. Um, for me, when I worked in like the school that I worked at, that was a behavioral school, there were so many people who were trained in restraint. I was not trained in restraint as a counselor, so I never involved. But even when they did the restraints, they would start a timer for how long they could hold. Um, and as soon as they hit that timer, they would release, even if the, um, client was still agitated. They would hold. And then if they needed to do a secondary hold, they would do a secondary hold. But there were protocols in place that before they ever like. Put their hands on anybody and set the timer. And as soon as they got through. And I sometimes saw them like all the time, like 3 or 4 times before the fans of the fandom. Right. But they would never just hold them for that whole period of time. They released them. They are following protocol that they were trained in. Then not my place. I never was in charge of time management. I never did the restraint hold, but I have seen them put into place and seen them follow a protocol, um, for how to use used and who is capable of using them as well. And I've seen them not be used correctly. I worked with a teacher that she, um, did for one of her students and hold that he I was there. I mean, he was, um, being violent against other students, but she didn't put him in a correct hold. She was like, um, prepositioning was off. And again, I'm not trying. But everyone said her positioning was up, and so he headbutted her and he cracked her front tooth. Um, and they said it was an inappropriate hold. It was actually cause it. So it's also protection for both parties as well. Um, and when you have the physical, um, holds should be a last resort and only when there's, uh, threat to others. And really, the first one was most of the time when I worked in classrooms. The actual first protocol is to remove every other kid from the room is that's the first step is remove the kid from or ask the kid who was upset to like, walk out of the room. We had like a calm down, um, corner area that kids would go to to calm down. Um, but the first step would actually not be the restraint. That's the last step in place. And you have other places that can be escalate to begin with. There are four types of aggression that can be noted. Instrumental aggression used by people who are worried that they can get their way through threats or actual violence. Um, and so the client makes an overt threat, unspecified counter offer should be used. There can be fear driven aggression. The client is on the defensive. And for virtually to protect against being hurt. Um, you in that position give the client plenty of personal space and match the client's peace and rhythm until the client is fully focused on the content of the session rather than the internal. See the fear really not being a giving space, open posture, open stance. Um, with this one, um, I have had kids that have like grabbed things, um, scissors in the classroom. Um, I had a kid, uh, if you mention this report, he broke a calculator and took the glass out of it and tried to cut his wrist with it, and I hope I just grab the glass. Um, and basically, in that case, he's a seventh grader, and he was like, I'm not going to do this work. I'm going to do this. Instead. I was like, no, that's not the option here. Um, so you can choose not to do the work. That is fine. But the choose to harm yourself is not the option is available to you. Um, and so that was like my counter offer is you can choose not to do this work. It's okay to say, like, I cannot do this work right now, but you're not going to threaten to hurt yourself in order to do the work. Then there can be irritable aggression based on a boundary violation, usually displayed by the adults who experienced some humiliation or interpersonal violation and are trying to put the world back into some semblance of order. Um, you see this a lot with people who've gone through extensive trauma histories, um, where it's a protective mechanism and then irritable aggression based on chronic anger displayed by clients who are angry at the world and seem to be looking for a really excuse to lose it. Um, and so it's really just anger for like, anger sake, um, and feeling like they weren't dealt a third hand. And what are some ways that you think the counselor should address these or, um, approach them? What would be a way to, like, de-escalate? You know, I actually kind of like you said, about removing cases from the environment, right? I mean. Yeah. This is like, change the environment to a safe environment. I think some of the things that we talked about and feeling validating what we became. And really specifically like vocal tone and word choice can be really important here. Um, because who has ever been really calmed down by somebody saying like, hey, calm down, right? Even if I say it in a soothing, calming voice, that typically doesn't work. So we do need to be, like, mindful of our language, what our goal is, um, and that we're not saying something that's not going to be helpful. Right. Um, so I think how would deflection or distraction work and play? Well, we can go with that. So I'm actually I just want something out to roll play with me here. Um, as an aggressive climb. Up area. We're going to role play the ball tonight has like stormed out of a group session. You got. The page. Okay. Look at the name I put on. Why do you measure? Because all of these idiots, you know, um, they're just dumb. And so I just got tired of them. And, you know, I don't like them, but they deserve it. Yeah, but, like, um, here's the thing. You know, you're maybe you're a. I know. So what's going to happen? I mean, definitely, if you help, you know, um, what to do. The problem is that you guys are just here to to see us fail. Yeah, but, like, you have to do. You have to do the work, right? I think you do. I hope you enjoyed it. I don't do any work. Then you turn over, interrupting my flow. I came in ready, prepared. And so this idiot said something stupid so that they had to figure out. Who was the victim? I mean, it's not going to be something. You have a job in your field, but they don't want. I'm going to post here. And this has been really. I said. So what did not go well without using good life skills? Then you know what did not go well, like well, was not a good approach. But close question please. Okay, so I was just like in her face anybody offended by that kind of stuff. Mhm. Yeah. But I heard like saying what's going to go wrong, which is like hearing what you're saying. You were like yeah. Just like okay, suck it up and get back in 30. You know, like I do what I want and then play with it. And also just another thing to like take you on my journey. I, you you are really looking at me at that point. But for some clients that would be like a for anything like where you can take out your urine. So one either if I'm working in a place where I know I have a that's the point, I would not be where is to begin with actually started where I sort of was because I did my job because I'm getting paid out. Like that's a very real fear, actually. Also, what about long hair? There is another thing too. Um, the only thing I didn't do was like, oh, like turning my back. That's another thing. And I've, um, I have had someone have gotten the little bite that has did someone going to grab my hair. Um, and it hasn't happened yet, but that's a possibility. Um, but if I was, if I did make the decision of what? If I was going to go buy a client, I would actually take off my earrings before she ever saw me consistently trigger? No. Like, oh, you're anticipating on the problem. All right. So, like, I'm really unique about the language I'm going to face. Now let's do it again. Same situation and me being a little bit more clients. Understand. Anthony, what's going on? You know, I was in group, um, because like, all of you would have comments to me, and, uh, so I said something in a therapist could go. So I think that, you know, that's frustrating or is that I'm actually trying to do the work this time. I don't feel like people are seeing my progress at all. So it's like, why in about the time we become you become human. That's good. Yeah, I get it. That's why I'm like, what's going on here? So I know was frustrating. But like, I, I hear people right. I'm sure it's the number one issue with um, I was it was, uh, about like this performance in the court for you. And then part of it is that you have other things that I can control. This is what I can do. Right? So imagine that you probably a lot of people on this one, how do you and I like to go up. Oh no. That right. Calm down. I mean I know and if something will get suspicious, you know, to go on and then I'll go back to work with you. What is up with all that? Well, it's also different. We want the company to come with us. And then. For the real world. To live with it. I know, but I also know you only have three women with them. So what? Are you really going with them? What do you mean? I'm already done. All the others have read more. So, like, I can offer you a lot. And then you go back in the group. For right now, you know, because if you don't go back and. You're not going to have anything like this. But who said that? Well, you know I do. I'm not the farmer or the foreman. And then I'll go back in the building. So you got 30s, and we're going to make it the last three sessions, just like you. Did. But what do we know about that? Firm. Empathetic. Empathetic tone of voice? I am listening, and you're not at. The same level as I am. Yes. I've moved in, like some sort of order. But you're putting clues in your language. You're saying idiots. Yeah. I'm not saying like, oh, they're not right. You are. Uh, established. Uh, you want to collaborate with us, right? Um, yeah. Like, how do we like what is it in the hospital? Like platform. Like. Yeah. Yeah, right. I mean, like, even with this, you offered, um, to go on a walk, which I feel like is really helpful. Do you have any questions? Yeah, I think it depends on the setting, whether or not it's 170. But you can leave of absence or. Uh, not ever. I know that. You also like, uh, in the finish line, like you said, you know, people are like, okay, I get to the point. That when someone says, I can't do this anymore, putting a realistic goal in front of them. Um, and if you go to, like, suicide assessment, it's not about, like, being there for like, how do you get to the next day what's in place for tomorrow? What is the plan? You know, and so especially, you know, like a client who is mandated and I have a finish line of like validating the work that might have been done and that like, we're not going to like about this within like a third. We have a goal. Right now all of the focus is on adjusting to people. And then we shift the focus of like, oh, how did recession work? And then I don't want to be here yet at all. Whereas if I get picked up now, it may make me sort of which I would rather the thing is perceived that, like, I'm just not eligible for recession. Maybe, you know, a few months of groups that are going to start over. So what what do we need to do to like, get back into it? I wouldn't say like, you have to do what you need to do to get you back and go after. Um, but then I worked on a domestic violence group, and the like. Doesn't really understand the probation side of the building would come back and the court order. Domestic violence group, they had to start over 3 or 4 times because they just never finished their sessions. And they have a certain way because they violated. And so, um, you know, put in a good time. And so it's like, okay, how do we make sure this time and like finish this group? Um, I'm interested in like is that. Right. So hopefully just say things never turn your back being on the same level, allowing for extra physical space, um, calmly bringing the level of arousal down. Um, and again, that's where, like, my tone of voice, what I'm saying and empathizing with the feelings, but not with the behavior. I never said it was okay for her to walk out of the group. But I validated her feelings that were going through. I still hold the boundary that like it was really caught for her, actually. Not only that, she wanted the group opportunity to get back in the group. Um, in suggesting alternative behaviors when appropriate. So if she, uh, she offered music, but if she said no, I don't want to take a walk, I would have, like, brainstorm like home to do that. In meditation, we can just sit here quietly. But I would have given some other options. Okay. All right. And then like, diffusing through reflection as well. Some of that of, like validating her feelings, validating her using her own language in that can be really important. All right. Now getting into our suicide assessment. Which of those we have covered already? Right. So we do need to make sure we understand the difference between prevalence and rate. Prevalence is the nominal for year, but rate is more like within 100,000 people. Million people. Um there we see it. Um, so in the US in 2020, 45,979 people, um, did, um, die by suicide? Um, that's one person dying every 11.1 minutes. Uh, it happens in all age groups. It's the second leading cause of death for youth aged 10 to 14. And adults 25 to 34. Women attempt suicide more often than men, uh, to a ratio of 3 to 1. However, um, men are more likely to die from suicide, mainly because they use more lethal means um, typically like guns or, um, jumping from a building, uh, whereas women are more likely to use medications, which sometimes, like they don't take for enough, um, for it to actually, um, harm them. Then there's also an SSRI, um, which are less often reported, uh, in the literature and not always the focus. Um, I will say, like every time I do a suicide assessment, I also just assess for regular harm, um, suicidal self-injury. Um, 13 to 17% of American adolescents and young adults will engage in unnecessary cutting behaviors, um, eating disorders, even, um, and it's really an attempt to injure themselves, but they do not have a suicidal intent behind those behaviors. So some, um, terminology to be aware of is the phrase committed suicide includes a negative perspective. Um, so more the language has changed to die by suicide, a suicide death, or took their own lives up for a more humanistic approach. Then there's primary victims, um, who are individuals for their life, suicide attempt survivors, those who have attempted suicide but survived it, and then survivors who are loved ones affected because they lost someone who died by suicide. All right. Risk factors, protective factors and warning signs you can define risk factors. For me, someone who hasn't been up here talking tonight. We hear from all about. Risk factors. Other factors that can increase the likelihood of suicide. Do they guarantee someone's going to commit suicide? No increased likelihood, but they do not guarantee we don't have a prescription that this this and this is going to guarantee that someone is going to have suicidal ideation. Some people are really, really resilient. Some people have very few risk factors, but they still struggle with suicidal thoughts or intrusive thoughts. All right. So these are just some guidelines we have. But they are not predictive. They just let us know what are some risk factors uh you can think of that may increase someone's likelihood. This can be enabling access to access to firearms recent divorce recent divorce. Well failure substance use when you're in love. Failure in love. Break ups. Isolation. Depression. Depression. Adoption. Same old same. Reveal. Financial issues. Financial issues. Veteran status or poverty. Abuse, sexual abuse of any kind of abuse. Previous previous attempts to understand the loss of another family member. Family history. Some cultural groups as well can have higher propensities. Um, bullying, things like that. There are a lot of different risk factors, um, that can contribute to it. Um, and so it's important to like, you know, to be aware of them. What are protective factors? What's the definition of someone who hasn't talked up here tonight okay. That makes them less likely to commit suicide. It's things that are around. Always have protective factors. There are things around us that support our support systems. All right. And so they are strengths that we want to know about the client. What are some protective factors that can come into play. He noted that they consider religion, religion, family and friends who care about their lives and the care about them. Tell me, how do you feel that you should get some self-care exercise, exercise at home calls for the future. Community supports and connections. Establish routines. Establish routines if they're not overwhelmed by those established routines. So that can be both um, and the risk factors I sometimes see with teams is like they have these routines and they feel like they're responsible. But just like, you know, you gotta watch sometimes with the substitute. Also, maybe if you don't like you can watch, you can remember there's going to be like accumulate on that. Yes. Okay. Kind of like actually for those sometimes. See there's also like, oh if what I want to do this becomes kind of more meaningful. Like potentially cutting if it's not getting more aggressively first helping them out their emotions, protective factors. We would still see this like like positive coping skills. And um, how do you behave in a society? Here's a coping skills. Just consider about that. Um, so we wouldn't want to put the like in some of these protective factors. That the access to resources know the poverty of the risk factors of access to resources. You know, we currently have the ability to drill here. Yeah. They're having a conflict is a protective factor. All right. What are some warning signs. Right. Um, more frequent mood swings and mood swings. Okay. Uh, giving away very personal items. Giving away items. Looking like you might be right. Okay. So, yeah, that isolation or like, kind of like not caring about, like, things. So they don't care about any of their responsibilities. So people can be really social. It's not like, uh, warning signs, but it's like they start going to work and they're just going to argue that drinking, right, like and socializing in that way, that that's a big shift. Talking about that. So the next one will take up and. That will require me and like yeah. Uh, substantive problem solving, a problem solving environment. So do increase risk. Increase risk taking behavior. All right. So those are all things to be mindful of. Uh, like we think through, um, what we're looking for in a suicide assessment. All right. Then there's acute suicide risk and chronic suicide risk. This is important to be aware of. Acute suicide risk is what we would consider imminent danger. Um, the we're worried about, like, the client is going to do something within the next 24 hours. Um, and that's where, like, we need something in place that may result in a hospitalization. You can have clients, um, that experience more chronic suicide risk, that they have intrusive thoughts, suicidal ideation for a longer period of time, and that, um, really results in, yes, a safety plan, but like, monitoring by, um, the counselor to assess whether or not we've moved into acute status or if, like, we're still working through depression and processing and like, what resources are in place, like outside of the counseling session. But typically with this, you're most likely monitoring the situation and looking for any kind of change. So for instance, I had uh, middle schooler, um, again, if we think that that 11 to 14 range. Right, um, is a high time for suicidality. And she had expressed this, um, and actually, again, through like text messaging, her mom texted me and said, she's in a, like a really bad place. I'm really concerned about her. And so I texted back and forth she did not want to get on the phone with me, but she was willing to text with me. Um, and she disclosed to me that she had taken a pair of scissors and cut herself not to commit suicide, but just feels something. However, because she was chronic suicide risk and she was demonstrating a behavior. But now with imminent harm. She was the teen. She was 13, actually. I started working with him. She's 12, but she's 13 at this point. Um, but I decided to break confidentiality, and I told her I was breaking confidentiality, um, that her mom used to be aware that she was actually engaging in self-harm because of that suicide risk that we were already having. Um, and she ended up she was hospitalized the next day. Um, but I went through a safety plan very similar to this, um, verbally with mom. And then I typed it up and emailed mom a copy of it, um, with the direction that, like, she should not be left alone for the next 24 hours at least, and that if mom did not feel like she can keep her safe, she needed to take her to the hospital. Um, but that she should not be left alone just because you saw this escalation, even though she wasn't reporting she had taken means to harm herself. Um, that evening. Um, and so the immediate professional intervention, and when we actually consider imminent harm, um, and how long it will the chronic suicide risk, we will view that as more of what we need to do chronic assessment, um, with the client for assessing suicide risk. And I'm going to play this video game. Play more than the reminder. So as we get into, like, the practicing, um, we would be looking at like suicide risk. But if someone is low, moderate or high, um, their desire and capability within it, as we talk about those risk factors, um, and with a risk factors, the things that we would look at is, hey, 173 has a bunch of different areas. And then there's also the safety method, which we're going to talk about today. But the first thing I want you to do is just get a partner. And I probably a slide about this a little bit later, but we're gonna do it now. And we really just have to get comfortable with saying the word suicide, which a lot of times you'll see it sometimes, um, like an S with a star. On social media, people avoid using the word. Part of your assessment is you have to say the word suicide. You have to say that word. It's not just like, have you thought about hurting yourself? Have you considered suicide? All right. And so I want you to just get comfortable, like saying that phrase. And so I want you to get a partner and say how we can say suicide. There needs to be no response from your partner. Um, you know, if I give a response, you know, the answer, the question. You're just getting comfortable saying the word I want you to say to the person next to you, and then I want you to go for it, because usually the person you're sitting next to, someone you're already a little bit comfortable with. I want you to go find somebody that if you were at the front of the class, like the holding the line here, you were at the front of the class. You go ask the question to somebody at the back of the class, all right? And just have you ever thought of suicide? If you're the respondent, you do not need to give a response. You. I should say if I can just get comfortable with the phrasing. Right. Well. With the person next to you first and then finding somebody and now that. I know, I feel like I'm telling you. Do you feel like you have to speak to somebody else? That is not. And that. Yeah. Is it the first time together? No. Comes. First together. Then I'm like, no, I was I was going to. Do the same. Thing. Like. Hey have you ever thought about. You know. When you are. Do the same thing. I. Just, you know, how do you. Think he. Wants you to practice that. Do you see? Like. I mean, it's all right. Everyone should have asked at least twice. The person next to you in person, in the back of the car. All right, come on back in, guys. Thanks. What was it like asking the question? More challenging than I ever thought. More challenging than usual. And looking for another guy that potentially could look like going on to ask this question. I like to look at somebody and ask the question and difficult. For me. So like I have a seven and eight year olds. Have anyone else aside? And I have had the most fun. Yes. Um, actually like suicide attempts among elementary age children in American school, but. Uh, the above is a little hard for, uh, people coming from, uh, different countries and cultures. Because speaking of the word, the very word that is inauspicious. And, uh, uh, in someone coming, have you ever come and, uh, had an idea of or part of committing suicide preparation. But it comes to those who has not been to the. Practice of bad enough to do something. We avoid a great deal. Um, I was going to say that the minority report that, um, things in English doesn't have the same place, a thing with numbers, like when you. Where do you do the same way. Uh, so if someone if he were to be a suicide, he gets home in the morning and I mean. The the number one question I had that came up, you know how we say it. So is it like, have you thought about or have you considered? That there could be some ethics of feeling like you knew it because it happened. But either way, like you can go because the answer is yes, you better go and get it. Because I've had I've done assessments before in previous work, and that is a question that comes up in finance. I do assessments but asking but like in this exercise it was kind of was different. Mhm. Yeah. You know have you thought about suicide. And then there can be different phrasing. Um going into what do you have notice about what um summer time again. And how do you approach assessments. He used the movie lot to bring it up in a way that allows the quiet empathy. And then. He also did a lot of normalizing even before AZT, even though. So we're not wanting to like, um, anyone feel like they don't fit in or that they're going to be shamed for like being open and honest. Right? Like normalizing being, um, questioning how like a normal person. Um, but I think. It does not have to be your first question. Right? It does have to be asked in your intake session. It does not have to be your first question, but, uh, I noticed that it was pretty unheard of, like, he was very straightforward, like somebody was a little quoted in your question. Do you think that when you. Look better, um, right, that there can be was avoidance, right. Um, and so some of you are on a trail, but it's important that you come back to it. He is very collaborative. And also they using their presentation. And he actually said yeah I go ahead. You know, there really isn't like you see them. There was like one hand or. I love how I literally just had to put up. With the putting on that, like really put on that leg and. He was like, oh, I need when you are meeting like where they are at versus he doesn't have like a prescriptive do this, this and this, uh, which you'll see with some of the suicide assessments. Um, I have 12 of these. Print it out, um, packets of different suicide assessments that the book comes along with that I had access to. I've also put them on the summary so that you'll see what the men's, um, mental status exam like this, um, where really just has. Um, in thoughts, suicidality and homosexuality. Mark. And you would ask the question, just mark on the documentation and support that. Um, this is not to be confused with the thesis of the Columbia suicide. So they're ready to help with the math. Let's ask, um, the racism is cans. Um, and then there's a third assessment form. Would that have been revised? Edition. And the original. The original is what my agency used, um, when I was in internship. Um, and so these are just some different assessments that I don't know what your agency will have as far as assessments go. Um, as far as, like, actually like formal assessments, um, I typically do a mini mental status exam in my sessions, and then I follow, um, the safety protocol because one of the reasons I like the safety protocol, um, this is published by SAMHSa, is that it does have identifying risk factors like protective factors and then assessing what the risk is. And knowing that as far as your method, um, versus it being a paper assessment, um, but of course, you know, different problems. Here there's different assessments can be available, um, in the approach. But the book also talks about what's happening, you know, again, in the huge tree, the question tree. And so as we get into practice, um, in suicide assessments, um, this last hour, I think that, um, graded, I wanted to go with the type like so much one again would not start with these questions. Right. But then please feel like I don't know how to start assessments. Right. Okay. So we're just focusing on the suicide assessment. What would be our first question in a suicide assessment. And us the very best as we practice it. We're just going to kind of like develop our own tree. So like how we would approach, uh, like when we get to the suicide assessment part of our intake. I'm. I don't know how you can use I human to say it's not a bad place to throw the in here. Welcome. They need to be using that. What is making the old. I think what's the situation surrounding that number? And. Like. And. First, another question to ask to the public. Feeling at you. How are you feeling? But what you end. Up with Peter, you said. But another one. Those can just be like a statement away. Tell me about it. Right. It was really cool. Remember? Open. What do you mean? I'm sorry. Have you felt this way in the past? What helped you get out of. There are multiple questions you can ask. How does this one. What have you decided not to do when you still have your first question? I'm right here on that side. And you can start with that. So the one thing is that, like the hesitancy of, like asking the question, you're still turn it over for what can also be kind of what you're starting to question what's happening. But we're probably going to want to follow you like with like the intake, like what brought you in here. But does anybody have any sort of suicide assessment notes? And what we have to say here. First question. Yeah. Um, and some people in this situation. So if you know some kind so you can give some like a, like a statement first, like normalizing. So one can give a normalizing statement. And I could be different for a lot of people. Normalizing statement. We're so pretty. I feel like the minister, as you say. Probably not until you asked them about the suicide. So that would come later. I didn't know about the. Pardon me. So. Mhm. So usually when I'm like trying to crochet and especially establish a report, I would start with Robert of the book to tell us that we should do something for an SSRI too. So have you ever thought of commit yourself. All right. So you don't have to you can go right straight into the question. I don't know. But what if they say no? What's your next step? They make you think that you don't really have. To. You can ask more specific questions. You can give some examples to start off with. Uh, but you also accept there. No. Right. Especially now where I would usually cry is that they've already told me something about where they've come in that seems to indicate some self-harming behaviors, like they don't know or so many others. Um, like I had a client which is on radio, which is perfect, right? And so when I ask her how she harms herself before she said no, and I'm like, well, the trick television is actually harming yourself is, uh, you're having to make it a side effect. Other behaviors along with that kind of like maybe pointing out some things that are shared with me. But we can accept, you know, unless we have information that contradicts that. I am figure that because I feel. Like, uh, so, like going back to here, but what would you say if they say no to the they haven't thought of harming itself. Um, things like you get genius geniuses working out things. So, yeah, like, you know, a lot of it, it's of, like, just as you were telling me. Have you ever thought about. So even if they say no to this, we still have to ask. Have you ever been sort of suicide? Because you have to use the word suicide. So we're sometimes counselors to the doctors. They ask about the harm to self, and they think all that includes suicide and you are not covering your yourself. So even if they say no to this, you then have to say, and it can be just because I know that is. Including suicidal thoughts. Should that be immediately at the upper level with the roundabout in that in the for me, and so that you have to ask the question of suicide, you have to determine eventually how you structure your sessions. When I get to the suicide assessment, very clear, very directive. Have you considered harming yourself? No, including suicide. And I have had people say no to this. And and so you have to listen. To them differently. All right people. And so you always have to ask this question. Even if you ask this question I said no, you have to ask about suicidal history, right. What if they say no to this? Are you looking at body language when you answer that question? So it's really looking at the floor and not making eye contact. And that's a topic that I would like to. But if it's a very convicted you know that I think it's important. So go that we can accept that. No. Right. So what will be your next question. You know. They don't like, you know. Well, they said they do have no suicidal ideation, so they do not suicidal ideation. What will be the next question of suicide risk assessment? Are they worried about it? I mean, look at the history. I probably wouldn't go that direction. And I think in the short term, would it be this point, you ask the history if you believe the history. And but really if we go through so somebody is telling us, no, I don't have you. So our job is not to like do it for something that the thing you ask the question they said no. Now you may have a client that said, hey, I should like you up front, right? But again, establishing report, you have to ask the question and it may not benefit the client for you because they may not come to the not ready to talk to you. Right. So you can say like, you know, if it starts to come up or you want to share this because like statement that you will be willing to do I reserve the right. Typically if I get a no no, my next question is have you ever thought of harming anyone else? Okay, so that's the common substance, as you say. And so then you're asking harm to others. And, you know, I will say a lot of the time you get nos to all of these, okay. And sometimes it will shift. Sometimes it will change. Can accept the. All right. And just say, like, if anything comes up for you that you want to share with me, please let me know if anything changes. All right. That will be the shortest suicide assessment you do when all the answers are no. Okay. And you can accept the note unless you have some clinical reason that you think there's something underlying somewhere. I'm telling you, and you fear imminent harm if you just get a first. Scared to tell you. I would say work on report versus trying to do okay. But if you do assess that there may be imminent harm, that's what you would say. Hey, I need a push here. Uh, you dig a little bit deeper because I'm actually concerned that there's immediate risk. Okay. So you go in back here. If you ask somebody. Have you considered suicide? And they say yes. What do you ask them? And I go back one second. And you're happy that they said no to the same thing? You think that they might be alive? Would you put that in there? So what I would put in. What would I do that notes, data assessment, planning. So in data I would put client denied as I denied each time. And that's what I would put in my notes for like actual risk assessment. In my assessment. I would not call client a liar in their notes. They can give their services at any point. And so like being careful what you put in your assessment, especially if you have no way to prove that here. But what I may say is like client seems hesitant on answering some of the questions. And I may just know that for my own personal record, that client experience hesitancy seemed uncomfortable talking about certain topics. And I would just note that in my assessment section. But I would have a final layer and I just know. Right. Have you consider suicide? Yes. What would be a next question? Do you have a plan for your plan? And what could be a little quicker? That could be a little bit jarring. What do you think? We could ease into that a little bit. How do you consider now or later? Can you tell me about it? Yeah, right. Can you tell me about it? Like we do have to get to whether or not there's a plan. We have to ask the plan question to the. So that is coming. But just like, can you tell me about it? Right. I. Think the House actually did that. They go into this process and sometimes they go, you and I don't say this to scare anyone, but I remember taking my suicide assessment class. We, um, our practicals in the fall. So we took a suicide assessment training in the summer, and they were like, this is not really a big deal about what you're going to face all the time. You do a census every time, but most of the people are going to say, no, no, no. Right. My very first client discloses that already to me. The very first time I ever saw. Right. I had to do a safety pilot. I have done three safety plans in the last year. There's just like that video said is people want you to ask. They're used to people not asking, but they want you to ask and they will share. Not always, but they will share often. Can you tell me about it? But another question to. Right. So yeah. And then go and see. So do you have a plan? Step taken. Mother of 21. But it was not easy. When did you must consider them? Because sometimes. You get. It is something that is past tense that even though share with you. Have you ever considered since that first point that I did? You told me it was six months ago. Because a few lessons, if you still share with me, considered it. But when I was like, how long ago with uh, um, he said six months ago. And so that lowered the. So then what would be my question when I say six months ago? I would further clarify that way. So you are not experiencing those symptoms right now because I would know if I progress. No. I reported suicidal ideation plus incident six months ago but is not currently expressing symptoms. Right. So when they do express something, how long ago you found that they're not currently doing this sometimes. Right. You can. Am. Sometimes I'll tell you every day. So those are two of them. What's another question we we get into asking when does that come up? Okay. So um, here you can ask what triggers specifically. What does that come up for you? Um, is there a frequent term that arises sometimes that there's like a specific time of day? Um, that will tell you like, oh, it's like when I first woke up in the morning, I just don't want to get out of bed and go to work unless I want to push through that moment. Okay. So the kind of specific moments that you shared with anybody in your family. So you can also then talk about others. But does anyone else know about this? But then I would want to know specifically of like once we get into like the planning steps is I want to know about me. Like and like. Do you plan to harm yourself at any point in the future? Those are the things. And there's a lot of different questions you can ask a lot of roundabout ways, but really you have to ask if they're suicide, I'm going to go. This is not in the book, but I feel it is. The book gave all these things that you can measure for. For me, you're not going to remember any of those when you're in the moment and you can memorize them, but that's fine. Um, so I think I have it in here somewhere. I have more go with the slap method as you need specificity. Are there specific steps or general thoughts in mind we follow with this plan? Result in a suicide? Um, accessibility? Do they have access to the items that they need and proximity helpful to those items to the client? Those are the things that by the time I'm done with my suicide assessment, if they have said yes, I want answers to these questions, okay. But there can be a lot of different ways. And again, it goes with your personal rapport style. But these are the things I'm wanting, folks, you won't always have one of these assessments with you, um, to go over. All right. The safety plan I'm gonna pass. I've got a printed out copy for everybody. As a first step plan of. Identify the risk factors. Identify the protective factors. Conduct a suicide inquiry. Determine the risk level and document. These are all things we've talked about tonight. Just really summarize there. The more up here. The. Okay. And then with after we do a suicide assessment, if we determine that somebody is at high risk, we would develop a safety plan. All right. I've also got a print out for everyone here. Um, to do is that you would write three warning signs, three internal coping strategies. What can they do on their own if they have nobody else? Who are three people that can call? And again this is call I've had clients say like I'm new here. I don't have anybody locally. It doesn't have to be somebody who can meet up with you. Who can you physically just get on the phone even and talk with um clinician, local urgent care center and the writing on a plan to make your, um, environment safer. Another one I like to think is what's one thing you're looking forward to? Like something that we have hope for as well. Um, and that would be like my next job. If I say that somebody is at high risk, you need to have a safety plan in place. Um, the book talked about those suicide contracts. Um, you will have some agencies that still use them. I have an example. Um, I actually have the safety plan, um, from my internship site in Virginia. Now, granted, this was a decade ago, but it actually has a non suicide, um, agreement here. Plus, then the safety plan added. Um, this is not an evidence based practice. And really, um, it's not considered ethical because all it does is make the counselor feel better. Um, versus actually being evidence based practice. Safety plans are the evidence based practice to be using with, um, our clients. So if you see a plan, I hope none of your slides have one. But, um, this is not considered a best practice, but some agencies do utilize, said my agency, to use, you know, suicide contracts. All right. Another thing to consider when we look back at the book and talk about this, and I think this is really important, is that when we're asking questions or reflections or summarizing, what is our purpose behind them? Are we trying to validate the client, educate the client, empower the client, or give them a reframe? Um, and I do have like an example case study here. Uh. How that can look differently. Like for a mom who's the process of reframe would be a bad mother would not care for children. We're not being cared for. She's not bad. She's just depressed. Let you know that being a mother is hard. It's not an easy thing. Um, it looks like you're suffering from depression. You have depression and normalizing with education and empowerment. Um, you're in control. And if nothing else, like you get to this appointment today, you have everything seems failure. Like what? And what ways are we reflecting? What ways are we being intentional with those reflections? Um, are we trying to reframe, support, educate, or empower the client? Most of the time in crisis call clients. I want to empower them as much as possible. Um, and so that's typically the stance I would come from, right? There's different levels of solutions. Unless you're working in an E.R. that's going to be probably outside of your determination of what level of care your clients get. Always document. And then we are going I will get to in uh, we've talked a lot about, but anyway, it's just really, um, suicidal self-injury. These are the evidence based practices. I will say group therapy is debated because within this website there is just a history that when they're in groups, they may learn other behaviors from other people, um, versus, um, actually getting support from the group. Um, so no, cutting contracts are also not effective. Family therapy is not effective for in a society. There's a lot of shame factor in that physical restraints have no sex or relaxing therapy are also not evidence based practices for self harm. All right. So practicing we are going to practice conducting a suicide assessment intervention. I want you to pick one of the people if you are the client that was in the summer. Explain again video. So you are not role playing yourself. You're picking whoever you feel most comfortable role playing and you get some creative liberties here. But you can decide if you're a play, a low, moderate or high risk client, and you're going to use this safety model to determine like, what are the protective factors, risk factors, and go through your own suicide assessment tree. Right. So decide what questions. And I know it's going to be like oh I want to write these questions down. I want to write down what to ask. You won't have a list of questions in front of you when you do your first suicide risk assessment. So take a glance at like these questions here. It actually gives also what you should look for at the back. I will let you hold on to this paper in front of you as a page of notes. All right. Uh, what we're going to do is a ten minute suicide assessment role play for each person. So you need to get a partner. I'm hoping we do have an even number tonight. I want you to have a partner who's not sitting next to you. Okay? And you're going to set a timer ten minutes. Then you're going to like, process what that was like for you. Note. And for the counselor, you're going to say whether or not you think the person was low, moderate or high risk. And the person high is going to confirm what they were trying to emulate. So all right, let's see if you can like accurately what um, judge clinically judge what they were trying to emulate to you. Then you will switch and do ten minutes with the other person doing the suicide assessment. Now again this is something that takes time. It's okay to be uncomfortable with it. Is anyone going to be perfect? The suicide of the person I know? Well, that's where we can tell you with consultation and training and practice. This is just like different suicide assessment. So it's okay, that's a little bit rusty. But that's why I also make you walk some 26 of them back to back. Yeah. The example. Um, so it's okay not to be perfect. It's okay. Give yourself some grace. Don't be like staring at the paper. I'm going to be walking around listening and caring for them. But a ten minute roleplay process. Ten minute roleplay process. And that'll be possible tonight. So find somebody that you are not sitting next to, somebody that you work in a small group with. So say I want to. Do it and I'll do it. So I know so you know I was in here. So if you guys want to spread out in the building, you can. Check your own time. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Eight 5955. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Hi. Hi. Hi. And they know all of us. Today? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. But you and I. Watch TV. So. Am. I. Love you, I love you. Yeah, um, I, I. Think a little. Yeah. So you don't have to worry about a lot of people. And so like, introducing yourself and you. Know what I mean? You know, things like that. Uh. So, um. Yeah. So, yeah, this is, I think. Um. I think I'm gonna have to wave a funeral. Yeah, well, that's all I know is. Right there. I can, you know. Yeah, yeah, I don't. I yeah, I don't think that's that. Yeah. You know, remember the University of, uh. Yeah. I probably should have been on your own. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I think. Um. You know, I, I can't think of what Harvey wants. To do, I think. Well, uh, this is your first call up here. Yeah. There we go. Yeah, that's. That's all. That on your mind? Wow. Okay. So can argue that, I think. Maybe they're trying to get. Some of the other stuff. Yeah. Um. Yeah. It's gone. It's gone. The. Other person. Has remained in. The. Pilot. So when? I say, you know, once. How do you. Feel about, um. Uh, everything. How would you say something? Like that? I. Would have to say that. I would say I wanted to be in the military. Trying to be offensive. So it does help. Not all the way, but. I think I would say that you have about 300 other issues. I have a sister, and she was, by the way. Tell me about it. Yeah. So we are going to be driving him. Have you ever heard of context? Um, yeah. We'll look into the college other side. Are you. Okay. I thought about you. You are not. Pregnant. How are you doing? Well. I don't feel like I felt myself in here. About you? Yeah, well, I know. You, um. Um. Probably, uh, like my sister. Although she's here in New York. I was working right over here. She has always. Been like. I feel like I'm. Right here. Uh, yeah. Uh uh, do you feel the need to know? I don't know. If I believe in them. I don't think so. Uh, yeah, I know. You might want to try that again. I don't have anything other than you do. Like outside of my home. Oh, yeah. I love you. You know, I've always wanted. To do. Things in other ways. But, like, you know, you want to do it. Again. So, you know, I know, I know. I know that you. Know. I don't make a lot more of like. You know, like. I said. I feel so blessed and. I feel like. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. I do like something I know. Yeah yeah yeah. Well, what do you like that I don't like, I like taking what? You don't? Uh. What kind of like people. Listen to what? You said, uh, you know, like listening to. You. You know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Uh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah. You know, just to. Say thank you, Lord. For people like you. Know. Like, you know, um, um. But. Uh. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I think that's good. I would say. Yeah. Yeah, I would say. So I'm gonna give you an answer to that question. I asked you to read it, and you thought about it, right? Have you done that? Right. Yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah, yeah. That was the first one. Uh, yeah. Yeah, that's what I was, right. I did think about this from the other side, and then I just, I kind of forgot what I said. Oh that's right. Yeah. No, that's all right. So I guess party. You should by now. So yeah, I know I was like, look at this and say good job you did it. You know, and I think, okay. Um. Oh, yeah. That's what I just gave you. So it's important to me. And, uh, it's true that you were married for years. Yeah, yeah, it was just, you know, it's like a meeting. I don't know, I think. That actually means a lot. Yeah. So. You. Go. Oh, right. Yeah. And then. I did the farming. You said. Yes. I said. Okay. All right. I think they did that. I think so, yeah. Yeah, yeah, I think it's just. And I. I do not care about those things. And you never. Know when. I was about two months ago, I started. Showing up. There. And I had no idea that. You weren't. Going to. Touch you. I have to say thank you so much for. Being with us. And so. I am so sorry. Right now you say can. I. Get a phone number. Okay. All. Right. And do. You have to go on. So a lot of times people have a lot. Of good things. What do you think about that? Yeah. Yeah. And then you know Naledi, you know I've got some. Research. And then you say. You want us to have something. You. Yeah. Um I've got the compensation. I. Just at least criticized myself. You know, I feel like I really like it, um. Yeah. Um. You know. So, um. So. Yeah, I definitely don't know. I mean. I don't know exactly what the word. Of. God. In heaven. Amen. Um, I think that, uh, you know what I mean? You know, they're going to be. A group for more than 30 years. But if I wanted to. Do it all the time. I was convinced and willing to. Follow through. Yeah. So, you know, some of them have, like. Oh, yeah. What kind of person that you. Know it's okay to. Feel like more about the father and son supervision. Sort of. There. Uh. Well. I don't know if. You'd like to read me out. I was so focused reading or. And it's so interesting. So I was like. Yeah, I'm. You know what? I don't. Know where. Three. Hundred. And 70. Six. I don't know. How? Are you? Going to make a run? Like. That. Have you got something? You know? Yeah. I don't know. I don't know. Oh, yeah, I know. I was not. Going. To lie. Because I think. That, you know, you're out of here. Yeah. Go. Ahead. I guess I need. To. Sounds like you're. Listening to music. I mean, do you remember? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah, yeah. That's what I was thinking. Um, yeah. Let's say one thing is that. You know? Everything okay? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So we'd like you to meet again. You know, like I want to watch over three hours. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's really good to start. Yeah. So I'm curious, so you could do 2 or 3 rides, but what about. Your. I'm so sorry. Yeah. Personality. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah, definitely. And then what was the. Feeling of your place? Because at first my divorce happened. And I was one and somebody else. But. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. And really good. Because sometimes, you know. Like, even gray and black. Is. The main. Event. Yeah, I know, I know my way. Like. I was like, you know, the thing is, I know none of that was. Okay. So. Yeah. Okay. So. Yeah, like, for the station, I like to write, you know. So I did it again restaurant wise. In 1999. That's what I did. Yeah, yeah. Um, you know, you can. I think I would. Ask you about the more now or I would see those people problems that I met. Everybody. And then I guess there was nothing I could write them, you know. Also very exotic, right? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Is that. So. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. So yeah I can go. In my whole life. You don't. Have to. Worry. About. A lot going on. Yeah. Um, but I feel. Like I did. And so that's why I don't think I. Don't think I was. I was just going to play right now. But. Yeah. My husband. And I would I would have enjoyed this really because this is so I would be okay for that. All right. Yeah. Yeah. Right. I love you. Yeah. All. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So that was someone else I know. Yeah. Oh, really? All right, guys, really briefly in our last three. I know, I know, that's how. I feel like. Yeah. Some of you guys may be like, hey, I thought that was moderate or high risk. Yeah. And I was just kind of stuck. Right. It's normal to feel that way because you're developing skills. Okay. Um, what I would suggest is like to actually really pay attention. And again, these are not in the book. These are my personal preference. Uh, validate, educate and empower and reframe. There is a separation between high suicidal list. My first step of validation is I really appreciate you being. A thank you for being open to all this is about what's going on okay. And validating that experience. The next piece for me is empowerment is especially for moderate and high risk. But I'm going to say is like as we develop treatment goals, my first goal for you have to be the same people. So tonight we're going to create a safety, um, to keep you safe between now and the next session. And really with what we're trying to do, we're not some people say forever, but like, how can we keep you safe for the next day? Because again, like, fun to be escape. If I said like, bro, you got to for the next six months, right. It would have been no. Right. I had to focus on like a time limit to speak. All right. So it's not keeping a secret. Like, how do we keep a safe protocol for right now? Um, Chris in there to kind of role playing like accessibility to have done the books and what sometimes doing to bring a partner into your safety plan that's actually been shared. And that could be like having your time. And so, I mean, like you have me that can argue. So I need someone to be a part of the safety plan in order to keep you safe. Company called right now and tell them that you have something to show you, something that needs to be taken away. Can we call in this moment right now in session? For me, most of the time it's whatever you have turned into the room, like letters from the teenager. I'm saying, like, I need your individual comments the last ten minutes. And I just want to say like, woke up in a field, you know, like I am, and then you're going to go back and say you ever played hard to self. And so now I have to bring that conversation and I validate those emotions and empower them and say, like, this is what I'm going to tell them. I'm not giving up the whole session. I'm not giving them like direct quotes from you. All I'm going to say is like, they need to be part of your shape, but you work with them. All right. For you guys, this is a personal thing. You can keep this copy the safety plan. I would like you. Is it the first of all too familiar? What is your self with this kind of intervention? This? To fill this out for yourself. And how you would sort of say if you can. Just so you can again have the experience of what it's like, what needs to be included. If you say to me, like, I don't have three people, part of you to be in terms of building your own network and say like, hey, where somebody points in my safety plan that I need to shore up my own support system. Am I only protective factors in my life? Right? Um, so if you feel like self-reflective activity to have as well. Um, but really, what I'm just giving it to you in it's not a required assignment, but that you just have some practice with filling out a safety plan for yourself so that you know how to walk through it. Have a good evening, guys. Thank you. Have you got your partner?