Welcome to Professional orientation law and ethics
Rachel Kerrigan, PhD
January 15, 2026
Welcome back!
Agenda
Internship questions
Syllabus review
Activity
Chapter 2- Professional Counseling Identity 
Chapter 1- Introduction to Ethics
p. 437 in text
Internship: start applying!Internship fair is next week before class
Required texts/Resources for this class
Remley, T. P., & Herlihy, B. P. (2024). Ethical, Legal, and Professional Issues in Counseling (7th edition). Pearson. ISBN-13: 9780138168094
***Note helpful appendixes***Lecture material comes primarily from Remley & Herlihy (2024)
Newkrug, E. (2022) A Brief Orientation to Counseling Professional Identity, History, and Standards (Third Edition). Cognella. (optional)
Articles/chapters on Discovery to read before class
Integration texts (Hamman, 2025; Watson 2019)
Helpful links:
ACA Ethical Standards- https://www.counseling.org/resources/aca-code-of-ethics.pdf  (Appendix A)  Note: The new code is expected to be adopted in March 2026 and will become the new official standard at that time
WA state Laws for counselors- https://apps.leg.wa.gov/WAC/default.aspx?cite=246-810
CCS-R Part 2: Counselor Dispositions and Behaviors: https://www.dropbox.com/s/znws845la5yavu7/Appendix%20F%20-%20CCS-R.pdf?dl=0
Syllabus- Key dates
Class Schedule: 6pm-10pm on Thursdays on the following dates 
January 15, January 22, January 29, February 12, February 19,  March 12, March 26, April 16
Due:
Professional communication practice: Jan 22
Personal Informed Consent Document: Jan 29
Online Trainings (2): Feb 12
Quizzes in class: Feb 19, and April 16
Quizzes will be open notes but done independently
One Paper: March 12
Written exam-written response to a vignette: March 26th
Class participation
10 points per class. Discussion and group work is a big part of this class.  One class may be missed if needed but participation points cannot be made up.  Missing a second class requires a doctor’s note. Contact me for details. 
Class 2Professional communication
Write a template for a letter to a clinical training site where you are interested in completing your practicum and internship. Demonstrate professionalism and a clear counselor identity in your communication. Limit the letter to three paragraphs. You may choose between:
Writing a letter to a site where you would like to apply, expressing interest in the site, your time frame (one year of clinical training from April-April), a bit about yourself, your availability and how they can contact you. 
Writing a thank-you letter after an interview (what you appreciated about the site and why you would be good fit).
Class 3Informed Consent
Develop a personalized informed consent document applicable for use in clinical training. Bring rough drafts of your document to class #3 (due 1/31).  At a minimum, please include the following:
Purposes, goals, techniques, procedures, limitations, and potential risks and benefits of services
Your qualifications (counseling student under supervision with a licensed professional)
Information about termination and referrals
Emergency protocols and crisis resources
The role of technology 
The implications of the diagnosis and intended use of testing and reports
Fees and billing information
Confidentiality and its limitations
The right to obtain records and actively participate in ongoing counseling plans
The right to refuse recommended services or modality change and be advised of the consequences of refusal
Site it if you use a template or an example, examples in your text (Appendix B)
Class 4Online Trainings:(due 2/14)
Mandatory reporting: https://risewiththealliance.org/programs/development-and-support-for-caregivers/mandatory-reporter/
Telehealth: https://nrtrc.catalog.instructure.com/courses/washington-state-healthcare-professional-telemedicine-training(note: the Northwest Regional Telehealth Resource Center (NRTRC) provides this training, and you will need to create a NRTRC account to complete the training. It takes only 30 minutes, and it is free)
Washington state required clinicians to have training in Telehealth to conduct sessions online. This certificate is required for Practicum. Please keep a copy of this certificate for your records. 
Class 5 &8Quizzes
Class 5 and 8
Open notes/open book 
Multiple choice/T/F questions
Quiz 1-covering chapters 1-8
Quiz 2-Covering chapters 9-16
Each quiz will be worth 80 points
Independent work, no internet searches, no collaboration with classmates
Class 6Principles paper
Code of Ethics Principle Paper (due March 14)– 140 points
Choose one of the six ethical principles outlined in the American Counseling Association’s (ACA) code of ethics (autonomy, nonmaleficence, beneficence, justice, fidelity or veracity) and research the principle in depth in three ways. The code of ethics should follow APA style formatting and be 6-8 pages in length.
 1. Explore the identified ethical principle within the counseling field. ▪ Why is the ethical principle foundational to counseling? Consider the history of this principle within the field (look for evidence in counseling theory, counselor identity and/or development of counseling). Offer two references. ▪ Identify other mental health ethical codes (ie Psychology, MFT, Social Work, Medicine) that consider this principle. Offer two references. ▪ What does current counseling literature say about this principle? Consider work with diverse populations. Offer at least one reference.
 2. Explain how ACA standards reflect the principle you researched. ▪ Identify three standards from the ACA code of ethics and explain how the principle you have researched is reflected in each of the standards. Put the standards in your own words and consider how you will put them to practice in your work. • Consider at least 2 subpoints in each identified standard ▪ Each student must include a standard from section H: Distance Counseling, Technology and Social Media
3. Explore the ethical principle from a Christian perspective. ▪ Which Christian virtue/virtues relate to the ethical principle? ▪ What does Christian doctrine teach on this principle? Include at two biblical references. ▪ Include one example of the virtue within church history or tradition. ▪ Identify a personal practice that may aid in developing this principle or virtue for a clinician.
Class 7Written exam
In class, March 26th. A passing score on this exam (80% or above) is required (KPI #1)
Each student will be given a case vignette related to legal and ethical counseling issues. The student will have two hours to complete a written response to the case study where they must: 
1. Identify any legal issues
2. Identify any ethical issues
3. Identify law or ACA ethical codes that address the issues in the case and how they are relevant
4. In light of the legal and ethical issues, outline 3-5 clinical steps (short term and long term) they plan to take the client through during their sessions.
5. Discuss what outside agencies/resources should be included or offered to the client to address legal and ethical issues in the short-term and long-term.
Students will not be allowed to consult resources or notes when taking this exam. This exam is used as a key performance indicator for student proficiency in Professional Counseling Orientation and Ethical Practice. 
50 points
Grade points
A Harvard grant study recently suggested which characteristic is most important for a happy life? (Waldinger & Schulz, 2023)
Warm connections
Based on their review of the research Heather & Ashley Holleman suggested the following...In your conversations	
Be Curious
Believe the Best
Express Concern
Share your life
See https://heatherholleman.com/about/
Philippians 1:3-4
Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit. Rather, in humility value others above yourselves, not looking to your own interests but each of you to the interests of the others.
Think about the following areas in your conversations
Social
Emotional
Physical
Cognitive
 Volitional (decisions)
Spiritual
The Six Conversations, Holleman, 2022
Break questions
Instead of how was your break:
Who did you spend time with?
What was a highlight of your break? 
How did you decide to go there?
How did your body handle the holiday?
Did you practice any meaningful spiritual practice?
I am so curious; Can you tell me about...
Chapter 2the exciting field of Counseling!
Counseling is the primary focus of a counseling degree
Brief history
“Counseling is a professional relationship that empowers diverse individuals, families, and groups to accomplish mental health, wellness, education, and career goals.” 
“20/20: A Vision for the Future of Counseling programs was created to develop a strategic plan for the growth and sustainability of the counseling profession...involving 31 major counseling organizations...The delegates met at the ACA Conference in Pittsburgh in March 2010 and agreed on a unified definition of counseling...The definition was then submitted to the leaders of the participating organizations, and was approved by 29 of the organizations. Details in jcd-july 2014 article by david M. Kaplan, et. al”
 
-20-20-a-vision-for-the-future-of-counseling/consensus-definition-of-counseling
consensus definition accepted by
American College Counseling Association
American Counseling Association (ACA)
American Mental Health Counselors Association
American Rehabilitation Counseling Association
Association for Adult Development and Aging
Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education 		         
Association for Counselor Education and Supervision  		         
Association for Creativity in Counseling
Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgen- der Issues in Counseling         
Association for Multicultural Counseling and Development 		
Association for Specialists in Group Work 
Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and Religious Values in Counseling 
Commission on Rehabilitation Counselor Certification 
Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related 
International Association of Addictions and Offender 
Counselors 
International Association of Marriage and Family 
Counselors 
National Board for Certified Counselors
• National Career Development Association
• National Employment Counseling Association 
• National Rehabilitation Counseling Association
(Only School Counselors and Counselors for Social Justice did not accept the definition at the time) 
CACREP specialties: all students must enroll in one specialized area 
Other mental health professions
Focus of Counseling:The wellness model:accomplish wellness, not cure illness
In the illness or medical model, the first thing a professional does is diagnose a client’s mental or emotional disorder. Once the disorder has been treated successfully, the client is discharged until another disorder appears. Then the client returns to the professional again for treatment 
The wellness model of mental health is founded on the following beliefs:
The best perspective for assisting individuals in resolving their emotional and personal issues and problems. Assumes Health.
Most of the issues and problems individuals face in life are developmental in nature and, thus, understanding the dynamics of human growth and development is essential to success as a helping professional.
Prevention and early intervention are superior to remediation in dealing with personal and emotional problems.
The goal of counseling is to empower individuals to resolve their own problems, independently of mental health professionals, and to teach them to identify and resolve problems autonomously in the future.
Focus of Counseling:A Developmental perspective
People’s stories are considered in the context of lifespan
Understanding developmental stages can clue us into looking for areas where there is stagnation/delay and offer vision for growth
Before offering a dx a counselor considers whether a behavior developmentally aligns with the client’s progress (see examples on p. 33).
With a partner brainstorm examples that you might see in practice where a developmental perspective would be helpful to consider.
Focus of Counseling:Prevention and early intervention
Focus and preference for prevention rather than remediation.  
Look for areas where things are going well 
Early intervention to prevent future challenges
Seek counseling early 
Normalize mental health, encouraging families and individuals to seek counseling before a crisis. 
Identifying positive traits, practices, strengths
Focus of Counseling:IndividualEmpowerment
Empower clients to solve their problems independently
Because our field focuses so much on cultural competency it is essential for each client to identify and utilize the cultural framework and values that are important to them in order to solve their problems. 
The primary message to clients is “you are capable of developing the skills you need for independent living and wellness” (p. 34)
All counseling students must study the following core areasWhich areas have you learned about so far? 
Professional Orientation and Ethical Practice
Social and Cultural Identities and Experiences
Lifespan Development
Career Development
Counseling Practice and Relationships
Group Counseling and Group Work
Assessment and Diagnostic Processes
Research and Program Evaluation
What stands out to you about the counseling field?Practice responding to the following question from friends or relatives:  what you are studying
Defining counseling?
Defining counseling as a profession that is similar to another profession, such as psychology or social work, is not helpful in educating the public about the profession of counseling…or in helping counselors establish our unique professional identity.
It would be best to explain that you are earning a master’s degree in counseling, which is a professional degree that allows graduates to provide professional counseling and mental health services to the public.
It would also be appropriate to explain the orientation of the profession focuses on wellness, prevention, early intervention, empowerment, and lifespan development. 
Terminal degree for licensure is a MASTER’S DEGREE
Common Additional services (besides counseling)
Assessment
Teaching
Diagnosis
Case management
Advocacy
Join the ACA!
Review the 19 divisions on page 48. Which might you consider joining? 
State license requirements vary
LPC
LPC-S
LMHC
Clinical Counselor
National voluntary certification
Licensure reciprocity across states lines is a current issue in counseling 
Working towards unity and reciprocity
https://counselingcompact.org/
Cacrep accreditation
Helps with licensure portability as many states require (Ohio, Kentucky, NC, Florida) or strongly prefer counseling degrees for CACREP accredited programs
Simplifies applications for licensure
In WA 50 hours of postgraduate supervision and 500 hours towards postgraduate experience for LMHC licensure
Prep for the NCE exam
Foundation for doctoral studies
Increased employability
Current issues in counseling	
Danger of fragmenting into separate groups along the lines of specialties, instead of working toward public recognition as one unified profession of counseling.
Working toward standardization of licensure requirements and school counselor certification requirements across the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and possessions of the United States.
Scope of practice: Ensuring that other mental health professional groups do not interfere with counselors diagnosing and treating mental and emotional disorders or limit the testing practices of counselors. Advocating for equal representation, compensation, recognition
Establishing job classifications in state governments and at the federal level for counselors (titles at times do not include a counseling title- “social work, psychologist, metal health technician…”) 
Telehealth-Standards for practice?
More issues to consider
Third party reimbursement
Increasing salaries for MA clinicians
Becoming united and societally-recognized as a profession
Increasing publications of experimental research studies
Increase availability of counseling services for everyone
Discussion
LINKS
https://doh.wa.gov/licenses-permits-and-certificates/professions-new-renew-or-update/mental-health-counselor/supervisor-directory
https://counselingcompact.gov/faq/
ethics
Definitions
Definitions
Professional Practice: “built from within but balanced from outside of the self” (P. 8)
Personal Values
Apply broadly to both the personal and professional functioning of counselors
Serve as a guide to determining what is good or right behavior
Each of us holds some values more strongly than other values
Each value system is unique and is influenced by upbringing, culture, and religious beliefs
In counseling we are asked not to impose our values, rather help the client live out their own. It is critical that we know and understand our own values and practice bracketing (see case of Carole on p. 4).
Professional values
What comes to mind when you think of values of the following groups/companies:
US Army
Red Cross
Amnesty International
Culinary arts (American culinary federation)
Interior Design
Landscape 
Museums
Professional values of counseling (ACA, 2014)
Ethics
Ethics: a discipline within philosophy that is concerned with human conduct and moral decision making.
Professional ethics refers to conduct judged as good or right for counselors as a professional group. 
Consensus about right behaviors have been codified and have become the ethical standards to which counselors are expected to adhere in their professional life.
Thus, ethics should guide one’s professional behavior and interactions.
Theories of Ethics
Ethical theories provide a framework that counselors can use to decide whether an action or contemplated action is ethical. 
Ascribing to an ethical theory will enable you to resolve various ethical dilemmas you encounter in your work and help you defend the solutions you reach. 
Principle Ethics in a field answer the question “what should I do”
Why Ethical theories are important
Theories of ethics have existed for centuries and provide a foundation for the ethical reasoning of contemporary professional counselors.
Principle ethics in Counseling (ACA 2014)
Review counseling’s principle ethics on pages 12-13
Define the principles
Review the case of Gabriella considering the principle ethics. Which Ethical principles come into play?
What other ways might these principles might come into play in a counseling relationship
Why a Code of Ethics?
Educate members of the profession as well as consumers about what constitutes ethical practice
Help to ensure accountability through enforcement of the standards
Protect the profession from government by allowing the profession to regulate itself and function more autonomously
Promote stability within the profession by establishing agreed-upon guidelines for practice
Serve as a catalyst for ongoing improvement of practice
examples of ethical codes	
ACA: Ethical Standards 
AACC ethical standards-https://aacc.net/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/AACC_Code-of-Ethics-2023_FINAL.pdf
Ethical Guidelines for Counseling Supervisors
Code of Ethics of the American Mental Health Counselors Association Ethical Standards for School Counselors
AAMFT Code of Ethics
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct Ethical Standards of Human Service Professionals
Ethics of the International Association of Marriage and Family Counselors Code of Ethics of the National Association of Social Workers
Canadian Counselling Association Code of Ethics
Code of Professional Ethics for Rehabilitation Counselors National Board for Certified Counselors Code of Ethics.
NBCC Standards for the Ethical Practice of Internet Counseling
Association for the Specialists in Group Work Professional Standards for the Training of Group Workers.
Association for the Specialists in Group Work Best Practice Guidelines
Association for the Specialists in Group Work Principles for Diversity-Competent Group. Workers
The ACA code includes
Preamble
8 sections (A-I)
The Counseling Relationship
Confidentiality and Privacy
Professional Responsibility
Relationships with Pther Professionals
Evaluation, Assessment and Interpretation
Supervision Training and Teaching
Research and Publication
Distance Counseling, Technology and Social Media
Resolving Ethical Issues
Principles Ethics vs Virtue Ethics
Principle ethics refer to the professionally agreed upon obligations that are always considered in ethical decision making.
Principle ethics ask: “What should I do?” 
Virtue ethics assume that professional ethics involve more than moral actions; they also involve traits of character or virtue.  
Virtue ethics ask: “Who should I be?” 
Virtue ethics
Beyond moral actions, virtue ethics looks at character, virtue ethics asks “Who should I be”, not just as a clinician but as a person.  The focus is on YOU as a person, not a particular action or decision.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kq-rOelLciE
Virtue ethics asks us to consider virtue OVER what emotion dictates, what is financially beneficial, the easiest solution. 
People have different strengths of character and should aim to express the virtues most important to them
To prepare For next class: Free character strength’s test: https://www.viacharacter.org/
Legal Issues
Most areas of counselor practice are affected by law
Counselors must know how to recognize legal issues and how to obtain legal advice
Counselors should: 
seek advice from fellow mental health professionals when they have clinical or ethical questions 
seek advice from lawyers when they have legal questions
Following laws typically represents minimum requirement
You are not alone! Support structures offer guidance and support
How should you get advice when a legal issue presents itself?
Steps in Making Ethical Decisions
A general eight-step process for ethical decision making. Keep in mind cultural context and your emotions. 
1. Identify the problem or dilemma-Is it a legal issue or a clinical issue? Take time to review the situation carefully.  (example-termination/leave p. 23)
2. Involve your client in the decision-making process -Throughout the process, involve your client, this empowers the client and builds the relationship with your client (part of safeguarding the integrity of the counselor. (example p. 9)
3. Review the relevant ethics codes -Review codes, laws and literature
4. Consider the principles and virtues. Consider not just what to DO but who you want to BE in the situation 
Steps continued
5. Tune into your feelings-consider the emotions you are experiencing.  Do you have fear/doubt? Do you feel you are being influenced by others in a direction you don’t agree with?  Be aware of emotions, beliefs, values and motivations at play. It is important that your body is relaxed and your mind is engaged throughout this process. Tend to your reaction and take steps to relax and engage. 
6. CONSULT with colleagues or experts-Emotions can interfere. Obtain consultation. This is important from a legal standpoint as well. 
7. Consider the context-Be culturally competent. What ramifications might there be for the client’s family, community, other professionals etc.
8. Make a decision and act on your choice-Don’t linger in indecision. Have courage to come to a decision and act it out.
Activity
Apply the ethical decision model on pages 12-13 to the scenarios in the text. At this point focus particularly on considering the 6-principle ethics in counseling, which of the 6 principle ethics come into play in making a decision?
case 1-1, p. 4
case 1-2, p. 6
case 1-3, p. 11
case 1-4, p. 13
case 1-5., p. 25
Discussion
Assuming that you are a moral and responsible person (as are most counselors), why do you think it is important for you to study ethical and legal principles and the decision-making process?