Case Study 7, Isabel A. Thompson
Elaine, age 25, was delighted when she landed a counseling position at a community mental health center right after she graduated, even though it meant moving to another state. She is now in her first year of postmaster's counseling practice and is working toward independent licensure. She left her friends behind when she moved, and many of her day-to-day contacts are at work.
Elaine's large caseload includes many individuals who are experiencing multiple life stressors. When she first moved to the new state and started her job, Elaine felt energized with the thrill of moving and working with new clients. After a few weeks, things changed. She tells an old friend over the phone, “At first I was starting something new and was excited to make a difference, but now it seems as if there is a cloud hanging over me, and I feel exhausted most of the time.” Many of her clients struggle to meet their basic needs, and their problems seem overwhelming. Elaine is not yet familiar with the community's resources, and she has trouble asking her coworkers for support.
Elaine is often so tired that she spends most of her free time watching TV. She used to eat a balanced diet, but now she frequently eats fast food and orders meals to be delivered. She used to exercise regularly, but now she does not have the time or energy. Since she moved, Elaine feels less connected to her old friends, and sometimes she doesn't pick up the phone when they call. Moreover, she does not ask her family for support, as she feels they are overwhelmed with her mother's chronic illness. Realizing that she felt lonely, she recently adopted a Yorkshire terrier and enjoys spending time with her pet after work.
Elaine sometimes wonders whether she has what it takes to be a good counselor. She believes that her greatest asset is that she truly cares about people. She decides to refocus at work and discover local resources to help her clients, but she still struggles when she gets home from work. She thinks about her clients' problems, has trouble sleeping, and occasionally but with increasing frequency has a drink to help her get to sleep.
Lately, some client issues have been particularly challenging for Elaine. One of her clients is a young woman around her own age, who shared how she was abused during childhood. In session, Elaine believed she handled the situation well, even though it reminded her of personal trauma. The client's story stuck in her mind. She tells her clinical supervisor that “it kept replaying over and over again in my mind, almost as if it had happened to me.” More and more frequently, client issues distress Elaine. She adds, “It feels like there are so many people suffering in the world, and everything I try to do is only a drop in the bucket.” Elaine meets with her clinical supervisor weekly, and her supervisor notes that Elaine has been guarded and has not self-disclosed as frequently or in as much depth as she did when she began supervision. 