Ethics Class 5 
February 19, 2026
Chapter 8 Malpractice
Chapter 9 Boundary issues
Dr. Rachel Kerrigan
agenda
Upcoming assignment
Malpractice and resolving legal issues
Boundaries
Quiz on chapters 1-8 
	open book, open notes, no search tools (internet or book), no collaboration with others
Code of Ethics Paper, 150 points
Due March 14. Choose one of the six ethical principles outlined in the American Counseling Association’s (ACA) code of ethics (autonomy, nonmaleficence, beneficence, justice, fidelity or veracity) and research the principle in depth in three ways. The code of ethics should follow APA style formatting and be 6-8 pages in length. Follow requirements in the syllabus.
Malpractice and resolving legal and ethical challenges
Malpractice (1 of 3)
Malpractice involves professional misconduct or unreasonable lack of skill.
Has been defined as the failure to render professional services to the level expected in a particular community by a prudent member of the profession with the result that a recipient of services is harmed.
Pearson, 2025
Malpractice
In order for a client plaintiff to prevail in a malpractice lawsuit against a counselor, the plaintiff must prove the following elements:
The counselor had a duty to the client to use reasonable care in providing counseling services
The counselor failed to conform to the required duty of care
The client was injured
There was a reasonably close causal connection between the conduct of the counselor and the resulting injury (known as proximate cause)
The client suffered an actual loss or was damaged
Pearson, 2025
Most common reasons for malpractice lawsuits
Mental health professionals are sued most often because of sexual relationships with their clients. 
One of the biggest payouts to individuals who sued counselors have to do with counselors engaging in sexual relationships with clients.
According to WA state law a counselor may never engage or attempt to engage in a sexual relationship with a client OR former client (see WAC 246-16- 100 ). This is MORE restrictive than the ACA code of ethics
The next leading cause of malpractice lawsuits against counselors revolves around situations in which clients attempt or complete suicide.
Pearson, 2025
respond directly to the person making the threat, if possible.
Calm the person down, if possible, and listen to the concerns.
Be careful and not admit to wrongdoing.
Do not say anything that you would not want repeated or would not want to repeat under oath at a later time.
What should you do if an angry client directly informally threatens to sue you in session?
respond fully and in writing to each of the charges made.
consult with an attorney.
submit as much documentation as you can that will help the ethics committee in its deliberations.
contact your professional liability insurance carrier 
Do not contact the client who filed the complaint to see if you can work things out.
If you receive a formal ethics complaint you should:
When a client threatens to commit suicide, an ethical duty arises to protect the client from harm to self.
Pearson, 2025
Clients at Risk for Suicide
Confidentiality requirements are waived when disclosure is necessary to protect clients or others from serious and foreseeable harm (A C A, 2014, Code of Ethics, §B.2.a.). 
The counselor’s first responsibility is to determine that a particular client may be in danger of attempting suicide. 
Evaluating and managing suicide risk is one of the most stressful situations that you will encounter in your work.
Counselors should focus on assessing client protective factors against suicide while also assessing client risk factors for suicide. 
Pearson, 2025
Clients at Risk for Suicide
It is necessary for all counselors to know the warning signs that a particular person is at risk for suicide. 
Counselors have a legal duty to evaluate accurately a client’s potential for suicide.
Counselors can be held liable for overreacting and for underreacting. 
However, courts have generally been reluctant to hold counselors accountable for harm that results from clients who attempt or complete suicide.
Some counselors require clients at risk for suicide submit to an evaluation by a mental health professional who has an expertise in suicide as a condition for continuing to provide counseling. 
Pearson, 2025
Making Assessments for Suicide Risk
If you work in an agency, school, hospital, or other organizational setting, you must always follow procedures established by your employer. 
If your employer does not have guidelines for how to manage potentially suicidal clients, you should ask that guidelines be established for the welfare of clients and to protect the counselors who have to make decisions in these difficult situations. 
Pearson, 2025
Non-suicidal self injury
In recent years, the professional counseling literature has introduced considerable discussion regarding nonsuicidal self-injury 
such behaviors involve intentional bodily harm that cause tissue damage without an individual having the intent to die
The prevailing belief among mental health professionals is that self-injury is not automatically a predictor of suicide attempts. 
self-injury and suicidal ideation are two separate behaviors and therefore should be assessed separately 
Pearson, 2025
How do you determine if a client is suicidal?
Do you have a plan?
Can you tell me specifically what you plan to do?
Do you have access to the weapons, pills, etc., that you plan to use to end your life?
Have you ever attempted to take your life before?  If yes, what happened 
Guidelines for assessing suicidal behavior
Take direct verbal warnings seriously
Pay attention to previous suicide attempts
Identify clients suffering from depression
Be alert for feelings of hopelessness and helplessness (giving up prized belongings)
Monitor severe anxiety and panic attacks
Determine whether individual has a plan
Identify clients who have a history of severe alcohol or drug abuse
Be alert to client behaviors (e.g. giving prized possessions away, finalizing business affairs, or revising wills)
Determine history of psychiatric treatment
Clients Who May Be at Risk for Harming Others
Making this decision as to whether a client may be violent in the future is difficult, as there is no scientific certainty for such decisions. 
Standard B.2.a. of the Code of Ethics (A C A, 2014) states that the counselor’s confidentiality requirement “does not apply when disclosure is required to protect clients or identified others from serious and foreseeable harm.” 
If you do determine that a client may be a danger to another person, the law requires that you take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the harm and protect the foreseeable victim from danger (Terasoff case)
Pearson, 2025
Clients Who May Be at Risk for Harming Others
Choices range from the least intrusive action (obtaining a promise from your client not to harm anyone else) to the most intrusive (having the client involuntarily committed to a psychiatric facility). 
Numerous possibilities exist between these two extremes, such as:
notifying the client’s family members and getting one of them to take responsibility for keeping the client under control
persuading the client to be voluntarily committed to a residential facility
notifying the police 
calling the client periodically
Pearson, 2025
The cases of Monica and the case of Javier
Review the cases of Monica (p.202) and Jovier (p.207) in pairs and discuss action steps you would take. Then take turns role playing the counselor and client for these two cases, beginning at the point where the . 
When you are the character, portray a low level of risk upon further questioning.
Christian character virtues, Watson, 2018
Character virtue 
Professional Ethic 
Supervision models 
Spiritual disciplines 
Faith 
Fidelity 
Alliance & attachment 
Cont. Prayer & Church 
Hope 
Beneficence 
Vocational mentoring 
Sabbath & Worship 
Love 
Respect/autonomy 
Relational Competence 
Intercessory prayer 
Justice 
Justice 
Diversity Competence 
Hospitality & Service 
Temperance 
Nonmaleficence 
Reflective practice 
Examen & Fasting 
Courage 
Integrity/veracity 
Wellness & Resilience 
Rule of life & Example 
Practical wisdom 
Competence 
Competency based 
Scripture & discern. 
We are called to the high standard of nonmaleficence, related to temperance Nonmaleficence: Do no harm, avoid hurting clients, awareness of own health in practice, self-regulation and humilityTemperance: self-control, restrain and humility, includes self-regulation“few other professions require the levels of self- awareness and self-regulation that are necessary for the practicing clinician” (Watson, 2018, p. 143)Christian practices: reflection, self-examination, fasting, self-restraintIntroduce routines that encourage times to reflect and examine and monitor yourself.
prayer of examen St. IgnatiusAsk God for lightGive thanksReview the dayFace your shortcomingsLook toward the day to comehttps://fullerstudio.fuller.edu/prayer-of-examen/Practices such as journaling, mindfulness exercises and targeted reflection in supervision also encourage examination
creating collages of how you practice rest and engagement in relationships outside of work may be a good way to remind yourself of how you practice this discipline
CCS-R
BoundariesA boundary can be conceptualized as a frame or membrane around the therapeutic dyad that defines a set of roles for the participants in the therapeutic relationship.Protect the clinician: Good self care requires clear boundaries between work/life balanceProtect the welfare of clients: clients are vulnerable in the relationshipLimits lend structure to the therapeutic relationship, which helps to create a safe space that is “unambiguous, consistent, and reliable” (Jordan & Marshall, 2010, p. 345). Pearson, 2025
Dual/multiple RelationshipsDual relationships occur when helping professionals take on one or more roles simultaneously or sequentially with the client.Dual relationships can include combining the role of counselor with other professional roles (i.e., teacher, minister, business partner, supervisor, employer) or personal roles (i.e., friend, relative, lover).They can be difficult to recognize before they occurNot all dual relationships are always avoidable but should be always be considered and evaluated The book argues that some dual relationships can even be helpful to clients (see p. 235-238)(Remley & Herlihy)  
Dual/multiple RelationshipsDual relationships occur when helping professionals take on one or more roles simultaneously or sequentially with the client.Dual relationships can include combining the role of counselor with other professional roles (i.e., teacher, minister, business partner, supervisor, employer) or personal roles (i.e., friend, relative, lover).They can be difficult to recognize before they occurNot all dual relationships are always avoidable but should be always be considered and evaluated The book argues that some dual relationships can even be helpful to clients (see p. 235-238)(Remley & Herlihy)  
potential risks of boundary crossing:Loss of objectivityClient consentIncompatibility of expectationsPower differential(Remley & Herlihy)  Pearson, 2025
potential benefits:Invites greater authenticity and congruence from counselorsHierarchical nature of relationship can promote client flourishing and growthEnhance the therapeutic allianceVideo 9-2, 9-3(Remley & Herlihy)  Pearson, 2025
navigating exceptions to common boundary issues, such as:bartering social and business relationships with clientsaccepting gifts from clientsself-disclosuretouching or hugging clientsPearson, 2025
Situations in which dual relationships may be unavoidable:rural communitiesworking with military familiespastoral counselingaddictions counselingcrisis and disaster counselingcounselor education programs(Remley & Herlihy)  Pearson, 2025
If Dual Relationship cannot be avoidedInformed consentSeek consultationEngage in ongoing discussionDocument and self monitorObtain supervision(Remley & Herlihy)  
SEEK CONSULTATIONWHEN NEEDED
Boundaries also involve staying within our field of expertise.
Read standard A.1.d
When might it be useful to enlist the support of others in a client's community?  
What are some examples of ways you might collaborate or partner with leaders in a client’s community for their health/recovery. 
COMPLETE ACTIVITY 9-1, (p.241) THEN DISCUSS IN GROUPS
Which of the items seemed to have a clear answer?
Which of them were not as clear and why?
What did you learn about yourself and others?
What was this exercise like for you?
Sexual relationships with clients
Are the only explicitly mentioned dual relationships prohibited by the ACA. One of the biggest payouts to individuals who sued counselors has to due with counselors engaging in sexual relationships with clients.
According to WA state law a counselor may never engage or attempt to engage in a sexual relationship with a client OR former client (see WAC 246-16- 100 ). This is MORE restrictive that the ACA code of ethics which specifies 5 years
Lawsuits regarding sexual relations with clients are not typically covered by liability insurance. 
Sexual relationships with clients
Power differential 
reported client symptoms are similar to victims of rape, incest, spouse battering 
Book points to reported feelings from clients of being trapped, guilty, isolated, ambivalence towards offending counselor, impaired ability to trust (p. 252)
If your client discloses abuse from a previous counselor (somewhat common), respect your client’s wishes on whether or not to report. You will need the client’s engagement (p. 255).
A common problem among clinicians
In relationships with connection and vulnerability, sexual attraction is common (Jacob et al., 2022)
In 1997 DeMayo reported that 51% of female Psychologists reported experiencing at least one incidence of inappropriate client sexual behavior
Data from 2019 CNA and HPSA report (with ACA support and collaboration) shows a sharp increase in inappropriate sexual misconduct among counselors (CNA & HPSA, 2019)
A challenging problem in counseling that “requires personal development work, supervision and institutional support” (Lukac-Greenwood & van Rijin, 2021)
Guidance is needed
Trainees are more likely than seasoned clinicians to respond ineffectively (Cambier et al., 2018)
Supervisors may also be uncomfortable addressing the topic with supervises (Kolarik et al., 2016)
Sexual boundary violations accounted for 53.9% of the top six allegations, and sexual/romantic relationships accounted for the highest percentage of closed claims (CNA & HPSO, 2019)
What to do if you find yourself attracted to a client(Remley & Herlihy)
Acknowledge to yourself the feelings you are having.
Accept that such feelings are not unethical, but that acting on such feelings would be unethical.
Seek consultation, supervision, or personal counseling for yourself, if you are not able to manage your sexual attraction to your client.
If your sexual attraction is interfering with your providing your client with high quality counseling services, refer your client to another mental health professional in a professional and appropriate manner.
If a client expresses sexual feelings towards you (Martin et al., 2010, Jenks & Oka, 2020)
This can be a very uncomfortable experience for clinicians-common reactions include anxiety, self protection, defensive thoughts, do not ignore!
 Seek supervision
Reinforce boundaries with clear, direct communication with the client
Case conceptualize (seek to understand the client’s behaviors from a clinical perspective)
Treatment plan (what needs to happen therapeutically)
Decide to refer out, or not 
Take care of your self! 
Remember if a client is not able to maintain set boundaries and you are in jeopardy of harm, this is a reason to terminate according to ACA (2014, A.11.c)
Recommendations from the CNA/ HSP
1. Prohibit and prevent any sexual activity with a current client, obtaining clinical supervision and/or consultation as needed. 
2. Manage transference and/or countertransference with appropriate clinical techniques, obtaining clinical supervision and/or consultation as needed. 
3. Document all instances of transference/countertransference in the clients' clinical record 
4. Terminating the client does not waive or eliminate the prohibition against a sexual/romantic relationship (counselors are not permitted to terminate counseling to facilitate an eventual romantic relationship with a client). 
5. Avoid extending the counseling relationship beyond conventional boundaries with clients, their significant others and their family members. 
6. Avoid any activities with clients that fall outside of accepted medical or mental health practices (CNA & HPSO, 2019b, p. 5)
counselor claim report
Jacob, C. J., Byrd, R., Donald, E. J., Milner, R. J., & Flowers, T. (2022). Avoiding Boundary Violations: Recommendations for Managing Attraction to and From Clients in Response to the Healthcare Providers Service Organization’s 2019 Report. Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 44(1), 6–17. https://doi.org/10.17744/mehc.44.1.02
The ACA Ethics Committee is responsible for adjudicating complaints. Because this aspect of the committee's work is strictly confidential, many ACA members may not be aware of how the committee performs this function. Please review helpful ACA resources here: https://www.counseling.org/resources/ethics
If you believe that an ACA member has acted or is acting unethically, you have an ethical responsibility to take action (ACA, 2014, Standard I.2.b.), however WA laws may exclude disclosure without an ROI.
Your first step should be to explain to your client the required professional boundaries of a client and counselor. Explore steps they could take.
Second, try “to first resolve the issue informally with the other counselor if feasible, provided such action does not violate confidentiality rights that may be involved” (Standard I.2.a.). 
3. If informal resolution is not feasible or if it is attempted without success, you should review the ACA policies for filing a report on a suspected ethical violation
If you suspect a colleague is acting unethically...
video 8-2
Video 8.2
In the video, a counselor observes her colleague violate two professional boundaries. What are the two ethical violations in question, as well as the potentially harmful effects of each action? 
According to commonly held best practices, what immediate steps/approaches should the counselor take to address her concerns about the colleague’s problematic behavior?
Under what circumstances would the counselor be justified in reporting her colleague to a relevant licensing board? 
The most fundamental principle according to the model of professional practice in your text is intentionality 