May 2017: The Washington Supreme Court decision in Volk
v. DeMeerleer, 386 P.3d 254, 187 Wn.2d 241 (2016), alters
the scope of the “duty to warn or protect” in at least three
critical ways:
1. It brings into question the groups of health
care professionals who are subject to the
duty to warn or protect in the voluntary
inpatient and outpatient setting.
2. The duty now clearly applies in the
voluntary inpatient and outpatient setting.
3. Most importantly, outside of the context of
an involuntary commitment proceeding,
the scope of persons to warn or protect
now includes those that are “foreseeable”
victims, not reasonably identifiable victims
subject to an actual threat.
Facts of the case: The Volk decision involved circumstances in
which a psychiatrist was treating a patient who had expressed
suicidal and homicidal thoughts in the past. Many years later,
and about four months after being last seen by the
psychiatrist, the patient killed two individuals known to the
patient. The patient had not voiced any thoughts to harm
them. Representatives of the deceased filed a lawsuit against
the psychiatrist for failing to protect them from the patient’s
violent actions. That lawsuit is still pending at the trial court,
but the Supreme Court’s decision established a new standard
that is now binding on treatment providers.
In Volk, the Supreme Court held that, in the outpatient and
voluntary inpatient treatment setting, the duty of health
care providers to warn or protect potential victims of
violence extends to all individuals who may be “foreseeably”
endangered by a patient, even if no specific target was
identified.
The WSMA, Physicians Insurance, and the Washington
State Hospital Association recommend that physicians and
providers who treat patients with violent tendencies or
ideations consider implementing the following guidelines
(these guidelines are intended to be general guidance and
not legal advice):
✓ Continue to use reasonable care to act
consistent with the standards of your
profession.
✓ Complete and update suicide and violence
risk assessments with findings documented
in the patient’s medical record.
✓ Develop a policy and procedure to assess
whether a patient has dangerous
propensities, and use it consistently.
✓ Document in the patient’s medical record
why you reached your clinical decision and
measures you have recommended to
mitigate potential risk, even when you are
assessing a patient who has violent
tendencies or ideations and do not believe
the patient will harm others.
✓ In all cases, carefully consider and
document in the patient’s medical record
the measures taken to mitigate risk.
Measures will fall into two categories:
measures to treat the patient and
measures to warn potential victims.
Measures to treat the patient may include,
but are not limited to: seeking to
hospitalize the patient; seeking to initiate
involuntary commitment proceedings;
GUIDANCE ON NEW DUTY TO WARN OR PROTECT STANDARD
WSMA, Physicians Insurance and
the Washington State Hospital Association will
continue to pursue legislative, regulatory and judicial
options to address the results of the Volk decision.
Currently, legislative efforts to fund
a study of the decision on the state’s mental health
treatment system are underway. Additional details
on those options will be forthcoming.

-- 1 of 2 --

scheduling more frequent visits or contacts
with the clinic; starting injectable
medication, etc. Measures to warn
potential victims may include notifying law
enforcement and notifying “foreseeable”
victims.
✓ When you decide to issue a warning, notify
law enforcement before contacting
potential victims. Document in the
patient’s medical record your notification
efforts and the individuals or groups
notified.
✓ In Volk, the Supreme Court held that it is a
jury’s responsibility to determine who may
be a foreseeable victim. We cannot,
therefore, provide firm guidance on how to
identify a foreseeable victim. In assessing
the scope of foreseeable victims, consider
people close to the patient, such as family
members, work colleagues and others
within the person’s social circle. Depending
on your assessment, notification to a
broader group could be required. In that
case, coordination with law enforcement
may be necessary. You must assess every
case individually.
✓ For any action taken, document in the
patient’s medical record the reasons the
action is necessary to warn or protect
foreseeable victims, and, if applicable, to
prevent or lessen a serious and imminent
threat to a person or the public’s health or
safety, as described above.
Finally, we recommend that you consider these points
in a clinical context, act in good faith and document in the
patient’s medical record your thought process in sufficient
detail to justify any course of action you decide to take, even
if you feel that a patient has not triggered the duty to warn
or protect potential victims.
Questions?
Washington State Medical Association: Tierney Edwards, JD, 206-956-3657, tee@wsma.org
Physicians Insurance: Risk Management, 800-962-1399, risk@phyins.com
Washington State Hospital Association: Taya Briley, 206.216.2554, tayab@wsha.org

-- 2 of 2 --

