Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 1 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2020
DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198817338.013.79
Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional
Competence
Scott D. Miller, Joshua W. Madsen, and Mark A. Hubble
The Oxford Handbook of Psychotherapy Ethics
Edited by Manuel Trachsel, Jens Gaab, Nikola Biller-Andorno, Şerife Tekin, and John Z. Sadler
Abstract and Keywords
Psychotherapists are ethically bound to provide services within the boundaries of their
competence traditionally delimited by their education, training, and supervised experi
ence. Throughout this chapter, two historical examples illustrate the shortcomings of the
current standard as well as the promise of an alternative. The guidelines now in place are
critiqued in light of the empirical evidence. The authors propose that effectiveness be
come the foundation of any formulation and assessment of competence. Developments
over the last two decades make it possible for clinicians to measure their results and com
pare them to international norms—a process known as routine outcome monitoring. How
ever, mere measurement and comparison to benchmarks are insufficient. To be ethical, to
protect public welfare, practitioners must also act on the data provided by routine out
come monitoring. Using feedback informed treatment and deliberate practice therapists
can both enhance their responsiveness to individual clients and continuously improve
their outcomes. Challenges of implementation are discussed. A case study of an agency
that successfully adopted routine outcome monitoring coupled with deliberate practice
using best practices gleaned from the implementation science literature is offered.
Keywords: competence, routine outcome monitoring, feedback informed treatment, deliberate practice
“The only ‘good’ learning is that which is in advance of development.”
—Lev S. Vygotsky
Introduction
Competence killed George Washington. It was December 1799. A physician had been
summoned to the Mount Vernon estate to treat the former, first president of the United
States. For reasons unknown, a minor sore throat had suddenly and unexpectedly wors
ened. The family and household staff were worried.

-- 1 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 2 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Three doctors eventually made the trek through the snowy, winter weather to
Washington’s bedside. After examining their patient and agreeing on the diagnosis, one
administered the accepted therapy of the day. By all accounts, it was executed with the
utmost skill. When no results were observed, the three healthcare professionals con
ferred and agreed more treatment was necessary. Several hours and two additional appli
cations later, the president was dead.
The cause of death? Historians agree George Washington likely did not die of some
strange or exotic disease. Rather, like many of his contemporaries, the care he received
killed him. The intervention, of course, was bloodletting, the “best practice” of its day, the
chief tool of which remains the title of one of medicine’s leading research journals, i.e.,
The Lancet (Flexner 1974).1 The question is, did Washington’s physicians act ethically?
According to the ethical codes of the four largest mental health provider organizations in
the United States—the American Psychological Association, American Counseling Associ
ation, National Association of Social Workers, and American Association for Marriage and
Family Therapy—the answer is an unsatisfying and deeply disconcerting, yes. Standard
2.01 of the Ethical Principles of Psychologists (APA 2017), for example, merely requires
practitioners “provide services … with populations and in areas … within the boundaries
of their competence, based on their education, training, supervised experience, consulta
tion, study, or professional expertise”—conditions easily met by Washington’s physicians.
Before objecting that professionals should not be held accountable for standards of care
yet to be developed, vetted by science, and accepted by peers and regulatory bodies, con
sider another historical example. The year is 1846. Hungarian-born physician Ignaz Sem
melweis is in his first month of employment at Vienna General Hospital when he notices a
troublingly high death rate among women giving birth in the obstetrics ward. At 25–30
percent, many expectant mothers prefer to give birth in the street rather than the clinic.
Medical science at the time attributes the problem to “miasma,” an invisible, poisonous
gas believed responsible for a variety of illnesses. Semmelweis has a different idea. Hav
ing noticed midwives at the hospital have a death rate six times lower than physicians, he
concludes prevailing medical beliefs cannot possibly be correct. The final breakthrough
comes when a male colleague dies after puncturing his finger while performing an autop
sy. Reasoning that contact with corpses is somehow involved he orders physicians to
wash their hands prior to interacting with patients. In no time, the mortality rate on the
maternity ward plummets, dropping to the same level as that of midwives. Similar results
obtain when he implements the same practice in another hospital in Pest, Hungary.
Nowadays, of course, handwashing is considered a “best practice.” Decades of research
show it to be the single most effective way to prevent the spread of infections. Science
has also provided an explanation in the form of “germ theory.” Such information was not
available, however, during Semmelweis’s day. His was merely a hunch—one which, by the
way, fell outside the boundaries of then current medical standards, his professional expe
rience, education, and training. What’s more, he continued to promote the practice even
after it was deemed unscientific by his peers and the broader professional community. Re

-- 2 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 3 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
turning to the earlier question, did Semmelweis act ethically? Once again, the answer is
both unsatisfying and unsettling. According to the field’s current codes, it is no.
If “ethics” is the “systematizing, defending, and recommending [of] principles for right
and wrong conduct,” it’s hard to defend a standard that deems a practitioner who compe
tently delivers an unhelpful, even deadly service (e.g., Washington’s physicians) morally
superior to one who is actually helpful but working beyond the limits of their “education,
training, supervised experience, consultation, study or professional expertise” (e.g., Sem
melweis) (Fieser 2005). That said, equating competence with education, training, supervi
sion, and experience is nothing new. Neither is it unique to the practice of psychotherapy.
What is more, the current competence criterion may not align with accepted definitions
of competence. For example, the definition provided by the American Psychological Asso
ciation Dictionary of Psychology is “one’s developed repertoire of skills, especially as it is
applied to a task or set of tasks. A distinction is sometimes made between competence
and performance, which is the extent to which competence is realized in one’s actual
work on a problem or set of problems” (https://dictionary.apa.org/competence). A reper
toire of skills is ostensibly distinct from education, training, supervised experience, con
sultation, study, or professional expertise, although presumably these experiences con
tribute to skill development. With respect to the second half of this definition, even if
“competence” and “performance” are not conflated, can an adequate standard of the for
mer not incorporate serious consideration of the latter?
Philosophical and historical discussions aside, one way to evaluate the validity of the cur
rent standard is to examine it in light of the empirical literature.
The Empirical Status of the Current Compe
tence Criterion
“Nor would a wise man, seeing that he was in a hole, go to work and blindly dig it
deeper.”
—The Washington Post, October 25, 1911
What does the evidence show regarding education, training, supervision, and experience?
In short, none are strongly or unequivocally related to outcome. At best, the data are
mixed. Consider supervision. To become a licensed practitioner, most jurisdictions in the
United States require between 1,500 and 3,000 hours of supervised experience in the
form of practica, internships, postgraduate training, and oversight. And yet, after review
ing a century of literature and research on the subject, Watkins (2011: 235) concluded,
“We do not seem any more able to say now (as opposed to 30 years ago) that psychother
apy supervision contributes to patient outcome.”.

-- 3 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 4 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
More recently, Rousmaniere et al. (2016) examined the impact of supervision on out
comes using hierarchical linear modeling (clients nested within therapists and therapists
nested within supervisors). Data were gathered for more than five years on 23 supervi
sors working with 175 trainee therapists in a real-world setting. Supervision was not
found to be a significant contributor to outcome, accounting for less than 1 percent of
variability. Neither did the supervisors’ experience level, profession (social work versus
psychology), or qualifications predict differences between supervisors in client outcomes.
Put bluntly, supervisors did not matter much, if at all.
Educational level, pre- and postgraduate training, and experience in the field fare no bet
ter (Atkins and Christensen 2001; Hill et al. 2017; Malouff 2012). For example, despite
the years-long training process and required coursework, no evidence exists connecting
any specific class or classes to the outcome of students’ future clients (Malouff 2012).
More, the research that does exist shows no relationship between the amount of graduate
training (i.e., years, degrees earned) and therapist effectiveness (Anderson et al. 2016;
Boswell et al. 2010; Fals-Stewart and Birchler 2002). Finally, and perhaps most damning,
studies, meta-analyses, and reviews have found minimally trained paraprofessionals
achieve results equal to or better than licensed service providers (Berman and Norton
1985; Durlak 1979; Hattie et al. 1984; Montgomery et al. 2010; Weisz et al. 1995).
Worldwide, most clinicians are required to engage in postgraduate, continuing education
to maintain their license or certification. Available research shows practitioners are gen
erally satisfied with such experiences. Unfortunately, attending these events has never
been shown to improve either the quality or outcome of psychological services (Neimeyer
et al. 2009). Worse, studies have found an association between participation and practi
tioner perception of enhanced competence (Neimeyer et al. 2012)—an unfortunate state
of affairs that may contribute to, and even exacerbate, therapists’ well-documented ten
dency to overestimate their effectiveness (Chow 2014; Walfish et al. 2012).
Finally, what about professional experience? Not surprisingly, large, multinational sur
veys show therapists link professional growth and development to the amount of time
they spend performing psychotherapy (Orlinsky and Rønnestad 2005). Here again, the ev
idence provides a different picture. Instead of improving with time and experience, the ef
fectiveness of the average practitioner tends to plateau early, followed by a slow deterio
ration (Miller et al. 2017). For example, in the largest study on the subject to date, Gold
berg et al. (2016b) documented an erosion in performance in a sample of 170 therapists
working with more than 6,500 clients, tracked over a five-year period. Importantly, the
decline was shown to be unrelated to client severity, number of sessions, early termina
tion, caseload size, or a host of other therapist factors (e.g., age, years of experience, the
oretical orientation).
In sum, the evidence simply does not support treating education, training, supervision, or
experience as proxies for competence (Grus and Rozensky 2019). More, doing so, as Muir
et al. (2019) point out, gives rise to a conflict with Standard 2.04 of the APA’s ethical code
which mandates “Psychologists’ work is based upon established scientific and profession

-- 4 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 5 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
al knowledge of the discipline” (APA 2017: 5). If, as psychologist John Malouff (2012: 29)
argues, “the ultimate goal of standards is to benefit clients,” then current ethical codes of
the major mental health provider organizations fail completely. They must be changed.
Adding Effectiveness to the Criteria for Compe
tence
“The proof of the pudding is in the eating.”
—William Camden
Fortunately, an evidence-based alternative exists for ensuring the “maintenance of com
petence … and the protection of the public” (Neimeyer et al. 2019: 63). Known in the lit
erature as Routine Outcome Monitoring, it involves using standardized measures to as
sess formally and routinely clients’ experience of the process and outcome of care. Then,
by comparing the results to established norms for quality and progress, it is possible to
determine in real time whether an individual practitioner’s clinical work meets or ex
ceeds empirically derived standards for effectiveness.
To date, two routine outcome monitoring systems—the Partners for Change Outcome
Management System (PCOMS) and the Outcome Questionnaire Psychotherapy Quality
Management System (OQ-Analyst)—have been the focus of the largest amount of re
search on tracking the performance of mental health practitioners (Lambert 2010;
Prescott et al. 2017). Both were purposefully designed to be used across treatment
modalities, diagnoses, client populations, and professional disciplines. They are simple in
construction, require little time to administer and score, and yield valid and reliable mea
sures of client engagement and progress. Computerized systems are available which au
tomate data aggregation and interpretation and permit comparison of practitioner results
to national and international norms.
The availability of tools for monitoring performance in real time provides an opportunity
to move beyond definitions of competence which have always aimed at, but ultimately
failed to, ensure the quality or outcome of care. In place of the proxies of education, train
ing, supervision, and experience, routine outcome monitoring offers facts, permitting a
new, evidence-based standard; namely, determining whether a practitioner is working
within the boundaries and limits of their own and the field’s known level of effectiveness.
In fact, based on the available evidence, professional and regulatory bodies in the United
States and abroad have already deemed routine outcome monitoring a “standard” of care
in the delivery of psychological services and clinical supervision (American Psychological
Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice 2006; Association of
State and Provincial Psychology Boards 2019; Joint Commission 2018, Tasca et al. 2019).

-- 5 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 6 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
The Trouble with Thresholds
“Be careful what you wish for, you may receive it.”
—W. W. Jacobs
In 2015, researchers Imel, Sheng, Baldwin, and Atkins reported the results of a provoca
tive thought experiment. Using a statistical procedure, they simulated the impact of re
placing poorly performing therapists—those falling in the bottom 5 percent of clinical ef
fectiveness—with clinicians randomly drawn from the overall population of practitioners.
Turns out, performing this procedure on a quarterly basis over a ten-year period resulted
in dramatic improvements in the number of people ultimately benefiting from psychother
apy. Even when the difference in outcome between clinicians was small, thousands more
ended up being helped over time when the worst performers were removed. When more
liberal estimates of therapist differences were employed—consistent with the variability
in therapist outcomes reported in naturalistic and experimental studies (cf. Johns et al.
2019)—the impact was far greater, with up to a third more clients experiencing recovery
(see Table 1). The authors conclude, “it is ethically questionable to continue to expose pa
tients to therapists who provide them little opportunity for improvement,” suggesting,
“performance-based retention of therapists could improve the … average response rate
and decreas[e] the probability that a patient will be treated by a therapist who has little
chance of helping” (Imel et al. 2015: 329).
Table 1. Change in total responses after removing lowest performing
therapists
Total responses (%)*
No removal 	30,000 (50)
ICC = 0.05 (Small) 	34,266 (57)
ICC = 0.10 (Medium) 	36,404 (61)
ICC = 0.20 (Large) 	39,307 (66)
(*) Note: Total number of potential responses over 40 iterations (10
years) is 60,000.
Reproduced from Imel, Z. E., Sheng, E., Baldwin, S. A., and Atkins, D.
C. (2015). “Removing Very Low-Performing Therapists: A Simulation
of Performance-Based Retention in Psychotherapy.” Psychotherapy 52:
329–336, https://doi.org/10.1037/pst0000023 Copyright © 2015,
American Psychological Association.

-- 6 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 7 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Several surveys reveal practitioners harbor concerns about routine outcome monitoring
that directly impact their willingness to employ measures in their clinical work. One that
stands out for many is fear about the misuse of the resulting data (Boswell et al. 2015;
Gleacher et al. 2016; Johnston and Gowers 2005; Unsworth et al. 2012). Despite evidence
that most clinicians achieve outcomes on par with those obtained in randomized con
trolled trials (Minami et al. 2008; Saxon et al. 2017; Stiles et al. 2008; Wampold and
Brown 2005), it is safe to assume Imel et al.’s (2015) proposal, summarized in the previ
ous paragraph, would likely exacerbate such worries—a fact the authors acknowledge,
noting their “basic premise might be troublesome for some therapists and health care
professionals” (Imel et al. 2015: 329). Indeed, in a recent study on the implementation of
routine outcome monitoring in Britain’s National Health Service, Waldron et al. (2018)
found clinician concerns did not abate over a six-month period despite the adoption of for
mal outcome monitoring policies, training in how to use measures, and the reassurance of
management.
Beyond the concerns of clinicians, equating competence with practicing within the bound
aries and limits of a therapist’s and the field’s known level of effectiveness inadvertently
perpetuates the same static, either/or quality of the current standard. In effect, one
threshold—producing results equivalent to colleagues—is simply replacing another—hav
ing the requisite training, supervision, and practice experience. Ultimately, both ap
proaches treat competence as a state achieved rather than an active, dynamic process of
continuous achieving.
On reflection, neither standard would have “served to protect” the women of Vienna or
former first president of the United States. Indeed, an argument can easily be made that
the professionals in both circumstances were practicing within the accepted norms of the
time. For history to have been different, Washington’s physicians and Semmelweis’s con
temporaries would not only need to have been held accountable for the effectiveness of
their practices, but also been ethically bound to work at improving their results. Had such
a standard been in place, those treating the president would have been compelled to re
gard his deterioration as “feedback,” a signal to change their treatment and possibly seek
outside consultation (Babins-Wagner 2017; Lambert 2010; Maeschalck and Barfknecht
2017). In the case of Semmelweis, guided more by outcomes than by conventional wis
dom, physicians of the period would have been encouraged to embrace his innovative hy
giene practices, thereby preventing the deaths of many future Viennese mothers, and po
tentially hastening the discovery and acceptance of germ theory. In sum, the truly compe
tent practitioner not only works within, but also continuously to extend, their own and the
field’s effectiveness.

-- 7 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 8 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Operationalizing a Dynamic, Evidence-Based
Competence Standard
“Certain therapists are more effective than others … because [they are] appropri
ately responsive … providing each client with a different, individually tailored
treatment.”
—Stiles and Horvath (2017: 71)2
On the heels of what was just discussed, we should note that mere measurement and
comparison to effectiveness benchmarks are insufficient to ensure either competence or
the public welfare. To be ethical, practitioners must also act on the data that routine out
come measures make available. Specifically, when client engagement or progress falls
short, several options must be considered: adjusting services, seeking consultation, mak
ing a referral, and exploring innovative and promising practices (Lambert 2010; Prescott
et al. 2017).
Dozens of randomized controlled trials and multiple meta-analyses now show that provid
ing clinicians with feedback, generated by ongoing measurement of the quality and out
come of care, leads to better results (cf. Knaup et al. 2009; Lambert and Shimokawa
2011; Lambert et al. 2003; Shimokawa et al. 2010; Østergård et al. 2018). Individual stud
ies document, for example, significant increases in the amount of client improvement as
well as the efficiency of treatment while simultaneously reducing the risk of dropout and
deterioration (Lambert 2010; Schuckard et al. 2017). Evidence supporting what is termed
“feedback informed treatment” continues to mount, appearing in the literature with in
creasing frequency (Goodman et al. 2013; Pinner and Kivlighan 2018).
As an example, the PCOMS system, introduced earlier in this chapter, tracks client scores
in real time using two brief, easy-to-use scales. The first, administered at the outset of
each session, is the Outcome Rating Scale (ORS; Miller and Duncan 2000). It is designed
to assess client progress. The second is the Session Rating Scale (SRS; Miller et al.
2000a). Given at the end of the visit, this tool measures the quality of the relationship or
working alliance, an essential component of all effective psychotherapy (Bachelor and
Horvath 1999; Norcross 2011). Together, the two scales take a minute or less to complete
and score. Both are free to use in paper and pencil format and available in more than 30
languages.3
Multiple, proprietary computer-based platforms are available that use predictive algo
rithms derived from a large and growing normative database to provide immediate alerts
to clinicians whenever treatment deviates from expected rates of progress or levels of
client engagement (Miller 2011; Schuckard et al. 2017). As an example, consider the
chart presented in Figure 1 showing the results of two treatment sessions with an adult.
The client’s scores on the ORS are represented with a thick black line. Two lines emerge
from the first session ORS score, dividing the graph into three differently shaded areas.
Over the course of treatment, scores falling in the topmost section are predictive of even

-- 8 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 9 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Figure 1. Graphic representation of two sessions of
psychotherapy using the PCOMS progress and al
liance scores
tual success; in the darker gray area, a negative or null outcome; and in between, in the
light gray area, an indeterminate result.
In this instance, the client’s scores have declined from the first to the second visit. Now in
the dark gray area, they indicate treatment is “at risk” for a negative or null outcome
(e.g., lack of progress over time or dropout). The darker, dotted line on the graph repre
sents the client’s scores on the SRS. Falling below the established clinical cutoff of 36
(represented by a light gray, dashed line), such results provide additional evidence that
action is required (Miller and Bertolino 2011). Indeed, an inquiry into the client’s experi
ence of the relationship would be in order. Multiple studies, in fact, document that im
proving SRS scores results in increases in both retention and outcome (Goldberg in press;
Miller et al. 2007; Owen et al. 2016).
Recently, researchers Brown and Cazauvielh (2019) provided novel and compelling evi
dence that feedback, in the manner described above, improves outcomes by increasing
clinician responsiveness to the needs and characteristics of the individual client. Using
frequency as an indication of engagement, they found therapists who most often logged
into a computerized routine outcome monitoring system to check client progress were
significantly more effective than their peers, with an average effect size difference of 0.2
between the two groups. That is, clients of responsive practitioners were better off than
close to 60 percent of those seen by their less engaged peers (McGough and Faraone
2009). Although a third variable—such as trait responsivity or conscientiousness produc
ing both more engagement with the monitoring system and outcome—cannot be ruled
out, randomized designs of routine outcome monitoring suggest that its impact is not due
merely to therapist variables (Schuckard et al. 2017). It is therefore reasonable to sus
pect that degree of engagement with these procedures is similarly not fully explainable
by therapist traits.
New and promising research on the subject of deliberate practice points to one additional
pathway for operationalizing a dynamic, evidence-based standard of competence. The re
search to be reviewed next, documents reliable and valid improvement in the effective

-- 9 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 10 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
ness of agencies, clinics, and individual therapists. Moreover, if implemented as part of a
new ethical standard, deliberate practice has the potential to increase the outcomes of
the profession as a whole.
Improving the Outcome of Psychotherapy One
Clinician at a Time
“Most people never run far enough on their first wind to find out they’ve got a sec
ond. Give your dreams all you’ve got and you’ll be amazed at the energy that
comes out of you.”
—William James
Until very recently, no reference to deliberate practice could be found in the clinical psy
chology or psychotherapy literature (Miller et al. 2020). Originally coined by psychologist
K. Anders Ericsson in 1993, the term refers to the process by which individuals across a
wide range of human endeavors can continuously improve their performance. Deliberate
practice has been researched for decades in many fields, including medicine, teaching,
sports, music, and chess and enjoys substantial empirical support (Miller et al. 2018).
In brief, deliberate practice involves continuously and systematically pushing performers
to reach for objectives just beyond their current abilities. It relies on four specific compo
nents (see Figure 2; Miller et al. 2018). The first is the identification of individualized
learning objectives—specifically, focusing on behaviors that consistently undermine or de
tract from success. Next is involvement of a coach, a person whose job is to design prac
tice activities which either correct or serve to enhance a performer’s skills or abilities.
Ongoing feedback is the third. In their recent review of the research on this component,
Miller et al. (2020) report feedback is most likely to be effective when it is timely, continu
ous, individualized, focused on specific goals, and designed for remediating deficits ver
sus reinforcing existing strengths. Fourth and final is successive refinement. Here, the
difference between deliberate practice and traditional definitions of practice becomes
most apparent. In place of mindless repetition, emphasis is intentionally directed to con
tinuous improvement, pushing the envelope of performance to a “just noticeable differ
ence” in every episode of practice.

-- 10 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 11 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Figure 2. The four components of deliberate practice
Miller et al. (2007) were the first to discuss deliberate practice in relation to psychothera
py, introducing the concept to explain a finding that had long defied understanding;
namely, some therapists are consistently more effective than others (cf. Ricks 1974; Oki
ishi et al. 2003; Saxon and Barkham 2012). Within a few short years, Chow et al. (2015)
had provided the first empirical evidence that the time therapists spend engaged in delib
erate practice predicts effectiveness. Based on data gathered in real-world treatment set
tings, the study showed the best therapists spent two and a half times more hours en
gaged in deliberate practice in a typical work week than their less effective counterparts.
One year later, Goldberg et al. (2016a) reported gradual but significant improvements in
outcome over a seven-year period resulting from the combined use of routine outcome
monitoring, feedback-informed treatment, and deliberate practice. Importantly, their
study, also conducted in an actual clinical setting, was the first in the history of the field
to document improvements in effectiveness at both the agency and individual therapist
level. Finally, and most recently, Miller et al. (2020) provided detailed, transtheoretical
guidelines practitioners can use to evaluate their results, improve their responsiveness to
clients, and identify targets for deliberate practice, thereby enabling them to meet the
new standard of working within and continuously to extend their own and the field’s ef
fectiveness.
To recap, routine outcome monitoring is designed to assess the quality and effectiveness
of treatment. Feedback informed treatment prompts therapists to take action when the
work with a particular client is at risk for a negative or null outcome. When employed, the
evidence indicates, it increases a clinician’s responsiveness, a quality research suggests
is characteristic of highly effective therapists (Stiles & Horvath 2017). If routine outcome
monitoring is thought of as a smoke detector—a device constantly monitoring for evi
dence of a fire—feedback informed treatment is the alarm, signaling immediate attention
and investigation are required. The final element for facilitating an improvement in per
formance is deliberate practice. It works either by remediating recurring errors or foster
ing growth beyond current levels of effectiveness. Staying with the analogy, deliberate

-- 11 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 12 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
practice represents both the effort invested in improving the response to fires when they
inevitably occur, and investing the time, energy, and effort necessary to create the condi
tions (i.e., innovative practices and structures) that make their outbreak less likely in the
future.
The potential benefits of the new standard notwithstanding, the stories of Washington
and Semmelweis, along with contemporary findings from implementation science, illus
trate the very real challenges of putting routine outcome monitoring/feedback informed
treatment/deliberate practice into practice.
Implementing an Evidence-Based Standard of
Professional Competence
“In theory, there is no difference between theory and practice. In practice, there
is.”
—Walter J. Savitch
Translating healthcare-related research findings into standards of care is known to take
time. In medicine, a figure often cited is seventeen years—a number one might consider
overly hopeful given that handwashing remains, nearly two centuries after Semmelweis’s
discovery, a significant challenge in healthcare (Joint Commission 2015; Morris et al.
2011; Rodak 2013). Studies show, for example, that medical providers clean their hands
less than 50 percent of the times they should (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
2019). The result? Annually, a million people in the United States acquire an infection
while hospitalized, resulting in thousands of deaths (Reed and Kemmerly 2009).
On the subject of routine outcome monitoring and feedback informed treatment, while a
recent study found clients of therapists who used measures to inform their clinical work
were 2.5 times more likely to experience benefit from treatment, the impact on outcomes
was not immediate (Brattland et al. 2018). Indeed, during the first two years of implemen
tation, measures and feedback made little difference. Only at year four did the practice
begin to exert a significant effect—a figure consistent with findings from the broader im
plementation literature (Fixsen et al. 2005).
Other studies have revealed additional challenges. Evidence indicates, for instance, ther
apists do not appear to learn from the information provided by routine outcome monitor
ing and feedback informed treatment. In a series of ingenious experiments, Lambert et al.
(2001, 2002) provided progress feedback to clinicians on half of their cases. With the oth
er half, measures were administered, but the results withheld. Consistent with findings
already cited, outcomes improved when information regarding client progress was made
available to clinicians in real time. However, when the data were not shared, no improve
ment obtained. The results were troubling given that therapists in the study were all ex
perienced and understood the purpose of the investigation: to identify clients at risk for
deterioration or dropout and then take steps to prevent these undesirable outcomes.

-- 12 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 13 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
What is more, the measures were simple and straightforward, so much so a reasonable
person would expect that, with time and experience, clinicians would come to recognize
the “tells” indicative of potential negative results. Still, Lambert reported, “even though
therapists ha[d] gotten feedback on half their cases for over three years, [they did] not
learn how to detect failing cases” on their own (Miller et al. 2004: 16).
Finally, several studies indicate the effects of routine outcome monitoring and feedback
informed treatment are not distributed equally across practitioners. As is true of thera
pists in randomized controlled tests of specific treatment approaches, the impact of rou
tine outcome monitoring and feedback informed treatment on outcome varies by clini
cian. In some as many as half do not benefit from measurement and receiving feedback
about their results (de Jong and De Goede 2015; Lutz 2014; Simon et al. 2012). Not sur
prisingly, those who experience the greatest impact have been found: (1) to be receptive
to feedback; (2) actively incorporate it in their work; (3) possess higher self-efficacy; and
(4) put less stock in their own assessment/feelings regarding client progress (de Jong et
al. 2012).
Altogether, the foregoing results make clear that broad utilization of routine outcome
monitoring/feedback informed treatment/deliberate practice will take time and consider
able effort. Findings from the emerging field of “Implementation Science” further indi
cate addressing the variability in therapist receptiveness—what is learned and applied,
and its ultimate impact on performance—will require much more. Evidence shows suc
cessful adoption is more likely when the focus of implementation initiatives is on cultural
and structural change within organizations, when any training provided is composed of
practice, feedback, and “live,” on the job coaching, and finally, when leaders, rather than
practitioners, are held accountable for putting new practices and standards into effect
(Fixsen et al. 2009).
The Goldberg et al. (2016a) study of routine outcome monitoring/feedback informed
treatment/deliberate practice cited earlier provides an excellent example of applying the
findings from implementation research. Recall, this study is the first to show it is not only
possible for therapists to document they are working within, but also to extend continu
ously their own and the field’s effectiveness. As a first step, agency management commit
ted to creating a practice environment conducive of professional growth. Following a pe
riod of exploration, consensus building, training, and piloting, a policy was adopted re
quiring the collection of progress and outcome measures at each and every session. It is
worth noting, during the exploratory phase of implementation, when therapists were sim
ply asked to try routine outcome monitoring, the majority (60 percent) used the measures
inconsistently. Following formal adoption, 40 percent of the licensed staff left the agency
within four months despite explicit reassurance from management that staff outcomes
would not be linked to performance evaluations. While the “exodus” may, at first blush,
strike one as alarming, the agency was soon fully staffed with individuals who were inter
ested in working in an agency setting that made effectiveness and continuous profession

-- 13 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 14 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
al growth, through routine outcome monitoring/feedback informed treatment/deliberate
practice, the standard of competence.
As the implementation continued, agency leaders also used the data resulting from rou
tine outcome monitoring to enact structural and procedural changes friendly to a “culture
of feedback.” For example, an expert in routine outcome monitoring/feedback informed
treatment/deliberate practice was hired to provide monthly two-hour videoconference
clinical consultations. At each meeting, practitioners brought cases identified by the mea
sures as “at risk” for dropout or a negative or null outcome. As opposed to the traditional
focus on diagnosis and treatment techniques, special attention was directed to under
standing and acting on the feedback clients gave regarding their experience of the thera
peutic alliance. Together with colleagues, the therapist and consultant openly shared
ideas for improving responsiveness to the individual client. When a recurring error or po
tential areas for professional growth became apparent, specific suggestions for subse
quent skill practice and refinement were provided which could later be addressed during
in-house supervision.
In sum, beyond any efforts aimed at securing practitioner compliance, successful imple
mentation of an evidence-based competence standard will necessitate change at the pro
fessional organizational level. The old way is the wrong way. That is, the customary ap
proach of just drafting rules, demanding adherence, and dispensing discipline for infrac
tions ignores the evidence about “what works” in sponsoring change. As Boswell et al.
(2015: 11) assert, the undue focus on the behavior of the individual practitioner fails to
consider systemic and contextual factors which “facilitate or inhibit … adoption, imple
mentation, and sustainability.” True, too, “overly authoritative dissemination methods
may reduce the chance a practice change is successfully implemented” (Creason et al.
2019: 410).
Summary Conclusions
A key plank in the ethical codes of all of the major mental health provider organizations in
the United States is that practitioners “provide services … with populations and in areas
… within the boundaries of their competence, based on their education, training, super
vised experience, consultation, study, or professional expertise” (APA 2017: 5). Presently,
competence is equated with educational attainment and professional experience; howev
er, research reviewed in this chapter shows clearly that neither ensures skillful or effec
tive practice. Replacing the field’s current definition of competence with a standard of
“working within and continually to extend the field’s and one’s own level of effectiveness”
would serve to protect public welfare and facilitate ongoing improvement in the results of
clinical services, meeting this new ethical standard. This would also resolve the inconsis
tency between standards equating competence with indicators that do not hold up under
empirical scrutiny (e.g., supervision, continuing education, experience) and those dictat
ing that “scientific and professional knowledge of the discipline” (APA 2017: 5) guides

-- 14 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 15 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
professional practice (e.g., Standards 2.01 and 2.04, respectively, of the APA Ethical Prin
ciples of Psychologists and Code of Conduct).
The combination of routine outcome monitoring, feedback informed treatment, and delib
erate practice, as reviewed in this chapter, provides an evidence-based approach for oper
ationalizing and meeting this new ethical standard—one which, research is showing, en
hances outcomes at both the agency and practitioner level. Regardless of the possibili
ties, significant challenges to implementation exist. Should the profession wish to move
forward, the responsibility for success cannot be placed on the shoulders of individual
therapists. Organizational leadership, informed by evidence-based implementation princi
ples, will be needed to create the cultural shift necessary to place effectiveness at the
forefront of clinical work and professional identity.
References
American Psychological Association (2017). Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code
of Conduct. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/ethics/code/ethics-code-2017.pdf
American Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice
(2006). “Evidence-Based Practice in Psychology.” American Psychologist 61: 271–285.
Anderson, T., Crowley, M. E. J., Himawan, L., Holmberg, J. K., and Uhlin, B. D. (2016).
“Therapist Facilitative Interpersonal Skills and Training Status: A Randomized Clinical
Trial on Alliance and Outcome.” Psychotherapy Research 26: 511–529.
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (2019). Supervision Guidelines for
Licensed Psychological Associates. Retrieved from https://cdn.ymaws.com/
www.asppb.net/resource/resmgr/guidelines/supervision_guidelines_for_l.pdf
Atkins, D. C. and Christensen, A. (2001). “Is Professional Training Worth the Bother? A
Review of the Impact of Psychotherapy Training on Client Outcome.” Australian Psycholo
gist 36: 122–130.
Babins-Wagner, R. (2017). “Feedback-Informed Treatment in Agency and Clinic Settings.”
In Feedback-Informed Treatment in Clinical Practice: Reaching for Excellence (ed. D. S.
Prescott, C. L. Maeschalck, and S. D. Miller, pp. 167–185). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Bachelor, A. and Horvath, A. (1999). “The Therapeutic Relationship.” In The Heart and
Soul of Change: What Works in Therapy (ed. M. A. Hubble, B. L. Duncan, and S. D. Miller,
pp. 133–178). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Berman, J. S. and Norton, N. C. (1985). “Does Professional Training Make a Therapist
More Effective?” Psychological Bulletin 98: 401–407.

-- 15 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 16 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Boswell, J. F., Castonguay, L. G., and Wasserman, R. H. (2010). “Effects of Psychotherapy
Training and Intervention Use on Session Outcome.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 78: 717–723.
Boswell, J. F., Kraus, D. R., Miller, S. D., and Lambert, M. J. (2015). “Implementing Rou
tine Outcome Monitoring in Clinical Practice: Benefits, Challenges, and Solutions.” Psy
chotherapy Research 25: 6–19.
Brattland, H., Koksvik, J. M., Burkeland, O., Gråwe, R. W., Klöckner, C., Linaker, O. M., …
Iversen, V. C. (2018). “The Effects of Routine Outcome Monitoring (ROM) on Therapy Out
comes in the Course of an Implementation Process: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” Journal
of Counseling Psychology 65: 641–652.
Brown, J. and Cazauvielh, C. (2019). “Clinician Engagement in Feedback Informed Treat
ment (FIT) and Patient Outcomes.” Retrieved from https://acorncollaboration.org/
blog/2019/2/12/therapist-engagement
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019). “Hand Hygiene in Healthcare Set
tings.” Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/index.html
Chow, D. (2014). “The Study of Supershrinks: Development and Deliberate Practices of
Highly Effective Psychotherapists.” Doctoral dissertation, Curtin University, Perth, Aus
tralia.
Chow, D. L., Miller, S. D., Seidel, J. A., Kane, R. T., Thornton, J. A., and Andrews, W. P.
(2015). “The Role of Deliberate Practice in the Development of Highly Effective Psy
chotherapists.” Psychotherapy 52: 337–345.
Creason, A. H., Ruscio, A. C., Tate, K. E., and McGraw, K. L. (2019). “Accelerating Psycho
logical Health Research Findings into Clinical Practice through the Practice-Based Imple
mentation Network Model.” Military Medicine 184: 409–417.
de Jong, K. and De Goede, M. E. E. (2015). “Why Do Some Therapists Not Deal with Out
come Monitoring Feedback? A Feasibility Study on the Effect of Regulatory Focus and
Person–Organization Fit on Attitude and Outcome.” Psychotherapy Research 25: 661–668.
de Jong, K., van Sluis, P., Nugter, M. A., Heiser, W. J., and Spinhoven, P. (2012). “Under
standing the Differential Impact of Outcome Monitoring: Therapist Variables that Moder
ate Feedback Effects in a Randomized Clinical Trial.” Psychotherapy Research 22: 464–
474.
Durlak, J. A. (1979). “Comparative Effectiveness of Paraprofessional and Professional
Helpers.” Psychological Bulletin 86: 80–92.
Fals-Stewart, W. and Birchler, G. R. (2002). “Behavioral Couples Therapy with Alcoholic
Men and their Intimate Partners: The Comparative Effectiveness of Bachelor’s- and
Master’s-Level Counselors.” Behavior Therapy 33: 123–147.

-- 16 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 17 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Fieser, J. (2005). “Ethics.” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved from https://
www.iep.utm.edu/ethics/
Fixsen, D. L., Blasé, K. A., Naoom, S. F., and Wallace, F. (2009). “Core Implementation
Components.” Research on Social Work Practice 19. Retrieved from https://
doi.org10.1177/1049731509335549
Fixsen, D. L., Naoom, S. F., Blasé, K. A., Friedman, R. M., and Wallace, F. (2005). Imple
mentation Research: A Synthesis of the Literature. Tampa, FL: University of South Flori
da, Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health Institute, The National Implementation Re
search Network (FMHI Publication #231).
Flexner, J. T. (1974). Washington: The Indispensable Man. Boston: Little, Brown, & Com
pany.
Gleacher, A. A., Olin, S. S., Nadeem, E., Pollock, M., Ringle, V., Bickman, L., … Hoagwood,
K. (2016). “Implementing a Measurement Feedback System in Community Mental Health
Clinics: A Case Study of Multilevel Barriers and Facilitators.” Administration and Policy in
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research 43: 426–440.
Goldberg, S. B., Babins-Wagner, R., Rousmaniere, T., Berzins, S., Hoyt, W. T., Whipple, J.
L., … Wampold, B. E. (2016a). “Creating a Climate for Therapist Improvement: A Case
Study of an Agency Focused on Outcomes and Deliberate Practice.” Psychotherapy 53:
367–375.
Goldberg, S. B., Rousmaniere, T., Miller, S. D., Whipple, J., Nielsen, S. L., Hoyt, W. T., and
Wampold, B. E. (2016b). “Do Psychotherapists Improve with Time and Experience? A Lon
gitudinal Analysis of Outcomes in a Clinical Setting.” Journal of Counseling Psychology
63: 1–11.
Goldberg, S. B., Rowe, G., Malte, C. A., Ruan, H., Owen, J. J., and Miller, S. D. (in press).
“Routine Monitoring of Therapeutic Alliance to Predict Treatment Engagement in a Veter
an Affairs Substance Use Disorders Clinic.” Psychological Services.
Goodman, J. D., McKay, J. R., and DePhilippis, D. (2013). “Progress Monitoring in Mental
Health and Addiction Treatment: A Means of Improving Care.” Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice 44: 231–246.
Grus, C. L. and Rozensky, R. H. (2019). “Competency-Based Continuing Education in
Health Service Psychology: Ensuing Quality, Recommendations for Change.” Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice 50: 106–112.
Hattie, J. A., Sharpley, C. F., and Rogers, H. J. (1984). “Comparative Effectiveness of Pro
fessional and Paraprofessional Helpers.” Psychological Bulletin 95: 534–541.
Hill, C. E., Spiegel, S. B., Hoffman, M. A., Kivlighan, D. M., Jr., and Gelso, C. J. (2017).
“Therapist Expertise in Psychotherapy Revisited.” The Counseling Psychologist 45: 7–53.

-- 17 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 18 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Imel, Z. E., Sheng, E., Baldwin, S. A., and Atkins, D. C. (2015). “Removing Very Low-Per
forming Therapists: A Simulation of Performance-Based Retention in Psychotherapy.” Psy
chotherapy 52: 329–336.
Johns, R. G., Barkham, M., Kellett, S., and Saxon, D. (2019). “A Systematic Review of
Therapist Effects: A Critical Narrative Update and Refinement to Baldwin and Imel’s
(2013) Review.” Clinical Psychology Review 67: 78–93.
Johnston, C. and Gowers, S. (2005). “Routine Outcome Measurement: A Survey of UK
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services.” Child and Adolescent Mental Health 10:
133–139.
Joint Commission (2015). “Sustaining and Spreading Improvement in Hand Hygiene and
Compliance.” Journal on Quality and Patient Safety 41(1).
Joint Commission (2018). New Outcome Measures Standard. Retrieved from https://
www.jointcommission.org/accreditation/
bhc_new_outcome_measures_standard.aspx
Knaup, C., Koesters, M., Schoefer, D., Becker, T., and Puschner, B. (2009). “Effect of Feed
back of Treatment Outcome in Specialist Mental Healthcare: Meta-Analysis.” British Jour
nal of Psychiatry 195: 15–22.
Lambert, M. J. (2010). Prevention of Treatment Failure: The Use of Measuring, Monitor
ing, and Feedback in Clinical Practice. Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa
tion.
Lambert, M. J. and Shimokawa, K. (2011). “Collecting Client Feedback.” Psychotherapy
48: 72–79.
Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Hawkins, E. J., Vermeersch, D. A., Nielsen, S. L., and Smart,
D. W. (2003). “Is it Time for Clinicians to Routinely Track Patient Outcome? A Meta-Analy
sis.” Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 10: 288–301.
Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Smart, D. W., Vermeersch, D. A., Nielsen, S. L., and
Hawkins, E. J. (2001). “The Effects of Providing Therapists with Feedback on Patient
Progress during Psychotherapy: Are Outcomes Enhanced?” Psychotherapy Research 11:
49–68.
Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Vermeersch, D. A., Smart, D. W., Hawkins, E. J., Nielsen, S.
L., & Goates, M. (2002). “Enhancing Psychotherapy Outcomes via Providing Feedback on
Client Progress: A Replication.” Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy 9: 91–103.
Lutz, W. (2014). “Why, When and How do Patients Change? Identifying and Predicting
Progress and Outcome in Psychotherapy.” Presentation delivered at the Calgary Counsel
ing Center. Calgary, Canada. Retrieved from https://www.scottdmiller.com/wp-con
tent/uploads/2016/09/Lecture-Wolfgang-Lutz-Calgary2014_send.pdf

-- 18 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 19 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
McGough, J. J. and Faraone, S. V. (2009). “Estimating the Size of Treatment Effects: Mov
ing beyond P Values.” Psychiatry (Edgemont) 6: 21–29.
Maeschalck, C. L. and Barfknecht, L. R. (2017). “Using Client Feedback to Inform Treat
ment.” In Feedback-Informed Treatment in Clinical Practice: Reaching for Excellence (ed.
D. S. Prescott, C. L. Maeschalck, and S. D. Miller, pp. 53–77). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Malouff, J. (2012). “The Need for Empirically Supported Psychology Training Standards.”
Psychotherapy in Australia 18: 28–32.
Miller, S. D. (2011). “Cutting Edge Feedback.” Retrieved from https://
www.scottdmiller.com/cutting-edge-feedback/
Miller, S. D. and Bertolino, B. (eds.) (2011). The Feedback-Informed Treatment and Train
ing Manuals (Vols. 1–6). Chicago, IL: ICCE.
Miller, S. D., Chow, D., Wampold, B. E., Hubble, M. A., Del Re, A. C., Maeschalck, C., and
Bargmann, S. (2018). “To Be or Not to Be (an Expert)? Revisiting the Role of Deliberate
Practice in Improving Performance.” High Ability Studies (December). Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1080/13598139.2018.1519410
Miller, S. D. and Duncan, B. L. (2000). Outcome Rating Scale. Chicago, IL: ICCE.
Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., and Hubble, M. A. (2004). “Beyond Integration: The Triumph
of Outcome over Process in Clinical Practice.” Psychotherapy in Australia 10: 2–19.
Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., and Johnson, L. (2000a). Session Rating Scale. Chicago, IL:
ICCE.
Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., Johnson, L. D., & Hubble, M. A. (2000b). “Jurassic Practice:
Why the Field is on the Verge of Extinction and What We Can Do to Save It.” Professional
Counselor 15: 28–35.
Miller, S. D., Hubble, M., and Chow, D. (2020). Better Results: Using Deliberate Practice
to Improve Therapeutic Effectiveness. Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa
tion.
Miller, S. D., Hubble, M., and Chow, D. L. (2017). “Professional Development: An Oxy
moron?” In The Cycle of Excellence: Using Deliberate Practice in Supervision, Training,
and Independent Practice (ed. T. Rousmaniere, R. K. Goodyear, S. D. Miller, and B.
Wampold, pp. 23–47). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Miller, S. D., Hubble, M. A., and Duncan, B. L. (2007). “Supershrinks: Learning from the
Field’s Most Effective Practitioners.” The Psychotherapy Networker 31: 26–35, 56.
Minami, T., Wampold, B. E., Serlin, R. C., Hamilton, E. G., Brown, G. S. J., and Kircher, J.
C. (2008). “Benchmarking the Effectiveness of Psychotherapy Treatment for Adult De

-- 19 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 20 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
pression in a Managed Care Environment: A Preliminary Study.” Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology 76: 116–124.
Montgomery, E. C., Kunik, M. E., Wilson, N., Stanley, M. A., and Weiss, B. (2010). “Can
Paraprofessionals Deliver Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy to Treat Anxiety and Depressive
Symptoms?” Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 74: 45–62.
Morris, Z. S., Wooding, S., and Grant, J. (2011). “The Answer is 17 Years, What is the
Question: Understanding Time Lags in Translational Research.” Journal of the Royal Soci
ety of Medicine 104: 510–520.
Muir, H. J., Coyne, A. E., Morrison, N. R., Boswell, J. F., and Constantino, M. J. (2019).
“Ethical Implication of Routine Outcomes Monitoring for Patients, Psychotherapists, and
Mental Health Care Systems.” Psychotherapy. Advance online publication. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pst0000246
Neimeyer, G. J., Minniti, A., and Taylor, J. M. (2019). “Critical Conversations in Continuing
Education: Contemporary Memes, Themes, and Dreams.” Professional Psychology: Re
search and Practice 50: 63–69.
Neimeyer, G. J., Taylor, J. M., and Cox, D. R. (2012). “On Hope and Possibility: Does Con
tinuing Professional Development Contribute to Ongoing Professional Competence?” Pro
fessional Psychology: Research and Practice 43: 476–486.
Neimeyer, G. J., Taylor, J. M., and Wear, D. M. (2009). “Continuing Education in Psycholo
gy: Outcomes, Evaluations, and Mandates.” Professional Psychology: Research and Prac
tice 40: 617–624.
Norcross, J. C. (ed.) (2011). Psychotherapy Relationships That Work (2nd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Okiishi, J., Lambert, M. J., Nielsen, S. L., and Ogles, B. M. (2003). “Waiting for Super
shrink: An Empirical Analysis of Therapist Effects.” Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy
10: 361–373.
Orlinsky, D. E. and Rønnestad, M. H. (2005). How Psychotherapists Develop: A Study of
Therapeutic Work and Professional Growth. Washington, DC: American Psychological As
sociation.
Østergård, O. K., Randa, H., and Hougaard, E. (2018). “The Effect of Using the Partners
for Change Outcome Management System as Feedback Tool in Psychotherapy: A System
atic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Psychotherapy Research. Advance online publication. Re
trieved from https://doi.org/10.1080/10503307.2018.1517949
Owen, J., Miller, S. D., Seidel, J. A., and Chow, D. L. (2016). “The Working Alliance in the
Treatment of Military Adolescents.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 84:
200–210.

-- 20 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 21 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Pinner, D. H. and Kivlighan, D. M., III (2018). “The Ethical Implications and Utility of Rou
tine Outcome Monitoring in Determining Boundaries of Competence in Practice.” Profes
sional Psychology: Research and Practice 49: 247–254.
Prescott, D., Maeschalck, C., and Miller, S. D. (eds.) (2017). Feedback-Informed Treat
ment in Clinical Practice: Reaching for Excellence. Washington, DC: American Psychologi
cal Association.
Reed, D. and Kemmerly, S. A. (2009). “Infection Control and Prevention: A Review of Hos
pital-Acquired Infections and the Economic Implications.” The Ochsner Journal 9: 27–31.
Ricks, D. F. (1974). “Supershrink: Methods of a Therapist Judged Successful on the Basis
of Adult Outcomes of Adolescent Patients.” In Life History Research in Psychopathology
(ed. D. F. Ricks and M. Roff, pp. 275–297). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Rodak, S. (2013). “Why is Hand Hygiene Still a Problem in Healthcare? Four Common
Culprits.” Retrieved from https://www.beckersasc.com/asc-quality-infection-control/
why-is-hand-hygiene-still-a-problem-in-healthcare-4-common-culprits.html?
goback=%2Egde_1805565_member_229507621
Rousmaniere, T. G., Swift, J. K., Babins-Wagner, R., Whipple, J. L., and Berzins, S. (2016).
“Supervisor Variance in Psychotherapy Outcome in Routine Practice.” Psychotherapy Re
search 26: 196–205.
Saxon, D., Ashley, K., Bishop-Edwards, L., Connell, J., Harrison, P., Ohlsen, S., … Barkham,
M. (2017). “A Pragmatic Randomised Controlled Trial Assessing the Non-Inferiority of
Counselling for Depression versus Cognitive-Behaviour Therapy for Patients in Primary
Care Meeting a Diagnosis of Moderate or Severe Depression (PRaCTICED): Study Proto
col for a Randomised Controlled Trial.” Trials. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13063-017-1834-6
Saxon, D. and Barkham, M. (2012). “Patterns of Therapist Variability: Therapist Effects
and the Contribution of Patient Severity and Risk.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy
chology 80: 535–546.
Schuckard, E., Miller, S. D., and Hubble, M.A. (2017). “Feedback-Informed Treatment:
Historical and Empirical Foundations.” In Feedback-Informed Treatment in Clinical Prac
tice: Reaching for Excellence (ed. D. S. Prescott, C. L. Maeschalck, and S. D. Miller, pp.
13–35). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Shimokawa, K., Lambert, M. J., and Smart, D. W. (2010). “Enhancing Treatment Outcome
of Patients at Risk of Treatment Failure: Meta-Analytic and Mega-Analytic Review of a
Psychotherapy Quality Assurance System.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
78: 298–311.

-- 21 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 22 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Simon, W., Lambert, M. J., Harris, M. W., Busath, G., and Vazquez, A. (2012). “Providing
Patient Progress Information and Clinical Support Tools to Therapists: Effects on Patients
at Risk of Treatment Failure.” Psychotherapy Research 22: 638–647.
Stiles, W. B., Barkham, M., Mellor-Clark, J., and Connell, J. (2008). “Effectiveness of Cog
nitive-Behavioural, Person-Centred, and Psychodynamic Therapies in UK Primary-Care
Routine Practice: Replication in a Larger Sample.” Psychological Medicine 38: 677–688.
Stiles, W. B. and Horvath, A. O. (2017). “Appropriate Responsiveness as a Contribution to
Therapist Effects.” In How and Why Are Some Therapists Better than Others? Under
standing Therapist Effects (ed. L. G. Castonguay and C. E. Hill, pp. 71–84). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Tasca, G. A., Angus, L., Bonli, R., Drapeau, M., Fitzpatrick, M., Hunsley, J., and Knoll, M.
(2019). “Outcome and Progress Monitoring in Psychotherapy: Report of a Canadian Psy
chological Association Task Force.” Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne 60:
165–177.
Unsworth, G., Cowie, H., and Green, A. (2012). “Therapists’ and Clients’ Perceptions of
Routine Outcome Measurement in the NHS: A Qualitative Study.” Counselling and Psy
chotherapy Research 12: 71–80.
Waldron, S. M., Loades, M. E., and Rogers, L. (2018). “Routine Outcome Monitoring in
CAMHS: How Can We Enable Implementation in Practice?” Child and Adolescent Mental
Health 23: 328–333.
Walfish, S., McAlister, B., O’Donnell, P., and Lambert, M. J. (2012). “An Investigation of
Self-Assessment Bias in Mental Health Providers.” Psychological Reports 110: 639–644.
Wampold, B. E. and Brown, G. S. (2005). “Estimating Variability in Outcomes Attributable
to Therapists: A Naturalistic Study of Outcomes in Managed Care.” Journal of Consulting
& Clinical Psychology 73: 914–923.
Watkins, C. E., Jr. (2011). “Does Psychotherapy Supervision Contribute to Patient Out
comes? Considering Thirty Years of Research.” The Clinical Supervisor 30: 235–256.
Weisz, J. R., Weiss, B., Han, S. S., Granger, D. A., and Morton, T. (1995). “Effects of Psy
chotherapy with Children and Adolescents Revisited: A Meta-Analysis of Treatment Out
come Studies.” Psychological Bulletin 117: 450–468.
Notes:
(1.) The story of George Washington originally appeared in Miller et al. (2000b) and is re
told here with permission of Professional Counselor magazine.
(2.) Reproduced from Stiles, W. B. and Horvath, A. O., ‘Appropriate Responsiveness as a
Contribution to Therapist Effects’, in L. G. Castonguay and C. E. Hill (eds.), How and Why

-- 22 of 23 --

Toward an Evidence-based Standard of Professional Competence
Page 23 of 23
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 02 September 2020
Are Some Therapists Better than Others? Understanding Therapist Effects, p. 71, https://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000034-005 Copyright © 2017, American Psychological Association.
(3.) Clinicians in independent practice can access the measures at: https://scott-d-miller-
ph-d.myshopify.com/collections/performance-metrics/products/performance-metrics-li
censes-for-the-ors-and-srs
Scott D. Miller
International Center for Clinical Excellence
Joshua W. Madsen
Department of Psychology, University of Calgary
Mark A. Hubble
Institute for the Study of Therapeutic Change

-- 23 of 23 --

