

-- 1 of 593 --

Ethical, Legal, and
Professional Issues
in Counseling
S E V E N T H 	E D I T I O N
Theodore P. Remley, Jr.
University of Holy Cross
Barbara Herlihy
University of New Orleans (Emerita)

-- 2 of 593 --

Content Development: Linda Bishop
Content Management: Rebecca Fox-Gieg
Content Production: Shruti Joshi
Product Management: Drew Bennett
Product Marketing: Krista Clark
Rights and Permissions: Jenell Forschler
Please contact https://support.pearson.com/getsupport/s/ with the queries on this content
Cover image by borchee/E+/Getty images
Copyright © 2025, 2020, 2016 by Pearson Education, Inc. 221 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030. All Rights Reserved.
Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission should be obtained
from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise. To obtain permission(s) to use material from this
work, please visit http://www.pearsoned.com/permissions/
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the page within the text, which constitute an extension of this
copyright page.
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks that may appear in this work are the property of their
respective owners and any references to third-party trademarks, logos or other trade dress are for demonstrative or
descriptive purposes only. Such references are not intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization,
or promotion of Pearson's products by the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner and Pearson
Education, Inc. or its affiliates, authors, licensees or distributors.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Remley, Theodore Phant, Jr., author. | Herlihy, Barbara, author.
Title: Ethical, legal, and professional issues in counseling/Theodore P. Remley, Jr., University of Holy Cross,
Barbara Herlihy, University of New Orleans (Emerita).
Description: Seventh edition. | Hoboken, NJ: Pearson Education, [2025] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023030642 | ISBN 9780138168070 (paperback) | ISBN 9780138168063 (ebook) | ISBN
9780138168032 (ebook) | ISBN 9780138168025 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Counseling—Moral and ethical aspects—United States. | Counselors—Professional ethics—United
States. | Counseling—Law and legislation—United States. | Counselors—Legal status, laws, etc.—United States.
Classification: LCC BF636.67 .R46 2025 | DDC 174/.91583–dc23/eng/20230802
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023030642
ScoutAutomatedPrintCode
ISBN-10: 	0-13-816807-5
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-816807-0

-- 3 of 593 --

We embrace the many dimensions of diversity, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender,
sex, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, ability, age, and religious or political beliefs.
Education is a powerful force for equity and change in our world. It has the potential to deliver
opportunities that improve lives and enable economic mobility. As we work with authors to create
content for every product and service, we acknowledge our responsibility to demonstrate inclusivity
and incorporate diverse scholarship so that everyone can achieve their potential through learning.
As the world’s leading learning company, we have a duty to help drive change and live up to our
purpose to help more people create a better life for themselves and to create a better world.
Our ambition is to purposefully contribute to a world where:
Accessibility
We are also committed to providing products
that are fully accessible to all learners. As per
Pearson’s guidelines for accessible educational
Web media, we test and retest the capabilities
of our products against the highest standards
for every release, following the WCAG guidelines
in developing new products for copyright year
2022 and beyond.
You can learn more about Pearson’s
commitment to accessibility at
https://www.pearson.com/us/accessibility.html
Pearson is dedicated to creating bias-free content that reflects the diversity,
depth, and breadth of all learners’ lived experiences.
Pearson’s Commitment
to Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion
• Everyone has an equitable and lifelong
opportunity to succeed through learning.
• Our educational content accurately reflects
the histories and lived experiences of the
learners we serve.
• Our educational products and services are inclusive
and represent the rich diversity of learners.
• Our educational content prompts deeper
discussions with students and motivates them to
expand their own learning (and worldview).
Contact Us
While we work hard to present unbiased, fully
accessible content, we want to hear from you about
any concerns or needs with this Pearson product so
that we can investigate and address them.
Please contact us with concerns about any
potential bias at
https://www.pearson.com/report-bias.html
For accessibility-related issues, such as using
assistive technology with Pearson products,
alternative text requests, or accessibility
documentation, email the Pearson Disability Support
team at disability.support@pearson.com

-- 4 of 593 --

iv
PREFACE
We are pleased that this text is now in its seventh edition and has been adopted for master’s and
doctoral courses in ethics in many counseling graduate programs throughout the United States and
abroad. We set out to write a text on ethics, law, and professional issues in counseling that would
provide basic information for graduate students in these areas and would offer sound practical advice
for counseling practitioners. Faculty members and students who have used this text in their teaching
and learning have told us that they find it to be comprehensive, rich with examples and case studies,
and written in a style that makes complex material understandable.
We think you will find it useful to know something about us, the co-authors, and how we
came to write this text. From 1997 to 2006, we were both professors in the counseling graduate
program at the University of New Orleans. Ted Remley is an attorney with several years of legal
experience and has been a school and community college counselor. Barbara Herlihy has worked
as a school counselor and a licensed professional counselor in private practice and community
agency settings. She currently is a retired counselor educator with special interests in counselor
ethics and social justice.
Before we became colleagues at the University of New Orleans, we worked together over
many years, co-authoring articles and presenting numerous workshops on law and ethics in
counseling. It was through these workshops that the idea for this text was born. The counselors
who attended our workshops had much in common despite practicing in a variety of settings
and having diverse clientele. They shared a deep and abiding commitment to the welfare of
their clients, a desire to stay current with the ethical standards of their profession, and a need to
feel competent in dealing with the legal issues that arose in their work. At the same time, they
sometimes felt overwhelmed by the complex and conflicting demands of the situations they
encountered. They frequently had difficulty distinguishing between legal and ethical issues. As
we worked together in our presentations to these counselors, we found that we very rarely dis-
agreed with each other but that we did bring differing perspectives. Barbara’s ethics orientation
led her to focus on client welfare and to emphasize protecting the client. Ted’s legal orientation
helped us to consider another dimension—that of protecting the counselor. We believe both
perspectives are important.
Because both of us regularly taught graduate courses in professional orientation and ethics,
we found ourselves discussing the need for a text written specifically for counselors that would
address ethical, legal, and professional issues. Thus, out of our backgrounds and shared interests
was conceived a text that is unique in that it approaches each professional issue in counseling
from both an ethical perspective and a legal viewpoint. We believe that you will find this inte-
grated approach particularly helpful as you grapple with the complexities inherent in the work
of the counselor.
We also believe that the best learning is active rather than passive and is personalized rather
than abstract. We hope that you will actively discuss and even argue about the issues that we discuss
throughout the text and that you will work to develop your own personal stance on these issues. Case
studies of common situations and dilemmas that counseling practitioners encounter are presented in
each chapter. We ask you to imagine that you are the counselor in each case study and to consider
what you would think, how you would feel, and what you might do in each situation. In these case
studies, as in real life, there is rarely a single correct resolution to the counselor’s dilemma, so we
hope that the situations will spark lively discussion among you and your classmates.

-- 5 of 593 --

Preface 	v
In this seventh edition, we discuss the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the counsel-
ing profession and acknowledge the dramatic shift from in-person to virtual counseling services.
Unfortunately, there are no standard, agreed-upon terms that are used for technology applications
in the counseling profession. However, the following words and phrases are frequently used
to describe counseling that is delivered electronically by voice, video, or text: telecounseling,
telemental health, teletherapy, online counseling, remote counseling, e-counseling, and virtual
counseling. The American Counseling Association’s Code of Ethics (2023) uses the term distance
counseling to describe counseling that does not take place while the counselor and the client are
in the same physical space. The Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational
Programs (CACREP) uses the term digital delivery to describe teaching, supervision, or counsel-
ing that is provided through electronic means. In this text, we have chosen to use the terms virtual
counseling, supervision, and teaching and define them, respectively, as counseling, supervision,
and teaching that take place using electronic means including video, voice, or text.
We hope that you will find this new edition to be interesting and informative.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
• Discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the counseling profession. We identify
and explore how the pandemic has changed every major ethical, legal, and professional issue
in counseling. At the beginning of each of the 16 chapters, we highlight how the urgent shift to
virtual counseling, supervision, and teaching that was necessitated by the pandemic has been
addressed by counselors, supervisors, and counselor educators.
• Additional case studies with discussion. More case studies that explore ethical, legal, and profes-
sional issues in counseling have been added, including situations related to virtual counseling,
supervision, and teaching. At the conclusion of each case, we provide our best reasoning as
counselor educators who specialize in ethics and law in counseling.
• Updated and current information on the use of technology in counseling, supervision, and teach-
ing. We have included recent refereed journal articles in Chapter 10 that provide the best thinking
related to the expanding use of technology in the counseling profession.
• Expanded attention to multicultural, social justice, and advocacy issues includes a discus-
sion of the disproportionate toll of the COVID-19 pandemic on marginalized members of
U.S. society.
• Updates to progress in allowing counselors to become licensed in more than their home state.
In Chapters 2 and 13, we report that states are passing legislation that will allow counselors who
are licensed in one state to more easily obtain a license in additional states.
• Includes issues related to trauma-informed counseling. We discuss the expanding literature about
the role of trauma in clients’ lives. We also identify and discuss ethical, legal, and professional
issues in trauma-focused counseling.
• Updated chapter references to the 2024 revised CACREP Standards.
KEY CONTENT UPDATES BY CHAPTER
Chapter 1: Introduction
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the counseling profession.
• New: update on planned revision of ACA Code of Ethics.

-- 6 of 593 --

vi 	Preface
• New: exercise for exploring the ACA Code of Ethics.
• Updated review of ethical decision-making models focused on counseling specific popula-
tions or on particular ethical issues.
• Five case studies with expert analysis.
Chapter 2: Professional Identity of Counselors
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the professional identity of
counselors.
• Updated discussion of the increasing recognition in the counseling profession of the impor-
tance of advocating for clients who face societal and institutes barriers that restrict their
access to resources or inhibit their growth and development.
• Updated description of the divisions of the American Counseling Association.
• New: introduction to the interstate counseling licensure compacts that are being developed.
• New: information about counselors now being recognized as providers of mental health
services to Medicare recipients.
• An update on the growth of the counseling profession throughout the world.
• Four case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 3: Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on multiculturalism, social jus-
tice, advocacy, and values.
• Updated discussion of the Multicultural and Social Justice Competencies and the updated
Advocacy Competencies
• New: discussion of the impact of the Black Lives Matter movement.
• Updated information on current challenges facing members of the LGBTGEQIAP+
community.
• Updated overview of intersectionality.
• A discussion about the controversy that has occurred when some conservative Christian
counselors and counselors-in-training have refused to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients
based on their religious beliefs.
• Seven case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 4: Client Welfare and Informed Consent
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on client welfare and informed consent.
• New: discussion of interruptions in services and termination of services in the context of
increased virtual counseling practices.
• Updated overview of diversity considerations regarding client informed consent.
• Five case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 5: Confidentiality and Privileged Communication
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on confidentiality and privileged
communication.
• Updated exploration regarding confidentiality since virtual counseling services have increased.
• A summary of current perspectives on the many exceptions to client confidentiality.
• Four case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.

-- 7 of 593 --

Preface 	vii
Chapter 6: Records and Subpoenas
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on records and subpoenas.
• New: discussion of recordkeeping in virtual counseling environments.
• Subpoenas issued for virtual court proceedings.
• Five case studies with expert analysis.
• New: two video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 7: Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on counselor competence, assess-
ment, and diagnosis
• New: discussion of ethical concerns in counseling that have arisen with the growth of the
use of artificial intelligence.
• A review of recent literature related to counselor burnout and impairment.
• An overview of the importance of diversity considerations in diagnosing mental disorders.
• Seven case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 8: Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on malpractice and resolving
legal and ethical challenges.
• Updated information on areas in which counselors are accused of wrongdoing.
• Specific advice to assist counselors avoid malpractice claims.
• Updated overview of ethical and legal issues related to providing counseling services to
clients who engage in non-suicidal self-injury.
• A discussion of the role of counselors in preventing cyberbullying.
• Updated information on counseling clients who are living with HIV.
• Five case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 9: Boundary Issues
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on boundary issues.
• New: an exploration of the special boundary issues associated with the increased use of
virtual counseling, teaching, and supervision.
• The impact of an increasingly diverse society on boundary issues in counseling.
• Updated review of unavoidable boundary issues that arise in counseling.
• Emerging perspectives on self-disclosure of counselors.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 10: Technology in Counseling
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on technology in counseling.
• New: discussion of how the recent increase of use of virtual approaches to counseling, teaching,
and supervision has changed the counseling profession.
• An overview of how clients now use social media.
• Emerging ideas about cyberbullying and sexting that are important to counselors.
• The advantages and limitations of virtual counseling.
• Updated summary of the guidelines that have been published for the use of technology in mental
health counseling.
• Perspectives on the use of social media by counselors.
• Updated information on electronic recordkeeping guidelines.

-- 8 of 593 --

viii 	Preface
• New: issues related to artificial intelligence and counseling.
• Three case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 11: Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on counseling children and
vulnerable adults.
• New: the impact on counseling of the overturning by the US Supreme Court of Roe v. Wade.
• Updated information on providing services to children who may be at risk of harm to self or
others.
• Special issues related to counseling children in school environments.
• Current perspectives on counseling survivors of sex trafficking.
• Seven case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 12: Counseling Families and Groups
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on counseling families and groups.
• Updated information on intimate partner violence.
• An exploration of value-laden issues in marriage and family counseling.
• Six case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 13: Professional Relationships, Private Practice, & Health Care Plans
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on professional relationships, private
practice, and health care plans.
• New: an exploration of how private counseling practices have changed since virtual counseling
has become so widespread.
• Updated perspectives on transitioning from being an employed counselor to owning and
operating a private counseling practice.
• New: developments in counselors being recognized as mental health care providers, including
recognition by Medicare.
• Six case studies with expert analysis.
• New: two video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 14: Issues in Counselor Education
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on issues in counselor education.
• New: issues related to online delivery of counselor preparation programs.
• Current perspectives related to gatekeeping in counselor education.
• Relationship boundaries between faculty and students in counselor education.
• Four case studies with expert analysis.
• New: two video vignettes with discussion questions.
Chapter 15: Supervision and Consultation
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on supervision and consultation.
• New: the increased use of virtual supervision.
• Four case studies with expert analysis.
• New: three video vignettes with discussion questions.

-- 9 of 593 --

Preface 	ix
Chapter 16: Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing
• New: discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on professional writing, conducting
research, and publishing.
• New: perspectives on student academic integrity since online education has become more
prevalent.
• Recent emphasis on research quality in the counseling profession.
• Five case studies with expert analysis.
• New: two video vignettes with discussion questions.
LEARNING MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
(LMS)-COMPATIBLE ASSESSMENT BANK, AND OTHER INSTRUCTOR
RESOURCES
• Video Examples Chapters provide real-life counselor and client interactions or counselor-to-
counselor interactions. These Video Examples include digital case examples giving you experi-
ences of counseling scenarios that you likely will encounter in a counseling practice. Accessible
through your eTexbook, simply clicking on the video icon allows you to observe the counseling
session presented. Thought-provoking questions are offered in the video captions to guide your
thinking in applying the counseling advice provided in the chapter.
LMS-Compatible Assessment Bank
With this new edition, all assessment types—quizzes and application exercises—are included in
LMS-compatible assessment banks for the following learning management systems: Blackboard,
Canvas, D2L, and Moodle. These packaged files give maximum flexibility to instructors when it
comes to importing, assigning, and grading assessments. Assessment types include:
• Chapter Quizzes Each chapter includes Chapter Quizzes that are available for instructors
to assign through their Learning Management System. Each quiz contains higher-order mul-
tiple choice questions that measure understanding of chapter content. Each multiple-choice
question includes feedback for the correct answer and for each distractor to help guide
students’ learning.
• Application Exercises Each chapter provides opportunities for you to apply what you have
learned in Application Exercises. These exercises are set up in a short-answer format and are
based on the chapter’s Video Examples or case-based scenarios and are intended to allow you
to practice applying the principles and processes of counseling practices. A model response is
provided to help assess and guide your learning.
• Chapter Tests. Suggested test items are provided for each chapter in multiple-choice format.

-- 10 of 593 --

x 	Preface
INSTRUCTORS RESOURCES
Instructor’s Manual
The Instructor’s Manual is provided as a Word document and includes resources to assist professors
in planning their course.
PowerPoint® Slides
PowerPoint ® slides are provided for each chapter and highlight key concepts and summarize the
content of the text to make it more meaningful for students.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The comments of the following reviewers were invaluable in suggesting updates for this edition of
the text: Nicole A. Cobb, Vanderbilt University.; Robert Casares, Wake Forest University; Claudette
Brown-Smythe, SUNY Brockport; Rebecca Koltz, Montana State University; and Rafael Outland,
SUNY Brockport.
We are also grateful to Robert Casares for his additional, specific review of Chapter 10:
Technology. His significant recommendations were instrumental in helping us update this chapter.

-- 11 of 593 --

xi
BRIEF CONTENTS
Section 1: 	Foundations
Chapter 1 	Introduction 	1
Chapter 2 	Professional Identity of Counselors 	28
Chapter 3 	Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	63
Section 2: 	Issues
Chapter 4 	Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	85
Chapter 5 	Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	107
Chapter 6 	Records and Subpoenas 	133
Chapter 7 	Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	160
Chapter 8 	Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	196
Chapter 9 	Boundary Issues 	228
Chapter 10 	Technology in Counseling 	258
Chapter 11 	Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	284
Chapter 12 	Counseling Families and Groups 	311
Chapter 13 	Professional Relationships, Private Practice,
and Health Care Plans 	337
Chapter 14 	Issues in Counselor Education 	368
Chapter 15 	Supervision and Consultation 	391
Chapter 16 	Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	415
Appendix A 	ACA Code of Ethics 	437
Appendix B 	Counseling Disclosure and Agreement Forms 	472
Appendix C 	Client Request Form to Transfer Records 	480
Appendix D 	Client Permission Form to Record Counseling
Session for Supervision Purposes 	481
Appendix E 	Guidelines for Counseling Case Notes 	482
Appendix F 	Clinical Supervision Model Agreement 	484
References 	486
Name Index 	551
Subject Index 	559

-- 12 of 593 --

xii
CONTENTS
Section 1: 	Foundations
Chapter 1 	Introduction 	1
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on
the Counseling Profession 	2
Professional Orientation 	2
Morals, Values, and Ethics 	3
Legal, Ethical, and Professional Behavior 	5
A Model for Professional Practice 	7
Professional Ethics 	9
Foundations of Ethics 	9
Theories of Ethics 	10
Linking Theory to Practice: Principles and Virtues 	12
Codes of Ethics 	14
Legal Issues 	21
Origins of Law 	22
Recognizing Legal Issues 	22
Obtaining Legal Advice 	23
Exercising Professional Judgment 	24
Summary and Key Points 	26
Chapter 2 	Professional Identity of Counselors 	28
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on
the Professional Identity of Counselors 	30
Philosophy Underlying the Counseling Profession 	30
Counseling Services 	34
Preparing and Credentialing Counselors 	35
Counselor Preparation Programs 	35
Credentialing 	36
Program Accreditation 	39
Ethical Standards Related to Credentialing 	40
The Origins and Evolution of the Counseling
Profession 	42
Counseling Psychology 	42
School Counseling 	43
Vocational Rehabilitation Counseling 	43
Counseling as a New Profession 	44
Steps in Becoming a Profession 	44
Progress Toward Professionalization 	45

-- 13 of 593 --

Contents 	xiii
Professional Associations of Counselors 	45
American Counseling Association 	46
ACA Divisions 	47
ACA State Branches 	49
Other Associations 	49
Current, Legal, and Political Issues Related to
Professional Identity 	50
Specialties Versus One United Profession 	50
Organizational Structure of ACA 	51
CACREP Accreditation of Specialties 	51
Varying State Licensure and Certification Requirements 	52
Legal and Political Issues 	52
Identity and Professionalism 	56
Counseling and Other Mental Health Professions 	56
Pride in the Counseling Profession 	60
Counseling Around the World 	60
Summary and Key Points 	61
Chapter 3 	Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	63
Multicultural Competence, Social Justice, and Advocacy 	64
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Multiculturalism,
Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	65
Components of Multicultural Competence 	67
Competence 	71
Intersectionality 	76
Values and Value Conflicts 	77
Counselors’ Personal and Professional Values 	77
Values and the ACA Code of Ethics 	80
End-of-Life Decision Making 	81
Clients Who May Be Victims of Illegal Discrimination 	82
LGBTGEQIAP+ Clients and Family Law Issues 	83
Cultural Issues in Crisis Counseling 	83
Summary and Key Points 	84
Section 2: 	Issues
Chapter 4 	Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	85
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on
Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	86
Client Welfare 	86
Counselor Needs and Motivations 	86
Preventing Dependent Relationships 	88
Mandated Clients 	89

-- 14 of 593 --

xiv 	Contents
Counseling Techniques 	90
Interruptions and Termination 	92
Preventing Abandonment 	94
Informed Consent 	96
Origins of Informed Consent 	97
Written Disclosure Statements 	99
Summary and Key Points 	105
Chapter 5 	Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	107
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on
Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	110
Confidentiality 	110
Origins of Confidentiality 	110
The Rationale for Confidentiality 	111
Counselor Practices and Confidentiality 	112
Ethical Standards and Confidentiality 	113
Privileged Communication 	114
Origins of Privileged Communication 	115
The Rationale for Privileged Communication in
Counseling Relationships 	117
Asserting the Privilege 	119
Responding to Subpoenas 	120
Suits for Disclosure 	120
Exceptions to Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	121
Client Waiver of the Privilege 	121
Death of the Client 	122
Sharing Information with Subordinates or Fellow Professionals 	122
Protecting Someone Who May Be in Danger 	125
Counseling Multiple Clients 	126
Counseling Minor or Legally Incompetent Clients 	128
Court-Ordered Disclosures 	129
Legal Protections for Counselors in Disputes 	129
Other Legal Exceptions 	129
Diversity Considerations in Confidentiality and Privileged
Communication 	130
Summary and Key Points 	131
Chapter 6 	Records and Subpoenas 	133
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Records
and Subpoenas 	133
Records 	134
Purposes of Records 	135
Ethical Standards Related to Records 	137

-- 15 of 593 --

Contents 	xv
Legal Requirements 	139
Confidentiality and Privileged Communication
Requirements 	140
Types of Records Kept by Counselors 	140
Client Access to Records 	147
Federal Laws Affecting Counseling Records 	148
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 	149
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 	151
Federally Funded Substance Abuse Programs 	152
Other Federal Statutes 	153
Handling, Storing, and Destroying Records 	153
Voluntarily Transferring Records 	154
Subpoenas 	155
Discovery in Litigation 	155
Validity of Subpoenas 	156
Interrogatories 	157
Appearances at Proceedings 	157
Testimony Under Oath 	158
Turning Over Records 	158
Summary and Key Points 	159
Chapter 7 	Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	160
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on
Counselor Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	160
Competence as an Ethical and Legal Concept 	161
Counselor Preparation 	163
Credentialing 	164
Maintaining Competence 	167
Diversity Considerations 	172
Erosion of Competence: Burnout and Impairment 	173
Assessment 	178
Evaluation and Assessment 	178
Testing 	181
Diversity Issues in Testing 	186
Diagnosis 	187
Functions of Diagnosis 	187
Risks of Diagnosis 	188
Ethical Challenges in Diagnosis 	188
Qualifications to Diagnose 	190
Diversity Considerations in Diagnosis 	191
Legal Issues in Diagnosis 	193
Summary and Key Points 	194

-- 16 of 593 --

xvi 	Contents
Chapter 8 	Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	196
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Malpractice
and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	196
Malpractice 	197
Clients at Risk for Suicide 	199
Clients Who May Be at Risk for Harming Others 	207
A Hypothetical Malpractice Case 	211
Actual Malpractice Cases 	213
Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	214
Legal and Ethical Decision Making 	214
Responding to Accusations of Unethical or Illegal Behavior 	215
When You Suspect a Colleague Is Acting Unethically or Illegally 	219
Unethical Behavior 	219
Unwarranted Complaints 	223
Inappropriate Discrimination Against Those Who
Have Been Accused 	223
Illegal Behavior of Others 	224
Cases Are Often Complex 	224
Guidelines for Preventing Problems 	225
Summary and Key Points 	227
Chapter 9 	Boundary Issues 	228
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Boundary Issues 	228
The Complexities of Dual Relationships 	229
Evolving Perspectives 	229
Problematic Characteristics of Dual Relationships 	230
Ethical Standards 	232
Risks and Benefits 	233
Unavoidable Dual Relationships 	236
Boundary Crossings Versus Boundary Violations 	240
Specific Boundary Issues 	242
Ethical Decision-Making Models 	250
Sexual Dual Relationships 	251
The Offending Mental Health Professional 	252
Harm to Clients 	252
Legal Consequences for Offending Counselors 	253
Postcounseling Sexual Relationships 	254
Sexual Attraction to Clients 	255
Counseling Clients Who Have Been Abused
by Previous Counselors 	255
Summary and Key Points 	256

-- 17 of 593 --

Contents 	xvii
Chapter 10 Technology in Counseling 	258
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Technology
in Counseling 	258
The Impact of Technology on the Counseling
Profession 	259
Client Use of Technology 	260
Virtual Counseling 	263
Informed Consent 	264
Advantages of Virtual Counseling 	265
Limitations and Boundaries 	266
A Rapidly Changing Environment 	267
Counselor Use of Technology 	270
Using the Internet to Educate Clients 	270
Communicating with Clients 	270
Telephone Use by Counselors 	271
Electronic Mail Communications 	272
Testing 	275
Technology in Teaching 	275
Technology in Clinical Supervision 	276
Social Media Use by Counselors 	277
Office Security Systems 	277
Electronic Recordkeeping 	278
Client Behavior and Technology 	279
Artificial Intelligence in Counseling 	280
Diversity Considerations in the Use of Technology 	282
Summary and Key Points 	282
Chapter 11 Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	284
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Counseling
Children and Vulnerable Adults 	285
Counseling Minor Clients 	285
Legal Status and Rights of Minors 	286
The Rights of Parents 	288
Counseling Children at Risk for Harm to Self or Others 	291
Release of Records 	293
Confidentiality in School Counseling 	293
Reporting Suspected Child Abuse or Neglect 	295
School Violence 	299
Survivors of Sex Trafficking 	300
Multiple Roles of Counselors in Schools 	300
Diversity Considerations with Minors 	302

-- 18 of 593 --

xviii 	Contents
Vulnerable Adults 	304
Elder or Vulnerable Adult Maltreatment 	304
Other Issues in Counseling Older Adults 	306
Diversity Considerations in Counseling Older Adults 	309
Clients Who Have Been Declared Legally Incompetent 	309
Summary and Key Points 	309
Chapter 12 Counseling Families and Groups 	311
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Counseling
Families and Groups 	312
Counseling Families 	313
The Legal Perspective 	314
Informed Consent 	314
Client Welfare 	316
Risky Techniques 	316
Family Violence 	317
Privacy, Confidentiality, and Privileged Communication 	318
Family Secrets 	320
Divorce and Child Custody 	322
Counselor Competence 	324
LGBTGEQIAP+ Couples and Families 	325
Counselor Values 	325
Group Counseling 	327
Informed Consent 	327
Screening 	328
Client Welfare and Protection from Harm 	329
Privacy and Confidentiality 	329
Confidentiality with Minors 	330
Privileged Communication 	331
Relationship Boundaries 	331
Socializing Among Members 	332
Freedom to Exit the Group 	333
Counselor Competence 	333
Diversity and Values Considerations in Group Counseling 	334
Summary and Key Points 	335
Chapter 13 Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and
Health Care Plans 	337
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Professional
Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	339
Professional Relationships 	339
Employer–Employee Relationships 	339
Confidential Information 	345

-- 19 of 593 --

Contents 	xix
Referrals 	346
Respecting Other Professionals 	347
Private Practice 	348
Taxes and Business Licenses 	350
Business Form 	351
Fees for Services 	352
Attorney and Accountant Services 	353
Professional Liability Insurance 	354
Making the Transition 	354
Health Care Plans 	355
State Insurance Laws 	356
Managed Care 	357
Types of Health Care Plans 	357
Counselors as Service Providers 	358
Federal Health Care Plans 	359
Client Privacy 	360
Diagnosis 	360
Informed Consent 	361
Receiving Payment for Services 	361
Continuing Treatment and Denial of Services 	361
Avoiding Fraud 	363
The Changing Nature of Health Care Plans 	365
Diversity Considerations 	365
Summary and Key Points 	366
Chapter 14 Issues in Counselor Education 	368
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Counselor Education 	368
Counselor Education Programs 	369
Informed Consent 	369
Admissions 	370
Curriculum Issues 	372
Gatekeeping 	378
Faculty and Student Issues 	382
Faculty Competence 	382
Diversity Considerations 	382
Student–Faculty Research Collaboration 	383
Relationships Boundaries Between Counselor Educators
and Students 	384
Diversity Considerations in Faculty–Student Relationships 	387
Relationships Among Students 	388
Responsibilities of Students 	389
Summary and Key Points 	390

-- 20 of 593 --

xx 	Contents
Chapter 15 Supervision and Consultation 	391
The Impact of COVID-19 on Supervision and Consultation 	392
Supervision 	392
Administrative and Clinical Supervision 	392
Fair Evaluation 	393
Informed Consent 	394
Supervision Agreements 	395
Supervisor Competence 	396
Confidentiality Concerns 	397
Supervisory Relationships 	398
Accountability and Responsibility 	402
Vicarious Liability 	403
Supervisor and Supervisee Rights and Responsibilities 	404
Technology Issues in Supervision 	405
Diversity Considerations in Supervision 	405
Consultation 	407
Accountability 	407
Power 	408
Consultation Contracts 	409
Consultant Competence 	409
Safeguarding Consultee and Client Rights 	410
The Consultation Relationship 	411
The Role of Values and Diversity in Consultation 	412
Summary and Key Points 	413
Chapter 16 Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	415
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Writing, Research,
and Publishing 	416
Professional Writing 	417
Academic Integrity 	417
Conducting Research 	420
Research Roles 	421
Research Design 	422
Protecting Research Participants from Harm 	423
Institutional Review Boards 	426
Reporting Results 	427
Commitments to Participants 	427
Honest and Accurate Reporting of Results 	428
Cooperating with Other Researchers 	429
Publication 	429
Giving Credit to Contributors 	429
Submitting Work for Publication Consideration 	431

-- 21 of 593 --

Contents 	xxi
Copyright Laws 	432
Contracts 	433
Reporting Income 	434
Summary and Key Points 	435
Appendix A 	ACA Code of Ethics 	437
Appendix B 	Counseling Disclosure and Agreement Forms 	472
Appendix C 	Client Request Form to Transfer Records 	480
Appendix D 	Client Permission Form to Record Counseling Session
for Supervision Purposes 	481
Appendix E 	Guidelines for Counseling Case Notes 	482
Appendix F 	Clinical Supervision Model Agreement 	484
References 	486
Name Index 	551
Subject Index 	559

-- 22 of 593 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 23 of 593 --

1
1Introduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1.1 Explain how ethical, legal, and professional
behaviors are different from each other.
1.2 Articulate the process involved in ethical decision
making.
1.3 Describe how to recognize legal issues and how to
obtain legal advice.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. Assuming that you are a moral and
responsible person (as are most
counselors), why do you think
it is important for you to study
ethical and legal principles and the
decision-making process?
2. What are the differences among
legal, ethical, and professional
behaviors?
3. What resources can you use when
you need help in resolving an
ethical dilemma?
4. How should you get legal advice
when a legal issue presents itself?
This text is intended primarily for prospective counselors,
so most readers are likely to be graduate students in coun-
selor education programs. However, many counselors who
are already practicing use this text as a resource to help
them address legal and ethical issues. Whether you are a
student or a practicing professional counselor, we hope you
will develop a thoughtful understanding of ethical, legal,
and professional issues in counseling as you digest and dis-
cuss the material.
Before you begin exploring these issues, it may be
helpful to have an overview of how this text is organized.
Section I contains this introductory chapter and two addi-
tional chapters that address professional identity and diver-
sity. These are cross-cutting issues that permeate every
ethical, legal, and professional issue that is discussed in
Section II. Each chapter in Section II focuses on a specific
issue such as confidentiality, competence, boundaries of the
counseling relationship, and technology in counseling.
Since the previous edition of this text was created, the
entire world experienced upheaval caused by the COVID-
19 pandemic. The pandemic not only disrupted lives but
also caused profound changes in the ways that counseling
is taught and practiced. Virtual counseling, supervision, and
education are now the norm, even in our post-pandemic
environment. Thus, each chapter now contains a short, new
section that describes the impact of the COVID-19 pan-
demic on the issue(s) addressed in that chapter.

-- 24 of 593 --

2 	Section 1 • Foundations
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the
Counseling Profession
During the early months of 2020, as the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic became apparent,
U.S. society went into lockdown. The widespread upheaval in people’s lives included dealing with
a life-threatening illness, the deaths of loved ones, loss of employment, widespread fear and anxi-
ety, and profound disruptions of daily routines of living. The impact on the counseling profession
was dramatic, as counseling and counselor education were forced to switch immediately to virtual
means of delivery. Adaptations and transitions occurred at a remarkably fast pace so that counseling
services could continue to be available, now in a virtual format, to most clients. Counselor education
programs switched to online delivery as well, and students were able to continue with their studies
and to graduate on time. These changes, born of necessity, turned out to have many advantages, and
virtual counseling and virtual counselor education have continued into the post-pandemic era, taking
their place alongside the resumption of face-to-face counseling and education. It will take time to fully
understand the impact of all these changes, but at this point it is evident that no aspect of the counsel-
ing profession, including ethical practice and legal requirements, remains untouched by the pandemic.
The ethical, legal, and professional issues raised by this transformation are discussed in more detail in
ensuing chapters.
PROFESSIONAL ORIENTATION
Ethical, legal, and professional issues, collectively, make up the professional orientation content
area of your graduate studies. A fundamental part of your professional development as a counselor
is to acquire a firm grounding in the area of professional orientation. This content area includes
three main components:
• Developing a professional identity as a counselor. This includes understanding the history and
development of counseling and related professions, knowing the professional roles and func-
tions of counselors and how these roles and functions are similar to and different from those of
other professions, learning about and becoming involved in professional organizations, gaining
awareness of counselor preparation standards and credentialing, knowing how to advocate for
your clients and your profession, and developing pride in your profession. Professional identity
is discussed in detail in Chapter 2.
• Learning about ethics. This involves becoming familiar with ethical standards for counselors,
understanding the ethical issues that counselors encounter, developing ethical reasoning and
decision-making skills, and being able to use an ethical decision-making model to apply your
knowledge and skills in your day-to-day professional activities.
• Learning about the law as it applies to counseling. This includes being able to distinguish
among legal, ethical, and clinical issues; acquiring a basic knowledge of legal issues in coun-
seling and the laws that affect the practice of counseling; and knowing what to do when you
are faced with a legal problem.
The importance of professional orientation is evident in standards for preparation and credential-
ing of counselors. The Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs
(CACREP) sets standards for counselor preparation and accredits training programs that meet these
standards. A primary purpose of the CACREP Standards (2024) is to ensure that students gradu-
ate with a strong professional identity. CACREP requires the curriculum for counselors-in-training

-- 25 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	3
to include studies that provide an understanding of professional functioning. Further information
about CACREP is provided in Chapter 2.
The National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC), a voluntary organization that creden-
tials counselors, also requires the counselors it certifies to complete coursework in the area of pro-
fessional orientation to counseling (NBCC, 2024). If you plan to become licensed as a professional
counselor, you should be aware that state counselor licensure boards mandate that licensees demon-
strate knowledge of professional orientation issues, which include ethical and legal issues.
Beyond external requirements, it is essential that you develop a strong professional identity
as a counselor during this time, when our profession is facing both new and ongoing challenges
from other mental health professions. Counseling is a relatively young profession, and the general
public may not be as aware of professional counselors’ identity as they are aware of the identities
of psychologists, social workers, and psychiatrists. You may be asked, “What kind of counselor are
you?” or “Is being a counselor like being a psychologist?” or “How are counselors different from
social workers?” These are legitimate questions, and you must be prepared to clearly explain who
you are as a member of this professional group, what you believe, how you are similar to other
mental health professionals, and, more importantly, how you are different from those professionals.
You must also be prepared to practice in ways that are ethically and legally sound and that promote
the welfare of your clients. Information throughout this text will provide you with an understand-
ing of your chosen profession of counseling and will prepare you to practice in an ethical and legal
manner.
We hope that seasoned practitioners, as well as counselors-in-training, will read this text and
find it useful. Professional, ethical, and legal standards are constantly changing, and it is important
to keep up to date. Also, as Corey et al. (2024) have pointed out, issues that students and beginning
practitioners encounter resurface and take on new meanings at different stages of one’s professional
development.
In the remainder of this section, we clarify some important terms, distinguishing among mor-
als, values, and ethics as these terms are used in this text. We also delineate the differences and areas
of overlap among ethical, legal, and professional issues as they apply to the practice of counseling.
Finally, we offer a model of professional practice that demonstrates how the multiple components
of practice are related to and connected with each other.
Morals, Values, and Ethics
The terms morals, values, and ethics are sometimes used interchangeably, and they do have overlap-
ping meanings. For instance, all three terms involve judgments about what is good and bad, or right
and wrong, and all pertain to the study of human conduct and relationships. Nonetheless, distinc-
tions must be drawn when these terms are applied to the behaviors of professional counselors so that
a shared understanding can be established.
The term moral is derived from the Latin word mores, which means customs or norms. Moral
actions are determined within a broad cultural context or religious standard. Although some moral
principles, such as “Do no harm to others,” are shared by most civilized groups of people, how these
moral principles are interpreted and acted on will vary from culture to culture and from individual
to individual within a culture. Thus, conduct that you evaluate as moral might be judged as immoral
by another person or by people in another society. It is important to remember that what you view
as moral behavior is based on your values. In this text, when we refer to moral conduct, we ask you
to think in terms of your personal belief system and how this belief system affects your interactions
with others in all aspects of your life.

-- 26 of 593 --

4 	Section 1 • Foundations
Although values are very similar to morals in that they serve as a guide to determining what
is good or right behavior, we use the term values to apply broadly to both the personal and the
professional functioning of counselors. Our personal values guide our choices and behaviors, and
each of us holds some values more strongly than other values. Your value system is unique to you,
and it has been influenced by your upbringing, the culture in which you live, and quite possibly
your religious beliefs. What is important about your personal values as they relate to professional
practice is that you have a high level of self-awareness of your values and that you learn to bracket
(Kocet & Herlihy, 2014), or set aside, your personal values within the counseling relationship. One
of the hardest lessons counselors must learn is to respect values that are different from their own
and to avoid imposing their own personal values on their clients. It is particularly difficult to avoid
imposing your values when an implicit bias (a bias of which you are not aware) is at work or when a
client holds values that are very different from your own (Thacker & Blueford, 2018). For example,
if you believe strongly that women have the right to choose whether to terminate a pregnancy, then
it will be challenging for you to keep your values in check as you counsel a woman who expresses
her support for a total ban on abortion. Similarly, it may be difficult for you to counsel clients who
are seeking divorce if you believe strongly in the sanctity of marriage. A series of court cases have
involved counselors with strong religious beliefs who declined to provide affirmative counseling to
clients who desired to improve their same-sex romantic relationships. Partly because of the contro-
versy generated by these court cases, the Code of Ethics of the American Counseling Association
(2014) includes several standards that make it quite clear that counselors must not impose their own
personal values on their clients.
Members of the counseling profession share certain professional values. These include enhanc-
ing human development across the life span, honoring diversity and embracing a multicultural
approach, promoting social justice, safeguarding the integrity of the counselor–client relationship, and
practicing competently and ethically (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, Preamble). These core values are
articulated in the Code of Ethics to help acculturate students to the expectations of the counseling pro-
fession (Francis, 2015). If a counseling student’s personal values were so strong that he or she could
not learn to counsel clients who held differing beliefs, or if a student could not embrace the profes-
sional values of the profession as articulated in the Code of Ethics, we would be concerned that the
student is not well suited for the counseling profession.
1-1 The Case of Carole
Carole is a master’s-degree student in counseling who is enrolled in her practicum course and
has begun to work under supervision with her first clients. Carole self-identifies as mixed-race
Latine: Her father is White, and her mother emigrated from a country in Central America.
Carole grew up hearing stories of the oppression and violence that her mother had experi-
enced in her home country before coming to the United States, and she has been saddened
and angered to see the prejudice that her mother continues to encounter as a member of the
Latine community.
Now in her sixth week of practicum, Carole has received positive feedback about her work
with clients. Today, however, she had a new client named Frank, who sought counseling for depres-
sion that he believes is caused by his inability to find a job. During the session, Frank spoke at length
and with bitterness about immigrants from Mexico and Central American countries who “have taken
all the jobs that rightfully belong to real Americans.” He also used a number of racial slurs as he was
speaking. Carole found herself feeling angry at Frank, and she struggled to get through the session.

-- 27 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	5
Ethics is a discipline within philosophy that is concerned with human conduct and moral deci-
sion making. Certainly, you have developed your own individual ethical stance that guides you in the
ways you treat others, expect them to treat you, and make decisions about what behaviors are good
or right for you. In this text, however, we think of ethics as it relates to the profession of counseling;
that is, ethics refers to conduct judged as good or right for counselors as a professional group. When
your fellow professionals have come to sufficient consensus about right behaviors, these behaviors
have been codified and have become the ethical standards to which you are expected to adhere in
your professional life (ACA, 2014). Therefore, think about ethics as referring to your professional
behavior and interactions. Keep in mind that ethics must prevail over your personal values when
value conflicts arise within a counseling relationship. Because the counseling relationship exists to
benefit the client, you must avoid imposing your own values on your clients.
Legal, Ethical, and Professional Behavior
Law is different from morality or ethics even though law, like morality, is created by a society, and
like ethics, it is codified. Laws are the agreed-upon rules of a society that set forth the basic prin-
ciples for living together as a group. Laws can be general or specific regarding both what is required
and what is allowed of individuals who form a governmental entity. Criminal laws hold individuals
accountable for violating principles of coexistence and are enforced by the government. Civil laws
allow members of society to enforce rules of living with each other.
Our view is that there are few conflicts between law and ethics in professional counseling. Keep
in mind, though, that there are important differences. Laws are created by elected officials, enforced
by police, and interpreted by judges. Ethics are created by members of the counseling profession and
are interpreted and enforced by ethics committees and licensure and certification boards. Laws dictate
the minimum standards of behavior that society will tolerate, whereas ethics pertains to a wider range
of professional functioning. Some ethical standards prescribe the minimum that other counselors will
tolerate from fellow professionals (for example, sexual or romantic relationships with clients are pro-
hibited), and some ethical standards describe ideal practices to which counselors should aspire (for
example, counselors shouldaspire to foster meaningful and respectful professional relationships).
During her feedback session regarding her work with the client, Carole acknowledged that
she had performed poorly in the counseling session and insisted that she would never be able to
work with clients like Frank who are prejudiced against people who share her heritage. She asked
to be reassigned to a different client.
• What do you think of Carole’s request to be reassigned so that she will not have to continue
working with Frank?
• If you were Carole’s supervisor, what would you tell her?
Discussion: Although Carole’s emotional reaction to the client’s prejudice toward people who share
her heritage is understandable, she must learn to bracket, or set aside, her personal values during
her counseling sessions. Her supervisor will work with her to help her process her reaction and learn
to effectively counsel clients who “push her personal buttons.” Actually, Carole is fortunate to have
encountered a client like Frank while she is in her practicum and can receive the assistance she
needs to become competent to work with such clients. Her supervisor will make it clear that refer-
ring Frank to a different counselor is not the solution to her difficulties and that Carole is expected to
develop the competence to work with clients who evoke uncomfortable personal reactions.

-- 28 of 593 --

6 	Section 1 • Foundations
Rowley and MacDonald (2001) discussed the differences between law and ethics using con-
cepts of culture and cross-culture. They argued that “law and ethics are based on different under-
standings of how the world operates” (p. 422). These authors advise you to learn the different culture
of law, seek to understand how law operates, and develop collaborative partnerships with attorneys.
We agree with the perspective that the cultures of counseling and law are different and that seeking
legal advice is often an important step in the practice of counseling.
Where does the notion of professionalism fit into the picture? Many factors—including the
relative newness of the counseling profession, compared to other mental health professions; the
interpersonal nature and complexity of the counseling process; and the wide variety of types of
counselors and their work settings—make it essential for counselors to conduct themselves in a
professional manner. However, it is not easy to define what it means to be professional, and we
discuss this in more detail in Chapter 2. Legal standards are the minimum that society will tolerate
from a professional. Ethical standards occupy a middle ground, describing both the minimal behav-
iors expected of counselors and the ideal standards to which counselors should aspire. Although
professionalism is related to ethics, it is possible to be unprofessional without being unethical. For
instance, a counselor might frequently run a bit late for counseling sessions, which might be consid-
ered unprofessional but would not be unethical. By contrast, if a counselor were to enter into a sexu-
ally intimate relationship with a client, this behavior would be unethical, illegal, and unprofessional
and would violate the professional values that counselors strive to uphold.
Professionalism is closely related to the concept in a profession of best practice, and perhaps
the concepts of law, ethics, and best practice in the field of counseling are on a continuum. Best
practice is the very best action a counselor could be expected to do. Best practice guidelines are
intended to provide counselors with goals to which they can aspire, and they are motivational, as
distinguished from ethical standards, some of which are aspirational while others are enforceable.
Although counselors vary to an extent in their beliefs about what constitutes best practice, you
will want to strive to practice in the best possible manner and to provide the most competent ser-
vices to your clients throughout your career. Meeting minimum legal standards or minimum ethical
standards is not enough for the truly professional counselor. Rather, professionalism demands that
you be the best counselor for your clients that you are capable of being.
1-2 The Case of Samya
Samya, who works in a community agency, will be seeing a 16-year-old minor for his first coun-
seling session. Samya knows that legally and ethically, she must have one of his parents sign an
agreement permitting her to disclose information regarding his sessions to his parent’s health
insurance company so that the parent will be reimbursed partially for the cost of her counseling
services. Samya also is aware that, according to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), she may include
his parents in the counseling process, as appropriate (§A.2.d.; §B.5.b). However, she realizes how
important confidentiality is to adolescents, and she wants to provide services to this minor in a
way that would meet best practice standards.
• What are some of the things Samya might do in this situation to go beyond what is minimally
required by law or the ACA Code of Ethics (2014)?
• How will Samya know if what she finally decides to do is best practice?
Discussion: You will have the information you need to answer these questions after you have
read material on ethical decision making, informed consent, confidentiality, and counseling

-- 29 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	7
A Model for Professional Practice
One source of very real frustration for prospective and beginning counselors is that there are so few
absolute, right answers to ethical, legal, or best practice questions. Throughout your career, you will
encounter dilemmas for which there are no cookbook solutions or universally agreed-upon answers.
We visualize professional practice as entailing a rather precarious balance that requires constant
vigilance. We also see counseling practice as being built from within the self but balanced by out-
side forces, as shown in Figure 1-1.
minor clients, all presented later in the text. For now, a brief answer is that Samya would be well
advised to hold a conversation with both the client and his parent(s) present, in which she dis-
cusses confidentiality and its limits (including the information she would share with the insurance
company). Including the client in the decision-making process is good practice, and Samya can
ask the client to sign the agreement to signify his assent, in addition to having the parents sign to
give legal consent. Best practice for Samya will mean keeping a careful balance, one that honors
both her minor client’s right to privacy and his parents’ rights to information about their son, and
working to establish and maintain a cooperative relationship with all parties.
FIGURE 1-1 Professional practice—built from within but balanced from outside the self
COUNSELING 	PRACTICE
The courage of your convictions
Decision-making skills & models
Knowledge of ethics, legal,
& professional standards
Self-awareness
Moral principles & virtues
of the helping professions
Intentionality

-- 30 of 593 --

8 	Section 1 • Foundations
In this model of professional practice, the internal building blocks climb up the post that
holds the arms of the scale. The most fundamental element, at the base, is intentionality. Being
an effective practitioner must start with good intentions, or wanting to do the right thing. The
overwhelming majority of counselors have the best intentions: They want to be helpful to those
they serve.
The second building block contains principles and virtues. Principles and virtues rep-
resent two philosophies that provide the underpinnings of ethical reasoning. Moral principles
are a set of shared beliefs or agreed-upon assumptions that guide the ethical thinking of help-
ing professionals (including physicians, nurses, and other medical specialists; teachers; and
mental health professionals). Basic moral principles include respect for autonomy (honor-
ing freedom of choice), nonmaleficence (doing no harm), beneficence (being helpful), justice
(being fair), fidelity (being faithful), and veracity (being honest). Virtue ethics focuses on the
traits of character or dispositions that promote the human good. We discuss these in more
detail later in this chapter.
The third element is knowledge of ethical, legal, and professional standards. You will find that
a wealth of resources is available to you as you work to gain, maintain, and expand your knowl-
edge base. Texts such as this one, casebooks, professional journals, codes of ethics, workshops and
seminars, professional conferences, some internet sites, and your supervisors and colleagues are all
excellent resources that can help to increase your knowledge.
The fourth element is self-awareness. As discussed earlier in this chapter, counselors must
maintain a high level of self-awareness so that they do not inadvertently impose their own values,
beliefs, and needs onto their clients. Knowledge of ethical, legal, and professional standards is not
sufficient: Best practice is achieved through constant self-reflection and personal dedication, rather
than through mandatory requirements of external organizations (Francis, 2015).
Even after you have developed a solid knowledge base and the habit of self-reflection,
you must have skills for applying your knowledge and reasoning through the questions and
dilemmas that will arise in your practice. You are also expected to have a model that will
serve as a road map to guide your ethical decision making and bring some consistency to your
decision-making process.
The final internal element is the courage of your convictions. This element can challenge even
the most conscientious counselors who have the best intentions. As a counselor, you will face ethi-
cal quandaries. It can take courage to do what you believe is right, especially when there is a high
cost to yourself, when your personal needs are involved, when you know that others may not agree
with or approve of your actions, or when (as is the case in ethical dilemmas) there is no single, clear,
right answer to the problem.
The following are some examples of ethical quandaries that take courage and that involve the
behavior of other counseling professionals: What if you know that one of your professors has pub-
lished, under her or his own name only, an article based largely on a paper you wrote? What if your
supervisor at your internship site is engaging in a behavior that you strongly believe is unethical?
What if you know that one of your fellow interns, who is also your friend, is engaging in inappro-
priate relationships with clients? In such instances, it can be easier to turn away from the problem
than to confront the individual involved and run the risk of retaliatory action by the professor, a
poor evaluation from your supervisor, or the loss of a friend. Chapter 8 discusses important points
you must consider if you suspect that another professional is behaving in an unethical manner and
actions you might take.

-- 31 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	9
It can be easier to recognize ethically questionable behavior on the part of others than to
acknowledge that you may also have some vulnerabilities. Consider the extent to which you might
be at risk of taking these potential ethical mis-steps that involve your own behavior: What if you
know that you are supposed to maintain personal boundaries between you and your clients, but just
once you agree to allow a client to buy you a cup of coffee and have a social conversation after
a session has ended? What if you know that you are supposed to render diagnoses of mental and
emotional disorders for your clients based on criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition–TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2022), yet you generally
render the same diagnosis of adjustment disorder for most clients because you think this diagnosis
is the least stigmatizing? What if you report to a counselor certification board that you attended a
continuing education workshop you paid for, even though you did not actually attend it? In these
situations, it might be tempting to make some minor compromises to your usual ethical behavior,
especially when you feel that no harm will come to a client or to anyone else as a result.
Nonetheless, if you do nothing when you know the behavior of other professionals is unethi-
cal, or if you compromise your own ethical behavior, you may be setting foot on an ethical slippery
slope. The slippery slope phenomenon is a term used by moral philosophers to describe what hap-
pens when one begins to compromise one’s principles: It becomes easier and easier to slide down
the slope, diminishing one’s sense of moral selfhood along the way.
The diagram of the model also includes external forces that can support counselors in their
efforts to maintain sound, professional practice. External sources of guidance and support include
consulting with colleagues, seeking supervision, and increasing your knowledge and skills through
continuing education activities. Your code of ethics is certainly a major source of guidance. Some
laws support counselors in fulfilling ethical obligations; for example, privileged communication
statutes can help you to uphold your clients’ confidentiality when called to testify in court or pro-
duce records of counseling sessions. The system (school, agency, institution, or organization) in
which you are employed may also have policies on which you can rely when confronted with a
challenge or a request to compromise your ethics.
PROFESSIONAL ETHICS
Concern about ethics acknowledges the awesome responsibilities inherent in the practice of counseling.
A counselor’s work can make a difference in whether an abused child’s life situation is recognized and
addressed, whether a battered spouse finds the self-affirming courage to move to a safe environment,
or whether a clinically depressed client who has suffered multiple losses of loved ones as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic finds the hope needed to move forward in life. Other clients come with less dra-
matic, more mundane problems, yet counseling can play a vital role in their struggle to lead more mean-
ingful and effective lives (Pope & Vasquez, 2021). Ethical counselors take these responsibilities seriously.
Foundations of Ethics
For many centuries, philosophers have debated what characterizes a moral and ethical person and
how to behave in a moral and ethical manner, and these issues have been addressed within the
helping professions since ancient times. The Hippocratic Oath was written about 2,500 years ago
in ancient Greece, and in fact, Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle created most of the
ethical principles that helping professionals use today.

-- 32 of 593 --

10 	Section 1 • Foundations
Theories of Ethics
Ethical theories provide a framework that counselors can use to decide whether an action or con-
templated action is ethical. It is important for you to have an ethical theory because it will enable
you to resolve the ethical dilemmas you encounter in your work and help you defend the solutions
you reach. However, a number of ethical theories take opposing positions on what it means to be
and act as an ethical person. Having some familiarity with a few of these positions may help you
become aware of the approach you take in your ethical decision making as a counselor and perhaps
challenge the assumptions you make. Remember that ethical reasoning is an acquired skill, not an
inherent gift, and it can be sharpened through practice.
One set of opposing viewpoints on ethics is ethical absolutism versus ethical relativism.
Ethical absolutists believe that there are some absolute moral standards that are universally appli-
cable; that is, these standards must prevail in all circumstances and are not dependent on a per-
son’s beliefs or cultural values. These standards exist a priori (they exist before a situation arises)
and independently of whether one believes in them. Ethical relativists, on the other hand, do not
believe that any absolute moral standards exist that can be universally applied. Rather, they take
the position that if the members of a culture believe an action is morally right, then it is morally
right to perform that action in that culture (Freeman, 2000). As you begin to study the codes of
ethics for counselors, these codes may seem to you to be written in absolutist terms, such as
“Counselors do not . . .” and “Counselors ensure that . . .,” which appear to suggest that there are
absolute dos and don’ts of ethical behavior. We believe, however, that ethical standards must be
interpreted in a relativistic manner, taking into account the uniqueness of the client, the situation,
and any cultural variables that are involved. These distinctions should become clearer to you as
you progress through the chapters of the text and begin to grapple with the ethical issues and
dilemmas that are presented.
A related issue that is raised by philosophers of ethics is that of utilitarianism versus deon-
tology, or consequential versus nonconsequential ethics. Utilitarian thought, represented by think-
ers such as John Stuart Mill, argues that people should choose the act that will do the greatest
good for the greatest number of people. In other words, an act is evaluated by its consequences.
By contrast, deontologists, represented by the thinking of Immanuel Kant, believe that an action
is justified by its being inherently right, not by its consequences. Another way to state this idea is
that what makes an action right is the principle that guides it. This philosophical issue underlies
much of the reasoning that counselors use in attempting to determine what ethical professional
behavior is.
A third set of opposing philosophical viewpoints has to do with what motivates people to
act morally or ethically. Egoism is the term used to describe actions taken out of self-interest,
whereas altruism is the word that describes actions taken to benefit others (Freeman, 2000).
Most people who choose counseling as their life’s work tend to see themselves as altruists, and
indeed one of the most fundamental ethical values of counselors is that “client welfare comes
first.” Although this ethical value is well established in the counseling profession, this does not
mean that there is no place for egoism or self-interest in our work. When we consider the pos-
sible consequences of a decision or action we might take, we would be prudent to reflect on the
effects that such an action could have on us as well as on our clients. This dual consideration of
altruism and self-interest, in fact, is reflected in the differences between the ethical and the legal
perspectives that are presented throughout this text. The ethical perspective is focused more on
the welfare and protection of the client, whereas the legal perspective is focused more on pro-
tecting the counselor.

-- 33 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	11
1-3 The Case of Edward
Edward is a high school counselor. His administrative supervisor is the school principal, Ms.
Gomez. Although Ms. Gomez has no training as a counselor, she generally has been supportive
of the counselors on her staff. She asks Edward to provide, for her eyes only, a list of his clients
and their presenting concerns. Edward trusts his supervisor to be responsible and to refrain from
sharing the list with others. Nonetheless, Edward believes it would be wrong to produce the
list because it would violate his clients’ right to confidentiality. At the same time, he realizes he
could be at risk for disciplinary action for refusing to produce the list. In the end, he decides that
no real harm would be likely to result from giving the list to Ms. Gomez. He is also concerned
that a refusal could negatively affect Ms. Gomez’s supportive attitude toward the counselors.
• What should Edward do? Do you believe that the principle underlying confidentiality should
be the overriding consideration?
• Or do you believe that it is more important for Edward to consider the consequences of
his decision?
Discussion: If Edward reasons that the ethical principle is more important, he would be committing
himself to uphold the moral principle of fidelity. Fidelity refers to fulfilling a responsibility of trust in
the counseling relationship: Counselors strive to be faithful to the promises they make, such as keep-
ing clients’ disclosures confidential. If Edward adheres to this line of reasoning, he could be said to
be thinking as an ethical absolutist—i.e., that the principle always applies, regardless of the situation.
He would also be thinking as a deontologist, by deciding that keeping the students’ confidentiality
is the right thing to do, regardless of the consequences. In addition, he might be relying on altruism,
in that he believes that his actions must uphold client welfare rather than serve his own interests.
If Edward decides to produce the list for Ms. Gomez, he might be motivated by egoism,
or a focus on protecting himself and his fellow counselors from negative repercussions. He could
be using utilitarian reasoning as suggested by Mill: that because no harm is likely to come to
the students, his decision will do the greatest good for the greatest number of people—not only
himself and his fellow counselors but also the students, who would be better served by having a
supportive school administration.
We believe the best course of action in this situation would be for Edward to have an open
discussion with his principal and explain his concerns about providing her with the list of students
he has seen in counseling. We would hope that his principal would either understand his concern
and withdraw her request or convince Edward of her need for the list and promise to keep it con-
fidential, which would override his ethical concerns about the privacy of his students.
All the theories discussed up to this point have focused on the question of what constitutes
ethical action. Other theories focus on what constitutes ethical character. Virtue ethics, which origi-
nated with Aristotle, explores the question of what character traits or dispositions form the basis
for right action (Wilczenski & Cook, 2011). Aristotle believed that positive personal character is
developed when individuals consistently take actions that are based on their society’s values. Virtue
ethics thus focuses on individuals rather than on actions and evaluates the whole individual instead
of isolated decisions the individual makes. Virtue ethicists believe that moral choices cannot be
made by issuing rules; what is needed instead is good judgment.

-- 34 of 593 --

12 	Section 1 • Foundations
The ethics of care, or relational ethics, is based on the recognition that human beings exist in
relationship and connection with one another. Psychologist Carol Gilligan (1982), who represents
this perspective, believes that ethics exists in a world of relationships in which the awareness of con-
nections among people gives rise to a recognition that we are responsible for each other. Thus, the
solution to an ethical dilemma is not found in a contest between opposing philosophies but, rather,
in a strengthening of the relationship on which the actors in the dilemma depend. Feminist ethicists
have further articulated the ethics of care. Manning (1992) has stated, “An ethic of care involves a
morality grounded in relationship and response. . . . In responding, we do not appeal to abstract prin-
ciples . . . rather we pay attention to the concrete other in his or her real situation [and to] the effect
of our response on the networks that sustain us both” (p. xiv). Relational or feminist ethicists do not
disagree with principle ethicists, but the focus of the former is different: They view moral actions as
those that empower individuals, promote social justice, and ensure that all people are cared for and
nurtured to develop their potentials (Jordan & Duffey, 2020).
With these general ethical theories in mind, we now turn to a consideration of ethical reasoning
as it has been applied in the field of counseling.
Linking Theory to Practice: Principles and Virtues
Thoughtful mental health professionals have struggled for many decades with questions of ethical
ideals, concepts, principles, and values and on how to link these to ethical decisions in professional
practice (Beauchamp & Childress, 1994; Jordan & Meara, 1990; Kitchener, 1992; Levitt et al.,
2015; Meara et al., 1996). Two helpful perspectives are principle ethics and virtue ethics. Even
though these two approaches are quite different from one another, they are complementary. When
integrated into a holistic framework for ethical decision making, they can serve as a bridge from
philosophy to practice.
Principle ethics has its foundation in moral principles, which are agreed-upon assumptions
or beliefs about ideals that are shared by members of the helping professions. They are prima facie
obligations that are always considered in ethical decision making (Meara et al., 1996). Although
moral philosophers do not agree about the nature or number of moral principles, the following six
are included in the Preamble to the ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014):†
• Respect for autonomy means to foster self-determination. According to this principle, coun-
selors respect the rights of clients to choose their own directions, act in accordance with their
beliefs, and control their own lives. Counselors work to decrease client dependency and foster
independent decision making.
• Nonmaleficence means to avoid taking actions that cause harm. This principle, long established
in the medical profession, obligates counselors to avoid taking actions that risk hurting clients,
even inadvertently.
• Beneficence is the counterpoint to nonmaleficence. It could be argued that the obligation of
ordinary citizens in our society ends with doing no harm to others, whereas professionals have
the higher obligation of providing a service that benefits society. Thus, counselors actively
work for the good of individuals and society by promoting the mental health and well-being
of their clients.
• Justice refers to the counselor’s commitment to fairness in professional relationships by treating
people equitably. Counselors’ actions and decisions must be fair to all concerned. Justice demands
equality, which has implications for nondiscrimination and equitable treatment of all clients.
† Source: Based on Preamble to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), American Counseling Association.

-- 35 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	13
• Fidelity refers to fulfilling a responsibility of trust in the counseling relationship by honoring
commitments and keeping promises. Counselors strive to be faithful to the promises they make,
such as keeping clients’ disclosures confidential.
• Veracity means truthfulness and addresses the counselor’s obligation to deal honestly with
clients and others with whom they relate professionally.
In theory, all these principles have equal value and should be considered along with all the
others when weighing an ethical decision. In reality, however, these principles can compete with
one another, and counselors may need to sacrifice one in order to uphold another. For example, a
counselor of a client who expresses suicidal ideation may decide to intervene by notifying family
members against the client’s wishes (thus breaching confidentiality and sacrificing fidelity) or by
seeking involuntary hospitalization (thus sacrificing client autonomy) to uphold the obligations to
prevent harm and do good (nonmaleficence and beneficence).
Virtue ethics starts from a premise very different from that of principle ethics. The basic
assumption of virtue ethics is that professional ethics involves more than moral actions: It also
involves traits of character or virtue. Virtue ethics focuses on the actor rather than on the action.
Principle ethics asks, “What should I do?”; virtue ethics asks, “Who should I be?” Patterns of virtu-
ous behavior are evident throughout the career of a professional, rather than being found only in
a particular action or decision. Thus, this perspective asks you to look at who you are, rather than
at what you do. Certain characteristics of virtuous agents have been suggested as appropriate for
mental health professionals (e.g., Meara et al., 1996). We hope that you will consider whether these
characteristics represent the ideals you hold for yourself and that you will assess their relevance for
you as an aspiring counselor.
• Integrity. Virtuous agents are motivated to do what is right because they believe it is right, not
because they feel obligated or fear the consequences. They have stable moral values and are
faithful to these values in their actions.
• Discernment. Discerning counselors can perceive the ethically relevant aspects of a situation,
know what principles apply, and take decisive action. Discernment involves a tolerance for
ambiguity, the ability to maintain perspective, and an understanding of the links between cur-
rent behaviors and future consequences.
• Acceptance of emotion. Without discounting the values of logic and systematic deliberation
about ethical issues, virtuous agents also recognize the role of emotion in ethical decisions.
Rather than assume that emotion hinders reason, they believe that emotion informs reason.
Virtuous counselors are compassionate and sensitive to the suffering of others.
• Self-awareness. Virtuous agents know their own assumptions, beliefs, and biases and how
these may affect their relationships and interactions with others.
• Interdependence with the community. Virtuous agents realize that values cannot be espoused
without awareness of context. They are connected with and understand the expectations and
values of their communities.
1-4 The Case of Gabriela
Gabriela has been counseling a 15-year-old girl, Danielle, for several weeks. Gabriela has had to
work hard to gain Danielle’s trust and attributes some of her success to herself being a parent of a
teenage daughter. Danielle was raised by abusive parents until she was 13, when she went to live
with her grandparents. Today she tells Gabriela that she is having some problems with her boyfriend.

-- 36 of 593 --

14 	Section 1 • Foundations
As Danielle describes these problems, Gabriela realizes that the boyfriend is treating Danielle in an
abusive manner. When Gabriela expresses her concern about this, Danielle replies that she loves
him and can get him to change, that her grandparents don’t know about his behavior, and that she
absolutely does not want Gabriela to tell them or anyone else.
• How might you apply each of the six moral principles to this situation? In this case, which
moral principle do you think must take precedence? How might you apply virtue ethics to
this dilemma?
Discussion: The moral principles could be applied in several ways. The principle of respect for
autonomy would support deferring to Danielle’s wishes and not telling anyone about her abusive
boyfriend. The principle of nonmaleficence would require Gabriela to weigh the risk for harm. Telling
someone who could prevent further abuse would support nonmaleficence. However, if Danielle
becomes upset by this action and refuses to continue in counseling, telling someone about her
abusive boyfriend also could violate the principle of doing no harm. Likewise, beneficence could be
interpreted in more than one way: Beneficence means that professionals have an obligation to pro-
vide a service that benefits society, so taking an action that would stop the abuse would best serve
society’s interests. Yet beneficence also means promoting clients’ mental health, and Gabriela could
respect Danielle’s wishes and continue to work to increase her awareness and self-esteem, which, for
now, could be the most beneficent thing to do. How Gabriela adheres to the principles of justice,
fidelity, and veracity will depend largely on whether she has informed Danielle that she would have
to breach confidentiality to prevent harm to her. If so, then telling her grandparents would be just
and truthful and would not be breaking her promise to keep Danielle’s disclosures confidential.
If Gabriela reasons through her dilemma from the perspective of virtue ethics, she will put pri-
mary importance on preserving and nurturing her relationship with Danielle. She will also be con-
cerned about Danielle’s other supportive networks, such as her relationship with her grandparents
and what she considers to be a loving relationship with her boyfriend, despite his problem behaviors.
Gabriela will work collaboratively with Danielle in reaching the decision as to whether or not to involve
the grandparents. Gabriela may be concerned about the risks to herself if she honors Danielle’s wishes,
if Danielle is harmed by her boyfriend, and if the grandparents threaten Gabriela with a complaint to
her licensing board or a lawsuit. Nonetheless, she will act with integrity, doing what she believes is
right despite the potential consequences. She will be sure to tune into her own feelings, checking to
see whether her values and life experiences might be influencing her desire to protect Danielle.
Both perspectives—a focus on principles and a focus on virtues—can contribute to your under-
standing of the basis for professional ethics. Principle ethics help you to systematically evaluate what
you should do when trying to resolve an ethical dilemma. Virtue ethics can help you examine your
ideals and define the kind of person you aspire to be as a helping professional. Thinking about prin-
ciples and virtues requires you to look inward in order to identify internal resources that can assist
you in ethical decision making. There are external resources as well, and primary among these is
your professional code of ethics.
Codes of Ethics
Promulgating a code of ethics is one way that a group of practitioners can establish its professional
status. Codes of ethics serve several other important purposes as well. They educate members of
the profession as well as prospective clients about what constitutes ethical practice, help to ensure

-- 37 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	15
accountability through enforcement of the standards, protect the profession from government intru-
sion by allowing the profession to regulate itself and function autonomously, promote stability
within the profession by establishing agreed-upon guidelines for practice, and serve as a catalyst
for ongoing improvement of practice (Cottone et al., 2022; Herlihy & Corey, 2015a). An estab-
lished code of ethics also can protect practitioners—if professionals behave according to established
guidelines, their behavior is more likely to be judged in compliance with accepted standards in a
malpractice suit or licensing board complaint. Most fundamentally, codes of ethics exist to protect
and promote the welfare of clients.
Some counselors practice mandatory ethics; that is, they function at a level of ethical reason-
ing that merely keeps them in compliance with minimal standards. By complying with these basic
musts and must nots, they meet the letter but not the spirit of the ethical standards. Those who prac-
tice at this level of ethical functioning may be motivated by a desire to prevent lawsuits, complaints
to ethics committees or licensing boards, or getting into trouble in some other way. According to
Pope and Vasquez (2021), counselors who set their sights at this level are vulnerable to denial and to
other means of distorting, discounting, or dismissing the ethical questions they encounter. Some of
the self-statements that these counselors use to justify their actions include:
“It can’t be unethical if I don’t see it as an ethical issue.”
“It isn’t unethical if there is no ethical standard that specifically prohibits it.”
“It can’t be unethical if I know other practitioners who do it.”
“It isn’t an ethical problem as long as no client has ever complained about it.”
“It’s not unethical as long as no one finds out about it.”
Other counselors practice aspirational ethics, a term that describes the highest standards of
conduct to which counselors can aspire. They understand the spirit behind the code and the moral
principles on which it rests. They not only look outward to established standards but also look
inward and ask themselves whether what they are doing is best for their clients. Aspirational ethics,
or positive ethics (Corey et al., 2024), means striving for the highest level of care for clients and is
closely related to the concept of best practice. Rather than focusing on preventing wrongdoing and
disciplinary actions, the emphasis is on continually striving to do better to serve clients.
A code of ethics that would address every possible situation that a counselor might encounter
would probably fill an entire library. Thus, you cannot expect your code of ethics to provide an
answer to every question you might have (Birrell & Bruns, 2016). Codes are a crucial resource, but
they are not a substitute for an active, deliberative, and creative approach to fulfilling your ethical
responsibilities (Pope & Vasquez, 2021). You must attend to both the letter and the spirit of the code
and work to understand the intentions that underlie each standard. As Herlihy and Corey (2015b)
have noted, “There is a very real difference between merely following the ethics code and living out
a commitment to practice with the highest ideals” (p. 13).
Your primary professional association, the ACA, has established a code of ethics to guide you
in your practice. The ACA Code can be found in Appendix A and at www.counseling.org. Figure 1-2
presents a brief overview of the nine sections of the Code and their general provisions.
The current ACA Code of Ethics, adopted in 2014, is the seventh version of the ethics code
established by ACA and its predecessor organizations. Development of the first Code was initiated
in 1953 by Donald Super, then president of the newly formed American Personnel and Guidance
Association (APGA). The Code was adopted in 1961. It was revised in 1974 and has been revised
approximately every 7 to 10 years since that time. The current Code is the result of a lengthy revision
process that began in 2011, when a Code revision task force was appointed to revise the 2005 Code
that was then in effect (Francis, 2015). In 2023, an Ethics Review Work Group was formed to develop

-- 38 of 593 --

16 	Section 1 • Foundations
FIGURE 1-2 ACA code of ethics: a synopsis
Preamble describes the American Counseling Association and its members, defines counseling, and
enumerates core professional values and ethical principles.
Purpose sets forth six purposes of the Code of Ethics and describes the ethical decision-making
process.
Section A: The Counseling Relationship addresses important issues in forming, maintaining, and end-
ing the counseling relationship. This section includes guidelines to help counselors keep client wel-
fare foremost. It also contains standards that emphasize the importance of informed consent and of
preventing the harm that can be caused by imposing one’s own personal values onto the counseling
relationship. It provides guidance on how to maintain appropriate professional boundaries, advocate
for clients, manage fees and business practices, and terminate the counseling relationship. Standards
are also provided for working with multiple clients, groups, and clients served by other professionals.
Section B: Confidentiality and Privacy addresses the client’s right to privacy regarding the information
shared during counseling sessions and records of sessions. Exceptions and limitations to confidential-
ity are specified, and special considerations in working with families, groups, and clients who lack
capacity to give informed consent are addressed. Guidelines are also offered for maintaining confiden-
tiality when consulting.
Section C: Professional Responsibility contains standards related to competence. It emphasizes the
importance of advertising services and qualifications in an accurate manner. It also addresses the
counselor’s responsibilities to the public and other professionals and offers cautions regarding treat-
ment modalities.
Section D: Relationships with Other Professionals offers guidelines for relationships with colleagues,
employers, employees, and consultees. This section highlights the importance of respecting and
establishing good working relationships with professionals in related mental health professions.
Section E: Evaluation, Assessment, and Interpretation includes standards on competence to select,
use, and interpret assessment instruments. Client rights in testing, test security, and proper testing
conditions are addressed. This section also includes standards related to diagnosis of mental disorders
and forensic evaluations.
Section F: Supervision, Training, and Teaching presents guidelines for counselor supervisors, trainers,
and educators. Responsibilities of supervisors and counselor educators are elucidated, and standards
address relationship boundaries, evaluation and remediation, endorsement of students to enter the
profession, and student welfare.
Section G: Research and Publication describes research responsibilities, rights of research participants,
and the reporting of research results. A range of issues is covered, from protection of human subjects
to ethical procedures in seeking publication.
Section H: Distance Counseling, Technology, and Social Media presents guidelines to assist counselors
to best serve clients using distance counseling, technology, and social media. This section addresses
ethical issues that are specific to these new and emerging resources.
Section I: Resolving Ethical Issues addresses the responsibility of counselors to know ethical and
legal standards and explains procedures for resolving and reporting suspected ethical violations.
Glossary of Terms provides definitions of terms used in the Code.
recommended revisions to the 2014 Code. Typically, the process of revising the Code, from forming
the work group to ratification by the ACA Governing Council, takes approximately 3–4 years.
As you learn about the ethical standards that you will be expected to uphold, keep in mind
that codes of ethics are living documents that change over time. They are periodically revised as the
profession’s knowledge base grows and as consensus emerges about new and controversial ethical
issues. Although the fundamental ethical principles do not change, new questions are constantly
arising as to how to apply the principles in a changing world of counseling practice. For instance,
when computer technologies first became widely available, ethical concerns centered around the

-- 39 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	17
security of client information stored on computers. Later, as internet usage burgeoned, many ques-
tions arose around the ethics of internet counseling. The explosive increase in the use of social
media raised a different set of issues, such as whether counselors should friend clients, former
clients, or supervisees. These developments led to the creation of a separate section on distance
counseling, technology, and social media (ACA, 2014, §H) that reflects the myriad issues that arise
when counselors use electronic means to provide services, store records, advertise their services,
and communicate with clients (Francis, 2015). This section of the Code gained importance during
the COVID-19 pandemic, when virtual counseling became the norm.
It is also important to keep in mind that, historically, counseling has not been a unified profession.
Codes of ethics have proliferated as various specialty groups within counseling (Brown et al., 2017;
Kelly, 2001), certification bodies, and state licensure boards have developed their own ethical standards.
When you are established in your own professional practice, it is likely that you will hold multiple affili-
ations and will be bound to know and adhere to multiple codes. For instance, you might be a member of
ACA and several of its divisions that have published specialty guidelines or separate codes of ethics (for
example, the Association for Specialists in Group Work published the Guiding Principles for Group Work
in 2021), be a national certified counselor (NCC), and be licensed as a counselor in your state. Holding
each of these credentials will require you to abide by each entity’s particular code of ethics. Although
these codes do not contradict each other, the existence of multiple codes of ethics has created difficulties
in enforcement, confusion for users of counseling services, and confusion for counseling professionals
themselves (Herlihy & Remley, 2001). Efforts are being made by various organizations to bring stan-
dards into alignment; for example, the ACA Ethics Committee reviews the codes of ethics and guidelines
for best practice of its divisions to ensure that they are consistent with the ACA Code of Ethics. Yet until
a single, universally accepted code of ethics for the counseling profession is established, you will need
to be knowledgeable about all the codes of ethics that pertain to your practice. Initially, though, what is
important is that you become familiar with your primary code, which is the ACA Code of Ethics (2014).
EXPLORING THE ACA CODE OF ETHICS 	We suggest that you turn to Appendix A and peruse
the ACA Code. You will see that it is a lengthy and detailed document, which could give you the
impression that it must contain the answers to almost any ethical question you may have. To test that
impression, use the Code to try to find the answers to these questions:
• Arriving home after a difficult counseling session at the end of the day, you feel a need to vent
with your life partner about your frustrations over the client’s lack of progress. Would it be
ethical for you to unburden yourself in this way?
• One of your clients has been laid off from work and requests that you barter with her (exchange
services) until she can find a new job. Would it be ethical for you to agree to barter with this client?
• A client presents you with a gift of a power pod to use with your laptop computer. Would it be
ethical for you to accept this gift?
• A client tells you that they are moving to another state and wants you to continue to work with
them via distance counseling. Would it be ethical for you to agree to continue to counsel this
client using the internet?
As you completed this exercise, you probably found that the answer to each question is, like the answers to
the vast majority of questions about ethical issues, “It depends.” In researching the first scenario, you may
have explored Section B of the Code, which addresses confidentiality, to see whether it would be permis-
sible for you to vent your frustrations with your life partner. You learned the importance of not making
any disclosures that could identify the client, but to monitor your effectiveness (§ C.2.d.), you would still
need to consider the larger question of acceptable ways to deal with unwelcome feelings toward a client.

-- 40 of 593 --

18 	Section 1 • Foundations
Although § A.10.e. directly addresses bartering and § A.10.f. addresses gifts, neither standard provides a
“yes or no” answer; rather, these standards suggest factors to consider when deciding whether to agree
to enter into a bartering arrangement or whether to accept a gift from a client. The final scenario is more
complicated; you may have found some guidance in Section H, which addresses distance counseling, but
legal issues exist as well and will need to be explored.
These scenarios illustrate the necessity of developing ethical reasoning skills, as opposed to
relying on a code of ethics to provide answers to real-world dilemmas. Ethical decision making is a
complex process, as is further discussed in the next section.
ETHICAL DECISION MAKING 	Ethical decisions are rarely easy to arrive at, and dilemmas can
be very complex. When counselors encounter ethical dilemmas, “they are expected to engage in a
carefully considered ethical decision-making process” and use a “credible model of decision mak-
ing that can bear public scrutiny of its application” (ACA, 2014, Purpose). Although no particular
decision-making model has been shown to be universally effective or applicable, many models do
exist, and we briefly review them here for your consideration.
One of the earliest models was A Practitioner’s Guide to Ethical Decision Making (Fo rester-
Miller & Davis, 1995). This guide presented a practical, sequential, seven-step model that was
based on the moral principles already discussed in this chapter. Over two decades later, Koocher
and Keith-Spiegel (2016) presented a nine-step model that took a similarly logical and primar-
ily cognitive approach to ethical decision making. The assumption inherent in these models—that
ethical decision making is an objective process for which the professional is solely responsible—
has been challenged by some writers, particularly those with a feminist orientation (Hill et al.,
1995; Meara et al., 1996; Rave & Larsen, 1995). Feminists have cautioned that traditional ethi-
cal decision-making models represent the information-processing style of White males, in that
the models are linear, logical, rational, dispassionate, abstract, and paternalistic. Feminists have
suggested that ethical decision making that is also holistic, intuitive, emotional, compassionate,
personal and contextual, and mutual may be more inclusive of other processing styles and more
culturally appropriate. Feminist theorists have also emphasized the importance of remembering that
ethical decision making does not occur solely within the mind of the professional. Walden (2015)
urged including the client in the process, noting that clients are empowered when counselors make
ethical decisions with them rather than for them. This perspective is sometimes called participatory
or relational ethics. Counselors who practice participatory ethics invite clients to be co-contributors
to the ethical decision-making process. They reject the premise that the counselor is the keeper of
knowledge and the person responsible for any decision related to an ethical issue that arises in the
counseling process (Fine et al., 2021).
Early models were also criticized for neglecting to consider multicultural issues, which led to
the development of several models that emphasized cultural sensitivity. Garcia et al. (2003) offered
a transcultural, integrative model as being more appropriate when working with clients from diverse
cultural backgrounds. They incorporated virtue ethics along with the feminist concepts of reflect-
ing on one’s own feelings and balancing the perspectives of all involved. They suggested that a
vital component that should be included early in the decision-making process is for counselors to
reflect on their own worldviews and on how these affect their interpretation of an ethical dilemma.
Frame and Williams (2005) presented a culturally sensitive ethical decision-making model that,
like the feminist models, was based in an ethic of care and a consideration of power dynamics. To
increase multicultural sensitivity, they added the element of assessing acculturation and racial iden-
tity development of the counselor and the client. Herlihy and Watson (2006) offered a model based
on a social justice perspective that puts multicultural competence at the core of the ethical reasoning
process. The model is grounded in virtue ethics, cultural identity development, and collaborative

-- 41 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	19
decision making. Tarvydas et al. (2015) proposed an applied participatory ethics model that is based
in social justice principles.
Cottone (2001) proposed a social constructivist model. Social constructivism is a relatively recent
movement in the mental health field and purports that a person cannot know reality through individual
contemplation because reality does not exist as objective fact. Rather, reality is socially constructed
through interactions with others. Social constructivists see ethical decision making not as a process
that occurs in the mind of the decision maker but as a process that is always made in interaction with at
least one other person and that involves negotiating and consensualizing (Cottone, 2001). Specialized
models that are focused on counseling specific populations or on particular ethical issues have also been
promulgated (Deroche et al., 2015). Models have been offered for managing boundary issues (Gottlieb,
1993; Herlihy & Corey, 2015b), resolving value conflicts (Kocet & Herlihy, 2014), integrating spiri-
tuality and religion into counseling (Barnett & Johnson, 2015), treating eating disorders (Matusek &
O’Dougherty, 2010), school counseling (Brown et al., 2017; Luke et al., 2017), counseling military per-
sonnel (Prosek & Holm, 2014), practicing play therapy (Seymour & Rubin, 2006), and (for counselor
educators) addressing problematic student behaviors (Letourneau, 2016), among others.
Clearly, many ethical decision-making models exist, and we believe that no one model will be
the most appropriate for every counselor or for every situation. Johnson et al. (2022) examined 38
existing models and organized them into a taxonomy, with the intent of providing counselors with
a streamlined way to choose the best model in a given situation. It is important that you are familiar
with several models so that you can select the model or models that are most helpful for the ethical
dilemma you are facing. There is some evidence that, in practice, counselors may not be making full
use of ethical decision-making models (Brown & Armstrong, 2022; Burkholder et al., 2020; Johnson
& Purgason, 2021; Levitt et al., 2015). This practice could lead to problems if a counselor made what
turned out to be a poor decision and a client was harmed. Responding to a complaint filed with the
ACA or with a licensing board will be difficult if the counselor cannot demonstrate the use of a “cred-
ible ethical decision-making model” as required by the ACA Code of Ethics (2014). When you are
faced with a difficult dilemma, you can do much to protect yourself by implementing the actions sug-
gested in a model, being able to provide a rationale if you deviate from the model, and documenting
your decision-making process.
COMMON ELEMENTS IN DECISION-MAKING MODELS 	There is much to be learned from all
the existing ethical decision-making models, and we do not endorse any one particular model as
being the right one for everyone or in every circumstance. Instead, what follows is a description
of steps that many of the models seem to have in common. We have tried to incorporate lessons
that can be learned from principle and virtue ethics, feminist and multicultural ethics, social con-
structivism, and specialty models. We caution you to keep in mind that although a list of steps
suggests that ethical decision making is a linear progression, in reality counselors rarely follow
a set sequence of steps to resolve an ethical dilemma. In practice, numerous aspects of ethical
decision making occur simultaneously in a dynamic process (Woody, 2013). What we offer next
is not a step-by-step model; rather, we have identified common elements of the decision-making
process that are found in multiple models. Although we believe that any credible model should
contain these elements in some form, this may not always be the case. To help ensure that you
have been thorough, you might use this checklist after you have applied your selected model to a
dilemma you are resolving.
Identify and define the problem. Before deciding what action to take when faced with a di-
lemma, determine whether you have an ethical or a legal or clinical issue. If a legal issue is
involved, consult with an attorney. If you have a clinical issue, consult with your supervisor or

-- 42 of 593 --

20 	Section 1 • Foundations
a trusted colleague. If, indeed, you have an ethical dilemma, it is prudent to take time to reflect
and gather information. Although you may feel some sense of urgency, rarely will decisions
that have ethical dimensions have to be made immediately. Take the time to consider what you
know (or what you can find out) about the situation, applicable ethical guidelines, and any
laws that might be relevant. Try to examine the problem from several perspectives, and avoid
searching for simplistic solutions.
Involve your client in the decision-making process. This is not a separate step in ethical deci-
sion making; rather, it should occur throughout the process. Walden (2015) reminded counsel-
ors that the client is an integral part of the ethical community of the counseling relationship.
Including clients in the process both empowers them and is culturally appropriate practice.
We can think of very few situations that would preclude making the client an active partner in
decisions affecting that client.
Review relevant codes of ethics and the professional literature. Examine the codes of ethics
of the professional organizations to which you belong (as well as the ethical standards of your
state licensing board if you are licensed as a counselor) to see if your issue is addressed in them.
Be sure to read the codes carefully, as there may be several standards that pertain to different
aspects of the dilemma. Also, read the recent literature on the issue at hand. This will help to
ensure that you are using the most up-to-date professional knowledge on the issue (Herlihy &
Corey, 2015a).
Consider the principles and virtues. Reflect on how the moral principles apply to the prob-
lem. Identify any ways they may compete with each other, and rank them in order of their pri-
ority in this situation. Consider how virtue ethics might apply in the situation as well. Rather
than focus exclusively on what you need to do in the situation, also reflect on who you want
to be and how any possible action might affect your sense of moral selfhood.
Tune into your feelings. Virtue ethicists believe that emotion informs judgment. Your feelings
will influence how you interpret the dilemma, so it is important to consider what emotions you
are experiencing as you contemplate the situation and your possible actions. To what extent
are you being influenced, for instance, by emotions such as fear, self-doubt, or an overwhelm-
ing sense of responsibility? Being aware of your emotions, beliefs, values, and motivations
can help guide you in your decision making.
Consult with colleagues or experts. Decisions made in isolation are rarely as sound as deci-
sions made in consultation. Corey et al. (2024) have pointed out that poor ethical decision
making often stems from our inability to view a situation objectively because we are emotion-
ally invested in it or because our prejudices, values, or emotional needs are clouding our judg-
ment. In addition, consultation would serve as an important element of your defense in court
if your decision were challenged legally (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019).
Consider the context. Keep in mind that your worldview will affect how you interpret the
dilemma and that the client’s worldview and culture may differ from your own. The resolution
that is chosen for the dilemma must not only feel right to you but also be appropriate for the
client. It is also important to remember that decisions occur in a context. Therefore, it is use-
ful to reflect on the potential ramifications of a decision for the client’s family members, the
community, and other professionals.
Identify desired outcomes, and consider possible actions to achieve the outcomes. Even
after thoughtful consideration, a single desired outcome rarely emerges in an ethical dilemma.
There may be several outcomes you would hope to see achieved in a situation. Consider pos-
sible actions that you could take to achieve the desired outcomes. It may even be useful to list

-- 43 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	21
desired outcomes on one side of a page and on the other side to generate possible actions that
would facilitate the achievement of each of those outcomes. It is possible that implementing a
particular action may achieve one desired outcome while eliminating another desired action,
thus forcing you to prioritize and choose one outcome at the expense of the other. Ponder the
implications and consequences of each option for the client, for others who will be affected,
and for yourself.
Choose and act on your choice. Once you have selected an action or series of actions, check
to see whether your selected options are congruent with your ranking of the moral principles.
Pay attention to how you feel about your choice. This final step involves strengthening your
ego or gathering the moral courage to allow you to carry out your decision.
SELF-MONITORING 	Even after the most careful deliberation, conscientious counselors cannot
help but ask, “How can I know whether I’ve done the right thing?” You can apply several self-tests
after you have resolved an ethical dilemma. The first three tests, suggested by Stadler (1986), have
withstood the test of time. First is the test of justice, in which you ask whether you would treat
others the same way in this situation. Second is the test of universality, which considers if you
would be willing to recommend the course of action you followed to other counselors who find
themselves in a similar situation. Third is the test of publicity: Are you willing to have your actions
come to light and be known by others? Another test is the reversibility test, which is a version of
the Golden Rule; in this test, you ask yourself if you would have made the same choice if you
were in the client’s shoes or if your child or life partner were subject to that choice. Finally, you
can check for moral traces, which are lingering feelings of doubt, discomfort, or uncertainty that
counselors may experience after they have resolved an ethical dilemma, particularly when expedi-
ency, politics, or self-interest has influenced the decision. Moral traces are unpleasant but perform
an important function: They act as a warning sign that you may have set foot on an ethical slippery
slope, as defined earlier in this chapter.
We hope you will return to this material on the ethical decision-making process as you pon-
der the case studies that are presented throughout this text. As you reflect on what you might do if
you were the counselor in each case study, you can gain practice in applying a systematic model,
as required by your code of ethics. Being an ethical professional involves a combination of knowl-
edge, ethical reasoning skills and problem-solving strategies, a basic understanding of philosophical
principles, application of a credible model to dilemmas that arise, and self-monitoring to ensure that
you respond with maturity, judgment, and wisdom. It is a task that requires a life-long commitment
and is never really finished. Even the most experienced counselors who are intimately aware of the
ethical standards wrestle with difficult ethical issues and dilemmas.
LEGAL ISSUES
The discussion of professional ethics that precedes this section emphasized the serious responsibil-
ity you have to clients, the difference you can make in their lives, and the duty you have to practice
in an ethical manner. Understanding the legal system and your role in it, the legal rights of your
clients, and your legal responsibilities to clients is also essential to practicing counseling in a pro-
fessional manner. Legal issues within counseling are somewhat frightening because the law is an
area that is complex, often vague, threatening, antithetical to the nature of counselors, and difficult
to fully grasp. The process of decision making around legal issues is presented in this chapter. In
addition, throughout this text, you are given information about the legal dimensions that surround
your functions as a professional counselor.

-- 44 of 593 --

22 	Section 1 • Foundations
Origins of Law
There are several sources of law in the United States. The basic source is the U.S. Constitution.
The 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. possessions also have constitutions. Laws cre-
ated by the federal, state, district, and possession governments cannot violate either federal or state
constitutional principles. The United States has adopted English common law, which includes a
set of societal principles that were not written into documents but have been accepted over time as
obvious within U.S. society. An example of common law that is very important to counselors is the
law of torts. Tort law relates to the principle that individuals will be held responsible for any harm
they cause to other members of society. Malpractice is an area of tort law that holds professionals
accountable for any harm they might cause to the public. The public relies on professionals to pro-
vide services in a manner that benefits and does not harm them.
A primary source of law is statutes passed by federal and state legislatures. These statutes may
modify the common law but may not violate constitutional principles. Governmental regulations, both
federal and state, are procedures adopted by agencies to carry out laws created by statutes. Regulations,
which are created by governmental agencies, may implement statutes but may not exceed the authority
of the statute. Finally, federal and state courts interpret the law. Whereas some accuse judges of creating
law, courts are limited to interpreting constitutions, common law principles, statutes, and regulations.
Almost all areas of counselor practice are affected by law. Most seasoned counselors are
keenly aware of the law of malpractice and the fact that they might be sued by a client. As a coun-
selor, you will probably come to share this awareness. You also must be aware of laws related to
confidentiality, records, parental rights, and licensing statutes, among others. In addition, you must
be able to identify legal problems as they arise, and you must adhere to legal requirements when
you are involved in any way with a legal proceeding. Legal issues are an important part of the day-
to-day professional practice of counselors in all settings.
Recognizing Legal Issues
Many of the ethical and professional judgment questions you will encounter as a counseling practi-
tioner will have legal implications as well. Sometimes counselors find it difficult to determine when
they have a legal problem or what to do once a legal problem has been identified. This section of the
chapter discusses how to recognize legal issues, how to get legal advice, and what steps to take to
ensure proper and professional practice.
The following are examples of legal issues that counselors face in their practices:
• The secretary tells you that there is a deputy sheriff in the reception area asking for you. When
you introduce yourself, the deputy hands you a subpoena that orders you to produce your case
notes and any other documents related to one of your current clients.
• One of your clients asks you to come to a child custody hearing that will determine whether
she will get permanent custody of her children.
• One of your clients has been arrested for drug possession. You receive a subpoena in the mail
that orders you to appear at her criminal trial.
• A new client tells you that his lawyer sent him to see you. He is suing his former employer
for having fired him and wants you to verify that he has emotional stress that is job related.
• A client tells you that her former husband’s lawyer called and told her that she had to let her
former husband have their children for the summer. She wants to know if the lawyer is right.
• A former client has sent you a letter demanding her money back. She thinks the 10 sessions
she had with you were a waste of money because you did not help her. She has sent a copy of
the letter to her lawyer.

-- 45 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	23
• A client you are seeing is expressing suicidal ideations and refuses to go voluntarily to the local
hospital for a psychiatric evaluation.
• You receive a notice from your state licensure board that a formal complaint has been filed
against you and that a hearing will be held on the matter.
• In your office mail, you receive a formal legal complaint against you that has been filed with
the local court, accusing you of professional malpractice. One of your clients murdered his girl-
friend 9 months ago. The complaint alleges that you were responsible for the young woman’s
death and asks for $1 million in damages.
A simple test to determine whether there is a legal issue involved in a situation you are facing
is to review the situation to see if any of the following apply: (a) legal proceedings of some type have
been initiated, (b) lawyers are on the scene in some capacity, or (c) you are vulnerable to having a
complaint filed against you for misconduct. If you are providing professional counseling services
and one or more of these three components exist, then you definitely are dealing with a legal issue.
Sometimes, all you need to do with a legal situation is clarify the nature of a counselor’s role with
your client and refer the client to attorneys for legal advice. When you are dealing with a legal issue
and you are unsure which course of action you should take, often you will need to consult a lawyer.
Obtaining Legal Advice
Most counselors are employed by organizations or entities that provide counseling services, such as
community mental health agencies, schools, businesses, hospitals, outpatient treatment programs,
or colleges. These entities all have administrators and organizational structures that require the
regular services of attorneys. It is the employees’ responsibility to request legal advice when deal-
ing with an issue that has legal implications beyond their ability to resolve. It is the obligation of
employers to provide employees with the legal advice they need to perform their jobs appropriately.
Counselors seldom have direct access to lawyers, primarily because the cost is prohibitive.
Also, administrators seek the advice of lawyers, but they must maintain their authority when mak-
ing administrative decisions. When a counselor identifies a legal issue in the work setting and
determines the legal questions to ask, the counselor should pose the questions to the immediate
supervisor and ask for assistance. If the counselor thinks an attorney needs to have special informa-
tion regarding the situation to render sound advice, the counselor should request a personal consul-
tation with the attorney, although such consultations are not normally allowed. The supervisor will
then either answer the counselor’s questions based on previous experience with similar issues or
seek legal advice through proper administrative channels within the organization.
In some circumstances, it is possible for counselors to give their legal problems to adminis-
trators within their agency. Many legal issues that arise are administrative in nature and should be
handled by administrators rather than by counselors. Examples of legal issues that counselors might
easily turn over to administrators include the following:
• A noncustodial parent demands of a school counselor that he be allowed to see his child’s
academic records.
• The police arrive at a counselor’s door and want to see the counseling file for a current client.
• A health insurance company representative calls a counselor and wants to know why the coun-
selor’s agency has so many claims signed by the same psychiatrist.
• A client becomes irate because a counselor terminates the counseling relationship after five
sessions, which is the agency’s policy.
• A lawyer for a former client calls a counselor and threatens to sue if the counselor does not
immediately give the lawyer the information being sought.

-- 46 of 593 --

24 	Section 1 • Foundations
• A secretary who reports to an administrator appears to be revealing confidential information
about clients to friends.
• A client tells a counselor that the counselor’s colleague in the agency has made sexual advances
during a counseling session.
If legal problems cannot be handed over to an administrator, then counselors themselves must
take responsibility for resolving situations in an appropriate manner. Once counselors have disclosed
their legal questions to their immediate supervisors and have received a response either from the
supervisor or from an attorney advising them as to the proper course of action, counselors must fol-
low that advice. It is essential for counselors to follow all legal advice given to them, even if they
do not agree with it. Only then will counselors be indemnified by their employers and supported if
problems arise later. By seeking and following legal advice when legal questions arise, counselors
are taking steps that may protect them from being held individually responsible in the event their
actions are challenged.
Counselors in independent private practice do not have the luxury of seeking legal advice with-
out charge within their work environment, and they are not protected from responsibility because
they do not have employers. Private practitioners must establish relationships with attorneys for
legal advice just as they must retain accountants to handle their financial and business affairs. The
cost of legal advice for a counselor in private practice is a necessary expense related to establishing
and maintaining a business. However, finding a lawyer who understands the nature of mental health
practices and is prepared to represent counselors effectively is not always an easy task (Remley,
1991). Counselors who are planning to open a private practice are advised to identify an attorney
while they are establishing their business so that they will have a working relationship in place
when problems arise. The best attorney probably would be a local one who is already representing
one or more successful mental health practitioners—counselors, social workers, or psychologists.
Such an attorney would already have been educated regarding the special issues surrounding mental
health practices. If an attorney who is experienced in representing mental health professionals is not
available, then a lawyer who represents other types of professionals—such as accountants, other
lawyers, or physicians—would be a good alternative.
Some counselors have jobs in which they testify in court on a routine basis or provide services
to clients who frequently are involved in litigation. These counselors learn their roles over time and
do not need to consult attorneys for advice each time they encounter a legal situation. For most
counselors, however, it is infrequent that they deal with legal proceedings, have clients who are
represented by lawyers, or think they are in danger of being sued. When such situations arise for the
majority of counselors, it is essential for them to obtain legal advice.
Exercising Professional Judgment
Throughout the workday, counselors often must exercise their professional judgment in difficult
areas. They are held accountable for making sound and reasonable professional decisions, given the
information they have available when they make such judgments (Hall & Rushing, 2010). If a client
believes that he or she was harmed because of a professional decision made by a counselor, then the
client might sue the counselor for malpractice. As a result, when a counselor exercises professional
judgment, there is always a risk afterward of being accused of wrongdoing.
A few of the areas in which counselors make judgments that are particularly vulnerable to
later legal challenges include the following:
• Determining whether a client’s condition poses a danger to self or others
• Deciding what to do to prevent harm after determining that a client is a danger to self or others

-- 47 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	25
• Rendering a clinical diagnosis that could have negative implications for a client at a later time
• Terminating a counseling relationship over the client’s objections
• Deciding whether to enter into a counseling relationship with a client who has a problem that
you have not treated before or have not been specifically trained to treat
• Reacting appropriately to a client who has expressed an interest in having a sexual relationship
with you
• Using an innovative intervention that has not been empirically tested
Just as counselors must obtain legal advice when legal questions arise in their practice,
they must also obtain professional consultation to the extent possible when making difficult
professional judgments. It is inappropriate to ask counselor colleagues about how to handle
legal problems, and at the same time it is inappropriate to consult with an attorney when making
difficult clinical decisions. A counselor colleague might give you advice about a legal situation,
but you cannot rely on the accuracy of that advice because your counselor colleagues are not
lawyers. Likewise, a lawyer might give you advice about how to handle a difficult clinical issue,
but lawyers are not educated as mental health professionals. If you ask attorneys about what to
do in difficult clinical situations, they will focus on protecting you rather than on knowing what
might be best for your client.
1-5 The Case of Fatima
Fatima is a counselor in a university counseling center who is in the process of planning for a
month-long vacation. She will be leaving in 2 months. She has been having a series of con-
versations with her supervisor and several of her colleagues at the center about the proper
way to handle her existing clients: when to tell them she is leaving; whether to refer them
permanently to other counselors; whether to refer them temporarily to other counselors and
take them back when she returns; whether to terminate with those who are nearing readiness;
and what to do about those clients who have expressed suicidal ideation in the recent past.
At the staff meeting today, the counseling center director announced that he had talked to
the university attorney about the situation and that her advice was just to tell all of Fatima’s
clients that she will be gone for a month and to let them decide what to do in the interim.
The director then said that the attorney had said that Fatima had no other legal obligations
to the clients.
• To what degree should the university attorney’s advice on this issue affect Fatima’s decision
making?
• Because the director told Fatima and the staff about the advice of the university attorney,
how should Fatima interact with the director if she decides to do something different from
what the attorney advised?
Discussion: It is good for counselors to get advice from attorneys regarding their legal obliga-
tions. However, a counselor’s ethical obligations may go beyond what is required legally. Fatima
will want to be careful not to offend the director, so perhaps she could thank the director for
obtaining legal advice. Later and in private, she might share the ACA Code of Ethics with the
director and point out some of the ethical obligations she wants to meet. She could then suggest
that a good goal for the center would be to follow ethical and best practice guidelines, in addi-
tion to legal obligations, in order to provide the best possible service to clients.

-- 48 of 593 --

26 	Section 1 • Foundations
When counselors face issues that require them to exercise their clinical judgment, particularly
when there are no clear right or wrong responses, it is essential to consult with colleagues to the
extent possible. In some situations, consultation might be impossible, such as when emergencies
arise. When time does allow, however, consulting about clients provides a substantial protection to
counselors whose clinical decisions are later challenged. The legal standard of care for counselors is
that counselors must practice in a manner consistent with the way in which a reasonable, similarly
educated counselor would practice under the same set of circumstances. By consulting with others,
counselors can prove later that they indeed met the standard of care by doing what other, presum-
ably reasonable, counselors advised or agreed on. If experts are available for consultation, it is wise
to talk with them as well. Experts might include former university professors, counselors who are
known for their expertise in a particular area, or counselors with extensive clinical experience.
It is impossible for counselors to know for certain whether they are making decisions that will
protect their clients or others from harm. Because of this uncertainty, it is essential that counselors
maintain current individual professional liability insurance policies at all times. Professional liability
insurance policies are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
Summary and Key Points
This introductory chapter has familiarized you with
some key concepts that form the foundation for
studying ethical, legal, and professional issues in
counseling. Following are some of the main points
made in this chapter.
The professional orientation content area of
graduate training involves the study of professional
identity, ethics, and law.
• Morals, values, and ethics are all interrelated
terms, but they have different meanings as used
in this text. The term morality refers to personal
beliefs and how these beliefs affect your conduct,
whereas ethics refers to professional behaviors.
Counselors share certain professional values, and
they hold their own unique personal values, which
they must take care not to impose on clients.
• When confronted with a dilemma, counselors
need to be able to distinguish whether they are
dealing with a legal, an ethical, or a professional
issue.
• A model of professional practice was presented
as one way to conceptualize how multiple factors
might fit together in a counselor’s actual practice.
The model contains internal and external build-
ing blocks that contribute to the development and
maintenance of sound, professional practice.
Counselors should take their ethical respon-
sibilities 	very 	seriously. 	Understanding 	ethics
involves learning about its foundations, recogniz-
ing different approaches to ethical decision mak-
ing, becoming familiar with codes of ethics, and
developing ethical decision making skills.
• Theories of ethics have existed for centuries and
provide a foundation for the ethical reasoning of
contemporary professional counselors.
• Principle ethics, which is based on the moral
principles of the helping professions, and virtue
ethics, which is focused on traits of character, are
two complementary ways of looking at the foun-
dations of counselor ethics.
• Codes of ethics are vital resources in ethical
decision making, but they cannot answer every
question that might arise in actual practice. The
ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) is the primary
code on which counselors rely.
• Of critical importance to counselors is the develop-
ment of ethical decision-making skills. Counselors are
required to use an ethical decision-making model to
reason through the ethical dilemmas confronting them.
Laws are agreed-on rules that set forth prin-
ciples that allow people to live together in a society.

-- 49 of 593 --

Chapter 1 • Introduction 	27
Laws dictate minimal standards of behavior, and
ethics prescribes both minimal professional behav-
iors and ideal or aspirational behaviors.
• Most areas of counselor practice are affected by
law.
• Counselors must know how to recognize legal
issues and how to obtain legal advice.
• Counselors should seek advice from fellow men-
tal health professionals when they have clinical
or ethical questions and should seek advice from
lawyers when they have legal questions.
• There is no substitute for professional judgment on
difficult ethical or legal questions encountered by
counselors, although many helpful resources exist.

-- 50 of 593 --

28
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
2.1 Explain how the wellness model of mental health in
counseling differs from the medical model.
2.2 Demonstrate an understanding of the difference
between state licensure and national certification for
counselors.
2.3 Explain how state statutes that license counselors
vary so much in what is required to be licensed.
2.4 Demonstrate an understanding of the organizational
structure of the American Counseling Association,
including its divisions.
2.5 Identify the current and major legal and political
issues facing the continued development of the
counseling profession.
2.6 Indicate how counselors are similar to and different
from other mental health professionals, including
psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers.
Professional Identity
of Counselors 2
Counselors are a relatively new professional group com-
pared to such other mental health professionals who practice
as psychologists, social workers, and psychiatrists. Potential
consumers of mental health services often are unaware that
counseling is a distinct profession that can be clearly distin-
guished from similar mental health professions. Even coun-
selors themselves sometimes find it difficult to describe the
distinctions. Thus, a vital professional task for counselors is
to adopt a strong professional identity and to be able to artic-
ulate that unique identity to others (Gale & Austin, 2003;
Healey & Hays, 2012; Smith, 2001).
Professional identity is a nebulous concept, but it is
vital to the long-term success of a profession. Individuals
who have a strong professional identity can easily explain the
philosophy that underlies the activities of their professional
group, describe the services that their profession renders to
the public, describe the training programs that prepare them
to practice their profession, explain their qualifications and
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. How do you respond when your
friends and relatives ask you
what you are studying in graduate
school?
2. How do you think the wellness
model of mental health espoused
by counselors is different from the
illness model or medical model of
mental health?
3. What are some of the major
challenges facing the counseling
profession today?
4. How do you think your experience
today as a counseling graduate
student is different from that
of students who graduated
pre–COVID-19?

-- 51 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	29
the credentials they possess, and articulate the similarities and differences between members of their
own profession and members of other, similar groups. In addition, those with a strong professional
identity feel a significant pride in being a member of their profession and can communicate this
special sense of belonging to those with whom they interact.
A number of articles have appeared regarding counselor identity over the last few years.
Counselor professional identity development has been discussed and studied from various perspec-
tives (Burns & Cruikshanks, 2017; Cinotti, 2014; DeKruyf et al., 2013; Dollarhide et al., 2013;
Field, 2017; Gibson, 2022; Healey & Hays, 2012; Hodges, 2011; Moss et al., 2014; Reiner et al.,
2013; Woo et al., 2016). Scholars have recognized the importance of understanding counselor pro-
fessional identity development for the success of the counseling profession.
In 2010, a definition of counseling was agreed upon by various organizations that represent the
profession (Kaplan et al., 2014). This agreed-upon definition, which can be found on the American
Counseling Association (2018a) website, is “Counseling is a professional relationship that empowers
diverse individuals, families, and groups to accomplish mental health, wellness, education, and career
goals.” This is a simple definition meant for the general public. This chapter offers a much more thor-
ough discussion of counseling, the counseling profession, and the professional identity of counselors.
2-1 The Case of Rivka
Rivka is a third-grade teacher who recently completed her master’s degree in counseling.
Because her school district employs counselors only at the high school level, she has assumed
that she will have to move to another district to fulfill her goal of being an elementary school
counselor. She is very excited when her principal calls to tell her that the school board is going
to consider hiring either counselors or school social workers for the elementary schools. The
principal asks her to attend the next school board meeting and speak about what an elementary
school counselor does and how counselors differ from social workers. Rivka wants to give a very
persuasive talk so that the board will decide to hire counselors and, she hopes, offer her one of
the new positions. She asks you for advice on what to say and how to say it.
• What advice would you give Rivka, in terms of the information she should present?
• What arguments do you think would be most persuasive in influencing the board members
to hire counselors?
Discussion: Rivka might gather all the information available from the American School
Counselor Association (ASCA; www.schoolcounselor.org) regarding the unique role of school
counselors in elementary schools. She should summarize this information for the school board
members. She should also be prepared to explain the differences between the roles of school
social workers and school counselors at the elementary school level.
The most influential information Rivka could present would be data showing that elementary
school counselors make a difference in schools in terms of students’ academic achievement; sat-
isfaction of parents with the school; and satisfaction of parents, teachers, and administrators with
elementary school counseling programs (Baker et al., 2021). Providing testimonials from students,
parents, teachers, and principals in schools that have effective elementary school counseling pro-
grams might also be very effective.

-- 52 of 593 --

30 	Section 1 • Foundations
We hope this chapter helps you clarify your professional identity as a counselor and helps you
tell others about the profession of counseling. It also is intended to help you understand and appre-
ciate the history of the counseling profession, the professional associations that serve counselors,
graduate program accreditation, and the credentials available to counselors.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Professional
Identity of Counselors
When the counseling profession was established over a half-century ago, professional counselors
could not imagine counseling clients when the counselor and the client were not in the same room.
Counselors sincerely believed they had to by physically present with clients to communicate fully
and effectively. They believed that clients and counselors had to not only hear each other, but that
counselors also needed to see the client so they could assess body language and messages that are
communicated without words. Counselor educators almost universally rejected the idea that coun-
seling students could be educated without being physically together in classrooms with their profes-
sors. Contemporary counselors continue to appreciate the value of nonverbal communication and
face-to-face human contact, but the COVID-19 pandemic has caused counselors to reassess whether
face-to-face contact during counseling sessions and preparation of counselors is necessary or even
preferable to the new options.
Although people were talking on the telephone during the 1950s, technology that allowed
people to email, text, or see each other on video as they talked was unimaginable. When video
technologies such as Zoom became available, many counselors continued to reject the idea that
legitimate counseling sessions could take place on video or that counselors could be trained online.
While counselors were debating these questions, the COVID-19 pandemic arrived, and the profes-
sion of counseling and the process of educating counselors were reimagined.
Contemporary counselors learned from the COVID-19 pandemic that effective counseling is
possible using digital methods and that counselors can be appropriately trained online. Counselors
and counselor educators have shifted from being suspicious of the use of video sessions in counsel-
ing or preparing counselors online to learning how to do both effectively and ethically.
PHILOSOPHY UNDERLYING THE COUNSELING
PROFESSION
Counselors have a distinct belief system regarding the best way to help people resolve their emo-
tional and personal issues and problems. This belief system provides the foundation for the pro-
fessional identity of counselors. Basically, counselors share the following four beliefs regarding
helping others with their mental health concerns:
1. The best perspective for assisting individuals in resolving their emotional and personal issues
and problems is the wellness model of mental health.
2. Most of the issues and problems that individuals face in life are developmental in nature, and
understanding the dynamics of human growth and development is essential to success as a helper.
3. Prevention and early intervention are far superior to remediation in dealing with personal and
emotional problems.
4. The goal of counseling is to empower individual clients and client systems to resolve their own
problems independently of mental health professionals and to teach them to identify and resolve
problems autonomously in the future.

-- 53 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	31
THE WELLNESS MODEL 	The first belief that counselors share is that the wellness model of men-
tal health is the best perspective for helping people resolve their personal and emotional issues
and problems (Ey et al., 2016; Leppma & Young, 2014; Mellin et al., 2011; Williams & Ramsey,
2017). Myers et al. (2000) developed a comprehensive model of wellness specific to counseling.
Historically, the primary model used by other mental health professionals in the United States to
address emotional problems was the medical or illness model, an approach created by physicians
in caring for persons with physical illnesses. In the medical model, the helper identifies the illness
presented by the person asking for assistance. The diagnosis of the illness is always the first step in
helping. This perspective assumes that the client is diminished in some significant way. The goal
of the professional helper is to return the help-seeker to the level of functioning enjoyed before
the illness occurred. Once the illness has been isolated, the helper applies scientific principles in
curing the illness. If the helper is successful and the illness is cured, the client then goes on about
life. If another illness negatively affects the client’s well-being, the client returns to the helper to
be cured again.
Psychiatrists, who are physicians, are educated to approach mental health issues utilizing the
medical model. Other mental health professions, including clinical psychology, psychiatric nurs-
ing, and clinical social work, came into existence when the medical model was prevalent, and these
mental health professionals have their roots in this tradition as well.
Counselors, on the other hand, belong to a newer profession with a different tradition.
Counselors have adopted the wellness model of mental health as their perspective for helping peo-
ple, and there is evidence that counseling from a wellness perspective is an effective method of
helping clients (Myers & Sweeney, 2004; Tanigoshi et al., 2008). A meta-analysis completed by
Weigold et al. (2020) supported the focus of the counseling profession on wellness. A construct
known as personal growth initiative is an individual’s active and intentional desire to grow in areas
that are personally important. An analysis of research related to personal growth initiative suggested
it can be increased through counseling and that having personal growth initiative increases success
in counseling. In the wellness model, the goal is for each person to achieve positive mental health
to the degree possible. From a wellness perspective, mental health is seen as occurring on a contin-
uum (Smith, 2001). At one end of the scale are individuals who are very mentally healthy. Maslow
(1968) described people who are fully functioning mentally and emotionally as self-actualizing.
At the other extreme are persons who are dysfunctional because of mental health problems. Such
people might include persons who do not have the capacity to respond to any kind of mental health
treatment or intervention.
In addition to this general continuum of mental health, the wellness orientation also views
mental health as including a number of scales of mental and emotional functioning (see Figure 2-1).
These scales represent an individual’s mental and emotional wellness in important areas of living.
Counselors assess a client’s functioning in each of these areas to determine where attention within
counseling might best be focused to increase wellness. These areas include family relationships,
friendships, other relationships (work, community, church, etc.), career/job, spirituality, leisure
activities, physical health, living environment, financial status, and sexuality.
Counselors assess clients’ current life situations and help determine which factors are interfering
with the goal of helping clients reach their maximum potential. Many persons are limited by physical
disabilities or environmental conditions that they cannot change. Keeping such limitations in mind,
counselors assist their clients in becoming as autonomous and successful in their lives as possible.
Although the distinctions between the medical model and the wellness model can be clearly
articulated, there is considerable overlap when they are put into practice. Many individual practi-
tioners within the other mental health professions deviate from the illness model. In fact, evidence

-- 54 of 593 --

32 	Section 1 • Foundations
that the medical profession has adopted many elements of the wellness model can be seen in current
trends toward preventive medicine, consumer education, and patient rights. Increasingly, medical
practitioners are coming to view patients as partners in their own health care, and this trend is also
evident in the approaches of many psychiatrists, psychologists, and other mental health profes-
sionals. At the same time, today’s counselors are educated to use the medical model of diagnosing
mental disorders (the DSM system; American Psychiatric Association, 2022) and often render such
diagnoses as a component of the services they provide.
Although wellness is a goal that counselors have for their clients, until recently few models
existed to explain to counselors how to achieve wellness integration in their practices. Long et al.
(2022) conducted a study in which 21 professional counselors were asked to identify the approaches
they used to help their clients achieve wellness, and then used the information provided by the study
participants to develop a model. In the model proposed by Long et al., counselors assess barriers to
wellness that clients are experiencing and use counseling skills to implement wellness interventions
for each particular client.
Within the counseling profession there is an increasing recognition of the importance
of advocating for clients who face societal and institutional barriers that restrict their access
to resources or inhibit their growth and development (Hunt et al., 2006; Ingersoll et al., 2004;
Myers & Sweeney, 2004). Client advocacy has long been a tradition in social work practice, but
until recently it has not been emphasized in the training of counselors, other than rehabilitation
counselors. Mental health professionals who operate from the illness model practice in ways
that are similar to the practices of mental health professionals who embrace the wellness model.
For example, mental health professionals who espouse either model would most likely provide
individual or group counseling services, spend time talking with clients, take clinical notes, and
render a diagnosis of any mental disorders the person may have. Perhaps the primary differences
between the two models are in the attitude of the professional toward the client and the focus
of the professional’s clinical attention. Counselors see the client as having both the potential to
Overall Functioning in Mental and Emotional Areas
Dysfunctional 	Self-Actualizing
Specific Areas
Family Relationships
Friendships
Other Relationships (Work, Community, Church, etc.)
Career/Job
Spirituality
Leisure Activities
Physical Health
Living Environment
Financial Status
Sexuality
FIGURE 2-1 The wellness orientation to mental health

-- 55 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	33
make self-affirming choices and to succeed in living rather as than having an illness that needs
to be remediated. In addition, the goal of counseling is to help the person accomplish wellness
rather than to cure an illness. Hansen (2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2012) and Hansen et al. (2014)
have written a series of articles that question many of the current practices and language used by
counselors, suggesting that the counseling profession may be moving away from its foundational
beliefs by classifying itself as a health care profession.
A DEVELOPMENTAL PERSPECTIVE 	A second belief that counselors share is that many personal
and emotional issues can be understood within a developmental perspective. As people progress
through the life span, they meet and must successfully address many personal challenges. Counselors
believe that most of the problems people encounter are developmental in nature and therefore are
natural and normal. Problems that some other mental health professionals might view as pathologi-
cal, and that counselors would see as developmental, include the following:
• A 5-year-old crying as if in terror when his mother drops him off for the first time at his kin-
dergarten class
• An 11-year-old girl who seems to be obsessed with boys
• A teenager vigorously defying their parents’ directives
• A 19-year-old becoming seriously depressed after breaking up with their romantic partner
• A young mother becoming despondent soon after the birth of a child
• A 35-year-old beginning to drink so much they are getting into trouble after 15 years of social
drinking
• A 40-year-old parent feeling worthless after their youngest child leaves home for college
• A 65-year-old professional person feeling very depressed as their retirement approaches
• An 80-year-old concerned that they are losing their mind because they are forgetting so much
By studying the developmental stages in life and understanding tasks that all individuals face
during their lives, counselors can put many problems that clients experience into a perspective that
views these problems as natural and normal. Even problems viewed as psychopathological by other
mental health professionals, such as severe depression, substance addiction, or debilitating anxiety,
could be seen as transitory issues that often plague people and that must be dealt with effectively if
individuals are to continue living in a successful fashion.
PREVENTION AND EARLY INTERVENTION 	A third philosophical assumption of counselors is our
preference for prevention rather than remediation of mental and emotional problems (McCormac,
2014; Nelson & Tarabochia, 2017; Wester & McKibben, 2016). When prevention is impossible,
counselors strive toward early intervention instead of waiting until a problem has reached serious
proportions.
A primary tool that counselors use to prevent emotional and mental problems is education.
Counselors often practice their profession in the role of teacher, using psychoeducation as a tool. By
alerting clients to potential future areas that might cause personal and emotional distress and preparing
them to meet such challenges successfully, counselors prevent problems before they arise. Just a few
examples of prevention activities are parenting education programs, anti-bullying groups for school-
children, career exploration groups, and pre-marriage counseling.
When the time for prevention has already passed and a client is experiencing personal or emo-
tional problems, counselors prefer seeing clients early in the process. Counselors believe that coun-
seling is for everyone, not just for individuals who have mental illnesses or emotional disorders.
By providing services to individuals when they begin to experience potentially distressing events

-- 56 of 593 --

34 	Section 1 • Foundations
in their lives, counselors hope to intervene early and thereby prevent problems from escalating. For
instance, counselors would prefer to see a client who is beginning to have feelings of depression
rather than someone who could be diagnosed as having an episode of severe depression, and coun-
selors would encourage couples who are beginning to experience problems in their relationship to
seek counseling rather than wait for their problems to escalate into serious marital discord.
EMPOWERMENT OF CLIENTS 	The fourth belief that counselors share regarding the helping
process is that the goal of counseling is to empower clients to problem-solve independently
(Chronister & McWhirter, 2003; Dailey et al., 2014a; Savage et al., 2005). Through teaching
clients appropriate problem-solving strategies and increasing their self-understanding, counselors
hope that clients will not need assistance in living their lives in the future. Realizing that individu-
als often need only transitory help, counselors also try to communicate to clients that asking for
and receiving help is not a sign of mental or emotional weakness but, instead, is often a healthy
response to life’s challenges.
It is quite easy for individuals to become dependent on those who provide help to them. Some
systems of mental health care seem to encourage a pattern of lifelong dependence. Counselors rec-
ognize this problem and encourage clients to assume responsibility for their lives and learn to live in
a manner that allows them autonomy and independence as those concepts are understood within the
clients’ cultures. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) in the preamble states that one of the fundamental
principles of ethical behavior of counselors is “autonomy, or fostering the right to control the direc-
tion of one’s life.” Although some people may need assistance throughout their lives because of a
physical or mental disability, all clients are helped to become as independent as their circumstances
will allow. Counselors do not present themselves as experts in mental health who must be consulted
when problems arise. Rather, counselors communicate the belief that clients are capable of develop-
ing the skills they need for independent living and wellness.
Counseling Services
To achieve a strong professional identity as a counselor, it is essential that you understand the phi-
losophy of helping that we have just described. In addition, you need to be knowledgeable about
the kinds of services that counselors offer to the public, even though the services that counselors
provide do not define the profession. Actually, counselors engage in many of the same activities
as other mental health professionals do. The key to a strong professional identity is the philosophy
underlying the services, not the services being rendered.
The basic service that counselors provide is counseling—for individuals, couples, families, and
groups. All other mental health professionals counsel patients and clients, too. A major difference
between counselors and other mental health professionals who counsel is that counseling is the pri-
mary professional service that counselors provide. By contrast, the primary service that psychiatrists
provide is the diagnosis and medical treatment of mental disorders as a physician; psychologists pri-
marily provide assessment and research; psychiatric nurses provide management of mental health care
within a hospital setting; and social workers primarily link clients to community resources. For mental
health professionals other than counselors, counseling may be a secondary or ancillary service.
In addition, many other professionals outside the mental health field call the service that
they provide to clients counseling. For example, attorneys provide legal counseling, accountants
offer financial counseling, and physicians offer counseling to their patients regarding their physi-
cal health. Counselors, in contrast to these non–mental health professionals, provide mental health
counseling services to clients.

-- 57 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	35
In conjunction with counseling, counselors also perform a number of other professional services.
These services include assessment, teaching, diagnosis, case management, and advocacy. Despite per-
forming these other duties, the primary service provided by counselors is mental health counseling.
Counselors have many job titles, roles, and duties in their professional positions. To develop a
strong professional identity, you must know when you are functioning as a counselor and when you
are performing other roles in your professional position. You must also be able to identify the types
of professional services that counselors render to the public.
PREPARING AND CREDENTIALING COUNSELORS
Ask lawyers what they were taught in law school, physicians what they were taught in medical
school, and engineers what they were taught in engineering school, and they can easily and clearly
describe the courses they took, the practical components of their educational experience, and the
topics covered in their preparation programs. To develop a strong professional identity, it is vital
that you are also able to describe your training program components. By describing the educational
programs that prepare counselors, you summarize the essential nature of counseling as a profession
and emphasize the basic knowledge required for becoming a counselor.
Counselor Preparation Programs
An important aspect of counselor training is that the profession considers individuals to be profes-
sionals after they have completed a master’s degree. Although a master’s degree is the required
professional degree in both psychiatric nursing and clinical social work, psychiatry requires a medi-
cal degree and a residency in psychiatry, and psychology requires a doctoral degree for the achieve-
ment of professional status. One difference between counseling psychology and the profession of
counseling is that counseling psychologists must hold doctorates to be considered professionals,
whereas counselors are considered professionals at the master’s-degree level.
In addition, counseling skills are the primary focus of the counseling master’s-degree training
programs. Although other subjects are taught, all the training emphasizes competency in the areas
of individual and group counseling. The other courses required in master’s-degree programs, such
as research, assessment, multicultural counseling, and career counseling, are meant to strengthen
the counseling skills of graduate students.
Counseling graduate programs generally are located in colleges of education within univer-
sities. The profession of counseling has its foundations in pedagogy and psychology, particularly
in counseling psychology and human growth and development. All these fields have their roots
in colleges of education, which is why counseling graduate programs are usually located there.
Some counselor educators and counselors are concerned that being located in a college of education
implies that counselors are being prepared to function only in educational settings, such as schools
or colleges. They believe that the general public’s perception is negatively affected when they think
of all counselors as being prepared and practicing in the same way that school counselors were pre-
pared and practiced at the beginning of the school counseling movement in the 1950s (Baker et al.,
2021; Levy & Lemberger-Truelove, 2021; Morris et al., 2021; Zyromski et al., 2018). The reality
is that the counseling process is educational in nature, and although counselors do not educate in
formal classrooms like traditional teachers do, counselors do educate their clients. Being located in
colleges of education strengthens counseling graduate programs because the colleges emphasize
pedagogy, human growth and development, applied research, and field placements as essential com-
ponents of learning skills.

-- 58 of 593 --

36 	Section 1 • Foundations
The counseling profession created the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related
Educational Programs (CACREP) to set national standards for the preparation of master’s- and
doctoral-level counselors (CACREP, 2024; Urofsky, 2013). CACREP was begun during the 1960s
under the leadership of Robert O. Stripling, a counselor–educator at the University of Florida.
CACREP began as a project of the Association of Counselor Education and Supervision (ACES), a
division of the ACA, and now functions as a separate corporation.
CACREP has established standards for the preparation of counselors (CACREP, 2024). These
standards require a minimum of semester hours in a master’s-degree program that prepares coun-
selors. In addition, the programs must include instruction in the following content areas: (a) profes-
sional counseling orientation and ethical practice, (b) social and cultural identities and experiences,
(c) lifespan development, (d) career development, (e) counseling practice and relationships, (f) group
counseling and group work, (g) assessment and diagnostic processes, and (h) research and program
evaluation. CACREP requires that students complete a 100-hour practicum and a 600-hour intern-
ship. The CACREP standards also require that program faculty be counselors, that programs have
a laboratory for training, and that a number of other requirements for quality instruction be met
(Bobby, 2013; Even & Robinson, 2013; Lee, 2013).
Not all master’s-degree programs in counseling are accredited by CACREP. Many pro-
grams that are not yet accredited have patterned their master’s-degree programs after the stan-
dards developed by CACREP. Although not all the counseling graduate-degree programs in the
United States are accredited by CACREP, it is accurate to say that CACREP standards have been
accepted by the profession as the model curriculum for preparing master’s- and doctoral-level
counselors (Lawson, 2016). Because graduation from a CACREP-accredited program is one type
of credential that a counselor might possess, CACREP accreditation will be discussed further in
the next section.
Credentialing
One of the greatest challenges faced by those entering the counseling
profession is to understand counselor credentialing. Credentialed indi-
viduals possess some type of indicator that they are legitimate profes-
sionals. Credentialing comes in many forms, which is the basic reason
people are so confused by it. In addition, some credentials are essential
to the practice of the profession; others are desirable but not necessary;
and still others are of questionable value or even worthless. This section
contains a discussion of credentials and should assist you in conceptu-
alizing and understanding counselor credentials.
A major problem that causes confusion among counselors and the
public is that terminology is not consistent within the area of credential-
ing. The major types of counselor credentials are degree, state license,
state agency certification, national voluntary certification, and program
accreditation.
DEGREE 	The most obvious credential that counselors hold is the mas-
ter’s degree. Other degrees, such as educational specialist or doctoral degrees, are credentials as well.
Counselors hold a variety of master’s-degree titles. A legitimate counselor might hold a Master of
Education (MEd), Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science (MS), Master of Divinity (MDiv), or
another, more unusual, master’s-degree title such as Master of Counseling (MCoun). Most of the titles

-- 59 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	37
of master’s degrees given in various universities were decided long ago and generally have little to
do with any differences in the actual program content. The degree title in no way indicates whether a
degree program requires a specified number of credits, includes a thesis, or has other specific require-
ments. In many universities, degree titles are decided politically. For example, many counseling mas-
ter’s-degree programs award MEd degrees because the degree programs are offered within university
colleges of education.
Although the basic credential for a professional counselor is a master’s degree in counsel-
ing, many counselors hold higher degrees, including educational specialist’s degrees, certificates of
advanced study, and doctoral degrees. Doctoral degrees in counseling usually are either the Doctor
of Philosophy (PhD) or the Doctor of Education (EdD), although some counseling doctoral pro-
grams might have titles such as Doctor of Arts (DA) or Doctor of Divinity (DDiv).
STATE LICENSE 	In most states, a license issued by the state is required before a person is
allowed to practice counseling in that state (Bergman, 2013; Morgen et al., 2012). This licen-
sure affects private practice counseling most directly because most licensure statutes state that
counselors who practice in many other settings are exempt from the licensure requirement. For
example, in most states, counselors who practice in local, state, or federal agencies; in nonprofit
corporations; or in schools or other educational institutions are exempt from the licensure require-
ment. Often when professions are first licensed, many exemptions are granted to the licensure
requirement. This occurs because of a concern that, if licensure were required for all members of
that profession, agencies that traditionally pay less for the professionals’ services would not be
able to attract employees. For example, when physicians were first licensed by states, physicians
employed in many settings were exempt from licensure. Over the years, these licensure exemp-
tions have been removed for physicians, and now almost all physicians, no matter where they
practice, must have a state license. The same removal of exemptions will most likely occur over
time in the counseling field.
Unfortunately, counseling licensure statutes have various titles. In some states, counselors
credentialed by the state are called licensed, and in other states they are referred to as certified. In
some states, they have even been called registered.
In the more general arena of state regulation of professions, the terms licensed, certified, and
registered have separate and specific meanings. A licensure law is referred to as a practice law, which
means that the professional must be licensed to practice that profession in that state. A certification law
is what is known as a title law, which means that a person must be certified to use the title of certified
professional but that the practice of that profession is not regulated by the state. Finally, a registra-
tion law was intended to mean that a professional had to register with the state but that no credentials
would be required for registration. These terms, however, have been used interchangeably from state
to state and from profession to profession. For example, registered nurses in almost all states in reality
are licensed even though their title indicates they are registered. In addition, most current state registra-
tion laws do require that registered persons have some type of credentials before they are added to the
state registry.
Currently, in some states licensed counselors actually function under title laws, and some
certified counselors, in reality, are operating under practice laws. As an individual counselor
who wants to practice in a particular state, you should ascertain exactly what the state credential
(whether a license, a certificate, or a registry) entitles the credentialed person to do. You do not
have to fully understand the complexity of all state regulatory laws to understand what the par-
ticular law means in your state. The American Association of State Counseling Boards (AASCB,
2023) and the American Counseling Association (ACA, 2023) provide contact information for

-- 60 of 593 --

38 	Section 1 • Foundations
state licensure boards (AASCB, 2023). In addition, the National Board for Certified Counselors
(NBCC) provides contact and testing information for state counselor licensure boards (NBCC,
2023). All 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam now have laws that regulate
the profession of counseling.
To add to the confusion regarding state counselor licensure laws, states have given several
titles to counselors who are licensed. The most common title is that of professional counselor.
However, other states use titles such as mental health counselor or clinical counselor. The individu-
als who proposed the counselor licensing laws in each state decided which title to use. In some
cases, titles were chosen to satisfy political compromises that had to be made to obtain legislative
support for the bills.
STATE AGENCY CERTIFICATION 	As the term is used here, state agency certification is different
from state licensure. It was explained previously that counselors in some states are certified rather
than licensed. However, in this section, the term certification is used to refer to the process whereby
official agencies of the state certify individuals as qualified to hold certain state jobs. In most states,
this agency process is referred to as certification, although some call it licensure.
The most obvious state agency certification process is for school counselors. In each state the
department of education determines which counselors may be certified as school counselors. To
maintain their school accreditation, schools in that state must hire certified school counselors, just
as they must hire only certified school teachers. The requirements for being certified as a school
counselor vary widely from state to state. In some states, school counselors must first be certified
and experienced school teachers before they can become certified as school counselors, although
this teacher certification requirement is being eliminated in most states. The requirements for state
school counselor certification should be obtained from the state department of education in the state
in which you wish to practice. The American Counseling Association (2023) and the American
School Counselor Association (2023) provide information about school counselor certification in
all states.
Another area in which counselors are certified by the state is in addictions counseling (Morgen
et al., 2012). Most states have various levels of certified addictions counselors, sometimes including
counselors who hold less than a bachelor’s degree. State agencies that provide addictions treatment
services are required to hire only certified counselors who meet state requirements for certification.
Information regarding state requirements for addictions counselors can be obtained from NAADAC:
The Association for Addiction Professionals (NAADAC, 2023).
Rehabilitation counseling is another specialty area that involves varying state requirements.
Although state rehabilitation agencies do not certify vocational rehabilitation counselors, they
have established minimum requirements for rehabilitation counselors that vary from state to state.
Information regarding the requirements for being hired as a vocational rehabilitation counselor can
be obtained from each state’s rehabilitation agency.
NATIONAL VOLUNTARY CERTIFICATION 	The two national certification agencies of the coun-
seling profession are the National Board for Certified Counselors (2023) and the Commission on
Rehabilitation Counselor Certification (CRCC, 2023). In 2023, NBCC certified more than 70,000
counselors in more than 40 countries (NBCC, 2023). In 2023, CRCC had over 15,000 certified reha-
bilitation counselors (CRCC, 2023). National certification is voluntary in that there is no governmen-
tal requirement that a counselor be certified for private practice. Even though a counselor may be
required to be licensed in a state to practice counseling, there is no legal need for that same counselor
to be certified by NBCC or CRCC. Counselors choose to become nationally certified to demonstrate

-- 61 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	39
they have met the highest national standards developed by their profession. National certification is
sometimes used as a job prerequisite as well, especially in the field of rehabilitation counseling.
The counseling profession created NBCC in 1982 as the national agency to certify counsel-
ors who had met the minimum requirements of the profession (NBCC, 2023). A National Certified
Counselor (NCC) is an individual who has met the requirements set forth by NBCC. NBCC now
functions as an independent corporation with its own board of directors. It was important for the
profession to create NBCC so that the profession, rather than each individual state legislature, could
determine the minimum requirements for being a professional counselor. In the same vein, it is impor-
tant for counselors to support NBCC by becoming NCCs as soon as they are qualified to do so. In
addition, counselors who hire other counselors should consider indicating that NCCs are preferred.
To become an NCC, a counselor must complete a master’s degree in counseling, have
2 years of post-master’s experience, and pass the National Counselor Examination. The 2 years of
post-master’s experience is waived for graduates of CACREP-accredited programs.
Every profession has national voluntary certification of specialists within that profession.
NBCC has created specialty certification for the counseling profession. Although some believe that
states should license counselors as specialists (Cottone, 1985; Emener & Cottone, 1989), we believe
states should license counselors generally and NBCC should certify specialists (Remley, 1995). Our
position is that the role NBCC plays in certifying counselors as specialists within their chosen areas
is vital to the success of the counseling profession. We believe that specialty designations should be
voluntary and should be offered by a national body such as NBCC.
To become certified as a specialist by NBCC, a counselor first must be an NCC. Currently,
NBCC offers specialty certification in addictions counseling, mental health counseling, and school
counseling. The specific requirements for becoming specialty-certified in one or more of these
fields can be obtained by contacting NBCC (2023). In addition, an affiliate of NBCC, the Center
for Credentialing & Education (CCE, 2023) offers additional specialty certifications, including
Approved Clinical Supervisor (ACS), Board Certified–TeleMental Health Provider (BC-TMH),
Global Career Development Facilitator (GCDF), Board Certified Coach (BCC), and Human
Services–Board Certified Practitioner (HS-BCP).
Rehabilitation counseling specialists began certifying rehabilitation counselors before NBCC
was formed. As a result, that specialty certification is offered by a separate certifying agency, the
Commission on Rehabilitation Counselor Certification (CRCC, 2023).
In addition to NBCC and CRCC, many other national voluntary counselor certifications are
available to counselors. Some of these certifications have high standards and are multidisciplinary
in nature. Others are simply designed to make money for the individuals who created them. If you
are interested in a national certification for counselors offered by a group other than NBCC or
CRCC, you should investigate the group’s reputation among members of the counseling profession,
the organizational structure of the group, and the general legitimacy of the credential.
The NBCC Foundation (2023), through the Global Capacity Building program, is providing
leadership in educating counselors about counseling in other countries and is helping to advance
mental health care worldwide. The program offers international institutes to counselors, helps coun-
tries establish counselor certification, and provides Mental Health Facilitator (MHF) training.
Program Accreditation
The training of counselors was summarized previously in this chapter. The standards for preparing
counselors that have been agreed upon by the counseling profession are included in the accredita-
tion standards of CACREP, also detailed in the previous section. The Council on Rehabilitation
Education (CORE) formerly accredited master’s-degree programs in the specialty area of

-- 62 of 593 --

40 	Section 1 • Foundations
rehabilitation counseling. CORE and CACREP have now merged, and CACREP accredits rehabili-
tation counseling programs, along with other specialty counseling programs.
A counselor’s graduation from a CACREP-accredited counseling graduate program is a creden-
tial. Although many competent counselors are graduates of non-CACREP-accredited programs, the
CACREP credential does distinguish counselors as having completed a preparation program that meets
the standards of excellence for the profession. Counselors can indicate on their résumés that they are
graduates of CACREP-accredited programs. Many job announcements now indicate that CACREP-
accredited program graduates are required or preferred.
Only master’s and doctoral-degree programs offered by regionally accredited universities
are listed in the directory. Nonaccredited universities also offer graduate degrees in counseling.
However, individuals who graduate from these nonaccredited university degree programs often are
unable to have their degrees recognized for the purposes of licensure, certification, or employment.
Accreditation of the university that offers degree programs in counseling, therefore, is essen-
tial for recognition. In addition to university accreditation, separate accreditation of counseling
programs is important. Many state licensure statutes for counselors require the same preparation
courses and field experiences as CACREP requires. In addition, NBCC has essentially the same
preparation standards as CACREP.
CACREP (2024) accredits master’s-degree programs in addictions; career; clinical mental
health; clinical rehabilitation counseling; college counseling and student affairs; marriage, couple,
and family counseling; rehabilitation counseling; and school counseling and doctoral programs in
counselor education and supervision.
CACREP reflects the minimum preparation program standards that have been agreed upon by
the profession for master’s- and doctoral-degree programs in counseling. If you want to determine
whether programs that are not accredited by CACREP reflect these minimum standards, you could
compare the degree requirements of those programs to the CACREP standards.
In established professions such as medicine, law, and even psychology, all preparation
programs are either accredited by their professional accreditation bodies or are actively pursuing
accreditation. Graduates of nonaccredited programs in those professions are unable to obtain
state licenses to practice or are unable to secure desirable jobs (LaFountain & Baer, 2001). It
is possible that, eventually, all master’s- and doctoral-degree programs in counseling will be
CACREP-accredited. Counseling graduate programs that do not have CACREP accreditation
will need to seek and obtain CACREP accreditation or will cease to exist because students will
not want to attend programs that are not CACREP-accredited, a change that is being resisted by
some within the counseling profession who believe that states have begun to add unreasonable
requirements for counselor licensure. Ohio has recently passed a law that requires all future
counselors who are licensed in that state to have degrees from CACREP-accredited programs
(Bray, 2013).
Ethical Standards Related to Credentialing
Professional counselors are ethically required to present their credentials accurately. According
to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), counselors must claim or imply only professional qualifica-
tions actually completed and correct any known misrepresentations of their qualifications by oth-
ers. They must clearly distinguish between paid and volunteer work experience and accurately
describe their continuing education and specialized training (§C.4.a.). With respect to degrees
held, counselors may advertise only the highest degree earned that is in counseling or a closely
related field (§C.4.d.). Some counselors hold a master’s degree in counseling and a doctoral
degree in another field.

-- 63 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	41
As you acquire various professional credentials, you certainly will want to advertise them.
Your professional association’s code of ethics imposes few restrictions on advertising (§C.3.), and
those are limited to restrictions that can be clearly justified to protect the public. Nonetheless, you
must know precisely what limits are contained in the code. In some circumstances, however, it is
difficult to determine what the ACA Code of Ethics allows.
2-2 The Case of Kevin
Kevin earned his master’s degree in counseling 8 years ago and has been working as a staff coun-
selor in a psychiatric hospital since he graduated. In addition to this employment, he opened a
part-time private practice when he became licensed as a professional counselor. Kevin recently
completed his doctorate in health care administration from a nontraditional distance-learning
university in California. He is now focused on his goals of moving into an administrative position
within the hospital as well as building up his private practice in case an administrative job does
not become available. He has decided to update the business cards and brochures he uses in his
private practice, and he has changed the wording to present himself as “Kevin Smith, PhD, MS,
LPC, Professional Member of the American Counseling Association.”
• Do you see anything wrong with the wording on Kevin’s cards?
• Do you believe a doctorate in health care administration could be considered a doctorate
in counseling or a closely related field?
Discussion: All of Kevin’s credentials on his card are directly related to counseling except per-
haps his PhD, which is in health care administration. If his doctorate was earned from a university
that was not accredited by one of the regional accrediting bodies, then the legitimacy of his
degree would be questionable. He must be careful not to mislead the public into believing that
he has a legitimate counseling doctoral degree. Whether the university from which he earned his
degree is accredited by a regional accrediting body is not known. Many nontraditional distance-
learning universities do hold regional body accreditation.
According to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), “Counselors do not imply doctoral-level
competence when possessing a master’s degree in counseling or a related field by referring to
themselves as Dr. in a counseling context when their doctorate is not in counseling or a related
field” (§C.4.d.). There are arguments for and against recognizing a PhD in health care administra-
tion as a doctorate in a field closely related to counseling. On one hand, counseling is a form of
health care, and a specialty within health care could easily be mental health care administration.
On the other hand, general health care administration is not a mental health field. Perhaps the
best way for Kevin to ensure that he is acting ethically, even though it might be a bit awkward,
would be for him to specify on his business cards that his PhD degree is in health care administra-
tion and that his MS degree is in counseling.
Basically, advertising must be accurate and must not be false, misleading, deceptive, or fraud-
ulent (ACA, 2014, §C.3.a.). When you become aware of any misrepresentation of your credentials
that might be made by others, you are responsible for making reasonable efforts to correct the
misinformation (§C.3.c.). Because many counselors hold multiple credentials, their business cards
and advertising brochures can sometimes resemble a kind of alphabet soup. A counselor’s degrees,
licenses, certifications, and professional memberships might include, for instance, MS (Master of

-- 64 of 593 --

42 	Section 1 • Foundations
Science) from a CACREP-accredited counseling program, LPC (Licensed Professional Counselor),
NCC (National Certified Counselor), CCMHC (Certified Clinical Mental Health Counselor),
CADAC (Certified Alcohol and Drug Abuse Counselor), and ACA Professional Member. It is
important for counselors to make reasonable efforts to ensure that the meaning of these credentials
is clear to potential consumers of their services.
In addition, as a credentialed counselor, you must be careful not to attribute more to your cre-
dentials than the credentials actually represent (§C.4.a.), and you should not imply that other coun-
selors are not qualified because they do not possess the same credentials as you do or because they
lack certain credentials (§§C.4.a. and D.1.a.). For example, it would be inappropriate for a Certified
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Counselor to say or infer that a mental health professional had to have that
credential in order to be competent to counsel clients regarding addiction or dependency problems.
Also, it would not be professional to denigrate the preparation of licensed psychologists by inferring
that their degree programs have prepared them less adequately for mental health practice than have
the degree programs of licensed professional counselors. The Code states, “Counselors acknowledge
the expertise of other professional groups and are respectful of their practices” (§D.1.a.).
THE ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION OF
THE COUNSELING PROFESSION
History is in the eye of the beholder. In other words, people view history from their own personal per-
spectives. Several authors have attempted to summarize the history of the counseling profession, and
each summary is different (Bradley & Cox, 2001; Field, 2017; Gibson & Mitchell, 2008; Hershenson
et al., 1996; Lawson, 2016; Sweeney, 2001). Various authors have emphasized different events and
have given their own interpretations to facts that have led them to various conclusions. The following
summary represents a brief view of the history of the counseling profession that recognizes the input of
others and adds our perspectives based on our observations as leaders and members of the profession.
While the psychology profession was establishing the doctoral level as the requirement for
professional status and counseling psychology was developing as a specialty area within it, his-
torical events were leading to the rapid development of school counseling programs and vocational
rehabilitation counseling. Eventually, changes within counseling psychology, the school counseling
movement, and federal funding of vocational rehabilitation counseling led to the emergence of the
new profession of counseling.
Counseling Psychology
The counseling profession basically shares its history with the emergence of counseling psychol-
ogy as a specialty within the psychology profession (Goodyear, 2000). Early leaders in the specialty
of counseling psychology distinguished themselves from other psychologists by declaring that they
were interested in the normal, healthy development of human beings rather than in illness and psy-
chopathology. In counseling psychology, the focus was on developmental stages in people’s lives and
career concerns. World War I and the work of Frank Parsons on career classifications provided the
impetus for the development of counseling psychology as a separate specialty within psychology.
Parsons created the concept in the United States that citizens should be assisted in selecting careers
that would be rewarding and that matched their abilities and interests (Gibson & Mitchell, 2008).
Although the field of psychology has offered doctoral degrees for quite some time, at the
beginning of its political movement to become a profession, psychology recognized individuals with
master’s degrees as professional psychologists. Several decades ago, the American Psychological

-- 65 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	43
Association (APA) declared that, in the future, only psychologists who held doctoral degrees would
be recognized as professionals. The profession decided to continue to recognize all existing psy-
chologists who held master’s degrees and allow them to practice but, in the future, to allow only
individuals who held doctoral degrees in psychology into the profession. Licensure laws in psychol-
ogy throughout the United States were changed to reflect this new political position.
Despite APA’s declaration that only psychologists at the doctoral level would be recognized
as professionals, universities throughout the United States continue even today to offer master’s
degrees in clinical and counseling psychology. Essentially, these master’s-degree programs in psy-
chology have produced and are continuing to produce graduates who have limited or no professional
recognition in psychology. Graduates of these master’s-degree programs most often seek and obtain
state licensure as counselors. When graduates of master’s-degree programs in clinical or counseling
psychology become counselors through the process of state counselor licensure, the professional
identities of both psychologists and counselors become blurred, and the public becomes more con-
fused about the differences between the two professions. In addition, a few licensure boards have
adopted rules in the last few years that do not recognize master’s degrees in psychology as accept-
able for licensure as professional counselors.
School Counseling
When the Russians launched the first spacecraft, Sputnik, in 1957, politicians in the United States
feared that, because the Russians had exceeded U.S. technology and beat the United States in the
race to space, they might overpower the country politically as well. In response to this fear, the
U.S. Congress created and funded substantial programs to encourage young people to seek careers
in technical and scientific fields. Part of this effort included placing counselors in high schools to
channel students into math and science courses. Throughout the United States, universities created
summer institutes in which high school teachers were given basic courses that led to their place-
ment in high schools as guidance counselors. In most instances, high school teachers were given
two or three courses in guidance or counseling, which then allowed them to be certified as school
counselors and assume guidance counselor positions within schools. Because the primary purpose
of this effort was to encourage students to take math and science courses, it did not seem necessary
for counselors to be prepared beyond the training provided in these summer institutes.
In a very short time, school accreditation groups required that high schools have guidance coun-
selors to receive or continue their accreditation. Today, almost all middle and high school accreditation
agencies require that these schools have counselors, and in some areas of the country, elementary schools
are required to have counselors as well. Almost all states now require that certified school counselors
have received the master’s degree and have completed specified courses and an internship.
Vocational Rehabilitation Counseling
In the 1950s, it was recognized in the United States that citizens with physical and mental disabilities
were not being given the help they needed to become productive members of society. As a result,
legislation was passed that provided counseling and educational resources that were meant to reha-
bilitate persons with disabilities so that they could function as autonomously as possible.
A major component of this rehabilitation legislation was funding to prepare counselors to
help persons with disabilities evaluate their disabilities, make plans to work, and find satisfactory
employment. Because of this funding, master’s-degree programs in rehabilitation counseling were
developed, and existing programs were expanded. State rehabilitation agencies created positions in
rehabilitation case management and counseling for the graduates of these programs.

-- 66 of 593 --

44 	Section 1 • Foundations
In summary, the dynamics around the creation of the specialty of counseling psychology, the
decision within the psychology profession that professionals would be recognized only at the doc-
toral level, the emergence of school counseling, and the funding of vocational rehabilitation coun-
seling programs led to the creation of counseling as a separate profession. Clearly, the origins of the
profession lie in the convergence of several disparate forces rather than in a single event.
Counseling as a New Profession
An entire area of scholarly inquiry in the field of sociology is devoted to studying the emergence
of new professions. Scholars within this field have identified the essential factors that define what a
profession is and what steps a group must go through to establish itself as a legitimate, separate, and
unique profession. In relation to other professional groups in general and to mental health profes-
sional groups in particular, counseling is a relatively new professional entity. To understand some
of the difficult problems facing the counseling profession today, it is important for counselors to
compare counseling to other, older mental health professions and to ascertain where we are in the
process of becoming a fully recognized profession.
Toren (1969) defined a fully developed profession as one that has the following traits: a body
of theoretical knowledge, members who possess competence in the application of this knowledge,
and a code of ethics focused on clients’ well-being.
A different concept of a profession has been offered by Hughes (1965). He said that, com-
pared to nonprofessions, emerging professions demand more independence, more recognition, a
higher status, a clearer distinction between those inside and those outside the profession, and more
autonomy in choosing colleagues.
Six criteria for determining professional maturity have been described by Nugent (1981).
According to Nugent, a mature profession and its members have the following characteristics:
• They can clearly define their role and have a defined scope of practice.
• They offer unique services (do something that members of no other profession can do).
• They have special knowledge and skills (are specifically trained for the profession).
• They have an explicit code of ethics.
• They have the legal right to offer the service (have obtained a monopoly, through licensure or
certification, over the right to provide the services).
• They have the ability to monitor the practice of the profession (the profession can police itself).
By considering these traits, conceptualizations, and definitions of a mature profession, it is
possible to see that the field of counseling meets the criteria, although to different degrees. Certainly,
counselors have a well-established code of ethics and have achieved societal recognition through
state licensure. Areas that need to be strengthened include identifying services that are uniquely
offered by counselors, developing a body of knowledge that belongs specifically to counseling and
does not borrow so heavily from psychology, and achieving a higher status within society.
Steps in Becoming a Profession
According to sociologists who have studied emerging professions within society (Abbott, 1988;
Caplow, 1966; Dugan, 1965; Etzioni, 1969; Friedson, 1983; Hughes, 1965; Scott, 1969; Toren,
1969), professions must go through a developmental process if they are to be successful in estab-
lishing themselves as fully recognized professions.
Caplow (1966) maintained that the steps whereby a group achieves professional status are quite
definite, and that the sequence of steps is explicit. The first three steps toward professionalization are

-- 67 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	45
(a) forming associations, (b) changing names to reduce identification with the previous occupational
status, and (c) developing a code of ethics. Certainly, the counseling profession has accomplished
these three steps. First, ACA was chartered in 1952 from three long-standing subgroups. Second, the
association’s name was changed from the American Personnel and Guidance Association (APGA)
to the American Association for Counseling and Development (AACD) and then to the American
Counseling Association (ACA). Each change reduced the identification with words such as guid-
ance, student personnel, and student development and embraced more fully the word counseling. In
addition, ACA has had a code of ethics since 1961.
According to Caplow (1966), the fourth step in accomplishing the goal of becoming a profes-
sion is prolonged political agitation. Counselors have been involved in substantial political agitation
since the first counselor licensure law was passed in Virginia in 1976. That political activity has been
continued as similar licensure laws have been passed in state after state, until licensure was gained in
all 50 states. In addition, counselors have lobbied state legislators to mandate school counseling pro-
grams, to include counselors as providers in health care programs, and to ensure that the professional
services of counselors are reimbursed by health care insurance companies. Clearly, counselors have
engaged in Caplow’s prolonged political agitation, and this process is continuing today.
Counselors have been fighting hard and making many changes to overcome the deficiencies
that have hindered the development of the profession. Some of the changes that have taken place
in the last 20 to 30 years in the field of counseling include the following: The length of most train-
ing programs has increased from 30 to 48 and then to 60 semester hours; efforts have been made to
improve the professional status of counselors through credentialing and legislation; laws are con-
tinually passed in states granting privileged communication to interactions between counselors and
their clients; the body of knowledge is being increased through scholarly publications specifically
in counseling, as distinguished from psychology; federal programs such as Tricare and Medicare
have begun to recognize counselors as mental health providers; and counselor licensure laws have
brought autonomy from being supervised by others to practice counseling (Fullen et al., 2020a;
Fullen et al., 2021; National Board for Certified Counselors, 2023; Westcott et al., 2022). Evidence
suggests that counseling is a recognized profession in the United States.
Progress Toward Professionalization
It is discouraging for graduate students preparing to enter the field to realize that counseling, despite its
progress, still has some way to go before achieving recognition on a par with other mental health profes-
sions within our society. On the other hand, it is encouraging to note that counseling is making progress
toward recognition as a profession at a relatively fast rate when compared to professionalization efforts
in other fields. For example, scholars within psychology wrote less than 50 years ago in one of their own
profession’s journals that they doubted that psychology could validly claim to be a profession (Phillips,
1982). The first law establishing psychologists as independent health practitioners was passed in 1968 in
New Jersey (Dorken & Webb, 1980), and some states still do not require a license to practice psychol-
ogy. In comparison, the first counselor licensure bill was passed in Virginia in 1976, and all 50 states,
the District of Columbia, and other U.S. jurisdictions have already passed licensure bills for counselors.
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS OF COUNSELORS
Professional associations are formed by professional groups for many reasons. First, associa-
tions provide a forum for professionals to gather to discuss issues and problems that exist within
the profession. An association allows the members of a profession to address issues as a group

-- 68 of 593 --

46 	Section 1 • Foundations
rather than work independently on behalf of the profession. Second, professional associations
provide leadership by speaking for the profession on critical legislative issues that affect the
profession at all levels of government (Li & Peters, 2022; McKibben et al., 2017). Professional
associations also provide continuing education for their members. Earning a master’s degree
in counseling is only the beginning of the learning process for counselors. As new information
becomes available, counselors must attend conferences and workshops, in person and virtually,
to update their skills and expertise. Professional associations provide such learning opportuni-
ties and publish scholarly journals, texts, monographs, and other media resources for the con-
tinuing education of their members. In addition, professional associations publish and enforce
a code of ethics for their members. Important hallmarks for professionals are having a code of
ethics and policing themselves.
American Counseling Association
The American Counseling Association (ACA, 2023c) has many divisions and state branches that
represent the counseling profession and serve counselors in various ways.
You should join ACA when you begin your graduate-degree program in counseling and
maintain active membership throughout your career as a counselor. Students receive discounted
membership. All members, including students, receive a subscription to the counseling profes-
sional journal, the Journal of Counseling & Development. In addition, members receive a monthly
magazine and bulletins, which include current political and professional news related to coun-
seling as well as announcements of professional development opportunities, job openings, and
advertisements for professional products. Other benefits of membership include the ability to pur-
chase professional liability insurance policies, reduced registration fees for the national convention
and national workshops, and discounted prices for texts and media products published by ACA.
Professional liability insurance is free to student members of ACA.
2-3 The Case of Juanita
Juanita recently received her master’s degree in counseling and has taken her first full-time job
as a counselor at an outpatient addictions treatment facility. Although her beginning salary was
lower than she anticipated, Juanita is confident that with hard work and determination, she
will get promotions and pay raises in the next few years. Immediately after beginning her job,
Juanita paid a $200 fee to register with her state counselor licensure board so that she could
complete her 2 years of supervised experience required to become licensed. She also decided,
with a local licensed counselor, to meet weekly at $90 per meeting for supervision. During her
2 years in graduate school, Juanita had been a student member of ACA and two ACA divisions,
the American Mental Health Counselors Association (AMHCA) and the International Association
of Addiction and Offender Counselors (IAAOC). In addition, she had been a student member of
her state counseling association and the state branch divisions of AMHCA and IAAOC. Juanita
is also a member of the national counseling scholarship honorary society, Chi Sigma Iota, and is
a National Certified Counselor (NCC). Both the organization and the certification board require
annual dues or renewal payments. Juanita is on a tight budget and is thinking that she might
not rejoin ACA and the two national divisions or her state counseling association and its two
divisions.

-- 69 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	47
• What will Juanita miss if she drops her ACA and national division memberships?
• What will Juanita miss if she drops her state counseling association and two state division
memberships?
• How would you advise Juanita?
Discussion: Most importantly, if Juanita drops her ACA and national division memberships, she
will miss the opportunity to stay informed of new developments in the counseling profession
from a national perspective. She will no longer get ACA and division newsletters, announce-
ments of national conferences, discounts for texts and conference registration fees, and bulletins
on important matters of interest to counselors. Juanita will also miss opportunities for continued
development of her professional identity as a counselor by not knowing what is going on in the
counseling profession at the national level. She will no longer be able to purchase the high-quality
professional liability insurance policy ACA makes available to its members.
If she drops her state association memberships, Juanita will miss the opportunity to stay
informed of new developments in the counseling profession at the state level, where state licen-
sure issues are addressed, and where funding for counseling positions and state laws affecting
counselors are monitored. She will no longer get state counseling association and division newslet-
ters, announcements of state conferences, discounts for conference registration fees, and bulletins
on important matters of interest to counselors in her state. Juanita will also miss opportunities for
continued development of her professional identity as a counselor by not knowing what is going
on in the counseling profession at the state level and not being connected professionally to her
state colleagues.
You might remind Juanita that she has spent considerable amounts of money to earn her mas-
ter’s degree in counseling. Not only has she paid for tuition and texts, but she has also lost income
she would have earned by working while she was taking her graduate classes. Although all of these
expenses may seem overwhelming to a new professional, if Juanita is to be successful in her career
as a counselor, she will need to continue her professional association affiliations and maintain her
counseling credentials. Counselors who isolate themselves from their professional peers seldom
have successful careers. Professionals in all fields have similar expenses. These membership dues,
certification renewal fees, and licensure board fees are part of the costs of being a professional.
ACA Divisions
Currently, ACA has 19 divisions. The American School Counselor Association (ASCA) and the
American Mental Health Counselors Association (AMHCA) ended their division status with ACA in
the past few years. ACA members, if they choose, may join one or more divisions in addition to their
basic ACA membership. Division members receive scholarly journals from divisions that publish them,
periodic newsletters, and, from time-to-time, information related to the divisions’ special purposes.
There are two types of divisions within ACA, and all divisions are subgroups of ACA. One
type of division has as members counselors who practice in various employment settings, such as
colleges, rehabilitation agencies, or mental health centers. The other type of division has as mem-
bers counselors who have special interests within counseling such as group counseling, multicul-
tural counseling, or marriage and family counseling. Figure 2-2 provides a listing of the 19 ACA
divisions with a description of their members.

-- 70 of 593 --

48 	Section 1 • Foundations
NAME OF ACA DIVISION 	MEMBERS INCLUDE
Association for Adult Development and
Aging (AADA)
Counselors who have a special interest in
counseling issues of adults and those who
specialize in gerontology
Association for Assessment and Research
in Counseling (AARC)
Counselors who are interested in testing and
research
Association for Child and Adolescent
Counseling (ACAC)
Counselors who have a special interest in
counseling children and adolescents in all settings
Association for Creativity in Counseling
(ACC)
Counselors who have an interest in understanding cre-
ative approaches to counseling (such as art, music, or
dance therapy)
American College Counseling
Association (ACCA)
Counselors who work in college and university settings,
including technical and community colleges
Association for Counselor Education and
Supervision (ACES)
University professors who teach in counseling graduate
programs, supervisors of counselors, and individuals
who specialize in counseling supervision
The Association for Humanistic Counseling
(AHC)
Counselors who are oriented toward humanistic
principles
Association of Multicultural Counseling and
Development (AMCD)
Counselors who have a special interest in
multicultural issues in counseling
American Rehabilitation Counseling
Association (ARCA)
Counselors who work in government and private voca-
tional rehabilitation settings
Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and
Religious Values in Counseling (ASERVIC)
Counselors who have special interests in spiritual, ethical,
or religious values issues in counseling
Association for Specialists in Group Work
(ASGW)
Counselors who have a special interest in group
counseling
Counselors for Social Justice (CSJ) 	Counselors who are interested in the eradication of
oppressive systems of power and privilege
International Association for Resilience and
Trauma Counseling (IARTC)
Counselors who are interested in
trauma-informed practices and resilience
International Association of Addictions and
Offender Counselors (IAAOC)
Counselors who work in addictions or prison
settings
International Association of Marriage and
Family Counselors (IAMFC)
Counselors who specialize in marriage and family
counseling
Military and Government Counseling
Association (MGCA)
Counselors who provide services to military personnel
and government employees
National Career Development Association
(NCDA)
Counselors who have a special interest in career
counseling
National Employment Counseling Association
(NECA)
Counselors who work in employment agency
settings
Society for Sexual, Affectional, Intersex, and
Gender Expansive Identities (SAIGE)
Counselors who have an interest in providing a
nonthreatening counseling environment by
aiding in the reduction of stereotypical thinking and
homoprejudice
FIGURE 2-2 The 19 divisions of the American Counseling Association

-- 71 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	49
ACA State Branches
Most U.S. states, plus the District of Columbia, the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, the Philippines,
and Europe, have ACA branches. Although these branches are chartered by ACA, they are sepa-
rate, independent organizations. To join a state branch, you must contact that organization. Most
branches offer discounted membership rates for graduate students. Telephone and address infor-
mation for state branch associations can be obtained by contacting the ACA. State branches hold
annual conventions, represent counselors from their states in legislative matters, publish periodic
newsletters, and sometimes provide publications and workshops for members.
Most state ACA branches have state branch divisions that parallel the national ACA divisions.
So, in addition to a state ACA association, often there will exist, for example, state divisions for
school counselors, mental health counselors, and counselors interested in multicultural counseling
issues. When you join your state ACA branch, you will also have the opportunity to join any divi-
sions that exist in your state that interest you.
Many important professional issues, such as licensure and school counselor certification, can be
addressed only at the state level. In addition, it is very important for counselors to know and interact
with their colleagues throughout the state in which they are practicing (Darcy & Abed-Faghri, 2013).
Therefore, throughout their professional careers, counselors should belong to their ACA state branch
in addition to belonging to ACA and should provide leadership for the counseling profession (Barreto,
2012 & DeDiego et al., 2022; Fullen et al., 2020; Meany-Walen et al., 2013; Young et al., 2015).
Other Associations
In addition to ACA and its national divisions and state branches, counselors belong to many other
national and international associations. These associations represent a variety of interests. Associations
consist of multidisciplinary groups of mental health professionals, professionals interested in special-
izations within the mental health field, special political-purpose groups, and even associations that are
in opposition to the professional and political interests of the ACA and counselors. It might be benefi-
cial for counselors to join multidisciplinary professional associations to gain from cross-disciplinary
interactions and fresh perspectives on mental health issues. Counselors may also want to purchase
materials developed by other associations or attend workshops these other associations sponsor.
One association that was created because of ACA’s success in state licensure for counselors is
the American Association of State Counseling Boards (AASCB, 2023). This group has as its mem-
bers state boards that license counselors and individuals who have been appointed to those boards
or who administer them. The group meets annually to update members regarding developments in
the area of counseling licensure.
Not all other mental health professional associations are supportive of counseling as a profes-
sion. The APA opposed counselors when counselors achieved recognition in state legislatures as an
independent profession and currently opposes licensed counselors’ efforts to pass legislation mak-
ing it clear that counselors can diagnose and treat mental disorders, can test, and can be reimbursed
by health insurance companies for their services.
Many associations focus on the certification of counselors and the accreditation of facilities
that offer counseling services. Groups that have not already been mentioned in this chapter include
the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF International, 2018); the
International Association of Counseling Services (IACS, 2018), which accredits university counseling
centers; and The Joint Commission (2018), which accredits hospitals, home care organizations, labo-
ratory services, and nursing care centers, among others. At the international level, the International
Association for Counselling (https://www.iac-irtac.org), an international NGO with United Nations

-- 72 of 593 --

50 	Section 1 • Foundations
consultative status, works to build collaborations among countries and promote the development of
counseling in countries where the profession does not currently exist. Additionally, NBCC is active in
initiatives to advance counseling and equitable access to mental health services worldwide.
CURRENT, LEGAL, AND POLITICAL ISSUES RELATED
TO PROFESSIONAL IDENTITY
One of your tasks as a graduate student preparing to enter the counseling profession is to develop a strong
identity as a counselor. Yet, as we have seen, the profession itself seems confused about its identity.
Highlighting and discussing some of the profession’s current identity problems may help you acknowl-
edge and put these problems in perspective as you develop your own professional identity as a counselor.
Specialties Versus One United Profession
Probably the most significant problem that the counseling profession faces today is determining
whether the profession will develop a strong identity as one united profession with a common philo-
sophical foundation and knowledge base, or whether the specialties will emerge as the dominant
force within counseling (Myers & Sweeney, 2001). If the specialties prevail, counseling has little
chance of becoming a unified and societally recognized profession.
The problems associated with the specialties within the counseling profession were discussed
3 decades ago in the November/December 1995 issue of the Journal of Counseling & Development
(Myers, 1995). In that issue of the primary professional journal of the counseling profession, authors
discussed the following established and emerging counseling specialties: career counseling (Engels
et al., 1995), college counseling (Dean & Meadows, 1995), school counseling (Paisley & Borders,
1995), marriage and family counseling (Smith et al., 1995), mental health counseling (Smith &
Robinson, 1995), rehabilitation counseling (Leahy & Szymanski, 1995), addictions counseling
(Page & Bailey, 1995), and sports counseling (Miller & Wooten, 1995).
A complex profession must include specialties because no one practitioner can be proficient
in all areas of the profession (Buser et al., 2017; Tarvydas et al., 2017). Specialties are necessary
to ensure that research, training, and improved practice occur in specialized areas of counseling,
which have unique needs and issues. If members of subgroups within a profession believe that their
specialties are significantly different from the general profession, however, then those specialty
groups will attempt to establish themselves as separate professions (Etzioni, 1969). This phenom-
enon seems to continue to occur in counseling, particularly within the specialties of mental health
counseling (Messina, 1999), marriage and family counseling, school counseling (Johnson, 2000),
and career counseling. Both the American School Counseling Association and the Association for
Mental Health Counseling were once ACA divisions, but they have disaffiliated themselves from
the parent organization, which creates a burdensome expense for school counselors and mental
health counselors who wish to affiliate with their specialty organization and support a unified
counselor identity by joining ACA. Additionally, discomfort is created when counselors recognize
that the specialty group members with whom they wish to affiliate may be working against the
overall goal of establishing counseling as a strong, viable, and societally recognized mental health
profession (Fox, 1994).
Our positions on this issue are that counseling is our primary profession and that counselors who
are members of specialty groups should support the overall profession while paying attention to their spe-
cial interests and needs within the counseling profession. When you enter the profession, you will have
opportunities to voice your own position, and you will want to consider carefully the issues involved.

-- 73 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	51
Organizational Structure of ACA
Historically, some specialty groups in counseling (school counselors, college counselors, career
counselors, and counselor educators) came together to form the first professional association, which
they named the American Personnel and Guidance Association (APGA) in 1952. The name was
later changed to the American Association for Counseling and Development (AACD) and is now
the American Counseling Association (ACA).
An unfortunate event occurred during the history of the association when, at some point, the
divisions within ACA were incorporated as separate legal structures. This makes ACA appear to be
a federation, or a group of groups, rather than one unified organization with subgroups of special-
ties. The separate incorporation of the divisions within ACA has led to many disagreements among
association leaders as to whether ACA is a manager meant to serve the interests of the divisions or
whether the divisions are subgroups of individuals whose primary interest is in being members of a
unified professional association.
These disagreements led the American College Personnel Association (ACPA) to disaffiliate
from ACA in 1992 and become a separate, autonomous professional association. The American
School Counselor Association (ASCA) ended its ACA division status and become a separate asso-
ciation in 2018, and the American Mental Health Counselors Association (AMHCA) did the same
in 2019. Two additional ACA divisions have seriously discussed disaffiliation, and have taken some
actions that could lead to ending their relationships with ACA. Leaders and members of counseling
associations have spent energy on the conflict rather than on the tasks of strengthening the counsel-
ing profession and ensuring that members’ continuing professional development needs are met.
When ACPA left ACA, ACA immediately created a new division, the American College
Counseling Association (ACCA), for members who worked in higher-education settings. In the
future, other divisions might disaffiliate from ACA and establish themselves as separate, autonomous
associations. If major divisions within ACA leave, ACA could create entities within ACA to replace
them. In any eventuality, ACA members will be able to continue their affiliation with ACA and will
have opportunities within ACA to affiliate with members who have their same specialty interests.
A basic aspect of human nature is that people tend to identify with the group they know best
and with which they are most familiar. Members and leaders within the specialty subgroups in coun-
seling have naturally tended to create well-organized entities that represent their specialized inter-
ests. It also is clear that counseling is at a critical stage of development (Collison, 2001; Lawson,
2016). Either the profession of counseling will find a way through its conflict and will emerge as a
unified profession or it will fragment, and its various specialties will attempt to establish themselves
as separate, independent professions. Bradley and Cox (2001) have suggested that perhaps a new
organizational structure is needed that will allow the larger ACA to accommodate the differences
within its divisions. Only time will reveal the outcome of the current struggles.
CACREP Accreditation of Specialties
Sweeney (1995) has pointed out that CACREP actually accredits master’s-degree programs lead-
ing to specialty degrees in counseling, rather than accrediting general master’s-degree programs
in counseling. If a university that offers a master’s-degree program in counseling wants to obtain
CACREP accreditation, the program must declare that it prepares master’s-level counselors for one
or more of the following specialty areas: addictions; career; clinical mental health; clinical rehabili-
tation counseling; college counseling and student affairs; marriage, couple, and family counseling;
rehabilitation counseling; or school counseling (CACREP, 2024). Even though CACREP accredits
master’s-degree programs leading to specialty degrees in counseling, a core curriculum that includes

-- 74 of 593 --

52 	Section 1 • Foundations
basic instruction for all counselors is required for accreditation in any of the specialty areas. Bobby
(2013) has explained how the CACREP standards have helped to unify the counseling profession.
This requirement that students specialize at the master’s-degree level does cause some profes-
sional identity problems for graduate students. Although professors encourage graduate students to
develop identities as counselors in general, these same graduate students are being told that they
must choose and prepare for one specialty area within counseling. There are questions as well about
what constitutes a particular specialty, such as clinical mental health counseling, and what makes it
different from other specialties (Hershenson & Berger, 2001).
Varying State Licensure and Certification Requirements
As explained previously in this chapter, the states that license counselors vary significantly in their
requirements. Most licensure statutes require 60 hours of graduate coursework and from 1 to 3 years
of post–master’s-degree supervision, and they include a variety of requirements that are unique to
the state (ACA, 2023). State requirements for certification as a school counselor also vary consider-
ably from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
These differences in licensure and certification standards reflect a profession that has not
been able to establish an agreed-upon set of standards and then to get those standards accepted by
political entities throughout the United States. Because of this lack of uniformity, individual coun-
selors who move from state to state often find that they must take additional coursework or even
earn another master’s degree to meet the new state’s standards (Lawson et al., 2017). Established
professions such as law, medicine, and even psychology have been able to establish licensing laws
across the United States that are uniform and allow members of their professions to be licensed and
to practice no matter where they live. Eventually, the licensing and certification laws for counselors
will become more uniform, but currently, the lack of uniformity causes problems for counselors
who relocate. Ohio’s law that requires those seeking licensure as counselors to have graduated from
a CACREP-accredited program beginning in 2018 (Bray & Lawson, 2013, 2016) may be the foun-
dation for other states’ passing similar laws. Leaders in the counseling profession and AASCB are
working to resolve problems associated with licensure portability from state to state (Bohecker &
Eissenstat, 2020; Mascari & Webber, 2013). A number of states have already adopted an interstate
counseling compact, and many states are considering doing so. The compact allows counselors
licensed in a compact state to practice in other compact states (ACA, 2023).
Legal and Political Issues
In addition to the professional-identity problems that currently exist for counselors, you must be
familiar with a few legal and political issues. The successful resolution of these issues is critical to
the continued movement of counseling to establish itself as a legitimate, societally recognized pro-
fession. Although many counselors are not comfortable with lobbying legislators (Schuster et al.,
2021), political advocacy for the counseling profession often is necessary, as the issues discussed
next illustrate.
CHALLENGES TO THE SCOPE OF PRACTICE OF COUNSELORS 	Counselors believe that they are
qualified to perform many professional services for clients, based on their training and expertise.
Two areas in which counselors have been challenged by psychologists and other mental health
professionals are psychological testing and the diagnosis and treatment of mental and emotional
disorders. Some psychologists and social workers claim that although they are adequately prepared
to perform these professional services, counselors are not.

-- 75 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	53
There is also an economic component to these issues. Counselors who test and diagnose and
treat mental and emotional disorders in their practices often compete in the marketplace with psy-
chologists and social workers. Many health insurance companies and health maintenance organiza-
tions require that mental health professionals be qualified to perform these tasks before they will
reimburse their insured members for the services of these professionals. Therefore, there is a sig-
nificant economic advantage for psychologists and social workers to claim that counselors are not
qualified in these professional practice areas.
This debate has taken place in state legislatures in the form of arguments over the language
in state statutes that license counselors for practice. In most states, counselors have been successful
in inserting language into their state’s licensing statutes that says they are competent and therefore
qualified to test and to diagnose and treat mental and emotional disorders. There are some states,
however, where these issues are still unresolved.
TESTING 	One of the core curriculum requirements for the preparation of counselors is testing, or
assessment. All counseling master’s-degree programs require at least one graduate course in testing
principles that includes evaluating the validity and reliability of tests, selecting appropriate tests for
clients, administering tests, and interpreting test results. Counselors have used tests in their prac-
tices since the profession was first established.
Of course, testing is a very broad area, and counselors might not be prepared at the
master’s-degree level to administer and interpret a number of psychological tests, such as indi-
vidual intelligence tests or projective tests. Psychologists have claimed that counselors should not
be allowed to test at all within their practices or should be allowed to use tests only in a very limited
fashion. Counselors, on the other hand, believe that they have the basic education needed to test and
that each counselor should determine the particular tests for which they are qualified by education
or experience to administer and interpret.
Some state licensure statutes give counselors broad testing privileges, whereas others either
are silent on whether testing is part of a counselor’s practice or are very restrictive in specifying
which tests a counselor may administer and interpret. In some states (Butler, 1998), counselors
have been accused of practicing psychology without a license because of their testing activities. In
states in which the testing practices of counselors are restricted, political activities are taking place
to change the statutes to broaden the authority of counselors to test.
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL DISORDERS 	Counselors are taught
to diagnose and treat mental disorders as part of their specialized training (Seligman, 1999). Ivey and
Ivey (1999) have explained how counselors, with their wellness orientation, can utilize a developmental
approach when using the DSM system. In most states, coursework is required in this area for counsel-
ing licensure. In addition, counselors are tested before they are licensed to determine whether they are
proficient in the diagnosis and treatment of mental and emotional disorders. Despite the preparation of
counselors in this area, it appears that the general public may also need to be better educated regarding
the skills of counselors in the area of diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders (Fall et al., 2000).
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR), published by the
American Psychiatric Association (2022), clearly states that many mental health professionals are
engaged in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders and that the manual is meant to be a
reference for all those professionals. The use of this standard manual is taught to counselors who
wish to be licensed.
As with the testing issue, in many states the scope of practice of licensed counselors includes
the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders. In states in which the authority of counselors to

-- 76 of 593 --

54 	Section 1 • Foundations
diagnose and treat mental disorders is being challenged, efforts are being made to change the
language of the licensure statutes to state clearly that counselors are qualified to perform this
professional activity (Kassirer et al., 2013).
JOB CLASSIFICATIONS FOR COUNSELORS 	Positions for counseling professionals exist in many
state and federal agencies. In some of these agencies, however, no job classification categories have
been established for counselors. As a result, when counselors are hired, their job titles might be psychol-
ogist I, social worker I, or mental health technician I. Although being hired into these positions gives
counselors jobs and entry into agencies, counselors may be discriminated against later because promo-
tions might require a license in psychology or social work or a graduate degree in one of those fields.
2-4 The Case of Elijah
Elijah has been working for 7 years as a counselor in a public mental health center that serves
underprivileged young men and women who have been released from prison and are seeking jobs
and trying to reintegrate into society. He was hired in the position as soon as he graduated from his
counseling master’s-degree program, and he got his state license as a counselor 4 years ago. Elijah
finds the work he does with his clients professionally rewarding and believes he could stay with
this state agency his entire career despite some frustrations with state rules and regulations that he
finds annoying. The agency Elijah works for is a unit of a state agency entitled “Human Services.” A
Secretary of Human Services appointed by the state governor is the top-level administrator for the
agency. The current Secretary is a former state senator who has a background in banking. There
are a number of Assistant Secretaries of Human Services who are state employee bureaucrats who
report to the Secretary. The agency Elijah works for is under the authority of the Assistant Secretary
for Social Welfare, who has a Master’s of Social Work (MSW) degree, is licensed by the state as a
social worker, and has been working for the state agency for 30 years.
Elijah and many other licensed counselors who work for the state agency were hired with a
“Social Worker I” job title, which required a minimum of a bachelor’s degree in a “social services
field” because there were no job titles for counselors at the time Elijah and the other counselors
were hired. Five levels of social worker job titles exist that are promotions that offer employees
higher pay ranges for continuing to do the same job. Elijah was recently promoted to Social
Worker II, which required a minimum of 5 years of successful experience as a Social Worker I
with positive annual evaluations and a master’s degree in a social services field. Elijah knows from
reading the personnel manual that to be promoted to a Social Worker III position, individuals
must have a minimum of 8 years of successful experience and hold an MSW. Elijah is concerned
that even after he has a minimum of 8 years of successful experience with the agency, he will
never get promoted to Social Worker III because he does not have an MSW. Elijah has discussed
his concern with his immediate supervisor, who holds an MSW, but his supervisor’s response was
that perhaps Elijah should consider going back to the university to earn a master’s degree in
social work.
• What agency changes are necessary for Elijah and other counselors with counseling master’s
degrees to be eligible for future promotions?
• What are the options available to Elijah and other master’s-level counselors in the agency
regarding their future promotion opportunities?

-- 77 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	55
Discussion: In order to for Elijah and other master’s-level counselors to secure advanced career
opportunities in their agency, they must either get the agency to create a series of job titles for
counselors that have counselor-credential requirements or get the agency to change the “Social
Worker” job title series requirements so that they can qualify for the additional levels of “Social
Worker” job titles. From a professional identity perspective and for future counselors hired by
the agency, it would be preferable for Elijah and the other counselors to advocate for a new job
title series to be established that has the word “counselor” in the title.
Elijah and his fellow counselors could advocate for themselves and the profession by mak-
ing proposals internal to the agency to get a counselor job series established that would be
equivalent to the social worker series. They could do this by writing proposals to administrators,
beginning at the bottom level and working up to the Secretary of Human Services. However,
it is possible that lower-level administrators who hold MSW degrees may block or ignore such
proposals.
If Elijah and the other counselors are not able to work internally to get a counselor job
series established, then they might work with their state counseling association to bring political
pressure on the agency secretary to make the changes. If that approach does not work, then the
state counseling association might get a legislator to introduce legislation that would establish a
counselor job series in the agency.
As a result of this problem, efforts are being made to have job titles established specifically for
counselors. Convincing a state or federal agency that job titles or classifications should be changed
is not an easy task. Bureaucracies are very slow to change. Nonetheless, professional associations
and leaders within the counseling profession must address this problem if counselors are to be fully
accepted as professionals within these agencies.
In Louisiana, a series of job categories for counselors who work in the state civil service
system was created in 2003 (C. Gagnon, personal communication, September 10, 2003). Until
that time, counselors were hired in job categories that limited their ability to receive promotions.
Creation of these new counselor job categories (which are equivalent to those that existed already
for social workers) was completed in a unique manner because of the political and legal environ-
ments in that state. The success in this endeavor has had a significant, positive impact on all coun-
selors currently working in that state and counselors who will be hired there in the future. NBCC
reported that in July 2014, a U.S. Senate subcommittee went on record as urging the creation of an
occupation series for mental health counselors (NBCC, 2023).
THIRD-PARTY REIMBURSEMENT 	It is essential for counselors in private practice that their clients
be able to access their counselors’ mental health services as part of the clients’ health care plan
(Palmo, 1999). If clients are participating in health maintenance organizations (HMOs) or preferred
provider organizations (PPOs), then counselors must be on the list of eligible providers for the cli-
ents. If clients are part of an indemnity health care plan, then counselors must be acknowledged as
qualified mental health care providers so that clients can be reimbursed for counselor services.
HMOs, PPOs, and health insurance companies can voluntarily acknowledge counselors as qual-
ified mental health care providers, and most do. However, these health care organizations have a legal
right to refuse to give their clients access to counselors unless there is legislation to the contrary. This
type of legislation, called freedom of choice legislation, requires health care providers to give access

-- 78 of 593 --

56 	Section 1 • Foundations
to licensed counselors for mental health care if the providers give access to other mental health care
providers such as psychologists or social workers. Many states have passed freedom of choice legisla-
tion. In states that have not, counselors are actively trying to get freedom of choice legislation passed.
ACA and NBCC are also active in seeking national legislative and regulatory changes that would
allow Medicaid recipients, military personnel, and federal employees to receive mental health services
from counselors as part of their health benefits. An important goal is for all Americans to have access
to mental health services from counselors, not just from psychiatrists, psychologists, or social workers.
Counselors have been successful in being recognized as providers for individuals who are on
active duty in the military and their dependents through TRICARE (ACA, 2023; NBCC, 2023), and
as providers of mental health services to Medicare recipients.
IDENTITY AND PROFESSIONALISM
Counseling and Other Mental Health Professions
As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, counselors are members of a relatively new profes-
sional group, and counselors are often asked what they do. A weak answer would be that counselors
do things similar to what psychologists do. A strong answer would be to describe the process of
counseling, including its philosophical foundations, the services that counselors provide, and the
components of training programs that prepare master’s-level counselors. A counselor or prospec-
tive counselor with a strong professional identity will be able to describe the process of counseling
without reference to other mental health professions.
The material provided in this chapter should allow you to state clearly what a counselor does.
However, a further challenge for counselors is to be able to describe objectively, accurately, and dis-
passionately the similarities and differences between counselors and other mental health profession-
als. Listeners should take away from a conversation with a counselor the conclusion that counselors
have a clear and unique identity within the field of mental health and that the counselor with whom
they have been talking takes pride in her or his chosen profession.
How are counselors similar to other mental health professionals, including psychiatrists, psy-
chologists, and social workers? They are all prepared at the master’s-degree level or higher, and they
all provide mental health services for clients. All mental health professionals follow a similar pro-
cess of assessing a person’s mental health needs, developing a plan for assisting the person, and then
providing mental health services consistent with the assessment and plan for treatment. All mental
health professionals counsel clients in some fashion. Mental health professionals of all types can be
found in agencies and institutions where mental health treatment is offered to individuals.
So, how are counselors different from other mental health professionals? The primary dif-
ference between counselors and other mental health professionals is that counselors espouse the
wellness model of mental health instead of the illness or medical model. The wellness model of
mental health emphasizes helping people maximize their potential rather than curing their illness.
Counselors believe that human growth and development stages and processes make life’s problems
normal and natural rather than pathological. Counselors emphasize prevention and early interven-
tion rather than remediation. Empowerment of clients is another goal of counselors. The training of
counselors focuses on teaching counseling skills rather than skills in physical health care, psycho-
pathology, assessment, or social service linkages.
Definitions of the mental health professions, including counseling, have been published by
professional associations. The definition of counselor is from the American Counseling Association
(2014); the definition of social worker is from the Council on Social Work Education (2014); the

-- 79 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	57
definition of psychologist is from the American Psychological Association (2014); and the defi-
nition of psychiatrist is from the American Psychiatric Association, as provided by MedicineNet
(2008). These definitions provide insight into how professional organizations view themselves. The
counselor definition focuses on the counseling process that was derived from mental health, psy-
chological, and human development principles. The social worker definition emphasizes the goals
of promoting social justice, human rights, and quality of life as well as eliminating poverty. The
psychologist definition states the requirements that psychologists hold doctoral degrees and that
psychologists focus on understanding human behavior. The psychiatrist definition begins by saying
that psychiatry is a specialty for physicians who focus on mental illnesses. Figure 2-3 summarizes
the differences in preparation program requirements for the major mental health professions of
counseling, social work, psychology, and psychiatry. This figure was developed using information
provided by the organizations that accredit these four mental health professions: for counseling, the
Council on Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP); for social
work, the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE); for psychology, the American Psychological
Association Commission on Accreditation; and for psychiatry, the Liaison Committee on Medical
Education (LCME) and the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN). This figure
illustrates the differences in the amount of post–bachelor’s-degree study required (ranging from
2 years of graduate study for counseling and social work and 3 years of graduate study for psy-
chology, to 7 years of graduate study for psychiatry). The content of the coursework requirements
demonstrates that the counseling curriculum has a primary focus on counseling; the social work cur-
riculum emphasizes social issues; the psychology curriculum has a heavy emphasis on evaluation
and research; and the psychiatry curriculum prepares physicians who specialize in behavior disor-
ders and neuroscience. An examination of the required courses within accredited counseling, social
work, psychology, and psychiatry programs would further demonstrate the different emphases of
the preparation programs for these mental health professions.
The similarities to and differences from other mental health professionals, as previously sum-
marized, are easy to articulate. It is vital that counselors learn to state both the traits we share in
common with our other mental health colleagues and the differences that make counselors unique as
mental health care providers (Sweeney, 2001).
In addition to understanding the differences and similarities, it is important to keep in mind
that you will also have working relationships with other mental health professionals when you enter
practice as a counselor. Psychologists often contribute articles to counseling professional journals
(Weinrach et al., 1998, 2001). In addition, many counselors work closely with other mental health
professionals on a day-to-day basis—for example, as members of multidisciplinary treatment teams
in hospitals or as members of school teams that provide services to students with special needs
(Goodman-Scott & Boulden, 2019; Walsh & Gibson, 2019). Increasingly, collaboration with other
mental health professionals is regarded as best practice, so it is vital for counselors to understand
the scope of practice of these other professionals. After studying the effectiveness of mental health
counselors in an integrated primary and behavioral health care environment, Ulupinar et al. (2021)
concluded that counselors perform well in integrated systems of care.
In a previous section we discussed some conflicts that currently exist between counselors
and certain other mental health professional groups. Despite the likelihood that you and your col-
leagues will disagree about professional issues, in the practice environment these differences are
always set aside in the interest of providing clients with the best possible mental health services
(ACA, 2014, §D.1.c.). You have an ethical obligation to respect approaches to mental health treat-
ment that are different from your own and to acknowledge the expertise of other professional
groups and be respectful of their practices (§D.1.a.).

-- 80 of 593 --

58 	Section 1 • Foundations
FIGURE 2-3 Comparison of preparation program requirements for the mental health professions
COMPARISON OF PREPARATION PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONS
Profession 	Graduate
Education
Required
Summary of Required Courses 	Practicum
Hours and
Required
Supervised
Field
Experience
Counseling 	60 hours
required;
Master’s
degree
Graduate coursework required in (a) professional
counseling orientation and ethical practice, (b) social
and cultural identities and experiences, (c) lifespan
development, (d) career development, (e) counseling
practice and relationships, (f) group; and specialty
area (addictions; career; clinical mental health; clini-
cal rehabilitation counseling; college counseling and
student affairs; marriage, couple, and family counsel-
ing; rehabilitation counseling; or school counseling).
A 100-hour
practicum and
a 600-hour
internship
required
Social Work 	60 hours
required;
Master’s
degree
Coursework required in professional social worker
identity; ethical principles; critical thinking; diversity
and difference; advancing human rights and social
and economic justice; research-informed practice
and practice-informed research; human behavior and
the social environment; policy practice; contexts that
shape practice; and engaging, assessing, intervening,
and evaluating individuals, families, groups, organiza-
tions, and communities.
A total of 900
hours of field
experience
required
Psychology 	3 full-time
years of
gradu-
ate study
required
for doc-
toral
degree
Coursework required in biological aspects of behav-
ior; cognitive and affective aspects of behavior;
social aspects of behavior; history and systems of
psychology; psychological measurement; research
methodology; techniques of data analysis; indi-
vidual differences in behavior; human development;
dysfunctional behavior or psychopathology; profes-
sional standards and ethics; theories and methods
of assessment and diagnosis; effective intervention;
consultation and supervision; evaluating the efficacy
of interventions; cultural and individual diversity;
attitudes essential for life-long learning, scholarly
inquiry, and professional problem solving.
One full-time
year of
residency
required
Psychiatry 	130 weeks
required
for medi-
cal degree
(usually 4
years)
Medical degree requires coursework in anatomy;
biochemistry; genetics; physiology; microbiology and
immunology; pathology; pharmacology and therapeu-
tics; preventive medicine; the scientific method; accurate
observation of biomedical phenomena; critical analysis
of data; organ systems; preventive, acute, chronic, con-
tinuing, rehabilitative, and end-of-life care; clinical
36-month
residency in
psychiatry
required

-- 81 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	59
COMPARISON OF PREPARATION PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONS
Profession 	Graduate
Education
Required
Summary of Required Courses 	Practicum
Hours and
Required
Supervised
Field
Experience
experiences in primary care, family medicine, internal
medicine, obstetrics and gynecology, pediatrics,
psychiatry, and surgery in outpatient and inpatient
settings; multidisciplinary content areas, such as
emergency medicine and geriatrics; disciplines that
support general medical practice, such as diag-
nostic imaging and clinical pathology; clinical and
translational research, including how such research
is conducted, evaluated, explained to patients, and
applied to patient care; communication skills as they
relate to physician responsibilities, including com-
munication with patients, families, colleagues, and
other health professionals; addressing the medical
consequences of common societal problems—for
example, providing instruction in the diagnosis,
prevention, appropriate reporting of, and treatment
of violence; the manner in which people of diverse
cultures and belief systems perceive health and ill-
ness and respond to various symptoms, diseases,
and treatments; gender and cultural biases; medical
ethics and human values.
The psychiatry residency must prepare physicians in
the psychiatric areas of development in the life cycle;
behavioral and social sciences; epidemiology and public
policy; diagnostic procedures; clinical aspects of psychi-
atric disorders; treatment of psychiatric disorders; special
topics (suicide; dangerousness; seclusion/restraint; risk
management; child abuse, sexual abuse, and domestic
violence; psychiatric consultation; professionalism/ethics;
other). In addition, the psychiatry residency must pre-
pare physicians in the neurologic areas of development
through the life cycle; basic neurosciences; diagnostic
procedures; clinical aspect of neuropsychiatric disorders;
treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders; diagnostic
and clinical evaluation of neurologic disorders/syn-
dromes; and management and treatment of neurologic
disorders.
FIGURE 2-3 (continued)

-- 82 of 593 --

60 	Section 1 • Foundations
Pride in the Counseling Profession
In Chapter 1, we defined professionalism as an internal motivation to per-
form at the level of best practices that represent the ideals of the profession,
to enhance its image, and to promote its development. A crucial component
of professionalism is having a sense of pride in one’s chosen profession.
Counselors who have strong professional identities are proud to be members
of their profession. By understanding and appreciating the counseling profes-
sion’s history, philosophical foundations, services that are offered to the public,
training program contents, and similarities to and differences from other men-
tal health professions, counselors will be satisfied with their chosen profession
and communicate this pride to those with whom they come into contact.
It is important for members of a profession to be self-critical and
to seek advancements in knowledge and improvements within the pro-
fession. At the same time, members of a profession must be comfortable
with the career choice they have made in order to develop a professional
identity that serves them and the profession well.
Counselors with strong professional identities express pride in their
profession by defending the profession when inaccurate statements are
made concerning the profession itself or members of the profession. To represent the profession
whole-heartedly to the public, counselors must be thoroughly familiar with the information pre-
sented in this chapter. Individual counselors who provide quality counseling services are respon-
sible for the positive reputation that the profession enjoys. Similarly, individual counselors who can
articulate the strengths of the profession are responsible for informing the public about the unique
contributions to society that members of the counseling profession are making.
Counseling Around the World
Although counseling is a profession that was established and developed in the United States, there is
evidence that the counseling profession, often in a form like that which exists in the United States,
is being established throughout the world. In other words, today’s counseling profession is trending
toward globalization (Guth et al., 2014; Lorelle et al., 2012; Shannonhouse & Myers, 2014).
Despite cultural differences among countries, there appears to be an interest worldwide in
having counseling services available to citizens. It appears that counseling imported from the United
States is being adapted to the cultures of the countries where counseling is being established.
Different countries have a variety of political environments that are affecting the ways in
which counseling is developing. For example, in many European countries, counseling is not
accepted as a field of study in universities, so counselors are being prepared in private schools. In
some African countries, counseling was established to help citizens cope with the AIDS epidemic
(Luke et al., 2016). In many Asian countries, counseling is closely following the model of the pro-
fession in the United States, despite the vast cultural differences between Asians and Americans.
As will be further discussed in Chapter 3, concerns have been raised regarding the need for cultural
humility when working with mental health providers in other countries to prevent colonization.
A book published by the American Counseling Association, Counseling Around the World:
An International Handbook, edited by Hohenshil, Amundson, and Niles (2017), summarizes how
the profession of counseling is developing in 40 countries located on six continents. In addition, the
leading journal in the counseling profession, the Journal of Counseling and Development, has pub-
lished a series of articles summarizing the beginnings of the counseling profession in a multitude of

-- 83 of 593 --

Chapter 2 • Professional Identity of Counselors 	61
countries including, but not limited to, Australia (Schofield, 2013); Ecuador (Smith & Valarezo, 2013);
Hong Kong (Yuen et al., 2014); Italy (Remley et al., 2010); Russia (Currie et al., 2012); South Korea
(Lee et al., 2012); Switzerland (Thomas & Henning, 2012); Taiwan (Guo et al., 2013); and Uganda
(Senyonyi & Ochieng, 2012). In addition, the development of counseling in other countries has been
documented in China (Shi et al., 2014); England (McCarthy, 2014); Ireland (McCarthy, 2011, 2014);
Mexico (Machorro & Suck, 2014); Scotland (Griesbach et al., 2008); Sierra Leone (Akinsulure-Smith &
Conteh, 2018); Southeast Asia (Thakore-Dunlap & Van Velsor, 2014); and Venezuela (Vera, 2011).
CACREP has established a registry that includes counselor preparation programs that are dif-
ferent from those in the United States but meet CACREP standards (CACREP, 2024). The registry
is known as the International Registry of Counsellor Education Programs (IRCEP) and can be found
at www.ircep.org/directory.
Summary and Key Points
The aim of this chapter is to help you clarify and
strengthen your professional identity as a coun-
selor. We hope that after reading the material in this
chapter, you will have a clear sense of your profes-
sional identity and be able to do the following:
• Explain the philosophy that underlies the activi-
ties of your professional group
• Describe the services your profession renders to
the public
• Describe the components of your profession’s
preparation programs
• Articulate 	the 	similarities 	and 	differences
between members of your profession and other,
similar professional groups
• Communicate your pride in being a member of
the counseling profession
We began the chapter with a discussion
of the philosophy underlying the counseling
profession. This philosophy, which makes the
counseling profession unique and distinguishes
counseling from other mental health professions,
includes the following four components: the well-
ness model of mental health, a developmental
perspective, a strong preference for prevention of
and early intervention into problems, and a goal
of empowerment for clients. We discussed the
impact of COVID-19 on the profession of coun-
seling. Virtual counseling was unusual before
COVID-19 but now is the norm.
Other aspects of professional identity pre-
sented in this chapter include counselor preparation
programs; credentialing; professional associations
for counselors; and current professional, political,
and legal issues. A brief history of the counseling
profession provided a foundation for a careful look
at its present status as a relatively new profession.
Following are some of the key points of this chapter:
• Vital professional tasks for counselor trainees are
to develop a strong professional identity and to
be able to articulate that identity to others.
• Counselors espouse the wellness model of men-
tal health as their perspective for helping people.
Other mental health professions have their roots
in the tradition of the medical model. Although
the differences between the two traditions are
clear, in actual practice many other mental health
practitioners use the wellness model, and coun-
selors are educated to use the medical model of
diagnosing mental disorders.
• Counselors take a developmental perspective to
understanding people’s personal and emotional
issues and problems. From this perspective,
problems that other mental health professionals
might view as pathological are seen by counsel-
ors as natural and normal.
• Counselors believe that prevention of and early
intervention into mental health problems are
far superior to remediation of mental health
problems.
• The goal of counseling is to empower clients so
that they will be able, in the future, to resolve their
problems independently of counselor assistance.

-- 84 of 593 --

62 	Section 1 • Foundations
• For counselors, mental health counseling is the
primary service they provide. By contrast, other
mental health professionals provide counseling
as a secondary or ancillary service.
• Counselors are considered to be professionals
after they have completed their master’s degree.
• Preparation programs emphasize the development
of counseling skills and are generally located in
colleges of education within universities.
• Credentialing in counseling is complicated and can
be confusing. It is important that you can distinguish
among state licensure, state certification, national
voluntary certification, and program accreditation.
It is also important that you plan your program of
studies carefully so that you will qualify for the cre-
dentials you will need to practice effectively.
• The counseling profession emerged out of a con-
vergence of several disparate forces, including
counseling psychology, school counseling, and
vocational rehabilitation counseling.
• The field of counseling meets the criteria gener-
ally accepted as constituting a mature profession
and is making rapid progress toward becoming a
societally recognized profession.
• The primary professional association for counsel-
ors is the ACA. This organization has various divi-
sions and state branches that serve the particular
needs and interests of its members. You should
join ACA now, if you have not already done so.
• Currently, the counseling profession is strug-
gling with several professional-identity prob-
lems. One issue currently being debated is
whether counseling will develop as a united pro-
fession or as separate specialties. Another issue
that is being decided is the organizational struc-
ture of ACA. A third problem is that require-
ments for becoming licensed as a counselor vary
from state to state.
• Contemporary legal and professional issues
include challenges to the scope and practice of
counselors, particularly in the areas of testing,
diagnosis, and treatment of mental disorders;
job classifications for counselors; and third-party
reimbursement for counseling services.
• Counselors have an ethical obligation to main-
tain positive working relationships with other
mental health professionals and to respect and
understand their differing approaches.
• Having a sense of pride in being a member of
the counseling profession is essential both for
your own internal satisfaction with your cho-
sen career and for the continued progress of
counseling toward being a societally recognized
profession.
• The profession of counseling is developing in
countries around the world. Each country is
adapting the profession to fit its own political cli-
mate and cultural heritage.

-- 85 of 593 --

63
3Multiculturalism, Social Justice,
Advocacy, and Values
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
3.1 Describe counselors’ responsibilities for promoting
multicultural competence, social justice, and
advocacy.
3.2 Explain why dealing with value conflicts has
become a central issue in counseling.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What do you see as the
characteristics of a culturally
competent counselor?
2. In what ways is multicultural
competence an ethical issue?
3. How would you define social
justice?
4. How can you ensure that you are
competent to provide counseling
services to the culturally diverse
clients who may seek your
assistance?
5. Do you believe a counselor should
be allowed to refuse to provide
counseling services to a client
whose beliefs or behaviors conflict
with the personal value system of
the counselor?
A core professional value of counselors, as articulated in
the Preamble to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), is “honor-
ing diversity and embracing a multicultural approach” in all
aspects of our work. If you are a counseling student or a new
professional, you may not be aware that this foundational
commitment to diversity has not always been a hallmark of our
profession. Over the past 7 decades, the counseling profession
has evolved significantly in its stance toward multicultural-
ism and social justice. The profession has moved from a posi-
tion of cultural encapsulation to an awareness of our ethical
responsibility to serve diverse clients effectively by practicing
in a multiculturally competent manner and to an emphasis on
social justice and advocacy aimed at improving the lives of all
people in our society and across the world (Clark et al., 2022).
In the early years of the development of the counsel-
ing profession, the impact of cultural diversity was virtually
ignored. Wrenn (1962) was one of the first counseling profes-
sionals to draw attention to this issue when he introduced the
term culturally encapsulated counselor. As Wrenn explained,
culturally encapsulated counselors define reality according to
one set of cultural assumptions and thus fail to evaluate other
viewpoints, becoming locked into stereotypical thinking in
the process. During the 1960s, the Civil Rights and women’s
movements increased societal awareness of equity issues, and
counselors began to recognize that cultural issues that had
been ignored in society had also been ignored in counseling.
The 1970s saw a growing concern about mental health
practitioners’ lack of preparedness to counsel diverse cli-
ents. The American Counseling Association (ACA) and its

-- 86 of 593 --

64 	Section 1 • Foundations
divisions provided leadership in the effort to make mental health services responsive to the needs of
a diverse clientele. Throughout the 1980s, multicultural counseling was increasingly recognized as a
major discipline within the profession. The need became apparent for counselors to be multicultur-
ally competent practitioners who are able to establish a working alliance that takes into consider-
ation both the personal and the cultural dynamics of the client and the counselor (Lee, 2013). As the
twentieth century entered its last decade, the Association for Counselor Education and Supervision
(ACES) and the Association for Multicultural Counseling and Development (AMCD), in a joint
effort, developed and operationalized the Multicultural Counseling Competencies and Standards
(Arredondo et al., 1996). Later, Arredondo and Aricniega (2001) added grounding principles that
placed these competencies in an ecological frame. In 2015, AMCD developed the Multicultural and
Social Justice Competencies (AMCD, 2015), which are endorsed by ACA.
The twenty-first century has been marked so far by a shift beyond awareness of societal ineq-
uities to an emphasis on social justice and advocacy. Multiculturalism, social justice, and advocacy
are complementary but distinct concepts that work together interdependently (Fickling & Gonzalez,
2016). Social justice has been defined as a commitment to promoting access and equity that has the
aim of empowering and ensuring full participation of all people in a society, especially those who
have been marginalized and systematically excluded on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, age, abil-
ity status, sexual or affectional orientation, socioeconomic status, immigration status, national ori-
gin, or other characteristic of group membership. Advocacy translates that commitment into action.
When issues of power, privilege, and discrimination arise, counselors are called on to address cli-
ent issues at successively broader levels (Durodoye, 2013). Counselors as advocates are able to
intervene to improve the social context that affects clients’ lives as well as the lives of individual
clients (Feldwisch & Whiston, 2015; Schuster et al., 2021). The ACA Advocacy Competencies, first
published in 2003, were updated in 2018. We recommend that you familiarize yourself with both
the Multicultural and Social Justice Competencies (2015) and the Advocacy Competencies (2018),
which can be found on the ACA website [www.counseling.org].
MULTICULTURAL COMPETENCE, SOCIAL JUSTICE,
AND ADVOCACY
Because the counseling profession was slow, historically, to recognize the connection between multi-
cultural competence and ethical behavior, multicultural considerations have been infused only gradually
into our profession’s code of ethics. Watson et al. (2006) traced this gradual infusion into successive
revisions of the ACA Code of Ethics over the years. When the organization (then the American Personnel
and Guidance Association; APGA) adopted its first code of ethics in 1961, counselors were essentially
a monocultural group. No mention was made of cultural awareness as a component of ethical practice
in the first version of the Code, and successive revisions gave only slight attention to cultural diversity.
As the 1980s drew to a close, it became apparent that the ACA Code of Ethics was continu-
ing to overlook the needs of disenfranchised groups. In 1995, the Code was revised extensively,
and multicultural considerations were infused so that they were prominent. In 2002, David Kaplan,
then president of ACA, appointed an Ethics Revision Task Force to propose revisions to the ethics
code, with special focus on multiculturalism, diversity, and social justice. The 2005 version of the
ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2005) gave centrality to multiculturalism by addressing diversity in the
Preamble and in every major section of the Code.
The strong commitment to diversity and multicultural competence that was visible in the
2005 Code is evident throughout the current ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014). The Preamble
articulates the core professional values of counselors, which include “honoring diversity and

-- 87 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	65
embracing a multicultural approach in support of the worth, dignity, potential, and uniqueness of
people within their social and cultural contexts” and “promoting social justice.” In the Introduction
to Section A, which focuses on the counseling relationship, counselors are urged to “actively
attempt to understand the diverse cultural backgrounds of the clients they serve. Counselors also
explore their own cultural identities and how these affect their values and beliefs about the coun-
seling process.” The Code clarifies that “multicultural counseling competency is required across
all specialties” and that counselors must “gain knowledge, personal awareness, sensitivity, dispo-
sitions, and skills pertinent to being a culturally competent counselor in working with a diverse
client population” (§ C.2.a.). The Code provides additional guidance regarding nondiscrimination
in several standards, including § C.5., which states that counselors do not condone or engage
in discrimination “based on age, culture, disability, ethnicity, race, religion/spirituality, gender,
gender identity, sexual orientation, marital status/partnership, language preference, socioeconomic
status or any basis proscribed by law.” Lee (2015) identified 26 standards in the 2014 Code that
address diversity issues, including specific standards related to confidentiality, assessment, diag-
nosis, relationship boundaries, technology, supervision, counselor training, and research. The con-
cept of social justice, which did not specifically appear in the ACA Code of Ethics until the 2014
revision (Francis & Farrell, 2022), is articulated in the definition of social justice as “the promo-
tion of equity for all people and groups for the purpose of ending oppression and injustice affecting
clients, students, counselors, families, communities, schools, workplaces, governments, and other
social and institutional systems.”
The 2014 Code of Ethics also addresses the commitment of counselors to advocate on behalf
of their clients. Advocacy involves confronting the social issues that negatively affect clients and
working to eradicate systems that perpetuate discrimination. Standard A.7.a. addresses this obli-
gation in the statement that “when appropriate, counselors advocate at individual, group, insti-
tutional, and societal levels to address potential barriers and obstacles that inhibit access and/or
the growth and development of clients.” As noted previously, to assist counselors in carrying out
advocacy activities ethically and effectively, a set of Advocacy Competencies, updated in 2018,
is available on the ACA website (www.counseling.org). Further explanation of competency for
advocacy at all levels has been given by Lewis et al. (2011) and in a special issue of the Journal of
Counseling and Development (2020).
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Multiculturalism,
Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values
It is abundantly clear that the COVID-19 pandemic took a disproportionate toll on marginalized
populations in our society (Litam & Hipolito-Delgado, 2021; Lund, 2020; Melamed et al., 2020;
Perkins et al., 2021; Saia et al., 2021). Members of Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC)
communities experienced COVID-19 transmission, hospitalization, and death at higher rates than
White populations (Saia et al., 2021). Preexisting racial and ethnic disparities were exacerbated by
COVID-19, negatively affecting communities of color that tended to be overrepresented in lower
socioeconomic groups, had limited access to health care and education, had an undocumented sta-
tus, and worked in jobs considered “essential,” such as food service, maintenance, and transpor-
tation (Litam & Hipolito-Delgado, 2021). The toll taken by COVID-19 on the mental health of
members of these communities has yet to be fully realized.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic touched the lives of almost everyone in our society (and
the world), other events that unfolded simultaneously exacerbated its effect on some communi-
ties (Balkin et al., 2021). A second wave of the Black Lives Matter movement occurred concur-
rently with the pandemic. Black Lives Matter began in 2013 as an expression of hope for Black

-- 88 of 593 --

66 	Section 1 • Foundations
people and of outrage over the killing of Trayvon Martin, which occurred in the wake of repeated
instances of police violence. At a time when COVID-19 was spreading at a catastrophic rate and
causing widespread fear and anxiety, the killings of Ahmaud Aubrey, Breonna Taylor, and George
Floyd in 2020 compounded the distress being experienced by Black Americans. The additional
trauma and bereavement of Black males, who continue to be disproportionately the victims of
police killings in the United States, will continue to need to be addressed by counselors (Lee &
Robinson, 2019). The emergence of the second wave of the Black Lives Matter movement has
drawn attention to the fact that systemic racism and discrimination affect health outcomes (Balkin
et al., 2021) and other domains central to recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., employ-
ment, education, housing; Edwin & Daniels, 2022; Moreno et al., 2020). Counseling students can
begin to learn the skills needed to prevent and resist racial trauma by developing a critical con-
sciousness of anti-Black racism (Mosley et al., 2021) and by participating in advocacy groups.
Members of Asian American and Pacific Islander communities, in particular, experienced
violent attacks related to the presumed geographical origin of COVID (Ermis-Demirtas et al.,
2022; Litam, 2020; Litam & Oh, 2020). Members of these communities experienced the additional
stressors of pandemic-related, race-based prejudice and discrimination (Lund, 2020), which had a
negative impact on their mental health. Reports of depression and anxiety symptoms among Asian
Americans increased sevenfold during the COVID-19 outbreak (Woo & Jun, 2021).
The pandemic years were particularly challenging for members of the LGBTGEQIAP+ (les-
bian, gay, bisexual, transgender, gender expansive, queer, intersex, asexual, pansexual) community.
For example, Hawke et al. (2021) concluded that transgender and gender diverse youth were more
greatly affected by mental health challenges during the COVID-19 pandemic than cisgender youth.
The researchers found that these youth reported significantly more mental health and substance use
service disruptions and less social support from their families compared with cisgender youth. Attacks
from the political realm were rampant during the COVID-19 pandemic. In April, 2022, for example, the
Association for Counselor Education and Supervision (ACES) noted that by March 11 of that year, over
150 pieces of legislation targeting LGBTGEQIAP+ individuals had been introduced in state legisla-
tures across the United States. In response, ACES issued a Unified Statement on Anti-LGBTGEQIAP+
Legislation that affirmed the dedication of ACES members to social justice, advocacy, multicultural
content in coursework, antiracist approaches to teaching, and gender-affirming care.
Disruptions in services caused by the pandemic also took a toll on individuals who were living
with chronic mental health conditions before the pandemic. Participants in a study by Costa et al. (2021)
reported negative impacts on their mental health: 21% reported that their mental health was much worse,
and 51% said their mental health was worse. Although the advent of telemental health services enabled
many individuals to remain connected with their ongoing mental health providers, individuals diagnosed
with some conditions were not as successful in making the transition. Zhu et al. (2022) found that indi-
viduals diagnosed with schizophrenia made up a lower proportion of telehealth encounters relative to
in-person visits, whereas those with anxiety and fear-related disorders accounted for a higher proportion.
Persons with substance use disorders were a particularly vulnerable population because of
their unique social and health care needs, as they faced increased risk for infection with COVID-19
and a severe illness course in addition to ongoing marginalization in health care and social systems
(Melamed et al., 2020).
In 2022 and 2023, as pandemic restrictions eased and were lifted, counselors and other mental
health professionals began to reflect on some positive outcomes that resulted from the devastat-
ing experience of the COVID-19 pandemic, although they also added cautions. Fish and Mittal
(2021) lauded state licensing boards for lifting some restrictions on jurisdictional coverage of ser-
vices so that licensed clinicians could continue to serve current clients and also lauded mental health

-- 89 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	67
providers for transitioning rapidly to teletherapy. These changes inadvertently presented new path-
ways to accessing mental health services for many populations that might not otherwise have been
able to seek or afford care. To the extent that these changes remain in place, they will likely help to
narrow gaps in the seeking of mental health care by populations that often struggle to find adequate
care. Saia et al. (2021) noted that responses to the pandemic also created new avenues of access
for people with disabilities, including telehealth, work-from-home opportunities, and virtual par-
ticipation. The authors noted that these were the very solutions and accommodations that members
of this population had been requesting but had been denied for years. Saia et al. (2021) cautioned
against a broad call for a “return to normal,” noting that such a call is steeped in ableist thinking.
Kopelovich et al. (2021) urged that many of the changes implemented during the pandemic be
maintained, including offering a spectrum of options for remote and in-person care, greater integra-
tion of behavioral and physical health care, leveraging of natural supports, and integration of digital
health interventions.
Components of Multicultural Competence
Cultural disparities that existed in our society were exacerbated by the pandemic and are ongoing.
This makes it even more vital that counselors have the competencies needed to serve diverse clients.
Multicultural competencies include attitudes and beliefs, knowledge, skills, and actions (Francis &
Farrell, 2022). Counselors need to be aware of their own values, biases, and assumptions about
human behavior. They also need to be knowledgeable about the cultural values, biases, and assump-
tions of the diverse groups of clients with whom they work (Gushue, 2022). In addition, they must
develop culturally appropriate intervention strategies for assisting these diverse clients. Finally, they
must be able to advocate for change at the individual, community, and societal levels.
SELF-AWARENESS 	A starting point for you in developing cultural self-awareness is to learn how
your own cultural and racial identities have an impact on your values and beliefs about the counsel-
ing process. Although it may be uncomfortable, you must engage in self-reflection and acknowl-
edge your own biases and assumptions.
For members of dominant groups in the United States, developing multicultural self-awareness
takes conscious effort because they have not had to experience themselves as marginalized beings.
McIntosh (1998), in a classic article about race and racism, argued that White privilege in our soci-
ety allows and even encourages a lack of awareness. She described White privilege as an invisible
package of unearned assets on which White people can rely and about which they are intended to
remain oblivious. Her contention is that Whites have been taught not to see this inherited systemic
advantage because remaining unaware of its existence maintains the status quo. For example, a
White female would be unlikely to fear for her life if she were pulled over by the police for driving
with a broken taillight, perhaps without realizing what a different experience that would be for a
young Black male.
3-1 The Case of Marlene
Marlene, a White high school counselor, is conducting a group for non–college-bound senior
girls. The topic of this session is “preparing for life after graduation.” The nine-member group
includes equal numbers of girls who are Black and White, and Consuela, who identifies as Latine.

-- 90 of 593 --

68 	Section 1 • Foundations
KNOWLEDGE 	In addition to developing cultural self-awareness, you must also seek out knowl-
edge that will enhance your understanding of clients who are culturally different from you (Butler
et al., 2022; Lee, 2013). When counselors do not have this knowledge base, therapeutic error is
likely to occur. Of course, it would be impossible for any counselor to be completely knowledgeable
about the cultural beliefs, values, communication styles, and behaviors of every potential client in
our highly diverse society. What is important is that you acquire basic competencies with respect to
knowledge of different cultures and that you are open to continuing to learn. A counselor’s lack of
knowledge can negatively affect the counseling relationship.
The discussion has turned to a consideration of the advantages and disadvantages of continuing
to live at home with parents for a while versus moving into an apartment with friends as soon as
one finds a job. Marlene notices that Consuela has remained silent for the past several minutes.
In an effort to draw her in, Marlene asks her, “Consuela, isn’t it more of an expectation among
Latine families that girls will continue to live at home until they marry?”
• What do you think of the question that Marlene posed to Consuela?
• What are some other strategies Marlene might have used to draw Consuela into the
conversation?
Discussion: The case of Marlene illustrates how the lack of awareness of one’s own assump-
tions can be manifested in a counseling situation. Marlene had good intentions when she asked
Consuela the question to draw her into the conversation. However, she failed to consider how
Consuela may have felt about being asked to speak for all Latine families. It hardly seems likely
that Marlene would have asked a similar question of one of the White students. In fact, being
able to count on not being asked to speak for all members of one’s racial or ethnic group is an
element of White privilege. Had Marlene examined her unconscious assumptions that may have
originated in her own status of White privilege, she would not have used this particular strategy
to draw Consuela into the discussion.
3-2 The Case of Jack
Jack, a counselor intern, is working in a college counseling center. Mai-Ling, a freshman who
came to the United States from mainland China with her parents 8 years ago, has come for her
first session with Jack and has agreed to let him audiotape the session for his supervisor. Mai-Ling
states that she has come for help in deciding whether to continue in her 2-year associate degree
program in computer operations or switch to a baccalaureate program in computer science. Jack,
very much aware that his supervisor will be listening for reflections of feelings and other attending
skills, asks Mai-Ling how she feels about being confronted with this decision. She responds by
simply restating her problem. The session continues in this fashion, with Jack probing for the cli-
ent’s feelings and the client responding in a cognitive, content-oriented manner. After the session
ends, Jack determines to ask his supervisor how to build rapport with this difficult client.
• What does Jack need to know about the culture of persons from mainland China that could
have been helpful to him in this counseling session with Mai-Ling?
• What do you think about Jack labeling Mai-Ling as a difficult client?

-- 91 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	69
Discussion: If Jack had known that some Asian clients can be very uncomfortable with the idea of
discussing their feelings with a stranger, he might not have perceived his client as difficult. His lack
of understanding led him to make an error that is common among counselors who lack knowledge
of different cultures—he blamed the client for his failure to establish a therapeutic alliance.
If you are a student in a CACREP-accredited counselor education program, you will be taking
(or may already have taken) a course in multicultural counseling, where you will begin to acquire
the knowledge you will need to serve a diverse clientele. You will want to keep up to date by reading
books and articles on new developments in multicultural counseling or that focus on specific groups of
clients, such as African American youth, and older individuals, to cite just two examples. Specialized
training is readily available through workshops and seminars, online courses, and other resources.
There is a limit, however, to what can be learned through reading and taking courses and seminars.
Experiential learning can be powerful. As you begin to practice, the most important resource for your
continued learning will be your clients. They are the most expert source of knowledge about their own
cultural values, beliefs, customs, and behaviors, and they are often willing to teach their counselors.
SKILLS 	The third component of ethical multicultural practice is culturally appropriate skills and
intervention strategies for counseling diverse clients. To develop these skills, you must recognize
that interventions that are effective when working with the dominant culture may not be effective or
appropriate when working with clients who are not White, of European ancestry, and middle class
(Bayne & Branco, 2018; Rogers-Sirin, 2017). It is also crucial to realize that many of the traditional
approaches to counseling that focus on the internal dynamics of the individual client are not likely to
be as useful to clients whose problems originate in societal oppression, discrimination, and margin-
alization. To serve these clients effectively, you will need to develop a repertoire of helping strate-
gies that consider not only the individual client but also the larger social systems in which the client
functions (Butler et al., 2022; Mifsud & Herlihy, 2022). It will be equally vital for you to develop
skills in performing alternative roles such as client advocate, consultant, social change agent, and
liaison with existing support systems in the client’s community (Lee, 2015).
3-3 The Case of Theo
Tameika, a 28-year-old Black woman, comes to the community mental health center seeking
counseling. During her initial session with Theo, a novice counselor who is White, Tameika reports
several symptoms suggestive of depression, including disturbance in her sleep patterns, loss of
appetite, general fatigue, and unexplained weeping spells. Theo inquires as to whether she has
experienced any losses or significant life changes recently. She replies, “Not really. I just keep
trying to keep it all together. And it’s hard when I earn a minimum wage and so much of it goes
for childcare for my two little ones. Some months I can’t afford both to feed my kids and pay the
utility bills. I can’t see how it’s going to get any better.” Theo suggests that she might get some
short-term relief by taking an antidepressant medication and offers to refer her to the mental
health center’s consulting psychiatrist. Tameika agrees to make an appointment, but she never
returns to the center.
• What do you think of Theo’s suggestions for assisting Tameika with her problems?
• What kind of help does Tameika need?

-- 92 of 593 --

70 	Section 1 • Foundations
Discussion: In this case, the counselor would have been more effective had he taken more of a sys-
temic approach to helping Tameika. Rather than focus on her intrapsychic dynamics and her depres-
sion, he might have explored with her whether there were any social support systems available in
her community. He might have discovered, for instance, that her religious faith was an important
source of strength for her, and he could have helped her connect with a church in her neighborhood
that offers free or reduced-fee child care for its members. He might have helped her contact social
services agencies such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children or a community organization
that could help her manage her financial problems. His failure to implement any such culturally
appropriate strategies could have been a major factor in Tameika’s failure to return to the center.
A skill that has received attention in recent years is broaching, which occurs when a counselor initi-
ates a discussion of racial, ethnic, and cultural (REC) issues that are relevant to the client’s present-
ing concerns (Day-Vines et al., 2020). Day-Vines and her colleagues (2018, 2020) have asserted
that because counselors wield the balance of power within the counsel-
ing relationship, it is incumbent upon them to initiate discussion of cli-
ents’ REC concerns. Recently, these scholars offered strategies based on
the Multicultural and Social Justice Counseling Competencies for dis-
cussing race, ethnicity, and culture with clients (Day-Vines et al., 2021).
ACTIONS 	Awareness, knowledge, and skills are building blocks to
actions that advocate for and with clients. Advocacy is taking actions that
will help to remove external and institutional barriers to clients’ well-
being. As advocates, counselors take actions that affect public opinion,
public policy, and legislation, intervening not only in clients’ lives but
also in the larger social and political arena. Even if you are a beginning
student in counseling, you can be an advocate. You can become active
in an organization that addresses the societal inequities that matter the
most to you, such as a group that advocates for LGBTGEQIAP+ rights
or for expanded mental health care for the underserved. You can join
with your faculty members and fellow students to spend a day at your
state capitol, lobbying legislators to support bills that mandate that
more counselors be employed in public schools to meet recommended
student/counselor ratios or that ban conversion therapy for minors.
3-4 The Case of Malik
Malik is a counselor in an urban elementary school in an inner-city neighborhood of a large city.
He has been counseling Tomas, a fourth-grader who is new to the school. Tomas’s parents crossed
the border from Mexico to the United States several months ago and are living with relatives while
waiting to hear from the immigration authorities as to whether they will be allowed to stay in the
United States. The school’s student population is diverse, with a majority of Black students and
smaller numbers of White students and second-generation Asian students. There are very few
Latine students, and none in Tomas’s grade in school. Malik’s heritage is Black and Asian, so he has

-- 93 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	71
Competence
As is evident, the primary ethical issue that relates to multicultural coun-
seling and advocacy is competence. Although there are some counselors
practicing today who remain culturally encapsulated, counseling profes-
sionals now generally recognize that they must learn to practice in a
diversity-sensitive manner and must develop advocacy skills for inter-
vening in unjust systems (Schuster et al., 2021). Nonetheless, prejudicial
attitudes and biases are deeply ingrained in Western society, and coun-
selors, as members of that society, have internalized these biases. Thus,
counselors can practice discrimination without being aware that they are
doing so (Gushue et al., 2022).
Our own understanding of multiculturalism is based on the prem-
ise that all counseling is cross-cultural. We define culture broadly to
include numerous cultural variables, including characteristics into which
people are born or that are visible, such as race or ethnicity, social class,
gender, age, and disability status. Culture also encompasses characteris-
tics that may not be visible, such as educational attainment, geographic
origin, marital status, language, religion, and citizenship status. Ethical
issues related to prevalent forms of bias based on these cultural charac-
teristics are discussed in the following subsections, along with strategies
to advocate for clients who are members of disenfranchised groups in our society. As advocates,
counselors have an ethical responsibility to confront the -isms of prejudice and discrimination at the
individual, group, and societal levels.
AVOIDING DISCRIMINATION
RACISM Racism refers to prejudice and discrimination against people of color and people of cer-
tain ethnic origins. Because the multicultural counseling movement historically has focused on
race, a substantial body of professional literature addresses the effects of race and ethnicity on the
felt comfortable in his knowledge of the students’ backgrounds, but he has had no experience with
immigrants from Mexico.
Tomas reveals to Malik that he has tried to make friends, but his classmates make fun of his
accent and the food in the lunches his mother packs for him to eat at school. He states that he feels
left out when his teacher acknowledges Black History month and Asian American Pacific Islander
Heritage month. Because Malik realizes that counseling Tomas individually will not suffice to help him
feel a sense of belonging at his new school, Malik arranges his schedule so that he can begin offering
psychoeducational groups to all the fourth-grade classes, focusing on appreciation for cultural diver-
sity. With Tomas’s permission, he also talks with Tomas’s teacher, who agrees to create a teaching unit
on Hispanic Heritage month and to see if Tomas would be willing to help her develop it.
Discussion: Malik was wise to recognize that Tomas’s problems originated in his classroom
environment and to take action steps to address the prejudice and exclusion that Tomas was
experiencing. He empowered Tomas to advocate for himself by arranging for the teacher to
invite him to help plan the teaching unit.

-- 94 of 593 --

72 	Section 1 • Foundations
counseling relationship, process, and outcomes. When a client and a counselor are racially or ethni-
cally different from each other, counselor insensitivity to the differences can lead to client reluctance
to self-disclose, mistrust of the counselor by the client, and premature termination of counseling.
Very rarely do counselors behave toward clients in a manner that is deliberately racist. However, even
counselors who are strongly committed to multiculturalism are not exempt from deeply embedded
racial/ethnic biases and prejudices. Unintended racism can take the form of microaggressions, which
are “brief and commonplace daily verbal or behavioral indignities, whether intentional or uninten-
tional, that communicate hostile, derogatory, or negative racial slights and insults” (Sue & Sue, 2013,
p. 154) and that have a potentially harmful or unpleasant impact on the target person or group. Ample
research evidence exists that microaggressions have a negative impact on the mental health of people
of color and persons with disabilities (Kattari, 2020; Nadal et al., 2014; Rivera et al., 2010; Sue et al.,
2022; Yeo et al., 2019). Counselors have an obligation to avoid re-creating and reenacting within
counseling sessions the dynamics of bias that exist in society.
As advocates, counselors recognize that racial and ethnic discrimination is rooted in the social
organization of our society and that mental health is profoundly affected by experiences of mar-
ginalization and oppression. Advocacy involves extending the work of counseling beyond the indi-
vidual client to address the external forces that create barriers to clients’ full participation in society.
This includes engaging in community empowerment strategies, political action, and other activities
aimed at systemic change. Counselors can take the lead in mobilizing the provision of mental health
services to communities in need.
SEXISM Sexism and gender issues may be overlooked in counseling. The vast majority of
master’s-level counseling practitioners are female, and it might be assumed that these practitioners
have the awareness and skills to counsel other women effectively. In reality, women and men are
equally influenced by gender-role socialization experiences that, if left unexamined, can lead to
gender discrimination and incompetent counseling practices.
Counselor self-awareness is an essential starting point to prevent bringing gender bias into the
counseling relationship. Self-awareness begins with reflecting on the impact of one’s own gender-
role socialization experiences. In addition to self-awareness, counselors need to acquire knowledge
that is foundational for counseling women, which includes understanding the specific life experi-
ences and worldviews of diverse groups of women. Counselors who work with female clients also
should have an understanding of the high-prevalence problems and issues experienced by women,
including domestic violence, sexual assault and harassment, body image and objectification, the
right to control their bodies, and conflicts between work and family responsibilities.
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS Socioeconomic status (SES) has been given little attention in the
counseling literature, although the link between poverty and mental health problems is clear
(Smith et al., 2008). SES affects all dimensions of a person’s life, including sense of self-worth,
access to mental health care, exposure to violence, and sense of personal power or agency
(Robinson-Wood, 2009). Research has demonstrated bias against low-SES clients in mental health
services: Clients from low-SES backgrounds are more frequently and more severely diagnosed
as having mental health problems, are prescribed different treatments based solely on class, and
have fewer services available to them and less experienced clinicians to serve them (Aponte &
Wohl, 2000). Counselors themselves may be unclear about the distinctions between SES
and social class (social class is more a culture that carries with it group membership, norms, and
socialization patterns, while SES includes income status) (Cook et al., 2021), which may contrib-
ute to deficiencies in treatment.

-- 95 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	73
A middle-class bias prevails in the training of counselors (Robinson-Wood, 2009). Because most
counselors come from or have achieved middle-class status (Bienvenu & Ramsey, 2006), it may be dif-
ficult for them to relate to the phenomenon of poverty and to become aware of their class biases (Clark
et al., 2017; Havlik et al., 2017). Culturally competent counseling includes the ability to hear class con-
ditioning when listening to clients’ stories. For example, a client might be reluctant to take certain occu-
pational risks because of socialization experiences that emphasized security and practicality (Fickling,
2016). Rather than focusing exclusively on personal relationships and insight with a client, counselors
should remain aware of and address the social and economic issues that affect the client’s life. Counselors
must understand the classism that clients may face so that they are able to facilitate client empowerment
to cope with the everyday discrimination that these clients encounter (Parker-Barnes et al., 2023).
ABLEISM Ableism is a form of discrimination or prejudice against individuals with physical, develop-
mental, or mental disabilities that is characterized by the belief that these individuals cannot function
as full members of society. The number of people with disabilities in the United States is much larger
than what is typically assumed. Counselors are subject to the same negative images and stereotypes
of people with disabilities (PWD) as the rest of society (Reeve, 2000). This problem may persist
because disability has not been widely recognized as a multicultural concern by counselors (Smith
et al., 2008), and most counselor education programs (other than rehabilitation counseling programs)
have not given much attention to disability issues (Hall, 2015; Hanjorgiris & O’Neill, 2006; Oksuz
& Brubaker, 2020). Deroche et al. (2020) found that counseling students may perceive themselves
as more competent to work with clients with PWDs if they have disability-related life experience,
although completion of a multicultural course was positively related to their perceived competence.
Developing the competencies that are necessary for providing effective counseling services
to PWDs begins with counselors’ awareness of their own assumptions, values, and biases about dis-
ability and with counselors confronting their own ableism. Counselors need to remain aware that
not all disabilities are visible; a counselor who is unaware of a hidden disability might erroneously
assume that the client’s slow progress in counseling is due to client resistance. It is also important to
remember that a client’s presenting problem may or may not be related to a disability.
Disability issues generally have not been included in social justice agendas (Fabian, 2007), and
marginalization is perpetuated when counseling PWDs is assumed to be exclusively the province of
rehabilitation counselors. Problems that are related to disability often involve systemic barriers, so
counselors should be skilled in advocacy approaches that focus on systems change.
AGEISM Ageism is a growing concern, as the number of older adults in the United States continues
to grow (Lum, 2007). Clearly, there will be a burgeoning need for culturally competent counselors
to serve this population in coming years. If you expect to work with older adults, you will need to
be alert to your own biases. It is important to guard against stereotyping and monolithic thinking or
assuming that all older people share the same life issues and counseling concerns.
3-5 The Case of LaTasha
Mary Jo, aged 78, comes to seeLaTasha, a counselor at a community mental health center. When
LaTasha asks Mary Jo what brings her to counseling, Mary Jo replies, “I really don’t know why I’m
here. My daughters pretty much insisted that I see a counselor, and I got tired of their nagging, so
here I am.” Further exploration elicits the information that Mary Jo’s daughters are concerned that

-- 96 of 593 --

74 	Section 1 • Foundations
she isn’t planning for retirement and that they believe that their mom “should retire and enjoy life
while she still can.” Mary Jo explains that she has no thoughts of retiring, she loves her work and
finds it to be a source of meaning in her life, and her employer wants her to stay on. As Latasha
listens, she thinks that perhaps she should inquire more deeply into the sense of meaning that
work provides for Mary Jo. Yet LaTasha, who is 28 years old, also finds herself thinking it might be
more important to explore whether Mary Jo has considered what she will do if her health starts to
fail or if she finds that she is no longer able to perform her job to the satisfaction of her employer.
• What do you think about LaTasha’s line of thinking here? If she steers the session toward
retirement planning, would she be imposing her own bias about the needs of people who
are Mary Jo’s age?
• Do you think LaTasha should consider exploring the apparent conflict between Mary Jo
and her daughters over Mary Jo’s desire to keep working? Would you want to involve the
daughters in the counseling process at some point?
Discussion: LaTasha seems to be unaware of the differences in perspective when age 78 is
viewed through the lens of a 28-year-old versus the lens of someone who has reached Mary Jo’s
age. Her lack of awareness of possible age bias may lead her to align with Mary Jo’s daughters
rather than with her client. This could happen if she focuses on retirement planning rather than
the reason Mary Jo has come for counseling, which is that her daughters have insisted and she
is feeling nagged. LaTasha might be more effective in working with Mary Jo if she were to stay
in the present moment with her client and attend to what Mary Jo has stated, rather than think
ahead to what she believes Mary Jo needs to do at this point in her life.
Older adults have tended to underutilize mental health services, perhaps partly because of the
stigma they attach to seeking psychological services. Counselors need to be prepared to address the
reluctance of some older clients to enter into counseling relationships. Counselors should be alert
to signs of possible elder abuse or neglect (see Chapter 11 for further discussion of this topic). As
advocates, counselors are uniquely positioned to assist older individuals because our developmental
perspective recognizes and supports positive growth across the life span.
DISCRIMINATION BASED ON SEXUAL ORIENTATION Discrimination based on sexual or affectional
orientation is an ongoing concern within the counseling profession. LGBTGEQIAP+ individuals
have experienced a long history of oppression and stigmatization in the United States. As is true
for working with clients who are members of any marginalized group, counselors need to explore
their own biases as a starting place for developing their cultural competence. Internalized attitudes of
homophobia, homonegativity, and heterosexism among mental health professionals have led to harm-
ful practices, such as assuming that a client is heterosexual, referring to another counselor a client
who discloses his or her sexual orientation, acquiescing in the dissolution of a relationship because
it is with a person of the same sex, and failing to support the desire for child custody of gay parents.
Counselors have become increasingly aware of the need to provide culturally sensitive services
to LGBTGEQIAP+ individuals (Dispenza & O’Hara, 2016; Shulman et al., 2017). Counseling
Competencies for transgender clients can be found on the ACA website (www.counseling.org).
RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION Spiritual and religious bias must be addressed, considering that
spirituality and religion play an important part in the lives of many clients (Ivey et al., 2007;

-- 97 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	75
Robinson-Wood, 2009; Steen et al., 2006). Spirituality can be defined as a personal relationship
with a higher power and faith that may be used to find meaning in life. Religion is a shared set
of practices and beliefs that is associated with denominational affiliations (Halbert et al., 2007;
Robinson-Wood, 2009).
Some counselors are uncomfortable with the idea of addressing spiritual or religious issues
within the therapeutic relationship. This discomfort may be due to lack of clarity about their own
views on spirituality and religion, a fear of imposing values, concerns about maintaining separation
of church and state in school and some other secular settings, or lack of training and questions about
competence (Adams et al., 2015; Genia, 2000; Hall et al., 2004; Steen et al., 2006). To assist coun-
selors with integrating social justice advocacy into this arena, Mintert et al. (2020) have applied the
Multicultural and Social Justice Counseling Competencies to religion and spirituality.
3-6 The Case of Clarence
Clarence was excited to graduate with his master’s degree and immediately secure employment
as a school counselor. In his first year, he has enjoyed his work and believes he has been suc-
cessful in connecting with and assisting the teenage clients who have sought him out. Now, the
student in the counseling room with him is Amber, who is 17 and is struggling with issues related
to “how far to go” sexually with her boyfriend. Amber states that the pressure to become more
active sexually isn’t coming from her boyfriend, who is respectful of her wishes, but from her own
desire to experience her sexuality. She states that she isn’t talking about intercourse and that
she is far from thinking about “going all the way.” Her struggle is related to her religious beliefs.
Her family is active in a church that has very strict rules about premarital sexual activity, and she
says she believes in the church’s teachings. Clarence considers himself an agnostic, and he is
unfamiliar with Amber’s church and its teachings. He finds that he is uncomfortable with the idea
of exploring Amber’s struggle with her religious beliefs and wonders whether he should even be
discussing this with her in a public school setting. He steers the conversation away from religion.
• What do you think Clarence should do so that he can be better prepared to continue to
work with Amber, assuming she returns for further counseling with him?
• What are the ethical issues involved if Clarence steers the counseling session away from a
topic that makes him uncomfortable?
Discussion: In avoiding a topic of discussion that causes him discomfort, Clarence is meet-
ing his own needs at the expense of his client’s. He has an ethical obligation to be competent
to explore religious issues with his client, and he can learn more about her religious beliefs by
asking her about them and how they are creating an internal conflict for her. He will need to
keep the focus on Amber’s beliefs and set aside any values about sexual behavior that might be
associated with his own agnostic religious views. He should seek further training and perhaps
supervision so that he can become competent to explore clients’ religious and spiritual values
when these values are pertinent to the issues that clients bring to counseling.
Because many clients believe spirituality is integrally connected to their personal growth and
mental health (Ivey et al., 2005), counselors must be open to discussing client spirituality (Buser
et al., 2017). Although it would not be ethical for counselors to impose their own spiritual or reli-
gious beliefs and values on a client, counselors should be able to explore spiritual themes when

-- 98 of 593 --

76 	Section 1 • Foundations
the client opens a spiritual discussion. LGBTGEQIAP+ clients, in particular, may struggle with
the incompatibility of their religious community and their sexual identities (Crockett et al., 2018).
Issues that arise when counselors refuse to counsel a client because the client’s beliefs or behaviors
conflict with the counselors’ religious beliefs are discussed later in this chapter.
Intersectionality
Intersectionality is a term used to address the need to understand marginalization based on oppres-
sion that moves toward a nuanced understanding of the ways in which interlocking systems of
oppression intersect to marginalize individuals in society, rather than on a single-axis framework
of one marginalized identity (e.g., race). For many individuals, intersecting systems of oppression
create a matrix of domination, which represents the ways that various forms of oppression are struc-
tured to produce and sustain inequality (Collins, 2000). Counselors use the concept of intersection-
ality to explore the ways that systemic, institutional, and structural oppression and privilege impact
individuals and communities (Lewis & Grzanka, 2016).
It is important to recognize that individuals have multiple, interrelated cultural charac-
teristics. Considering any of these variables in isolation fails to reflect the complexities of a
person’s life experiences and worldview (Constantine, 2001, 2002). Constantine suggested that
counselors examine how race, class, gender, and other cultural factors interact in their own lives.
If you engage in this process, you will recognize that you simultaneously experience both privi-
lege and oppression (as a middle-class White heterosexual woman or as a Christian Black man,
for example). Realizing that you occupy both positions on the power spectrum and reflecting on
your own experiences of privilege and oppression may increase your understanding and sense of
empathy for your clients.
3-7 The Case of Horst
Arthur is a 32-year-old Black man who is employed as a nursing instructor at a community college
and is married with two children. He seeks counseling from Horst after he becomes involved in
an intimate relationship with Mark, an openly gay man. Mark also works at the community col-
lege, and their coworkers have gossiped among themselves about the relationship, although no
one has said anything directly to either Arthur or Mark. Arthur believes he has come to the point
in his life when heterosexual marriage is no longer viable for him. He presents with several issues,
including coming out to his wife and children and redefining himself as a gay man. He believes
that his wife suspects the truth and will come to accept who he is, but he fears losing the close
relationship he has enjoyed with his children.
• What are the issues Horst must address in providing counseling to Arthur?
• What information will Horst need to be a culturally competent counselor in this situation?
• What skills will Horst need to be a culturally competent counselor in this situation?
Discussion: Horst, as Arthur’s counselor, must have awareness, knowledge, and skills across
several dimensions if he is to be effective in helping Arthur. First, Horst must be aware of the
impact of Arthur’s multiple cultural identities. Until recently, Arthur has enjoyed heterosexual
privilege, and he may not be prepared to deal with the realities of being an openly gay man. He
may find that some of his friends will not be able to accept his gay identity. On the other hand,

-- 99 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	77
Arthur has had experience in coping with a marginalized status—he is Black and works in a pre-
dominantly female occupation. Horst must be knowledgeable about sexuality so that he does
not make erroneous assumptions, such as believing that Arthur must be bisexual because he has
engaged in heterosexual intercourse for many years. If Arthur’s wife and children want to join
in the counseling process and Horst decides to accept them as counseling clients, Horst must
have family counseling skills so that he can help Arthur and his family create new family rules and
boundaries. Therefore, he must have a range of competencies—in multicultural counseling, fam-
ily counseling, and LGBTGEQIAP+ counseling—to be effective in helping Arthur.
Every client, and every counselor, belongs to multiple cultures, and the salience of member-
ship in any of these cultural groups changes according to the situation. At the same time, each indi-
vidual is unique. You will need to keep your attention balanced in your work with clients. If you pay
too much attention to cultural group membership, you may inadvertently stereotype your client. If
you focus too narrowly on the client as an individual, you might overlook the impact of the cultural
environment on that client (Corey et al., 2010).
With respect to cultural diversity, perhaps more than any other ethical issue, it is crucial that
counselors attend to the spirit of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014). Standards regarding nondis-
crimination and honoring diversity are included throughout the Code, but we believe it would be a
mistake to think that only these specific standards are pertinent to multiculturally competent prac-
tice. Rather, we believe that all of the ethical standards are best seen as multicultural standards. If
cultural diversity is a theme that runs throughout the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), it is also a theme
that runs throughout this text. This chapter only introduces the multitude of considerations that
are involved in ethically sensitive, multicultural counseling practice. Each of the ensuing chapters
focuses on a specific ethical/legal/professional issue, and there is also a section devoted to diversity
considerations that relate to that issue. For instance, some diversity issues that arise in informed
consent are discussed in Chapter 4. Diversity is far too important an issue in the professional prac-
tice of counselors to be limited to one section of this text.
VALUES AND VALUE CONFLICTS
Counselors’ Personal and Professional Values
The primary ethical standard related to counselor values is §A.4.b. of the ACA Code of Ethics (ACA,
2014), which requires counselors to be aware of—and avoid imposing—their own values, attitudes,
beliefs, and behaviors on clients. Although this ethical obligation is easy to state, it can be difficult to
uphold in practice. A counselor’s values will influence the counseling process in many ways (Levitt &
Moorhead, 2013), including which goals are considered appropriate or desirable in counseling, whether
and how the client will be diagnosed, and which client issues will become the focus of therapy. Even
the theory from which the counselor operates can influence the counseling process in value-laden ways:
Certain theories promote specific values. For instance, the Adlerian approach emphasizes the develop-
ment of social interest as a benchmark of mental health, whereas the existential approach emphasizes
individual freedom and responsibility. The influence of counselor values on the counseling process can
be very subtle, and counselors can communicate their values in many indirect ways: through nonverbal
responses, by focusing on some elements of a client’s story while not responding to others, and through
the interventions they select (Francis & Dugger, 2014). Counselor values can also significantly affect

-- 100 of 593 --

78 	Section 1 • Foundations
counseling outcomes. Research has shown that the degree of congruence between the values of the coun-
selor and those of the client can influence therapeutic outcomes and that clients tend to change in ways
that are consistent with the values of their counselors. Jadaszewski (2017) has cautioned against the “val-
ues paternalism” (p. 298) that occurs when impositions of counselor values occur outside the awareness
of the counselor, which underscores the need for counselors to be aware of their own values.
Both the client and the counselor enter counseling relationships with their own sets of val-
ues, which they have acquired through years of experience and exposure. Value conflicts may never
become a problem in counseling when the value systems of the client and the counselor are similar
or compatible. When the value systems of the counselor and the client differ, however, particularly
around emotionally charged issues, these differences can become problematic (Barrett & McWhirter,
2002; Kiselica & Robinson, 2001; Millner & Hanks, 2002). Value-laden issues can create problems if
counselors have not clarified how their own personal beliefs might affect their therapeutic work with
clients who present with issues that challenge the counselor’s beliefs (Guiffrida et al., 2019).
A great deal of controversy has been generated over the ethical issues raised when the beliefs
and behaviors of clients are in conflict with the personal values of their counselors. The value con-
flict that has been at the heart of the controversy has occurred when some conservative Christian
counselors and counselors-in-training have refused to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients because
these counselors hold the religious belief that non-heterosexual relationships are a sin and must not
be condoned through gay-affirmative counseling (Bayne et al., 2021, 2022). This value conflict has
generated court cases, legislation, and a substantial body of literature examining whether counselors
can use their religious beliefs as the basis for refusing to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients. This
conflict also has generated articles expressing a variety of opinions (Giordano et al., 2018; Guiffrida
et al., 2019). For example, Smith and Okech (2016a, 2016b) have questioned whether counselor
preparation programs in Christian faith–based universities should be eligible for accreditation by
CACREP, while Sells and Hagedorn (2016) have argued that counseling students in Christian uni-
versities can be taught to prevent imposing their religious beliefs on the clients they counsel.
Because this controversy is ongoing and is situated within a larger movement to deny mental
health services to LGBTGEQIAP+ clients, we discuss this issue in detail.
COURT CASES 	In two court cases, counseling practitioners were terminated from their employment,
and in two other cases, counseling students were dismissed from their training programs after they refused
to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients regarding same-sex relationships (Bayne et al., 2021, 2022).
In Bruff v. North Mississippi Health Services, Inc. (2001), a client asked her employee assis-
tance program (EAP) counselor (Bruff) for help with improving her relationship with her same-sex
partner. Bruff explained that “homosexual behavior” was against her religious beliefs and offered to
refer the client to another counselor. Although the client accepted the referral, she did not return for
counseling and eventually filed a complaint with Bruff’s employer. The employer tried to accom-
modate Bruff’s religious beliefs but determined that it would place too great a burden on Bruff’s fel-
low counselors if Bruff were allowed to refer to other counselors all clients whose issues presented
a conflict with her religious values. Bruff was placed on leave without pay and was terminated
from employment after she refused opportunities to transfer to other positions within the company.
Bruff filed suit against her former employer. One of her claims was that her employer had vio-
lated her right to freedom from religious discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964. Eventually, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against Bruff. The court determined that
although employers do have a legal obligation to make reasonable accommodations for religious
beliefs, Bruff’s inflexible position caused undue hardship to her fellow EAP counselors.
A second legal case, Walden v. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2010), presented
issues very similar to those in Bruff. In this second case, an employee of the Centers for Disease

-- 101 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	79
Control and Prevention (CDC) sought same-sex relationship counseling from Walden, an EAP coun-
selor. Walden told the client that same-sex relationships conflicted with her religious values and
referred the client to another counselor. The client later brought suit, stating that she had felt judged
and condemned even though the referral had been satisfactory. Walden’s employer tried to accommo-
date her religious beliefs by asking her to refer future clients without telling them about her religious
objections or personal values. When Walden refused, she was laid off and was later terminated after
she did not avail herself of opportunities to apply for other positions within the CDC. Like Bruff,
Walden filed suit, and the court ruled against Walden due to her rigid position regarding referrals.
Both the Bruff and Walden rulings were based primarily on issues of employment law rather than
on the ethical issues related to refusing to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients regarding their same-sex
relationships. Ethical issues related to values conflicts have played a more prominent role in the cases of
two counseling students who were dismissed from counselor education programs at Eastern Michigan
University and Augusta State University (now Augusta University) in Georgia after they refused to
counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients because same-sex affectional relationships were not acceptable, aco-
ording to their religious beliefs. Both students sued their universities. The students claimed that the
counseling graduate programs violated their constitutional right to express their religious beliefs.
In Ward v. Wilbanks (2010), Julea Ward, a master’s-degree student in the counseling program at
Eastern Michigan University (EMU), was dismissed from the program in 2009 after she refused to coun-
sel an LGBTGEQIAP+ client. Ward was enrolled in her practicum course when she learned that a clinic
client she had been assigned to counsel had previously sought counseling for same-sex relationship issues.
Ward told her faculty supervisor that she would not be able to counsel this client effectively due to conflicts
with her religious beliefs. The supervisor reassigned the client. Later, the faculty held an informal review
meeting with Ward to express their concern that Ward was not complying with the counseling program’s
policies or the ACA Code of Ethics, which prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation (ACA,
2014). The faculty offered Ward the choices of completing a remediation plan, leaving the program, or
requesting a formal hearing. After a formal review, Ward was dismissed from the graduate program.
Ward then brought suit against EMU, with the backing of the Alliance Defending Freedom
(formerly the Alliance Defense Fund). The U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan
granted a motion made by the university for summary judgment (Ward v. Wilbanks, 2010), which
means that the judges on the court found that the student did not have a foundation for her lawsuit
based on the pleadings that had been filed by both sides (i.e., the claim of discrimination by the stu-
dent plaintiff and the response by the university). A higher court (U.S. 6th District Court of Appeals)
overturned the lower court’s summary judgment decision (Ward v. Wilbanks, 2012) and remanded
the case back to the district court for a jury trial. The suit was settled out of court. According to
Rudow (2013), the resolution upheld EMU’s program policies and confirmed the right of the pro-
gram to use the ACA (2014) Code of Ethics as the guide for defining ethical behavior.
In the case of Keeton v. Augusta State University (2011), student Jennifer Keeton was asked by
faculty at Augusta State University (ASU) in Georgia to complete a remediation plan after finishing
her first year of the master’s-degree program in counseling. In classes, Keeton had often expressed
her condemnation of “homosexuality” based on her religious beliefs, and the faculty was concerned
that she “might not be able to separate her religious views on sexual morality from her professional
counseling responsibilities” (Keeton v. Augusta State University, 2011, p. 4). When Keeton failed to
complete the remediation plan, she was dismissed from the master’s-degree program. She brought
suit against the faculty and the university, claiming that her right to freedom from religious discrimi-
nation had been violated. The student also asked for a preliminary injunction to prevent ASU officials
from dismissing her from the program if she did not complete the remediation plan. The federal
district court denied the student’s motion for a preliminary injunction, and the student appealed the
decision. The U.S. Court of Appeals upheld the lower court’s denial of the preliminary injunction.

-- 102 of 593 --

80 	Section 1 • Foundations
The particular circumstances surrounding this case are included in the court’s written decision.
The Court of Appeals concluded that “the evidence in this record does not support Keeton’s claim
that ASU’s officials imposed the remediation plan because of her views on homosexuality. Rather,
as the district court found, the evidence shows that the remediation plan was imposed because she
expressed an intent to impose her personal religious views on her clients, in violation of the ACA Code
of Ethics, and that the objective of the remediation plan was to teach her how to effectively counsel
LGBTGEQIAP+ clients in accordance with the ACA Code of Ethics” (Keeton v. Anderson-Wiley,
et al., 2011, p. 17; Rouse & Horn, 2022). The court found that ASU officials did not tell the student
that she had to change her religious beliefs, as she had claimed, but instead had required her to separate
those beliefs from her work in counseling clients. Keeton’s motion for a preliminary injunction to keep
the university from dismissing was denied, and her lawsuit against the university claiming that her
rights were violated was dismissed by a federal judge in a U.S. District Court in June 2012.
STATE LEGISLATION 	The issue raised by the students in these two lawsuits has not been confined
to the courts; it has been introduced into the legislative arena as well. Legislation that allows mental
health professionals to refuse to provide services to LGBTGEQIAP+ clients based on the profession-
als’ religious or personal beliefs is referred to as conscience clause legislation. A law has been enacted
in Arizona that prohibits a state university from discriminating against or disciplining a student in a
counseling or related mental health program because the student “refuses to counsel a client about goals
that conflict with the student’s sincerely held religious beliefs” (AZ Rev Stat §15-1862, 2011). A simi-
lar bill was passed in Mississippi. In Michigan, a similar bill, the Julia Ward Freedom of Conscience
bill (HB 5040/SB 518, 2011), contained essentially the same language but was not enacted into law.
In Tennessee, another similar bill was introduced. Due to efforts by mental health professionals in that
state, a less restrictive version (Tennessee SB 2423/2115, 2014) than the originally proposed bill was
enacted that affirms the right to religious freedom but places no restrictions on the ability of counselor
educators to fairly educate their students (Wise et al., 2015). To understand the impact of such legisla-
tion on those targeted, Grzanka et al. (2019, 2020) explored the perceptions of LGBTGEQIAP+ resi-
dents of Tennessee. Not surprisingly, the researchers found that these individuals held a deep skepticism
toward mental health care and were aware of the individual and societal consequences of the legislation.
It is concerning that the introduction into state legislatures of these types of bills has been
increasing since 2015. In 2022, in response to a wave of legislation targeting LGBTGEQIAP+ indi-
viduals, ACES issued a Unified Statement on Anti-LGBTGEQIAP+ legislation, which can be found
on the organization’s website (https://acesonline.net). In the ACES Statement, it was noted that over
150 pieces of legislation targeting LGBTGEQIAP+ and transgender people had been introduced
in state legislatures. The Statement affirmed that it is a basic ethical responsibility of counselors to
oppose any efforts to target groups of individuals through oppressive language, acts, or policies.
Values and the ACA Code of Ethics
New language in the 2014 ACA Code of Ethics clarifies the distinctions between personal and
professional values. The revised Preamble spells out the professional values of enhancing human
development, honoring diversity, promoting social justice, safeguarding the integrity of the coun-
seling relationship, and practicing with competence and ethical diligence (Francis, 2015). Some
counseling students have strongly held religious beliefs and values that cause them to question
whether they can provide counseling services to LGBTGEQIAP+ clients or other clients who
are members of marginalized groups. As these students progress through their training programs,
they will learn how to set aside or bracket (Kocet & Herlihy, 2014) their personal values within

-- 103 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	81
the counseling relationship. It is important that these students understand that they are not being
asked to change their religious beliefs, only to refrain from bringing these beliefs into their work
with clients. Counseling students are expected to embrace the professional values shared by coun-
selors and to set aside their personal values in keeping with the duty to put client welfare first and
foremost.
As we have noted, the role of personal values is described in §A.4.b. of the ACA Code of
Ethics. This standard requires counselors to be aware of—and to avoid imposing—their own val-
ues, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors on clients. Several additional standards clarify related duties.
Standard C.5 states that counselors do not condone or engage in discrimination based on clients’
membership in marginalized groups, including those whose sexual orientation differs from the ori-
entation of the dominant group.
Some counselors and counselors-in-training who object to counseling LGBTGEQIAP+ clients
have argued that they are not competent to provide services to this group of clients. The ACA Code
makes it clear that counselors are expected to “gain knowledge, personal awareness, and skills pertinent
to working with a diverse client population” (§C.2.a.).
Some counselors have argued that they could act in accordance with their religious beliefs and
prevent harm by referring LGBTGEQIAP+ clients to other counselors. As support for their argu-
ment, they have cited §A.11.a, which states that when counselors lack the competence to be able to
assist clients they should avoid entering into or continuing counseling relationships. This standard
does not apply, however, to referring an entire class of people, such as LGBTGEQIAP+ individu-
als. There is a distinct difference between being unable (incompetent) to counsel a client effectively
and being unwilling to learn how to do so. Both §C.2.a. (requiring counselors to gain competence
in working with diverse client populations) and §C.5 (nondiscrimination) underscore the inappro-
priateness of referring LGBTGEQIAP+ clients to other counselors. Finally, §A.11.b. states clearly
that counselors do not refer clients or prospective clients based solely on the counselor’s person-
ally held beliefs or values. These standards are interrelated and need to be understood together.
Counselors must understand that they cannot “just go to one statement in the Code . . . and then base
their ethical decision making on that” (Kaplan et al., 2017, p. 112).
Before concluding this chapter, we address another ethical issue that can be values-fraught: the
counselor’s role in end-of-life decision making.
End-of-Life Decision Making
A controversial issue in today’s society is whether people who are terminally ill, have an incur-
able condition, or are in intolerable pain have the right to choose the time and means of their own
deaths (Herlihy & Watson, 2004). As more members of U.S. society live to an advanced age and as
life-sustaining medical technologies continue to advance, it is likely that counselors will be called
on more frequently to counsel clients who are considering hastening their own deaths (Manis &
Bodenhorn, 2006). In recognition of this growing need, ACA signed on to an amicus brief submitted
to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1997 in support of the role of mental health professionals in assisting
individuals with their end-of-life decision making.
A standard in the previous ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2005, §A.9), acknowledged that not
every counselor will feel comfortable or competent to work with terminally ill clients who wish
to explore their end-of-life options. This standard, which allowed counselors to refer a terminally
ill client who wished to explore end-of-life options to other counselors, based on the counselor’s
personal values and beliefs regarding the issue (Kaplan & Martz, 2014a), does not appear in the
current Code (ACA, 2014). Counselors are thus expected to be competent to work with clients

-- 104 of 593 --

82 	Section 1 • Foundations
across the entire developmental spectrum, which includes clients who are nearing the end of their
lives (Bevacqua & Kurpius, 2013). Patients with terminal illnesses often are ready to engage in
end-of-life talk within a supportive therapeutic relationship (Shaw et al., 2017), and counselors need
to be prepared to assist these patients. Wheeler and Bertram (2019) emphasize that counselors must
know the relevant laws in their states before they enter into counseling relationships with terminally
ill clients and their families.
Counseling assistance with end-of-life decision making may have been a particularly valuable
service for some older adults during the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, when waves of
the virus struck multiple residents of nursing homes. Because the prognosis was dire for many of
these individuals, counseling for potential end-of-life planning may have been beneficial.
Before you work with terminally ill clients, you also will need to explore your own beliefs about
end-of-life decision making. Under what circumstances do you think hastening one’s own death is an
acceptable option to explore? When a person is terminally ill and death is imminent? When the illness
is fatal but the person could live for several more years if they undergo multiple, painful surgeries or
must take potent medications with severe side effects? When a condition is not terminal but has left a
person in constant, intolerable pain? When a terminally ill person wants to hasten their death to avoid
being a burden to his family? When the person already has lived well into their 90s? What if the indi-
vidual is only 30 years old? When you work with clients who want to consider end-of-life options, it
is essential that you do not impose your own beliefs and values, even inadvertently, about such issues
as living and dying, quality of life, or religion or spirituality. Your task will be to assist clients to make
decisions consistent with their own values and belief systems. You should also be prepared to work
with family members and be aware that they may need counseling to cope with complicated grief
after their family member dies (Crunk, et al., 2017). An excellent resource for learning more about
issues surrounding end-of-life decisions is a book entitled Counseling Clients Near the End of Life: A
Practical Guide for Mental Health Professionals (Werth, 2013).
Clients Who May Be Victims of Illegal Discrimination
Section C.5. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that counselors do not condone or engage in
discrimination based on “age, culture, disability, ethnicity, race, religion/spirituality, gender, gender
identity, sexual orientation, marital/partnership status, language preference, socioeconomic status,
immigration status, or any basis proscribed by law.” Counselors have a duty to ensure that individuals
who are under their care are not harmed (see Chapters 5, 7, and 11). There may be circumstances in
which you must take action to ensure that individuals from minority groups are not harmed physically
or emotionally by others. For example, McFarland and Dupuis (2001) have argued that professionals
have a legal duty to protect LGBTGEQIAP+ clients from violence in schools. Legal duties of coun-
selors related to discrimination are found in the U.S. Constitution as well as laws and statutes.
The U.S. Constitution provided a foundation for making discrimination illegal through the
Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment (Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 1995), the Due
Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment (Truax v. Raich, 1915), and the
First Amendment. In addition, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits public and private
employers, labor organizations, and employment agencies from discriminating on the basis of race,
color, sex, religion, and national origin. After Title VII was enacted, federal laws were passed that
prohibit discrimination on the basis of age (Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967) and
disability (Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990).
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) lists the groups that counselors are admonished not to discrimi-
nate against and includes groups that are not protected from discrimination by the federal constitution
or by federal statutes. The groups that are not legally protected include subgroups based on culture,

-- 105 of 593 --

Chapter 3 • Multiculturalism, Social Justice, Advocacy, and Values 	83
ethnicity, race, spirituality, gender identity, sexual orientation, marital status/partnership, language pref-
erence, and socioeconomic status. Some states and local government entities, however, have passed
nondiscrimination laws for some specific purposes related to these groups (Belton & Avery, 1999). In
our view, counselors do not have a professional responsibility to expose those who they think may be
illegally discriminating against protected groups or to encourage clients to assert their legal rights or to
assert those rights for the clients, which could be disempowering. On the other hand, counselors do have
an obligation to assist clients in making decisions about whether to take action, and what action to take,
if they are struggling with value conflicts or if they believe their legal rights have been violated, just as
counselors would strive to empower clients to make other types of important decisions in their lives.
When clients express concern that they may have been illegally discriminated against, counselors
should first help the clients decide whether they want to take any kind of action. Counselors can be very
supportive in helping clients to consider their options and the possible consequences, both positive and
negative, regarding these options. It is important that counselors stay within their bounds in these situa-
tions and that they not render legal advice or promote their own political or moral agendas via the client.
LGBTGEQIAP+ Clients and Family Law Issues
Counselors should be aware of a number of family law issues in contemporary society that may be
affecting their LGBTGEQIAP+ clients. Counselors clearly should not provide legal advice to their
clients; rather, counselors should refer their clients to attorneys or legal advocacy groups if clients
need legal assistance.
Same-sex marriages became legal in the United States in 2015 as a result of the U.S. Supreme
Court case Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015); 135 S.Ct. 2584 (2015). In a landmark 5–4
decision, the Supreme Court held that the fundamental right to marry is guaranteed to same-sex cou-
ples by both the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
to the U.S. Constitution. The ruling determined that it is unconstitutional for a state to refuse to give
a marriage license to a same-sex couple. Prior to this ruling, same-sex marriages had been legal-
ized in some states, but not in others. Legalized marriage for same-sex couples has revolutionized
society in the United States and has dramatically changed the way counselors provide mental health
services for same-sex couples and their family members.
Cultural Issues in Crisis Counseling
Culturally competent crisis counseling has never been more needed than in recent years. Much of the
work that counselors performed during the COVID-19 pandemic was crisis counseling, as individu-
als, families, and communities attempted to deal with major disruptions in and threats to their lives.
Crisis counselors played a vital role in helping families that were experiencing increased risk of family
violence and child abuse during the “stay at home” mandate (Sinko et al., 2022). Litam and Delgado
(2020) described specific cultural considerations in crisis management interventions that can be used
with clients of color at an appropriate social distance. In addition to the crises precipitated by COVID-
19, mass casualty shooting incidents have increased over the past two decades. More than 32 public
mass shootings occurred between 2016 and 2020, making it essential that counselors are equipped to
treat primary, secondary, and tertiary victims of these incidents (Cowan et al., 2020).
Counselors who assess and manage crisis situations must be sensitive to cultural differences
in their work. In discussing models of assessing crisis situations, Myer (2001) and Knezevic and
Olson (2014) have cautioned that individuals from various cultures react differently to crisis events.
Because nonverbal behavior such as hand gestures and eye contact probably is influenced by cul-
ture, Myer has suggested that crisis counselors distinguish physiological responses from gestures.

-- 106 of 593 --

84 	Section 1 • Foundations
Myer also has recommended that counselors avoid making stereotypical conclusions regarding non-
verbal behaviors such as sitting on one’s hands (which could mean the person is cold rather than
wants to hide his or her feelings) or lack of eye contact (which could mean the individual is showing
respect for the other person rather than displaying a sign of sadness).
Crisis counselors often assess an individual’s time orientation to determine whether a client
is focused on the past and a loss, the present and a transgression, or the future and a threat (Myer,
2001). Asian Americans may be primarily oriented to the past or present, with little attention paid
to the future, and crisis events are likely to be interpreted from a past or present perspective. Native
Americans tend to be present-oriented and experience crises in that way.
Myer (2001) has recommended that crisis counselors avoid imposing their values on individu-
als they counsel in crisis situations. For example, Southeast Asian immigrants may be reluctant to
seek assistance from the police when they are victims of crimes because of police oppression in
their countries, and LGBTGEQIAP+ victims of domestic violence may refuse to seek help because
of fear of ridicule. What may seem to crisis counselors to be self-defeating reactions could have
foundations that are culturally appropriate.
Managing a crisis is important to counselors from a legal perspective. Because they may be
liable for harm that comes to their clients if a crisis situation is not managed properly, counselors
must understand and react appropriately in crises.
Summary and Key Points
This chapter addresses vitally important ethical and
legal issues in counseling related to multicultural
counseling, social justice, and advocacy. This chap-
ter also explores the related issue of counselor val-
ues. The following are key points.
The counseling profession has evolved over
the years, from a lack of awareness of cultural dif-
ferences to a commitment to multiculturally com-
petent practice to an emphasis on social justice and
advocacy aimed at improving the lives of all people
in our society and across the globe.
• The COVID-19 pandemic had a profoundly nega-
tive effect on marginalized persons in our society.
• Multicultural competencies involve counselors
becoming self-aware of their biases, values, and
assumptions; gaining knowledge about other cul-
tural groups; developing culturally appropriate
intervention skills; and taking actions to advo-
cate for and with diverse clientele.
• Multiculturally competent counselors are aware
of, avoid perpetuating, and work to eradicate
discrimination based on race or ethnicity, SES
or social class, ability status, age, sexual orienta-
tion, religion, or other group membership.
• All people have multiple cultural identities and
belong to cultural groups that are dominant and
cultural groups that are peripheralized in U.S.
society. Counselors must understand how the
intersectionality of cultural identifies affects the
client’s worldview.
Counselors must be aware of their personal
values and should not impose these values on clients.
• Some counselors’ religious beliefs have led them
to refuse to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients,
and these referrals to other counselors have
resulted in court cases and state legislation.
• Counselors need to be prepared to assist clients
with end-of-life decision making.
• The U.S. Constitution and various statutes pro-
hibit discrimination. When counselors work with
clients who believe they have suffered illegal
discrimination, counselors can help these clients
to consider their options and the possible conse-
quences of those options.
• Counselors need to be aware of family law issues
that affect LGBTGEQIAP+ clients.
• Crisis counselors must be sensitive to cultural dif-
ferences in the ways that clients respond to crises.

-- 107 of 593 --

85
4Client Welfare and Informed
Consent
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
4.1 Discuss the primary counselor responsibilities
associated with protecting client welfare.
4.2 Describe the rationale for informed consent in
counseling.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What steps should counselors take
to safeguard the welfare of their
clients?
2. What kinds of information do you
think clients need in order to be
able to give their fully informed
consent to enter into a counseling
relationship?
3. Under what circumstances do you
think it would be acceptable for a
counselor to terminate counseling
services to a client?
Trust is the cornerstone on which the counseling relation-
ship is built (American Counseling Association, 2014, Code
of Ethics, Introduction). If clients are to make progress in
achieving their goals in counseling, they need to feel safe in
the relationship and to trust that the counselor is committed
to safeguarding their welfare and respecting their rights. In
your work as a counselor, it is fundamental that you put client
welfare first and foremost. The counseling profession attaches
such importance to this principle that it is the very first ethical
standard in the Code of Ethics of the American Counseling
Association (ACA). Standard A.1.a. states that the “primary
responsibility of counselors is to respect the dignity and to
promote the welfare of clients” (ACA, 2014). There are very
few exceptions to this principle, and exceptions occur only
in the rare circumstances when the good of others in society
outweighs what might appear to be best for a particular client.
Counselors have what is known in law as fiduciary rela-
tionships with their clients. A fiduciary relationship means that
the counselor promises to act in the best interests of the client,
and the client accepts that trust (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019). The
duties of fiduciaries are so strong that any transaction between a
fiduciary and the recipient of services is presumed to be fraudu-
lent and void if the fiduciary benefits from it. Transactions that
benefit a fiduciary (or counselor) will be upheld in court only
when the counselor can present clear and convincing proof
that the transaction was legitimate (Ludes & Gilbert, 1998).
Because of the law related to fiduciaries, counselors have a sig-
nificant legal burden to protect the best interests of their clients
and to avoid any interactions or transactions with clients that
benefit the counselors themselves at the client’s expense.

-- 108 of 593 --

86 	Section 2 • Issues
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Client
Welfare and Informed Consent
Massive numbers of individuals and families suffered multiple losses (of loved ones, employ-
ment, and their routines of daily living) during the COVID-19 pandemic, while simultane-
ously losing the ability to receive in-person counseling services. This resulted in a dramatic
increase in virtual counseling, which has continued after individuals have largely returned to
their pre-pandemic lives. As counselors have shifted to providing online counseling services,
they have needed to adapt their practices to ensure that they continue to promote and protect
client welfare.
The COVID-19 pandemic presented challenges to protecting client welfare with respect to
interruption of services, termination of client sessions, and abandonment of clients. Virtual counsel-
ing relies on technology, which sometimes does not work properly. Counselors thus need to have
backup plans if their virtual counseling platform is not working when counseling sessions are sched-
uled. Alternatives such as telephone calls, texting, or email communications should be considered
for connecting with clients and rescheduling virtual sessions that are not possible due to the failure
of technology.
When providing counseling virtually, counselors should continue to secure informed consent
to ensure that clients understand what counseling entails before they agree to participate in the pro-
cess. An informed consent discussion can be held over the internet, but a signed document also
needs to be obtained. Electronic signatures are now legal in the United States. In 2000, a federal law
was passed stating that electronic signatures are legal in every state and U.S. territory where federal
laws apply. The legislation that was enacted is known as the U.S. Electronic Signatures in Global
and National Commerce Act (15 U.S. Code Chapter 96), also known as the E-Sign Act. Acceptable
e-sign signatures include a name typed onto a signature block, a scanned or digitized image of a
handwritten signature attached to an electronic record, or a handwritten signature input onto an elec-
tronic signature pad.
CLIENT WELFARE
Protecting client welfare is the foremost ethical obligation of counselors. Counselors have a number
of specific responsibilities related to safeguarding client welfare. These responsibilities begin when
a counseling relationship is entered and extend through termination of the relationship.
Counselors must remain aware of their own needs and motivations when they are working with
clients. As is discussed in Chapter 3, they also must be aware of and able to bracket, or set aside,
their personal values. In addition, counselors must work to safeguard client welfare by preventing
the fostering of dependent relationships, using appropriate counseling techniques, and managing any
interruptions that might occur during the counseling process. They should also terminate counseling
relationships in an appropriate manner and without abandoning clients who need continued services.
Mandated or involuntary clients have certain rights that counselors need to safeguard as well.
Counselor Needs and Motivations
It is vitally important for counselors to be aware of their own needs and motivations in order to
maintain a fiduciary relationship that keeps client welfare foremost. Without this self-awareness,
counselors run the risk of meeting their own needs at the expense of the client’s needs.

-- 109 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	87
4-1 The Case of Lynn
Lynn has been counseling Elaine, a 30-year-old client. During this session, Elaine states that she
wishes she could just walk away from her marriage, but she can’t do it because it would traumatize
her children. Lynn, herself a child of divorce whose father abandoned the family, further explores
Elaine’s fears for the children. At one point Lynn says to her client, “Well, yes, the statistics do
show that a lot of kids lose touch with their fathers after a divorce. It would be really hard for them
if that happened. It could even have repercussions well into their adult years.”
• What do you think motivated Lynn to respond the way she did?
• Do you see any problem with Lynn’s response?
Discussion: It appears that the counselor, Lynn, is interjecting her own feelings about paternal
abandonment into the session. Lynn is focusing on her own feelings rather than trying to help
Elaine clarify her own feelings about the issue. By focusing on the client’s children rather than on
the client herself, Lynn is discounting the client’s feelings and imposing her own values about the
effects of divorce on children onto the client.
This case example illustrates that, if counselors lack self-awareness of their unfinished busi-
ness, areas of vulnerability, and defenses, there is a risk that they will inadvertently be working on
their own issues in the counseling relationship rather than on the client’s issues. As Corey et al. (2024)
have noted, counselors who are unaware of their own issues are in a poor position to recognize the
ways in which their personal lives are influencing their interactions with clients. This is particularly
true when the client’s problems or issues are similar to the unresolved issues of the counselor.
We are not suggesting that counselors do not have their own needs or that it is unethical to
get some of these needs met by choosing counseling as a profession. In fact, most counselors would
probably say that they get a real sense of satisfaction or fulfillment from their work and from know-
ing that they have made a difference in the lives of others. Still, it is important for you to explore
your own answers to these questions:
“What motivates me to choose the counseling profession?”
“What do I get out of being a counselor?”
“What needs of mine am I getting met?”
Knowing your own needs will help you identify potential areas of vulnerability and sources of
therapeutic error.
For example, if you have a strong need to nurture others, you may be tempted to encourage
client dependency. You might also encourage client dependency if you have a strong need to feel
important or even indispensable to your clients. If you have a strong need to be liked and appreci-
ated, you may avoid confronting your clients. If you have strong needs to feel useful or to prove your
competence, you may want to rush in and give answers or advice to your clients. If you can recognize
your potential areas of vulnerability, you will be better able to keep the best interests of your clients
foremost and less likely to allow your needs to intrude into your work with clients. You will be better
able to avoid actions that meet your personal needs at the expense of your clients’ needs.

-- 110 of 593 --

88 	Section 2 • Issues
When counselors project their emotions onto a client and the counselors’ own needs become
entangled in the therapeutic relationship, this phenomenon is commonly referred to as countertransfer-
ence. Countertransference can benefit a counseling relationship if counselors are aware of and can mon-
itor their internal reactions to a client and how those reactions are influencing the counseling process
(Corey et al., 2024), but countertransference becomes problematic when counselors lack self-awareness
and lose their objectivity. What is important to remember is that sound ethical practice requires counsel-
ors to pay attention to their emotional reactions to clients and to seek consultation or supervision when
these emotional reactions are interfering with the work that is occurring in the counseling relationship.
It is also important for you to keep in mind that counselors, by the very nature of the relation-
ship between a help seeker and a help provider, have power over their clients. Because professionals
possess knowledge and skills beyond those of the ordinary citizen, our society extends privileges
to professionals. Individuals who seek services from professionals must trust those professionals to
practice in a manner that is helpful, and not harmful, to them. With respect to the counseling rela-
tionship, clients may not know whether counselors are treating them in a way that benefits them or
are taking advantage of them or their lack of knowledge of how the counseling process is supposed
to proceed. Counselors could use the power they have in professional counseling relationships to
meet their own personal needs rather than the needs of the client. As a member of the counseling
profession, you have an ethical obligation to avoid misusing your power and to keep the needs of
your clients foremost in the therapeutic relationship.
Preventing Dependent Relationships
Counselors must avoid fostering dependent counseling relationships with clients. Clients have
the right to expect that the counseling process will help them learn new skills for living and
develop an increased ability to make decisions without the counselor’s help. We have mentioned
the possibility that some counselors might encourage client dependency on them. This could
happen to you in a number of ways if you are not alert to the potential problem of fostering client
dependency. During your internship, you must complete a certain number of contact hours with
clients, and you might be tempted to keep some clients in counseling longer than necessary in
order to fulfill your requirement. You also might do so in hopes of demonstrating to your super-
visors that you are so helpful to your clients that they keep returning to see you. As was noted
earlier, temptations to foster dependency might arise out of a need to feel needed, a need to
nurture others, or a need to feel that you are important or indispensable to your clients. After you
graduate, if you are in private practice, you might be tempted to unnecessarily prolong counsel-
ing out of a need for income from client fees.
Sometimes it is not the counselor’s needs but rather the client’s needs that work to foster a
dependent relationship. Some clients may attempt to maintain or even increase their dependency on
the counselor. They may request more frequent sessions, bring up a new crisis every time the coun-
selor suggests that they may be nearing the end of their work together, or engage in other strategies
to prevent making progress toward independent functioning. For these clients, remaining dependent
on the counselor is less risky than learning to live autonomously. Counselors must therefore find
ways to balance ongoing support for them while encouraging independence and risk taking.
The dramatic increase in the number of clients who participate in managed care health plans
has had an impact on this issue. Managed care plans limit clients to a certain number of sessions
and require counselors to justify any requests for additional sessions. Thus, it is much more difficult
for counselors to unnecessarily prolong a counseling relationship. Nonetheless, counselors are obli-
gated to work toward helping clients reach a place where they no longer need counseling and should
be motivated by an internalized sense of responsibility to promote client welfare.

-- 111 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	89
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS 	When counselors work to uphold their
ethical obligations to prevent fostering dependency and to promote cli-
ent independence and autonomy, they sometimes misapply the prin-
ciple of autonomy. Counselors need to keep in mind that autonomy is
a highly individualistic concept and that the counseling goal of hav-
ing clients achieve individual independence or autonomy may not be
appropriate for clients whose choices are made in the context of family,
group, or community (Herlihy et al., 2018; Mifsud & Herlihy, 2022).
With the easing of COVID travel restrictions, counselors are again
becoming engaged in trauma work internationally. They need to realize
that Western concepts of autonomy may conflict with the needs of refu-
gees (Bemak & Chung, 2017) or victims of mass trauma or humanitar-
ian crises (Tarvydas et al., 2017). At the same time, counselors must not
lose sight of the facts that there are within-group differences and that
each client is unique. Counselors working globally need to remember
that many cultures in the world are collectivistic rather than individual-
istic in nature. In these contexts, a counseling goal of promoting a cli-
ent’s individual autonomy would be culturally inappropriate and would
likely even be harmful.
Mandated Clients
Special ethical considerations exist when counselors are assigned to work with reluctant clients
(Borsari & Tevyaw, 2005; Kiracofe & Wells, 2007). In some situations, clients may attend coun-
seling sessions because someone else has pushed them in that direction even though the clients
themselves are not convinced that counseling is a good idea for them. In other, more serious circum-
stances, clients may have been ordered to attend counseling or else suffer negative consequences.
Sometimes judges require individuals to attend counseling or go to jail.
The term involuntary client probably is not the best pairing of words. A client who chooses
to enter into counseling rather than accept an alternative or an unwanted consequence is, in
fact, making a choice. Mandated clients do choose counseling, however reluctantly, over other
options (such as jail). The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) supports this reasoning in §A.2.e., which
states that mandated clients may refuse services. This standard also states that counselors are
ethically obligated to explain, to the best of their ability, the potential consequences of such
refusal (§A.2.e.).
The term mandated clients usually refers to clients who are involved in the criminal justice
system and are receiving counseling services as a condition of their release or progression through
the system. These clients usually are required to sign a waiver of their privacy rights when they
begin a counseling relationship. Because they are being required to participate in counseling and
would suffer negative consequences if they refused, the person or entity requiring the counseling
also requires some type of report regarding their participation in the counseling process. Counselors
who work within the criminal justice system must balance this reporting requirement against their
desire for clients to feel safe to do therapeutic work on the multiple traumas they face, as many
offenders have a preexisting trauma history and regularly experience traumatic events while incar-
cerated (Pringer & Wagner, 2020). Thus, it is crucial that counselors work to promote a safe context
by providing structure and guidelines for safety and confidentiality (Sotero et al., 2016) and by
ensuring that the informed consent process includes a thorough explanation of the consequences of
the choices that are available in the circumstances.

-- 112 of 593 --

90 	Section 2 • Issues
The legal issue involved in these situations is to ensure that involuntary clients know that
reports must be made and understand the types of information that will be included in the reports.
The privacy waiver form that involuntary clients sign should contain as much specific information
as possible. Because different individuals and entities require that various types of information be
reported, the form should allow for detailed information to be added. A model agreement form for
involuntary clients that includes a waiver of privacy is included in Appendix B.
An ACA Code of Ethics provision that applies to counseling involuntary or mandated clients
states that counselors nust be accurate, honest, and objective in reporting their professional activi-
ties and judgments to third parties, including courts or others who receive evaluation reports (ACA,
2014, §C.6.b.). Although counselors who work within the criminal justice system cannot avoid
making reports, when possible it is best to view counseling and evaluation as two separate pro-
cesses and for counselors who counsel involuntary clients to refuse to evaluate those same clients.
Reporting on counseling attendance and progress toward reaching counseling goals set by clients
is different from evaluating clients for issues such as fitness for parenting, ability to work after an
injury, a mental condition, or progress toward eligibility for parole.
Sometimes counselors do perform such evaluations, but counselors who evaluate individuals
must be unbiased. If they have counseled a client in the past, they are biased and should not agree
to evaluate that same person. If a counselor is evaluating a client, the counselor must make clear to
the client that the purpose of their meetings is to gather information for an evaluation, not to provide
counseling services. Further, clients must understand that there is no confidentiality in such situa-
tions and that their counselors will report their findings to a third party. See Chapter 7 regarding the
requirements of counselors who serve as evaluators.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) addresses role changes in the professional counseling rela-
tionship. When counselors change from an evaluative role to a therapeutic role, or vice versa, they
must obtain the client’s informed consent for the change and explain the client’s right to refuse ser-
vices related to the change (§A.6.d.). Counselors must be particularly sensitive to the rights of reluc-
tant, involuntary, or mandated clients. It is essential that counselors fully disclose to such clients any
privacy rights that clients are waiving as they enter into such arrangements. For example, if a judge
who orders an individual to engage in counseling requires periodic reports to a court official (such
as a probation officer) on the person’s attendance and progress toward counseling goals, counselors
must obtain written permission from the client for such reports and must ensure that the client has
a full understanding of the types of reports that will be made. Granello and Hanna (2003) have sug-
gested that counselors who provide services to individuals involved with the criminal legal system
must develop a good understanding of the system to serve their clients well.
Counseling Techniques
Another consideration in promoting client welfare is the counselor’s obligation to select appropri-
ate counseling strategies or techniques. In recent years, mental health professionals have worked
to develop guidelines for treatment planning that match client concerns with the strategies that
research has demonstrated to be the most effective in treating those concerns. Hansen (2005, 2006)
has expressed a concern that the movement in the counseling field in which a particular approach
is required to treat a particular presenting problem takes away the essence of counseling, which is
human beings connecting in a creative, meaningful, and therapeutic manner. Despite such cautions,
the ACA Code of Ethics requires counselors to use techniques, procedures, and modalities that are
grounded in theory and/or have an empirical or scientific foundation (ACA, 2014, §C.7.a.).
If you use any techniques that could be considered experimental or unusual, you should do so
very cautiously (Ho, et al., 2012). The client should be informed of any potential risks and benefits

-- 113 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	91
and should consent to your use of such techniques. Before attempting these techniques, you should
be sure that you are adequately trained and have a sound clinical rationale for their use. For example,
as suggested by Crockett et al. (2017), counselors who choose to use techniques such as neurofeed-
back in their practices must understand the procedures to use and be properly prepared to use those
procedures. Although neuroscience is a burgeoning specialty area of practice, concerns remain about
the potential for client exploitation if the informed consent process misleads clients into holding
unrealistic expectations of the techniques (Luke et al., 2020). Before employing an experimental
or unusual counseling technique, think about how you would justify your procedures if a complaint
were filed against you by a licensing board or in a court of law.
As a counselor, your selection of techniques will depend on a number of factors, including
your theoretical orientation and your training. Corey et al. (2024) put it best when they advised that
your strategies should fit your counseling style and be tailored to the specific needs of your client. Of
course, counselors should not use techniques that might cause harm to a client. One example of such
a technique is conversion therapy or reparative therapy, which entails attempting to change a client’s
sexual orientation to align with heterosexual norms. In 1999, the ACA Governing Council adopted a
statement opposing the promotion of reparative therapy. In 2006 the ACA Ethics Committee issued
an interpretation of the ACA Code of Ethics regarding conversion therapy and the ethics of referring
clients for this practice. In the current ACA Code of Ethics (2014), a standard (§C.7.c.) specifies
that counselors should not use techniques, procedures, or modalities when substantial evidence sug-
gests harm from using these techniques, even if clients request those techniques. Researchers have
demonstrated that reparative therapy is detrimental and causes damage to clients (ALGTBIC, 2009;
Conine et al., 2021; Finnerty et al., 2017) and should not be used or condoned.
Counselors have an ethical responsibility to work jointly with clients to devise counseling plans
that offer a reasonable promise of success (ACA, 2014, §A.1.c.). As we have mentioned, managed
care organizations typically limit the number of sessions for which a client will be reimbursed and
require counselors to justify any requests for additional sessions. Counselors will be more successful
in making such requests when they can present empirical support for their clinical judgments.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS 	Counselors who espouse traditional
counseling theories and their associated techniques must be aware that
these approaches have limited applicability in working with culturally
diverse clients (Jencius & West, 2003).
Psychodynamically oriented counselors (Neo-Freudians) who
focus on their clients’ early childhood relationships with their par-
ents and on intrapsychic conflicts may overlook a client’s historic
experiences with discrimination and oppression. A psychodynamic
therapist’s strategy of remaining relatively anonymous to serve as a
projection screen for the client’s transferences could be a poor fit
for clients from cultures that value cooperative relationships or for
clients who expect the helper to take an active role.
Cognitive behavioral therapists are more active in implement-
ing strategies such as direct teaching of skills and assigning homework.
However, some techniques, such as identifying cognitive distortions or
irrational self-talk, fail to consider the language-bound nature of cogni-
tions. Cognitive behavioral approaches, like psychodynamic approaches, may not incorporate variables
such as race, ethnicity, class, gender, or culture that may be salient to the client’s core identity. From the
client’s perspective, the therapeutic alliance has been found to be positively related to the counselor’s mul-
ticultural orientation and multiculturally competent behavior (Oh et al., 2022).

-- 114 of 593 --

92 	Section 2 • Issues
Humanistic counselors, particularly those with a Rogerian orientation, offer clients accep-
tance, unconditional positive regard, and empathy, all of which may help to transcend cultural dif-
ferences and establish a therapeutic alliance. However, these approaches may fail to consider that
barriers to self-actualization may exist in the client’s environment rather than within the self. In
addition, the nondirective stance may not meet the needs of clients who might benefit from advo-
cacy and assistance in navigating an oppressive culture.
Today’s counselors must have repertoires of helping strategies that extend beyond those
offered by traditional counseling theories (nearly all of which were created by and reflect the world-
views of Euro-American White males). It is particularly important for counselors, as they step into
the international arena, to have training in a wide variety of counseling techniques, including those
that originated in non-Western cultures, and to be competent in working in nontraditional roles.
Interruptions and Termination
In an ideal world, once a counselor has accepted a client and begins providing services to that client,
those services will continue on a regular basis until the client is able to function effectively without the
ongoing assistance of the counselor. In reality, however, counselors must sometimes interrupt counsel-
ing services for a period of time, and counselors occasionally terminate counseling relationships before
clients are prepared to discontinue counseling services. Sometimes, clients will terminate counseling
prematurely, for various reasons. From both an ethical and a legal perspective, counselors must be
careful to protect the best interests of clients when services have to be interrupted or are prematurely
terminated.
INTERRUPTIONS IN SERVICES 	There is truth in the wry observation of Pope and Vasquez (2016)
that both counselors and clients tend to find comfort in the fantasy that the counselor is invulner-
able. The reality is, however, that sometimes counselors fall seriously ill, have accidents, or are
called away by family emergencies. Counselors must therefore plan ahead for emergency absences
by developing procedures to safeguard their clients’ welfare. Anticipating that unexpected events
might occur, counselors should have plans in place regarding who will notify the clients, who has
access to client records, and how the transfer of clients to another counselor will be handled.
Counselors are also no different from other workers in that they take vacations, go out of town
to attend conferences, and do other things that cause interruptions in the weekly rhythm of the thera-
peutic relationship. Clients sometimes have strong and even puzzling reactions to their counselor’s
absence, so it is important that counselors give clients adequate notice and ensure that clients know
whom to contact in a crisis or emergency. The ACA Code of Ethics requires counselors to make
appropriate arrangements for the continuation of treatment during interruptions caused by vacations
or illnesses and, when necessary, following termination (ACA, 2014, §A.12).
Counselors who counsel clients at risk for harm to self or others are well advised to arrange
for those clients to also be under the care of other professionals who have accepted responsibility
for the well-being of the clients. Counselors should work to ensure that all clients are able to tolerate
counselor absences for reasonable periods of time.
TERMINATION 	Termination is an important stage in the therapeutic relationship that sometimes
is given inadequate consideration. Termination is an intentional process that occurs over time when
a client has achieved most of the treatment goals, and it provides opportunities for consolidating,
making plans for maintaining, and generalizing client gains made in counseling. Effective termina-
tions model how healthy relationships should end and provide clients with opportunities to work
through their feelings about ending their therapeutic journeys.

-- 115 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	93
Proper termination of the counseling relationship conveys caring and helps to prevent harm, which
are important ethical considerations (Corey et al., 2024; Vasquez et al., 2008). Clients should be able
to expect that their counseling sessions will end when they have received what they were seeking from
counseling or when they have realized the maximum benefit from the counseling services. Counselors
should always anticipate termination as a phase or stage in the counseling relationship, and they should
provide pre-termination counseling or recommend other service providers when necessary (ACA, 2014,
§A.11.c.). In addition, counselors should raise and discuss the issue of termination with the client well in
advance of the final session. Doing so allows ample time to plan for the client’s transition to functioning
without the counselor and to dealing with the natural and appropriate issues of separation and loss. It is
best if the counselor and client mutually agree on the timing of the termination. However, depending on
the circumstances, the ultimate decision might be made independently by either the counselor or the client.
PREMATURE TERMINATION 	Not all counseling relationships end smoothly and by mutual agree-
ment. In reality, circumstances can arise that allow the counselor to terminate the counseling relationship
even against a client’s wishes. According to the ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §A.11.c.), it is ethi-
cally permissible for counselors to terminate counseling relationships in the following circumstances:
• It is apparent that the client no longer needs assistance, is not likely to benefit, or is being
harmed by continued counseling.
• Clients do not pay the fees as agreed upon.
• The counselor is in jeopardy of being harmed by the client or someone with whom the client
has a relationship.
When counselors are unable to be of continued assistance to clients or decide to end the relation-
ship over the client’s objection, counselors must give adequate notice and give the client time to secure
another mental health care provider (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019). In addition, counselors should sug-
gest an appropriate referral and do all they can to facilitate a smooth transition to the new mental health
professional. If the client is unable to continue to pay the counselor’s fee, an appropriate referral can be
made to free services or to an agency that uses a sliding fee scale, if such alternatives are available. If
a client refuses to accept the suggested referral, the counselor is not obligated to provide free services.
Many clients are able to afford counseling services only because they have managed health
care plans that will reimburse them for a significant portion of the cost. Under managed care plans,
people are given only the services that the managed care company deems to be necessary and appro-
priate through a process known as utilization review (see Chapter 13 for a detailed discussion of
health care plans). Counselors face difficult ethical challenges when further treatment is denied by
utilization review panels. Counselors must maintain clinical responsibility for the clients’ welfare,
and when clients need further counseling, counselors cannot allow financially motivated decisions
to supersede their clinical judgment. Counselors should thus appeal, or have their clients appeal,
utilization review decisions when they believe clients are in need of continued care.
Sometimes it is the client who terminates the counseling relationship before an agreed-upon
termination. Swift et al. (2012) have noted that approximately 20% of clients drop out of counsel-
ing prematurely. Even when the counselor believes that a client is making progress and that treat-
ment goals are being met, clients may call and cancel with or without giving an explanation, fail to
keep appointments, or fail to reschedule. The counselor’s ethical obligation in these situations is to
attempt to communicate a willingness to continue to meet with the client, either to continue counsel-
ing or to summarize and end treatment, or to refer the client to another mental health professional.
Wheeler and Bertram (2019) have noted that legal difficulties can occur because of these no-closure
terminations, and they advise counselors to document carefully and to send a letter to the client
indicating that the client’s apparent decision to terminate has been accepted.

-- 116 of 593 --

94 	Section 2 • Issues
Both client and counselor characteristics can contribute to the risk of terminating counseling
services prematurely. Anderson et al. (2019) found that client characteristics of being female and
identifying as a member of a sexual minority were associated with an increased risk of prema-
ture termination and that clients were more likely to terminate services when they perceived their
counselor as lacking multicultural competence. There is also some evidence to suggest that when
counselors are ethnically or linguistically different from their clients, clients are more likely to ter-
minate prematurely (Maramba & Nagayama Hall, 2002). These findings underscore the importance
of counselor sensitivity to the experiences of disempowered members of society and of developing
and maintaining multicultural competence, as discussed in Chapter 3.
Preventing Abandonment
Abandonment can be considered a form of inappropriate termination and can occur when the cli-
ent’s counseling needs are not being adequately addressed by the counselor, either when treatment
ends or during the course of treatment due to counselor unavailability. Ethical guidelines in the ACA
Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §A.12) and legal decisions related to physicians (Allison v. Patel, 1993;
Manno v. McIntosh,1994) prohibit counselors from abandoning their clients. Once a counseling
relationship has been established, the counselor cannot arbitrarily end it if the client will be put at
risk as a result. Terminating during a client crisis or emergency could put the client at risk and could
result in ethical and legal difficulties for the counselor (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019).
As noted, advance planning can help avoid the risk that clients will feel abandoned by their
counselors. Counselors should take care to give clients ample advance notice when planned inter-
ruptions are anticipated, such as the counselor’s taking maternity or paternity leave, undergoing a
surgical procedure, or going on vacation.
The key to ending a professional relationship with a client properly, and thus not being exposed
to charges of abandonment, is to give the client adequate notice that you are ending the professional
relationship and ample opportunity to locate a new counselor if needed. It might be important, too,
to discuss with the client how to locate agencies and individuals who offer counseling services.
Giving notice of termination and time for the client to find a new counselor may not, however, lead
to the client taking the initiative to find a new counselor. If a client refuses to see another counselor
after you have given notice that you are withdrawing your services, it will be essential for you to
document carefully and fully the notice you gave, your assistance with the referral process, and the
time you gave the client to locate a new professional.
Hilliard (1998), an attorney who represents mental health professionals who are sued by their
clients, has observed the events that lead individuals to sue their mental health providers. As a prac-
tical consideration, Hilliard has recommended that mental health care providers never terminate a
professional relationship over a client’s objection when the client is angry or when the client is in a
serious crisis situation. Taking the time to address a client’s distress is very important to prevent unre-
solved angry feelings that could lead to a lawsuit. Also, a judge or jury probably would not support
a mental health professional’s decision to end a relationship in the midst of a crisis (Allison v. Patel,
1993; Manno v. McIntosh, 1994). Ending a counseling relationship because insurance benefits have
run out, even as the client is at risk for suicide, is very risky (Packman & Harris, 1998) for both the
client and the counselor.
Of course, counselors may always refer a client to a psychiatrist or a health care facility that
evaluates individuals for suicide risk or danger to themselves or others. This referral does not always
lead to a transfer of that client to another professional or termination. In many circumstances, coun-
selors continue to provide services to a referred client in collaboration with another mental health
professional. When such a referral is made, however, it is very important that the counselor inform

-- 117 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	95
all parties whether the referral is a transfer of the client to another professional or the counselor will
be providing services in conjunction with the other professional.
To protect mental health professionals from being held accountable for abandonment of their
clients, Hilliard (1998) and Macbeth et al. (1994) developed the following guidelines for mental health
professionals to use when they are terminating their relationships with clients in adverse circumstances:
• Honestly discuss with the client your intention to terminate and the specific reason for your
decision.
• Give the client an opportunity to make changes that would be necessary to continue the
relationship.
• Give written notice to the client that the relationship will be terminated.
• Offer the client one to three termination sessions.
• Give your client up to three good referrals.
• Give your client places to contact in the event of emergencies.
• Place in the client’s file a summary of your interactions with the client that are related to the
termination issue. Do not transfer that document to another individual or entity without an
express written request from the client.
• Give the client plenty of time to find another mental health professional. If more time is
requested, allow it.
• Transfer records to the new mental health professional promptly.
4-2 The Case of Benita
Although Benita has been working with her client Julianna for 3 months, they have actually met
for only 8 of their 12 scheduled weekly sessions. Twice, Julianna failed to appear for her appoint-
ment and later said that she forgot. On two other occasions, Julianna called to cancel a day or
two in advance and left a message with no explanation. During the counseling sessions, Julianna
has been apologetic about the missed appointments and has been open about her struggles
with trying to be more assertive in her personal and work relationships; however, she has not
completed any of the assertiveness-training exercises that Benita has suggested as homework.
Today, Julianna leaves a message that she doesn’t think counseling is doing her any good and
that she doesn’t intend to continue the process.
Benita has to admit to herself that she feels relieved. She sometimes had felt annoyed with
Julianna for cancelling or not showing up for sessions and for failing to even try the homework
assignments. Also, Julianna’s lack of progress had led Benita to question her own effectiveness
as a counselor. Benita decides to send Julianna a brief letter acknowledging the termination of
their counseling relationship and offering to provide her with a list of referrals if she later decides
to resume counseling.
• What do you think about the way Benita has decided to respond to Julianna’s message?
• If you were to advise Benita to self-reflect on her work with Julianna, what might you want
her to consider?
Discussion: Benita’s intended letter to Julianna may meet the rudimentary intent of the ethical
requirements, but it falls short of a response that would reflect best practice. We would advise Benita
to attempt to contact Julianna to schedule a termination session in which Benita should encour-
age Julianna to give her honest feedback about the counseling process as she has experienced it.

-- 118 of 593 --

96 	Section 2 • Issues
Benita seems to be blaming herself for Julianna’s lack of progress and to be reacting out of her relief
that she will no longer need to question her counseling efficacy. If Benita can arrange to meet with
Julianna again, even if the client remains steadfast in her decision to terminate their sessions, Benita
can convey the message that perhaps Julianna isn’t quite ready to take action toward change but
that she is welcome to return at a later time or contact Benita for a referral. Together, they can also
review whether other factors may have contributed to the lack of success: Perhaps the goal should
have been revisited, or maybe Julianna didn’t feel safe in the relationship. If Julianna isn’t willing to
meet again, we would advise Benita to look at some sample letters to see how she might convey in
her letter her acceptance of both the decision and the client.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS 	As we have noted, clients sometimes drop out of counseling with-
out discussing with the counselor their intentions for doing so. This can happen for many reasons—
sometimes clients just need to take a break from the intense personal explorations involved in coun-
seling, or they may drop out or discontinue the counseling relationship because they do not believe
they are benefiting from counseling. Client termination of the relationship will occur in any coun-
selor’s practice, and it may be helpful to remember that no counselor is skilled enough to be able to
assist every client. Thus, it is important that you self-monitor to discern whether the clients who are
discontinuing counseling with you are those who are culturally different from you. If you see such a
pattern, this is a signal that you must work to increase your cross-cultural counseling skills.
INFORMED CONSENT
Informed consent is such a vital and complex component of protecting client welfare that it is discussed
as a distinct factor in this chapter. Securing the client’s informed consent is both a legal and an ethical
obligation. From an ethical perspective, the rationale for informed consent is simple: Clients have the
right to know what they are undertaking when they come for counseling. Most clients are not experts
in counseling, so they must trust their counselors to provide them with the information about counsel-
ing that they need to make a good decision (Handelsman, 2001). Providing clients with the opportunity
to make an informed decision about entering into a counseling relationship demonstrates respect for a
client’s autonomy and self-determination and is integral to the formation of an effective therapeutic alli-
ance. By communicating the client’s role in making treatment decisions, informed consent can increase
the client’s sense of ownership over the process, establish that the counselor and the client are partners
working toward common goals, and reduce the client’s anxiety by demystifying the counseling process
(Fisher & Oransky, 2008; Margolin et al., 2005). The more that clients understand how counseling
works, the more they are likely to benefit from the counseling process (Corey et al., 2024).
The ACA Code of Ethics spells out in considerable detail the elements that need to be included
in securing informed consent (ACA, 2014, §A.2.b.). At a minimum, the client must be informed about:
• The purposes, goals, techniques, procedures, limitations, potential risks, and benefits of coun-
seling services
• The counselor’s qualifications, including relevant degrees held, licenses and certifications
obtained, areas of counseling specialization, counseling experience, and approach to counseling
• Arrangements for continuation of services if the counselor dies or becomes incapacitated
• The role of technology
• The implications of diagnosis and the intended use of tests and reports

-- 119 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	97
• Fees and billing information, including procedures for nonpayment of fees
• Confidentiality and its limitations
• Clients’ rights to obtain information about their records and to participate in ongoing counseling
plans
• Clients’ rights to refuse any recommended services or modality change and to be advised of
the consequences of refusal
In addition to the elements addressed by the Code, we recommend that counselors begin the
informed consent process with new clients or prospective clients by offering a brief statement of the
counselor’s philosophy (how the counselor sees the counseling process taking place). A counselor can
offer a simple sentence that begins with “I see counseling as . . . ” to set the tone for a discussion that
clarifies shared expectations of the process. For example, clients will be better able to make a choice
about entering counseling if they are aware that they will be asked to do homework between sessions,
complete assessments, or try out new behaviors outside of the sessions (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019).
Clients also need to be informed about fees. They need to understand the implications of insurance
reimbursement, including the fact that any assigned diagnosis will become part of their permanent
health record. The No Surprises Act, passed in 2022, requires all providers of medical care, including
counselors, to inform clients about fee arrangements, anticipated length of treatment, and potential
additional fees. Clients are entitled to know about the codes of ethics to which the counselor sub-
scribes and how to obtain a copy of those codes (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019).
The National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC) has joined with Chi Sigma Iota to pro-
vide a useful booklet that describes clients’ rights and responsibilities (www.nbcc.org/ethics). This
booklet incorporates the elements specified in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), as well as some
additional client rights, and presents them in language that is clear and suitable for most clients to
understand. The booklet also describes the client’s responsibilities in the counseling relationship.
Presenting the information in this way helps to establish that counseling is a shared endeavor in
which both parties have rights and responsibilities. You may be thinking that a lot of information
must be included in the informed consent process, and, indeed, this is true. For clients to be able
to give truly informed consent, they must have considerable information before deciding whether
to enter a counseling relationship. You may be concerned that inundating prospective clients with
information will overwhelm them and give the impression that the counseling relationship is noth-
ing more than a complex, contractual business arrangement. In fact, it is difficult for counselors to
achieve the delicate balance between giving clients too little information and giving them so much
information that they feel overwhelmed or intimidated (Barnett et al., 2007).
Origins of Informed Consent
As a legal concept, the process of informing recipients of professional services and obtaining their con-
sent to receive such services is relatively new. The requirement that health professionals obtain informed
consent from their clients before rendering services began in medicine (Appelbaum et.al., 1987).
Fifty years ago, it probably rarely occurred to physicians that they should explain to patients
what the physician knew about the patient’s medical conditions, tell patients about various treat-
ment options, or allow patients to decide which option to choose. Perhaps consumers of medical
services were once less educated or less aware of their right to receive such information. It has been
only in the last half of the twentieth century that courts have created the requirement that patients
must be educated or informed regarding their medical treatment options and consequences before
they are able to give valid consent to treatment that is legally binding. The first case in the United
States that took this position was Salgo v. Leland Stanford Jr. Univ. Bd. of Trustees (1957).

-- 120 of 593 --

98 	Section 2 • Issues
The Salgo case provided the essential information that physicians must give to patients. According
to Appelbaum et al. (1987), these elements are “disclosure of the nature of the ailment, the nature of the
proposed treatment, the probability of success, and possible alternative treatments” (p. 41). Canterbury
v. Spence (1972), a later case, took a different position on informed consent: It found that physicians
were required to disclose information about a proposed treatment that a reasonable person, such as the
patient receiving treatment, would find necessary to decide to either accept or refuse treatment.
After considering the case law on informed consent, Berner (1998) has argued that there are two
elements to the informed consent legal standard: the professional element and materiality. The profes-
sional element is defined as information that a reasonable physician would provide to another patient in
similar circumstances. Materiality, on the other hand, is defined as the amount of information that the
average patient would consider adequate in deciding whether to accept the treatment. If Berner is correct,
then courts will most likely require that physicians provide basic information to all patients and require
that physicians ensure that the particular patient with whom they are dealing understands the information.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which went into effect
April 15, 2003, has had a powerful impact on informed consent practices in medicine and mental
health. This federal law and its regulations are explored in detail in Chapter 6. Essentially, HIPAA
requires all health care providers who transmit records electronically (which most likely includes all
providers) to comply with procedures to ensure patient privacy. The requirements include explain-
ing to health care recipients in detail their rights related to privacy and records (which essentially is
the informed consent process discussed earlier). This federal law has thus transformed the concept
of informed consent, which once was rather vague, into a concrete framework that includes dis-
closure of steps taken to ensure client privacy, and it also requires clients to sign a document stat-
ing that they have been informed of their rights. Figure 4-1 includes a list of essential elements of
informed consent documents to ensure that counselors and agencies meet the HIPAA requirements.
At present, there have been no appellate legal cases involving the responsibility of mental
health professionals to obtain informed consent from their clients. But like other legal areas in
FIGURE 4-1 HIPAA requirements for informed consent disclosure statements
To comply with HIPAA, here are some areas you must include on the form that your clients sign stating
that they have been informed about your proposed treatment and agreeing to the treatment and the
arrangement with you:
✓ 	State that your client’s personal information may be used and disclosed to complete treatment. Also
state that information may be provided to health care companies related to payment for your services.
✓ 	Develop a complete written description of the procedures you will follow in your office regarding the
keeping of or disclosing personal information of clients.
✓ 	Tell your client that you have a more complete description of the way in which you will keep or dis-
close their personal information and that this complete description is available for them to see. State
that the client has a right to review the complete description before signing this consent form. Explain
that your practices may change in the future and that if the client wants to see these revisions, the
client must make that request in writing, after which you will make the revisions available.
✓ 	Tell your client that they may request that you restrict how their personal information is used or
disclosed. Explain that you will consider any such requests and will notify them whether you have
agreed to their request.
✓ 	Explain that the client has the right to revoke their consent in writing, except to the extent that actions
have already been taken by you based on prior consent.
✓ 	Get the client’s signature, and have them indicate the date on the form.
✓ 	Keep the form for at least 6 years.

-- 121 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	99
mental health, most of the precedents and rules are created first with physicians and later become
verified for mental health professionals through cases involving psychologists, counselors, and
social workers. Nonetheless, it is probably safe to conclude that counselors do have a legal obliga-
tion to obtain informed consent from their clients before they begin treatment with them. Further,
the informed consent should include information that would be given to the client by other profes-
sionals and should be delivered in a way that the client understands. HIPAA also requires that the
informed consent of clients be verified with their signatures.
Written Disclosure Statements
In mental health, written contracts for informed consent are commonly referred to as disclosure
statements. These statements disclose to clients the nature of the counseling relationship into which
they are entering. Disclosure statements are also legal contracts that are signed by both the client and
the counselor. Many agencies and other settings in which counselors are employed have standard dis-
closure statements that must be used. For counselors who are self-employed or who must create their
own statements, Appendix B includes model disclosure statements for counselors who are providing
counseling services to clients in a private practice and for employed counselors who are providing
counseling services to clients in an agency or mental health center, respectively. The model counseling
disclosure statements for private practice and for agencies or mental health centers are similar in many
ways. However, fee issues and some other aspects of the disclosure statements are quite different.
Additional disclosure statements found in Appendix B are for counselors who evaluate individuals,
who counsel mandated or involuntary clients, and who counsel in schools.
Beyond the informed consent areas required by the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) and areas
suggested in the literature, some legal concerns need to be addressed in disclosure statements. The
following informed consent issues are particularly sensitive and could lead to legal problems if not
handled properly. Examples of problems that could arise are included. A client might have the basis
for a lawsuit against a counselor if the client believes, for some reason, that the counselor had done
any of the following:
1. Failed to include required HIPAA elements (see Chapter 6). 	Example: A client was not
notified when they began counseling that they had the right to review their counseling records.
The client complained to the federal government, and the counselor subsequently was asked
to verify that they had informed the client of these rights.
2. Guaranteed an outcome as a result of counseling. 	Example: A wife agreed to enter marriage
counseling with her husband. She believed that, by agreeing to engage in counseling, she was
guaranteed that her marriage would not end. She says the counselor told her that counseling was
“the only thing that would save her marriage.” She felt betrayed by the counselor when, after five
sessions, her husband moved out of their home and filed for divorce. She sues the counselor for
breach of contract, conspiracy, and alienation of affection.
3. Guaranteed privacy with no exceptions. 	Example: A new client expresses concern to their coun-
selor that others might find out what they tell the counselor in their sessions. To reduce the client’s
anxiety, the counselor explains the ethical and legal responsibilities that exist to protect the client’s
privacy. The client subsequently believes that the counselor stated that they would never, under
any circumstances, reveal to anyone else information shared in their counseling sessions. Later the
counselor informs the client’s spouse, over the client’s objection, that the client has expressed sui-
cidal ideas and that the counselor believes that the client should be evaluated to determine whether
they are at risk. The client sues the counselor for breach of contract, malpractice, and intentional
infliction of emotional distress.

-- 122 of 593 --

100 	Section 2 • Issues
4. Agreed to fee arrangements different from what was intended. 	Example: A counselor begins
a counseling relationship with a client, charging the client the counselor’s standard rate of
$75 per hour. After 3 months of sessions once a week, the counselor tells the client that the fees
will be increased in 1 month to $90 per hour. The client objects, saying that they believe the new
hourly rate is too high. The counselor replies that they are not willing to provide further counseling
services to the client unless the client agrees to pay the new rate. The client sues the counselor for
breach of contract and abandonment.
5. Touched without implied or actual permission. 	Example: During a group counseling expe-
rience, a counselor asks group members, who are blindfolded, to allow themselves to fall
backward into the arms of another group member to demonstrate the difficulty of trusting
another person. A female group member reluctantly participates and is caught by a male group
member. The female group member is very upset after the exercise and leaves the session vis-
ibly shaken. The female client sues the counselor for breach of contract, breach of fiduciary
duty, assault, battery, and sexual assault.
6. Misrepresented credentials. 	Example: A client begins counseling sessions with a master’s-level
licensed counselor. The client tells their family members and friends that they are seeing a psy-
chologist for therapy. The client makes out their checks to “Dr.,” notes on the checks that they are
paying for “psychological services,” and gives the checks each week to the office receptionist, who
deposits them. At the ninth session, the client calls the counselor “Doctor,” and the counselor cor-
rects the client. The client says, “You are a psychologist, aren’t you?” The client is very upset when
they realize that the counselor is a master’s-level licensed counselor. The client sues the counselor
for breach of contract and fraudulent misrepresentation.
7. Failed to communicate the nature of counseling. 	Example: A client has taken a new job in
which they are required periodically to give presentations to small groups of potential clients. The
client is very anxious about speaking before groups and has sought counseling to overcome the
associated anxiety. The counselor believes that the client’s anxiety is the result of low self-esteem
and focuses on positive reinforcement of the client’s positive attributes. After five sessions, the
client complains that they are still as anxious as they were when they began counseling. The client
tells the counselor that they had expected to be taught how to give presentations without being
anxious and does not understand why the counselor has not provided books to read, given advice
on how to be less anxious, or helped them practice making presentations during sessions. The client
sues the counselor for breach of contract and malpractice.
8. Neglected to warn client about possible stigma. 	Example: After the first session with a new
client, the counselor completes an insurance form at the client’s request. The counselor indicates
on the form that the client has had a single episode of depression and assigns the appropriate
DSM diagnosis. The counselor counsels the client for 10 sessions, terminating the sessions after
the client moves to a new city hundreds of miles away. Two years later the client contacts the
counselor and complains that they have been denied a security clearance for a job they have
applied for because the counselor diagnosed them, without their knowledge or consent, with a
mental disorder. The client sues the counselor for breach of contract, malpractice, and defamation.
These eight hypothetical situations illustrate the importance of ensuring that counselors and
their clients have the same understanding regarding their relationship before counseling begins. All
of these problems could have been prevented if the counselors had fully informed the clients regard-
ing the counseling relationship. Since HIPAA has been implemented, all counselors must give their
clients written informed consent documents to sign. To be effective, however, these documents must
include essential information beyond the HIPAA requirements.

-- 123 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	101
4-3 The Case of Ibrahim
Ibrahim, a new licensed professional counselor (LPC), works in a very efficient community men-
tal health agency that utilizes the latest technology. Before he begins his first counseling ses-
sion with each client, Ibrahim types in the client’s name and prints out a personalized disclosure
statement that includes all of the HIPAA, ethical, and legal requirements for such documents.
Ibrahim is counseling Maureen, a young mother, who discloses that her husband, Jake, gets
angry with their infant daughter when she cries and shakes the child to stop her crying. Ibrahim
informs Maureen that he must report Jake’s actions to the authorities as possible child abuse.
Ibrahim, being sensitive to Maureen’s concerns, explains in detail what may happen as a result
of the report and assures her that he will continue counseling her. Maureen complains that
she never would have told Ibrahim about Jake’s actions if she had known that Ibrahim would
make a report to authorities. Ibrahim responds that Maureen signed the informed consent form
when they began their counseling relationship and that the form clearly states that counselors
are legally obligated to report incidents of suspected child abuse. Maureen responds that she
didn’t read the document but just signed it along with all those other papers for insurance.
Maureen says she will not continue her counseling relationship with Ibrahim because she no
longer trusts him.
• What could Ibrahim have done at the outset of his counseling relationship with Maureen
that might have prevented this unfortunate situation? What would have constituted best
practice in this situation?
• How can counselors balance the need to inform new clients of the limits of confidentiality
in the relationship and to establish rapport at the same time?
Discussion: Ibrahim might have considered the following actions to prevent this unfortunate
situation:
• Ibrahim might have spent some time with Maureen in their first session pointing out some
of the major exceptions to confidentiality. One such major exception is a counselor’s legal
duty to report suspected child abuse.
• Ibrahim might have asked the intake person in his agency (if such help had been available)
to go over some of the major details in the documents with Maureen before he began his
first session with her.
To discuss confidentiality limits and establish rapport, counselors should consider taking the fol-
lowing actions:
• Focus on establishing rapport in the first session, and, at the end of the session, go over
important details regarding the counseling relationship.
• Highlight in bold type or large type the most important parts of the many papers that clients
sign in order to draw clients’ attention to those parts.
• Create a written brochure that explains the counseling relationship, including confidential-
ity limits, and send the brochure to prospective clients for them to read before their first
appointment.

-- 124 of 593 --

102 	Section 2 • Issues
In the process of having clients sign counseling disclosure statements, counselors should attempt
to ensure that clients understand what is in the documents being signed. If questions arise later about
what counselors may have said regarding the counseling sessions, a signed written document estab-
lishes the intents of the parties much more clearly than does a statement of what the counselor or the
client says they intended. In addition, counseling disclosure statements can be used to correct misun-
derstandings on the part of clients before counseling begins.
Written disclosure statements allow counselors to provide detailed information. Oral
exchanges between counselors and potential clients can then focus on areas that the counselor
wishes to emphasize or that cause particular concern for clients.
As noted, every counselor should have a professional disclosure statement that can be given to
clients. A complete and signed disclosure statement will fulfill a counselor’s legal obligation to obtain
informed consent from a client. Keep in mind, though, that disclosure statements are necessary but
not sufficient strategies for securing genuine informed consent. They cannot serve as a substitute
for a dialogue with the client. Counselors cannot rely on standard forms, no matter how well they
are written, to serve as the sole means of securing informed consent. Prospective clients are likely
to have many questions about informed consent, and some of these questions are best addressed in
face-to-face conversations. Such a dialogue gives clients an opportunity to clarify any information
that seems confusing to them and gives counselors the opportunity to gauge the extent to which the
clients comprehend the information. At the outset of the relationship, informed consent discussions
present a mutual opportunity for the client and the counselor to ensure that they understand their
prospective shared journey.
Informed consent procedures must be sensitive to the client’s ability to understand. The ACA
Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) affirms the obligation of counselors to communicate information in
ways that are both developmentally and culturally appropriate (§A.2.c.). To ensure client comprehen-
sion, it may be necessary in some cases to arrange for a qualified interpreter or translator. Counselors
are cautioned, though, that having a translator present may not be sufficient to ensure the client’s
informed consent if the translator lacks understanding of the counselor’s role and the purpose of
the informed consent information. Paone and Malott (2008) have advised counselors to have a pre-
session briefing with a translator to review informed consent concepts and how these concepts should
be communicated to the client.
Some clients may be presumed to lack the capacity to give informed consent. Such clients
might include minors or adults who are developmentally disabled or who suffer from cognitive
impairments or a severe thought disorder. In these cases, counselors must seek the consent of
legal guardians. Counselors should also seek clients’ assent to services and include clients in the
decision-making process to the extent possible (ACA, 2014, §A.2.d.). Bennett et al. (2006) have
advised counselors to view informed consent capacity as being on a continuum rather than as an
all-or-none ability. The informed consent process should be designed to fit each client’s cognitive
strengths, vulnerabilities, and decision-making capabilities (Fisher et al., 2006).
Managed care arrangements present some specific difficulties in acquiring informed consent.
Clients often do not understand how their health plans affect the duration of their treatment, the
implications of a diagnosis (Kress et al., 2013), or the amount or nature of the information their
insurance providers require counselors to provide. Clients who participate in managed care health
insurance plans need to know that the insurer may request their diagnosis, results of any tests uti-
lized, treatment plans, and other clinical information (Corey et al., 2024). Because it would be
impossible for counselors to know the details of each of the health care plans of their clients, it is
preferable for counselors to stress to clients that they should themselves investigate the terms and
limits of their coverage rather than have their counselors undertake that entire burden. Once the

-- 125 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	103
provisions of the plan are known, counselors should discuss with clients the limitations of their
coverage; for example, perhaps they will need to agree on treatment goals that are more limited than
they would be if cost were no object (Vasquez et al., 2008). See Chapter 13 for further discussions
regarding managed care.
From an ethical perspective, ensuring informed consent is not a one-time event. Rather, it is
an ongoing process that begins with the initial contact between client and counselor and continues
throughout the counseling relationship. It is not always possible for counselors to provide complete
informed consent information during the first session. For example, insurance policies often dic-
tate the number of sessions that will be reimbursed, and counselors may not be able to accurately
inform clients about the duration of reimbursed counseling until they receive the necessary informa-
tion from the client’s managed care company. Specific goals of counseling and the techniques that
may be used to accomplish those goals cannot always be clearly formed during the initial meeting.
Some elements of informed consent are best left until a trusting therapeutic relationship has been
established; for instance, a client who suffers from a phobia might become anxious when told about
exposure therapy, a technique that has proven effective for treating phobias but includes elements
(such as getting on an elevator) that might seem frightening at first (Fisher & Oransky, 2008). The
ACA Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) describes informed consent as an ongoing part of the counsel-
ing process and advises counselors to document discussions of informed consent throughout the
counseling relationship (§A.2.a.). As counseling progresses, the goals, issues, risks, and benefits
often change, and clients need to have updated information so that they can continue to make sound
decisions regarding their treatment (Handelsman, 2001).
It is impossible to predict which clients will need what information and when they will
need it, so it is best to be as thorough as possible in a written disclosure statement. Later, in a
face-to-face discussion, issues that arise frequently in one’s practice can be emphasized, and rare
events can be given less attention. For example, Weinrach (1989) has
suggested that the two-most-common problems for private practitio-
ners concern (a) fees and billing and (b) late cancellations or no-
shows. Thus, it behooves counselors in private practice to be clear
with their clients about methods of payment and policies regarding
missed appointments.
Research supports the wisdom of securing informed consent.
Studies have suggested that clients want information about their pro-
spective counselors (Braaten et al., 1993; Hendrick, 1988); that they
perceive counselors who provide informed consent information as
being more expert and trustworthy (Sullivan et al., 1993); and that
clients who have received appropriate information are more likely to
follow their treatment plans, to recover more quickly, to be less anx-
ious, and to be more alert to possible negative consequences (Handler,
1990). In addition, some legal problems can be prevented by the use
of disclosure statements. If allegations do arise that a counselor did not
fully explain the counseling relationship to a client, a disclosure state-
ment signed by the client often can go a long way toward vindicating
an accused counselor who has done no wrong.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS 	It is important for us as counsel-
ors to question whether the individualism inherent in our concept of
informed consent is truly respectful of people of all cultures. We need

-- 126 of 593 --

104 	Section 2 • Issues
4-4 The Case of Henry
Joseph, a Navajo Indian who espouses the traditions of his culture, is Henry’s new client. During
the initial interview, Henry wants to secure Joseph’s informed consent, which would include
Henry giving Joseph information about the implications of diagnosis and the potential risks asso-
ciated with counseling. Henry says, “Sometimes clients in counseling seem to feel worse before
they feel better.” He adds that based on the symptoms Joseph has described, Joseph seems to
be experiencing mild depression.
• What would Henry need to know about Joseph’s culture that would help him conduct
informed consent procedures in a culturally sensitive way?
• Can you identify any problems with what Henry told Joseph?
Discussion: Henry should have made an effort to gain some basic understanding of the Navajo
culture before meeting with Joseph. In traditional Navajo culture, it is believed that language
has the power to shape reality and control events. Therefore, Henry, by following his standard
informed consent procedures, could be creating the reality for Joseph that he is depressed and
thus will feel worse before he feels better.
4-5 The Case of Loretta
Soo Jung is a 22-year-old immigrant from Korea who is brought to the counseling center by her
husband. During the intake interview, she tells her counselor, Loretta, that she has been having
crying spells, has lost her appetite, and is not sleeping well. She gave birth to her first child 2
months earlier. When Loretta suggests to Soo Jung that she may be experiencing postpartum
depression, Soo Jung becomes upset and says, “Why are you telling me this? You need to talk to
my husband.”
• Why do you think Soo Jung became upset?
• How might Loretta have handled the intake interview differently to avoid upsetting this client?
Discussion: Soo Jung appears to share a family-oriented world view that is common among
people from some Asian cultures. Because the counselor did not include this client’s husband in
this discussion, Soo Jung may have interpreted the counselor’s actions as attempting to under-
mine her marital relationship. An awareness of the Korean culture and its views on marriage
might have led Loretta to interview Soo Jung and her husband together as the counseling rela-
tionship was being established.
to be aware that the full and truthful disclosure that counselors value may be at variance with some
clients’ cultural beliefs about hope and wellness, that autonomous decision making may run counter
to family-centered or group-centered values, and that uncoerced choices may contradict cultural
norms about obedience to the wishes of elders or spouses.

-- 127 of 593 --

Chapter 4 • Client Welfare and Informed Consent 	105
There are communities of clients in our pluralistic society who do not claim Euro-American
values as their own. Counselors must also remember to put the client’s needs first. Lasser and
Gottlieb (2017) remind counselors that they must take into consideration the frame of reference
or belief and value systems that are central to the client to remain sensitive to cultural differences.
Expanding our frame of reference regarding informed consent does not mean that we must abandon
our commitment to client autonomy, but it does encompass respect for the cultural values that our
clients bring with them to counseling.
Counselors must also be sensitive to clients’ rights to informed consent when clients have been
legally adjudicated as incompetent. Clients with developmental disabilities, older adults who have
cognitive impairments, and persons who have been diagnosed with a psychotic or thought disorder
often are judged to have diminished capacity to consent. Keep in mind that diminished capacity is
not the same as an absence of capacity. Counselors have an ethical obligation to discuss consent with
these clients in a manner that they can understand and to obtain their assent to services even though
their agreement may not be legally recognized (Fisher & Oransky, 2008; Handelsman, 2001).
The importance of using language that clients can understand is equally important with cli-
ents who are children, adults who are not well educated, and clients whose first language is not
English. If you work with such clients, it would be wise to carefully check the readability level
of your written disclosure statement. When English is a second language for clients, it would be
helpful to have a copy that has been translated into the client’s primary language. The overarching
principle is that consent procedures, both oral and written, must be developmentally and culturally
appropriate for the client.
Summary and Key Points
This chapter addresses two vitally important and
interrelated ethical and legal issues in counseling:
client welfare and informed consent.
Following are key points regarding client
welfare:
• Counselors are ethically responsible for putting
client welfare first and foremost in their work.
• Counselors have a fiduciary relationship with their
clients, which means that they have a legal obli-
gation to protect their clients’ best interests and to
prevent interactions that benefit themselves.
• Respecting diversity is fundamental to protecting
client welfare and promoting client dignity in our
pluralistic society.
• It is vital for counselors to be aware of their
own needs and motivations, unfinished business,
areas of vulnerability, and defenses so that they
will not inadvertently be working on their own
issues during the counseling sessions rather than
on the client’s issues.
• Counselors must be aware of their personal val-
ues and must not impose their values on clients.
Recent court cases have highlighted issues related
to value conflicts between counselors and clients.
• Counselors must avoid fostering client depen-
dency. They have an obligation instead to pro-
mote client autonomy and independence.
• When counseling involuntary or mandated cli-
ents, counselors must inform these clients of the
limits of confidentiality and the nature of any
reports that may be made to courts or other enti-
ties that are requiring the clients to attend coun-
seling. Counselors must be sensitive to these
clients’ rights and ensure that these clients under-
stand any privacy rights they may be waiving by
taking part in counseling.
• Counselors have an obligation to select appro-
priate counseling strategies or techniques and
to make clients active partners in treatment
decisions.

-- 128 of 593 --

106 	Section 2 • Issues
• Counselors must protect the best interests and
welfare of clients when counseling services are
interrupted or terminated prematurely.
• It is unethical, as well as illegal, for counselors
to abandon their clients. Although there are valid
reasons for a counselor to end a counseling rela-
tionship, care must be taken not to put the client
at risk when doing so. Several guidelines were
offered for counselors to use when they are ter-
minating counseling relationships in adverse
circumstances.
The following are key points regarding
informed consent in counseling:
• As an ethical obligation, informed consent is
based on the rationale that clients have the right
to know what they are undertaking when they
come for counseling.
• Counselors should understand that counseling
services are contractual in nature. Agreements
should thus be put in writing in an informed con-
sent document.
• The requirement that health professionals inform
prospective recipients of services and obtain
their consent to treatment originated in the field
of medicine. More recently, it has been applied
to the mental health field. A number of model
disclosure statements are available to assist
counselors who work in various settings and
with a variety of clientele.
• The requirements of HIPAA have transformed
informed consent into a legal requirement, and
counselors must ensure that their procedures are
in compliance with this law.
• Informed consent in counseling involves a
number of elements that are required by the
ACA Code of Ethics, recommended by various
researchers, and suggested as a means to address
legal concerns.
• Counselors need to be aware of at least eight
areas of informed consent that, if not handled
properly, could lead to legal problems.
• It can be difficult to achieve a balance between
providing prospective clients with too little infor-
mation and giving them so much information that
they feel overwhelmed or intimidated. Informed
consent is an ongoing process that should be
conducted both orally and in written form.
• It is important for counselors to be sensitive to the
fact that informed consent as traditionally con-
ceptualized may not be respectful of people of all
cultures and to educate themselves as appropriate
for their clients.

-- 129 of 593 --

107
5Confidentiality and Privileged
Communication
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
5.1 Demonstrate an understanding of the difference
between confidentiality and privileged
communication.
5.2 Explain how concerns about client confidentiality
have changed with the increase in virtual counseling
that has taken place since the beginning of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
5.3 Identify some common exceptions to confidentiality
in counseling sessions.
5.4 Explain legal principles regarding the rights of
parents or guardians when counseling minors.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What do you think are the
distinctions among the terms
privacy, confidentiality, and
privileged communication?
2. Some studies have shown that
clients are not very concerned about
privacy or confidentiality when they
seek counseling services. What do
you think about such findings?
3. How would you respond if a client
asked to see the notes you have
taken related to their counseling
sessions?
4. What do you think should happen
to clients’ records after they die?	Confidentiality is one of the most fundamental of all profes-
sional obligations in counseling. It is also one of the most
complex and problematic duties to manage in day-to-day
practice. Consider, for instance, what you would do if you
were the counselor in each of the following situations.
5-1 The Case of Elena
Elena has been working with Pete, aged 28, who came
for counseling to resolve some family-of-origin issues
that he believes are creating problems in his relationship
with his partner, Jacob. During their last counseling ses-
sion together, Pete tearfully revealed that he recently dis-
covered that Jacob is having a sexual relationship with a
mutual friend of theirs named Alex. Pete has read email
messages between them that clearly indicate they are
having an affair. Jacob and Alex do not know that Pete
knows about their affair. Pete told Elena that he is very
angry with both Jacob and Alex and recently has had
fantasies about killing both of them because they have
betrayed him.

-- 130 of 593 --

108 	Section 2 • Issues
• How should Elena determine whether Pete is serious about possibly killing Jacob and Alex?
• As Pete’s counselor, is Elena obligated to warn Jacob or Alex about Pete’s statement that
he has had fantasies about killing them?
Discussion: Counselors have both an ethical and a legal (except in Texas) duty to take action
to prevent harm if they believe their client is serious about planning to harm another specific
person. The legal duty exists (except in Texas) because of the Tarasoff case (Tarasoff v. Regents of
University of California, 1976), which is discussed in detail in Chapter 8. It is important to realize
that sometimes clients make statements about killing themselves or others but they are simply
upset and overstate their distress.
In this situation, Elena must ask Pete specific questions to determine whether he might
be serious about possibly trying to kill Jacob or Alex or both of them. Elena has to do an
assessment to determine whether Pete might be at risk of seriously harming Jacob or Alex.
In most cases of this kind, after asking specific questions, Elena probably will determine that
Pete is upset but has no intentions of killing either Jacob or Alex. If she decides that Pete is
not at risk of seriously harming Jacob or Alex, then Elena should ask Pete to let her know if
he feels differently in the future and should enter into her notes what Pete said, the questions
she asked Pete, his answers, and her conclusion that he is not currently at risk of seriously
harming anyone.
If, after completing a risk assessment by asking Pete a series of questions, Elena deter-
mines that Pete might pose a risk of seriously harming Jacob or Alex, then she will have to take
action to prevent the harm. The action Elena must take varies from state to state and depends
on state laws that might have been enacted related to the duty to warn intended victims. If Elena
determines that Pete may be at risk of harming others, the best result would be to convince Pete
to submit to an evaluation at a hospital so that he could be committed if necessary. If Pete would
not agree to voluntarily submit to an evaluation in a hospital, then Elena will need to report her
concern to legal authorities, and in some states, warn the intended victims. Other options for
Elena in such dire situations are discussed in Chapter 8.
5-2 The Case of Nancy
Nancy, a counselor in private practice, has been conducting a group on Zoom for adolescent
girls aged 14–16. The parents of the girls brought their daughters to Nancy for counsel-
ing and agreed that their daughters could participate in the group counseling process. The
focus of the group is on building self-esteem and making wise choices. During the fourth
session today, the group members begin discussing boyfriends and whether to just say no
to sex. Marlee, a 15-year-old freshman, shares that she and her boyfriend are having sexual
relations and that she thinks it’s okay because they are really in love. She mentions, almost
in passing, that her boyfriend is 20 years old and that her parents would kill her if they found
out about him.
• Can Marlee’s counselor keep her disclosure in confidence, or must she notify Marlee’s
parents?
• If Nancy breaches confidentiality, what are the risks to her relationship with Marlee?

-- 131 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	109
• If Nancy breaches confidentiality, what are the risks to the group process, to the trust that
other group members may have come to feel toward her, and to her reputation for trust-
worthiness among the student population in general?
• Are these risks greater than the risks posed by keeping Marlee’s relationship with her boy-
friend a secret from her parents?
Discussion: Nancy cannot keep Marlee’s disclosure a secret; she must notify Marlee’s parents,
although she should first inform Marlee of her obligation and explain why she cannot keep the
secret. If Nancy does not tell the parents and Marlee becomes pregnant or is harmed by the rela-
tionship with an adult male, the parents might attempt to hold Nancy responsible. Nancy should
check her state law, as she may also be required to report suspected child abuse to authorities.
Whether Nancy has to report suspected child abuse depends on the language in the statute in
her state.
It certainly is possible that Marlee will be very upset after Nancy tells her parents, and
Marlee may not want to continue the counseling relationship. Nancy should do her best to main-
tain the relationship. This may be possible if she is able to convince Marlee that it is in her best
interest for her parents to know, or if she can obtain Marlee’s agreement that Marlee will tell her
parents, perhaps in Nancy’s office with Nancy present.
This group might not continue, although Nancy should try to keep it functioning and work
through the issue with the other students. Hopefully, Nancy has already discussed the limits of
confidentiality with the group members so they will understand why she cannot keep Marlee’s
secret. It is likely, however, that Nancy’s reputation among adolescent clients for trustworthiness
will be compromised, and it is possible that the other group members will tell their friends that
Nancy will tell their parents what they say if they go to her for counseling.
After pondering these scenarios, you might not be surprised to learn that counselors encounter
dilemmas of confidentiality more frequently than other types of ethical challenges and find them the
most difficult to resolve (Fisher, 2008). Questions surrounding confidentiality can be very complex
and often involve legal as well as ethical considerations. Fisher (2016) has developed an e-book that
leads mental health professionals through the decision-making process for determining when to
disclose confidential information.
A useful starting place may be to clarify the distinctions among three terms—privacy, con-
fidentiality, and privileged communication. These terms are sometimes used interchangeably by
counselors, but the concepts have important differences. Both confidentiality and privileged com-
munication arise from our societal belief that individuals have a right to privacy. Privacy is the
broadest of the three concepts and refers to the right of persons to decide what information about
themselves will be shared with or withheld from others. Confidentiality and privileged communica-
tion both apply more specifically to the professional relationship between counselors and clients.
Confidentiality is primarily an ethical concept that refers to the counselor’s obligation to respect the
client’s privacy and the promise to clients that the information they reveal during counseling will be
protected from disclosure without their consent. Privileged communication is the narrowest of the
three terms and is a legal concept. Privileged communication laws protect clients from having con-
fidential communications with their counselors disclosed in a court of law without their permission
(Garner, 2014). For a communication to be privileged, a statute must have been enacted that grants
privilege to a category of professionals and to those whom they serve.

-- 132 of 593 --

110 	Section 2 • Issues
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Confidentiality
and Privileged Communication
It will be some time before ethics codes, statutes, and case law are created or revised to address the
issues of privacy, confidentiality, and privileged communication in the current digital environment.
The COVID-19 pandemic arrived unexpectedly and counselors, supervisors, and counselor educa-
tors are doing their best to ensure the privacy of clients is protected in the rapidly evolving world of
virtual counseling.
Despite concerns about telecommunications sometimes being hacked or compromised since
the COVID-19 pandemic began, counselors generally have found that clients feel secure using
encrypted HIPAA-compliant telecommunications for video meetings and communicating by text,
email, and telephone calls. Even before the pandemic, paper or recorded counseling records were
vulnerable to exposure. The same is true for digital communications and recordings. Counselors
have an obligation to take reasonable steps to ensure digital communications, recordings, and
records related to their work with clients are secure. Today, reasonable steps include ensuring that
secure telecommunications are utilized, that third parties do not hear counseling sessions as they
occur, and that electronic records are stored appropriately. Maxim et al. (2022), Rollins et al. (2022),
and Wootton et al. (2020) have provided guidelines for ensuring that privacy is maintained using
Zoom and other digital platforms when conducting counseling sessions and supervising counselors
in training. To ensure client privacy, counselors should use encrypted video platforms; ensure no
one else can hear the counselor and client when counseling is taking place; ensure any recordings
are stored in a password-protected location; and warn clients that they would be risking their privacy
if they are not in a private place when counseling is taking place. An essential part of preventing
privacy problems when providing virtual counseling is to be properly trained in using the platform
of choice and to ensure technical issues do not interfere with the quality of sessions.
In this chapter, we first explore confidentiality as an ethical issue and then discuss privileged
communication. Later, we look at the numerous exceptions that exist, both to confidentiality and to
privilege.
CONFIDENTIALITY
Origins of Confidentiality
Helping professionals assume that an assurance of confidentiality is an indispensable requirement
for effective counseling and that, without this assurance, many clients would not feel safe to discuss
openly the intimate and personal aspects of their lives or would not seek counseling (Mosher &
Berman, 2015). Actual studies, however, show only mixed support for this assumption. Some stud-
ies have supported the belief that privacy assurances are essential (Alderman, 2017; Leichliter et al.,
2017; Whetten-Goldstein et al., 2001), whereas other studies have indicated that such assurances
have little effect on encouraging disclosures (Dienlin & Trepte, 2015; Peter & Valkenburg, 2011;
Steijn, 2014; Steijn et al., 2016), or that limits to confidentiality matter only to some clients in some
circumstances. Despite this lack of unequivocal evidence, confidentiality has become such an inter-
nalized norm in the counseling profession that it is rarely questioned. A brief look at some of the
historical origins of the profession may be helpful in understanding how this norm developed.
Counseling represents the fusion of many diverse influences. One of these influences was the
emergence of the field of psychiatry in the treatment of mental illness. Almost until the beginning
of the nineteenth century, mental illness was viewed as mystical and demonic. These early times

-- 133 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	111
are associated with images of “lunatics” in chains in asylums. It was not until the 1800s that sig-
nificant strides were made in the understanding of mental illness, and not until the 1960s that the
deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill brought these individuals back into contact with society.
Another force that bears mentioning is the emergence of psychoanalysis in the early to middle
twentieth century. Patients of Freudian analysts were expected to work through their socially unac-
ceptable urges, sexual fantasies, and repressed feelings and thoughts, and to do so in a society that
held Victorian social mores. Early notions about mental illness and negative impressions about the
nature of personal material discussed in analysis helped to create a social stigma. In this climate, it
is understandable that the patient’s need for absolute privacy was assumed and that people would
want to hide any information related to their having sought and received treatment.
It was not until the middle of the twentieth century that other, countervailing influences
emerged in the mental health field. Carl Rogers’s humanistic views, other theorists who empha-
sized the natural developmental life stages that all individuals pass through, and the career guidance
movement all helped to shift thinking away from counseling as a service only for the mentally ill or
the sexually repressed. Concurrently, as scientists began to discover the biological bases for some
mental disorders and to find medications that could alleviate conditions formerly thought to be
untreatable, the stigmatization associated with mental illness and psychotherapy began to decrease.
Nonetheless, even in current society, a notion stubbornly persists that there is something shameful
about seeking the services of a mental health professional. Unfortunately, many members of today’s
society would likely not question the language used by the U.S. Supreme Court in its 1996 decision
in Jaffee v. Redmond et al., p. 8, a case we describe later in this chapter:
Because of the sensitive nature of the problems for which individuals consult mental health
professionals, disclosure of confidential communications made during counseling sessions may
cause embarrassment or disgrace.
The Rationale for Confidentiality
Whatever its origin, confidentiality is universally viewed today as being essential to the counseling
process, which depends on an atmosphere of confidence and trust in which clients are able to tell
their stories freely and to honestly disclose their feelings, fears, thoughts, memories, and desires.
Clients need to know that they can trust their counselors to respect their privacy, and the counselor’s
confidentiality pledge is the cornerstone on which this trust is built (ACA, 2014, §A: Introduction).
Confidentiality is a strong moral force that helps shape the manner in which counselors
relate to their clients. Bok (1983) has suggested that confidentiality is based on four premises.
The first two premises relate to respect for client rights in counseling. The principle of respect for
autonomy (which is described in Chapter 1) means that counselors honor their clients’ ability to
be self-determining and to make their own choices. Applied to confidentiality, it also means that
counselors honor the rights of clients to decide who knows what information about them and in
what circumstances. The second premise is respect for human relationships and for the secrets that
certain types of relationships entail. In the professional relationship, the intimate context in which
these secrets are shared is seen as essential to counseling. The third premise has to do with the
counselor’s obligation that arises from autonomy and respect. Bok contends that an additional duty
is created by a pledge of silence, which is the offer of confidentiality extended by the counselor
to the client. Counselors are bound to this pledge both in word and in deed; when they have given
their word, they are obligated to actively work to protect clients’ secrets from disclosure. The final
basis for confidentiality is its utility. The rationale here is that confidentiality in counseling relation-
ships is useful to society because clients would be reluctant to seek help without an assurance of

-- 134 of 593 --

112 	Section 2 • Issues
privacy. Society gives up its right to certain information and accepts the risks of not knowing about
some problems and dangers in society in exchange for the benefit that is gained when its members
improve their mental health.
Respect for autonomy is only one of the moral principles on which confidentiality rests.
Another is fidelity, which means being faithful and keeping promises, as we describe in Chapter 1.
Certainly, one of the most important promises that counselors make to clients is that they will keep
the secrets shared in counseling. Today, confidentiality is an issue not only of counselor belief sys-
tems but also of consumer rights. U.S. culture has placed increasing emphasis on the rights of
service recipients, and clients are more likely to hold an expectation that their privacy will be main-
tained by the professionals whose help they seek. This expectation of privacy has important legal as
well as ethical implications, as you will discover later in this chapter.
Counselor Practices and Confidentiality
How well do practicing counselors deal with confidentiality issues? Some evidence suggests that
counselors feel confident of their ability to make sound ethical judgments about confidentiality
issues. Probably because counselors have developed a good understanding of their obligations
around client confidentiality, very few refereed journal articles on the topic have been published in
recent decades. Gibson and Pope (1993) surveyed a large national sample of counselors regarding
their beliefs about whether a wide range of behaviors were ethical or unethical and how confident
they were in making these judgments. Twenty-nine percent of the items for which the confidence
rating was very high (at least 9.0 on a 10-point scale) concerned confidentiality. In a more recent
survey, Neukrug and Milliken (2011) asked American Counseling Association (ACA) members to
rate 77 behaviors as ethical or unethical. In their study, two confidentiality-related behaviors about
which the respondents were in overwhelming agreement (over 95%) were that it is ethical to break
confidentiality if a client is threatening harm to self and that it is unethical to fail to reveal the limits
of confidentiality to a client.
Counselors’ confidence in their ethical judgments may be well founded. Complaints made
against helping professionals for violations of confidentiality are not as common as one might
expect. Various studies have shown that only 1% to 5% of complaints made to the ethics com-
mittees and state licensing boards of counselors involve violations of confidentiality (Anderson
& Freeman, 2006; Garcia et al., 1994; Garcia et al., 1995; Neukrug et al., 1992). It appears that
mental health professionals take seriously their pledge to maintain their clients’ confidentiality and
are diligent in honoring it. Grabois (1997/1998) reported that there have been only a few cases in
which mental health professionals had been sued for breaching confidentiality. Counselors should
not become complacent about their confidentiality practices, however. Statistics regarding formal
complaints may not accurately reflect the actual frequency of breaches of confidentiality. According
to one study, 61.9% of psychologists reported that they had unintentionally violated their clients’
confidentiality (Pope et al., 1987). Clients may not have been aware of these unintentional breaches.
Although it may be startling to think that the majority of practitioners may have violated their cli-
ents’ confidentiality, it is somewhat understandable when we pause to consider the myriad ways that
an inadvertent or careless breach could occur. The following examples illustrate this point.
Counselors do not always have the luxury of having a separate entrance and exit for their clients to
use. When clients who are leaving their sessions must pass through a waiting area, counselors need to
take special precautions to guard their clients’ privacy. We know one very conscientious counselor in
private practice who routinely left 15-minute intervals between the end of one scheduled appointment
and the beginning of the next and who avoided scheduling consecutively any clients from the same part

-- 135 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	113
of town. Nevertheless, one day she ran late with a client, who exited into the waiting room and ran into
a friend from church. Both clients appeared uncomfortable to have encountered each other in this way.
Counselors are encouraged to consult with each other regarding clients who present challenges
to them, and most consultations can be managed without revealing a client’s identity. However, it is
important not to obtain a colleague’s advice while walking through the halls of an agency or institu-
tion, at a restaurant, or in another public place. Pope and Vasquez (2016) related the story of a coun-
selor who was consulting a colleague about a particularly difficult client while they were on a crowded
elevator. The counselor did not mention the client’s name but gave enough detail that the client, who
happened to be standing only a few feet behind them in the elevator, was able to ascertain that they
were the subject of the discussion and to listen with intense interest and dismay.
In our environment today, much counseling takes place virtually, creating even more ways
that counselors could unintentionally compromise a client’s privacy or confidentiality. For example,
a counselor’s interactions with a client might be overheard by a family member or someone else
without the counselor realizing it; a recording of a client session might be mistakenly transferred to
a computer folder that has open access, or a private email or text to a client might be accidently sent
to someone else.
Clearly, it is easy for even seasoned practitioners to violate a client’s privacy unintentionally.
Students in counselor training programs must also take special care to maintain client confidential-
ity. Although it may be tempting to share with family, friends, or fellow students your excitement
about what you are learning in a practicum, a practice session with a peer client, or an experiential
group, it is important to keep in mind that the ethical obligations of students are the same as those
of practicing counselors (ACA, 2014, §F.5.a.). Your conversations must not reveal any information
that could conceivably allow listeners to ascertain the identity of a client. Case notes, test protocols
and interpretations, audiotapes, and videotapes of work with clients must not be left in places where
they might be seen by anyone other than authorized supervisors or professors. It is a good idea to
get into the habit of zealously safeguarding client confidentiality from the very beginning of your
graduate studies.
A question that surfaces quite often for beginning counselors is whether they have an obli-
gation to maintain the confidentiality of private information that is disclosed to them when they
are not in the role of counselor—for example, when a neighbor tells a counselor about an event
that occurred a few houses away. The answer is that confidentiality and privileged communication
exist only when counselors are functioning in the role of a professional counselor. As explained
by Sydow (2006), courts have held that—even when a counselor is at work—privilege exists only
when a counselor–client relationship exists and when the counselor is providing professional coun-
seling services.
Ethical Standards and Confidentiality
Confidentiality is the only specific ethical issue to which an entire section of the Code of Ethics
(ACA, 2014) is devoted. Section B: Confidentiality and Privacy emphasizes the client’s right to pri-
vacy in the counseling relationship. Exceptions and limitations to confidentiality are addressed, and
because exceptions to confidentiality may be mandated by legal as well as ethical considerations,
the standards are carefully written to minimize conflicts between law and ethics. This section
addresses special circumstances in counseling minors, families, and groups and offers guidelines for
maintaining confidentiality when consulting or conducting research.
The Introduction to Section B is general and states, “Counselors recognize that trust is a
cornerstone of the counseling relationship.” An early standard in this section states, “Counselors

-- 136 of 593 --

114 	Section 2 • Issues
respect the privacy of prospective and current clients” (§B.1.b.). Sometimes counselors, in their
zeal to protect a client’s privacy, mistakenly believe that they should maintain a client’s confiden-
tiality even when the client asks them to share information with others (Herlihy & Corey, 2015a).
When clients request that information be disclosed, counselors should honor these requests. If the
counselor believes that releasing the information might be detrimental to the client’s best interests,
these concerns should be discussed with the client, but the ultimate decision belongs to the client. In
many instances, client requests for disclosure are not particularly problematic for counselors, such
as when clients move and later request that their records be sent to their new counselor. Other situa-
tions may cause counselors some discomfort, for example, when clients ask to see their own records.
It is important to realize that records are kept for the benefit of clients and that counselors are obli-
gated to provide clients with access to their records, unless the records contain information that may
be misleading or harmful to the client (ACA, 2014, §B.6.e.). The Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), a federal statute that is discussed at length in Chapter 6, requires that
clients be given access to their counseling records except in exceptional circumstances in which
clients may be harmed by seeing their records.
One of the reasons that confidentiality is such a difficult ethical issue is that confidentiality is
not absolute. Although counselors should make every effort to prevent inadvertent breaches, some-
times confidentiality must be breached. Counselors must, therefore, inform clients at the outset that
there are limitations to their confidentiality. School counselors have unique confidentiality issues with
the students they counsel (Trice-Black et al., 2013) because of their role and their responsibilities to
parents and to administrators. It is important to discuss these limitations thoroughly and to identify
foreseeable situations in which confidentiality must be breached (ACA, 2014, §B.1.d.). Counselors
may be hesitant to explain the exceptions to confidentiality to new or prospective clients for fear that
clients will feel constrained in discussing their problems. However, some researchers have found
very little evidence that explaining in detail the limits of confidentiality actually inhibits client dis-
closures. Others have concluded that the advantages of informing clients about limits outweigh any
disadvantages in terms of inhibited disclosure (Baird & Rupert, 1987; Muehleman et al., 1985).
There are numerous exceptions to confidentiality (Kåmpf, 2009; Knapp, 2017). We have iden-
tified at least 15 types of situations in which compromising a client’s confidentiality might be per-
missible or required. Because most of these exceptions to confidentiality have both a legal and an
ethical basis, we will explore them in more detail after we have discussed the legal counterpart to
confidentiality: privileged communication.
PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATION
At the beginning of this chapter, we noted that privacy is a broad concept that provides the under-
pinnings for both confidentiality and privileged communication. The right to privacy is guaran-
teed to all citizens by the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits government
searches without warrants. This privacy right is not absolute, however. When the interests of society
outweigh the individual’s right to privacy, the privacy right is compromised in the interest of pre-
serving a stable societal structure.
Basically, privileged communication means that a judge cannot order information that has
been recognized by law as privileged to be revealed in court. The concept of withholding any rel-
evant evidence is antagonistic to the entire system of justice in the United States because legal pro-
cedures demand that all evidence relevant to a case be presented to a judge or jury. The legal system
also demands that the opposing side in a court case have access to the evidence before the trial takes

-- 137 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	115
place through a process called discovery. As a counselor, you will surely want to guarantee that the
information that clients give you will be kept confidential. The idea that information and secrets
revealed in a counseling session might someday be disclosed in court is very unsettling for counsel-
ors. However, the idea that a judge or jury might have to decide the outcome of a court case without
the benefit of essential privileged information is very unsettling to judges.
A good question to ask, then, is “Why did the idea of privileged communication emerge in
the U.S. legal system in the first place?” According to Slovenko (1998), the evidence presented in
a court determines the quality of a trial in a court of law. Despite the strong belief that all evidence
should be available to the judge or jury who will decide the outcome of a case, federal and state leg-
islators have realized that the requirement to make available all evidence compromises many impor-
tant interactions. Legislators have been convinced that, without a guarantee of absolute privacy for
conversations between citizens and certain professionals, it would be impossible for professionals
to provide necessary assistance to those who seek their help. As a result, statutes have been enacted
that specifically exempt certain conversations between citizens and professionals from the general
rule in law that all relevant evidence will be presented in a court case. These laws are called privi-
leged communication statutes.
Origins of Privileged Communication
According to Shuman and Weiner (1987), the first reference to courts recognizing a legal privilege
between professionals and the citizens they served was in early Roman law. This privilege was
based on the duty of servants (attorneys) to their masters (clients) rather than on the modern prin-
ciple of a right to privacy.
Under English common law, the foundation on which the legal system in the United States is
based, there was no need for privileged communication. In early England, truth during trials was
determined by various modes, including witnesses swearing to tell the truth, defendants being put
to a physical endurance test, or individuals who were disagreeing engaging in a battle (Shuman &
Weiner, 1987). Even when witnesses were used in trials, they also served as the jurors and relied
on information they had gathered as members of the community. Individuals who were not jurors
but volunteered information were viewed as meddlers and could be sued for interfering with the
legal process.
About 1450, English equity courts began recognizing subpoenas for nonparty witnesses and
started using them in law courts in 1562 (Wigmore, 1961). Yet few communications were privileged
under English common law. Other than government secrets, the common law recognized as privi-
leged only attorney–client and husband–wife relationships (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987).
Once the English legal system allowed judges to compel witnesses to testify at trials, a ques-
tion arose as to whether certain information obtained by professionals should be excluded from
testimony for one reason or another. Wigmore (1961), the leading authority on evidence, described
four requirements for a relationship to be privileged under the law:
1. The communications must originate in a confidence that they will not be disclosed.
2. This element of confidentiality must be essential to the full and satisfactory maintenance of the
relationship between the parties.
3. The relationship must be one that, in the opinion of the community, ought to be sedulously fostered.
4. The injury to the relationship that disclosure of the communications would cause must be greater
than the benefit gained for the correct disposal of the litigation.

-- 138 of 593 --

116 	Section 2 • Issues
State and federal legislatures have used these requirements as criteria in considering
whether to grant privilege to relationships between citizens and various categories of profes-
sionals. The question of which professional relationships meet these criteria and, therefore,
should be accorded privilege has been a source of controversy that continues to this day. Some
legal scholars have criticized all statutes that have been passed by legislatures granting privi-
lege to relationships with professionals (Chafee, 1943; Curd, 1938; McCormick et al., 2006;
Morgan, 1943; Wigmore, 1961). The attorney–client relationship was the first professional rela-
tionship to be recognized under English common law, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I.
Currently in the United States, the attorney–client privilege is universally recognized
(McKinsey & Burke, 2015).
Physicians, on the other hand, have been less successful at obtaining legal privilege with their
patients. According to Shuman and Weiner (1987), most legal scholars agree that the concept of
a physician–patient privilege fails Wigmore’s test. Almost every jurisdiction in the United States
now has privileged communication statutes for physician–patient interactions. However, many of
the statutes include a multitude of exceptions, including criminal cases, workers’ compensation
proceedings, will contests, cases where the condition for which treatment or diagnosis was sought
is raised by the patient to support a claim or defense, or cases in which the parent–child relationship
is at issue.
According to Knapp and VandeCreek (1987), the clergy–communicant privilege is unique
because it has its roots in common law, but it is now protected by statute. These statutes were passed
to ensure that confessions by penitents to priests would be absolutely confidential. The clergy, in
persuading legislators to pass such statutes, stressed that there was a substantial societal benefit in
assuring citizens that their confessions would never be repeated by priests or by members of the
clergy outside the confessional. The clergy argued that unless citizens were absolutely convinced
that their confessions would remain confidential, they would not confess their sins, which could
cause serious disruption to the framework of society. In a few states, despite privilege laws for
clergy, they are required to report suspected abuse (O’Reilly & Chalmers, 2014). They asserted that
the need for privacy in the confessional far outweighed the need for all evidence to be presented in
a trial. The notion of extending the clergy–communicant privilege to include counseling has been
criticized by Knapp and VandeCreek (1987). They argue that the privilege for recipients of mental
health services should apply only when citizens have relationships with professionals with special-
ized training in counseling or psychotherapy, and that only a few specially trained pastoral counsel-
ors have such qualifications.
McCreary (2011) has explored the unusual situation in which a clergy member was also a
licensed professional counselor (LPC) and was providing mental health services. In a Texas case
(Westbook v. Penley, 2007), a minister disclosed to his congregation private information about a
female client’s extramarital affair that was revealed in a counseling relationship with the minister
(it is standard practice in this church to discuss personal issues brought to the minister with the
entire congregation). The Texas court determined that the minister’s action was church related, and
that a civil court should not interfere, despite the fact that the minister was also an LPC and would
not have been allowed to reveal the private information of his client if he had not also been her min-
ister. In this particular case, the court decided that the role of minister outweighed the role of LPC
when the two roles were in conflict.
It is very important for counselors who have other roles to avoid trying to assume both roles
at the same time. Counselors with dual roles should be clear in their own minds which role they
are performing at a given point and communicate effectively their role with the persons they are
helping.

-- 139 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	117
Once citizens had been granted privileged communication with attorneys, physicians, and
clergy, a variety of other professionals, including mental health professionals, began arguing suc-
cessfully for privileged communication statutes for the benefit of their clients. Remember, though,
that any exception to the general rule that all evidence will be presented in court is compromised
by privileged communication statutes. Each time such a statute is passed, the legislators have to be
convinced that making an exception to the rule is vital to the well-being of society, and that an indi-
vidual citizen’s need for privacy outweighs the need for evidence in court cases.
The earlier scholars who argued for a mental health professional–client privilege (Cottle, 1956;
Fisher, 1964; Guttmacher & Weihofen, 1952; Heller, 1957; Slovenko, 1960; Slovenko & Usdin, 1961)
did not base their arguments on the physician–patient privilege. Instead, they contended that citizens
who sought the services of mental health professionals required more privacy than patients needed
with physicians (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). Because of physicians’ status in U.S. society, you
might think that physician–patient privilege could be considered more important than mental health
professional–client privilege. However, some legal scholars (Guttmacher & Weihofen, 1952; Louisell
& Sinclair, 1971; Slovenko, 1960; Wigmore, 1961) have concluded that it is more important to protect
the privacy of clients of mental health professionals than it is to protect the privacy of physicians’
patients because of the unique nature of the psychotherapeutic relationship.
Before World War II, no state had a privileged communication statute for mental health pro-
fessionals, although some psychiatrists were covered under physician–patient privilege statutes
(Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). State legislative bodies meet annually, changing statutes each time
they meet, and sections affecting privileged communication statutes might be found in obscure
places in state statute volumes. Therefore, it is impossible to give a completely accurate picture of
privileged communication statutes for counselors and other mental health professionals. However,
it is true that all 50 states and the District of Columbia have enacted some type of privileged com-
munication statute for mental health professionals and their clients (Jaffee v. Redmond, 1996).
Statutes making relationships between mental health professionals and their clients privileged
vary substantially from state to state in their language and construction. States have taken four
approaches in formulating privilege laws for relationships between clients and their mental health
providers (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). Some privilege statutes are modeled on attorney–client
privilege laws. Others take the approach of the proposed, but rejected, Rule 504 of the Federal Rules
of Evidence (28 U.S. Code §504). This rule has advantages over the attorney–client privilege laws
because the proposed rules specify the extent and limitations of the privilege with great precision.
A third approach provides for a privilege but allows judicial discretion in its waiver. The last group
of statutes is idiosyncratic and does not follow any special pattern.
The Rationale for Privileged Communication
in Counseling Relationships
Over the past few decades, counselors have been working to convince state legislators to enact privi-
leged communication laws that protect their relationships with clients. Many of the arguments used
to justify passage of these statutes were accepted and repeated by the U.S. Supreme Court (Remley
et al., 1997) when Jaffee v. Redmond et al. (1996) was decided in favor of the existence of such a
privilege under the Federal Rules of Evidence.
Counselors have argued that society benefits when individuals seek counseling to help them
lead more productive lives as citizens. Mental health professionals have argued that because clients
must reveal personal secrets that could be embarrassing, sensitive, or against their best interests,
clients must be assured that the content of their counseling sessions will not be revealed without

-- 140 of 593 --

118 	Section 2 • Issues
their permission. Society benefits when clients receive counseling that allows them to be more inde-
pendent and productive, and these benefits outweigh the negative consequences of some evidence
being privileged and, therefore, unavailable in court cases.
However, after an extensive review and analysis of empirical research studies related to con-
fidentiality and privileged communication in the mental health professions, Shuman and Weiner
(1987) concluded that although confidentiality is important in therapeutic relationships, privilege is
not. Among their more interesting findings were (a) few laypersons know whether privilege exists in
their states, (b) many mental health professionals indicate that clients are reassured by their disclo-
sure or threat of disclosure of potential harm to self or others, and (c) judges do not find privilege a
great impediment to finding the truth at trials. The first two findings argue against privileged com-
munication statutes that protect relationships with mental health professionals, whereas the last one
would seem to support the existence of such statutes.
Another argument used to get counselor privileged communication statutes passed is that the
evidence lost to courts because of privilege statutes would never have been produced in the first
place if the statutes did not exist. Clients would not go to counselors and reveal their secrets if they
did not have the protection of legal privilege. As a result, society does not lose important evidence
in lawsuits by granting privilege to counselor–client relationships because the evidence would never
have come into existence if there were no privilege.
Psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers have been successful in their efforts to have
statutes enacted that grant privileged communication to their relationships with clients. Counselors
have argued that their services are similar to those of other mental health professionals and that they
are as deserving of the protection.
Privileged communication statutes vary, ranging from some that protect counselor–client rela-
tionships to the fullest extent allowed by law to others that are quite weak. Professional counselors
in jurisdictions where there are no counselor–client privileged communication statutes, or where
existing ones are weak, are continuing in their efforts to get such laws passed or strengthened.
Auerbach (2006) has pointed out that clients who seek mental health services in a particular state
have varying degrees of privacy, depending on the exact language found in multiple statutes that
grant privilege of clients with psychiatrists, licensed counselors, licensed psychologists, licensed
social workers, and other licensed mental health professionals. Auerbach has argued that states need
to reform their privileged communication statutes, and that clients should have the same privacy
protection, no matter which category of mental health professional provides services.
Privileged communication statutes are not always limited to interactions between clients and
licensed professional counselors. In some states, school counselors, substance abuse counselors, or
other designated categories of counselors have privilege. On the other hand, if a category of mental
health professionals is not listed in a privileged communication statute, courts deny privilege to the
relationships of clients with those professionals (Kaplan & Zirkel, 2017; Moberly, 2007). You must
investigate the statutes of the state in which you practice to determine whether your interactions
with clients enjoy privilege and to determine exactly what privilege means in your state.
If you practice in a state that does not offer statutory privilege, you should inform your clients
that you will keep confidential the content of your counseling sessions with them, but that one of
the exceptions would be if a judge orders you to disclose information. You must include the same
exception even if you practice in a state that does include a counselor–client privileged communica-
tion statute, but it is much less likely that a judge will order disclosure in a state with such a statute.
Occasionally, counselors will be involved in court cases heard in federal rather than state
courts. The U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Jaffee v. Redmond et al. (1996) has interpreted the Federal
Rules of Evidence to mean that there is a licensed psychotherapist–patient privilege in some cases

-- 141 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	119
heard in federal courts (Remley et al., 1997). In the Jaffee case, the psychotherapist was a social
worker. It seems probable, but not guaranteed, that a similar privilege would be acknowledged for
licensed counselor–client relationships in future cases. In a review of psychotherapist–patient privi-
lege decisions in federal courts, Boumil et al. (2012) concluded that judges usually do not grant
privilege to relationships that do not have statutory privilege, but they might determine that the
value of confidentiality in a relationship outweighs the need for confidential information in a par-
ticular case. The same lack of uniformity in applying the law could be said to describe privileged
communication statutes and case law in state courts as well.
Counselors struggle with deciding the exact language to use when writing disclosure statements
for clients or when informing clients orally regarding the confidentiality and privilege that might exist
in the relationship. On one hand, counselors want to fully inform clients of the exceptions that exist
to confidentiality and privilege so that clients will be able to give truly informed consent to entering
the counseling relationship (see Chapter 4 under Informed Consent). On the other hand, counselors do
not want to be so technical and detailed in describing exceptions to confidentiality and privilege that
clients become confused or lose confidence in the privacy of the counseling relationship. Suggested
disclosure statements regarding confidentiality and privilege are included in Appendix B.
Asserting the Privilege
A statutory privilege belongs to clients rather than to counselors. If you or your records are sub-
poenaed or if you are asked during a legal proceeding to disclose privileged information, it is up
to your client to assert the privilege so that you will not have to disclose the information (Boumil
et al., 2012). However, sometimes the client cannot be located or is not present when counselors are
asked to disclose privileged information. In these circumstances, the counselor has an obligation to
assert the privilege on behalf of the client. In our opinion, counselors should secure the advice of an
attorney if they are put in the position of asserting a client’s privilege because legal procedures and
questions regarding privilege are quite technical.
5-3 The Case of Abdul
Abdul is an elementary school counselor. He has been counseling a brother and a sister who are in
the first and third grades, related to the separation of their parents six months ago. The parents are
going through a divorce. The children are living with their mother, and Abdul has regular contact with
her. Abdul has never met the father of the children. This morning, Abdul was handed a subpoena
issued by the attorney for the father of the children by a person paid to deliver the subpoena to
Abdul at his school. The subpoena states that Abdul is ordered to provide copies of all notes he has
regarding counseling with the two children and must appear at a deposition in the attorney’s office
during the school day in two days. Abdul asks the school social worker how he should proceed, and
the social worker tells him she has no idea because she has never gotten such a subpoena.
• Should Abdul send copies of his counseling records to the attorney?
• Should Adul appear at the deposition?
• How should Abdul handle this situation?
Discussion: Abdul should not consult with colleagues about a subpoena. Instead, he should
talk with his principal; explain that he understands the father may have a right to information

-- 142 of 593 --

120 	Section 2 • Issues
Responding to Subpoenas
Subpoenas are legal documents that might require counselors to give a written response to a written
list of questions; produce copies of records; appear for a deposition, court hearing, or trial; or appear
and bring their records with them. Subpoenas are official court documents and cannot be ignored.
Counselors who do not respond appropriately to subpoenas can be held in contempt of court and
fined or jailed until they comply. Unless you deal with subpoenas on a regular basis in your work,
you should obtain legal advice before responding to a subpoena. Methods of obtaining legal advice
are discussed in Chapter 1.
An attorney will review a subpoena for you and will advise you how to respond. If you
must appear at a deposition, hearing, or trial as a result of a subpoena, you should ask your
attorney to prepare you for what to expect, to advise you about how you should conduct
yourself, and if possible, to go with you so you can receive advice
throughout the proceeding. More information on responding to sub-
poenas is contained in Chapter 6.
Suits for Disclosure
When counseling relationships are privileged under state or federal laws,
clients have a right to expect counselors to keep information from their
sessions private. With or without the privilege, counselors have a legal
duty to maintain the privacy of their clients. Clients enter the counseling
relationship with assurances of privacy and with very high expectations
that information they disclose will not be revealed.
If a counselor discloses confidential information and the dis-
closure does not qualify as one of the exceptions to confidential-
ity and privilege, a client could sue the counselor for malpractice.
The client would be required to prove the elements of a malprac-
tice suit, as explained in Chapter 8. Clients who could show that
they were harmed by the counselor’s disclosure might prevail in
such lawsuits and collect damages from the counselor. In addition,
about his counseling sessions with the father’s children, but that the mother may have privacy
rights as well; and ask the principal to obtain legal advice so that Abdul will know how to pro-
ceed. It is the principal’s obligation either to consult with an attorney who provides legal advice
to the school and relay information from the attorney to Abdul, or to allow Abdul to consult
directly with the attorney.
Because subpoenas have legal authority, and because they sometimes are invalid due to
privileged communication statutes or laws regarding how subpoenas are served, an attorney’s
advice is necessary. Abdul could be held in contempt of court if he fails to comply with a valid
subpoena, and he could violate the rights of the mother or the children if he complies with an
invalid subpoena. Abdul should ask any questions he has regarding complying or not with the
subpoena, but ultimately, he should follow the advice he receives from the attorney for the
school. If the mother of the children has an attorney, the attorney for the mother will receive a
copy of the subpoena that Abdul received from the father’s attorney.

-- 143 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	121
clients could complain to licensure or certification boards or to employers if they believe a
counselor has disclosed confidential information without their permission. Thus, it is cru-
cial that you understand the exceptions to confidentiality and privileged communication and
know how to apply these exceptions in your practice.
EXCEPTIONS TO CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVILEGED
COMMUNICATION
The general rule that counselors must keep their clients’ disclosures confidential is easy to
understand and follow. Exceptions to this general rule occur frequently in the course of coun-
seling, however, and counselors must understand these exceptions and be able to apply them to
real situations (ACA, 2014, §B.2.). After reviewing counselor privileged communication stat-
utes in all states, Glosoff et al. (2000) concluded that exceptions are numerous and extremely
varied. As a result, it is very important for counselors to know the content of the privileged
communication statute that exists in their state (if there is one) and the specific exceptions
that are included. Glosoff et al. categorized exceptions into nine areas and listed those areas
from the most to the least frequently cited in state statutes. Complaints filed include instances
when:
• A counselor and client have had a dispute about another matter (such as billing or disagreements);
• A client is litigating their mental condition in a lawsuit;
• A client might be a danger to self or others;
• A report of child abuse has to be filed;
• A client is contemplating committing a serious crime that might harm others;
• A client is ordered to have a psychological examination by a judge;
• A legal proceeding is held to determine if a client needs to be involuntarily hospitalized;
• A client has been a victim in a crime; and
• A client has been accused of harming a vulnerable adult.
To facilitate understanding, we have organized the exceptions into clusters according to the
purposes they serve. First, we discuss client waiver of the privilege or right to privacy and exceptions
that deal with sharing information with subordinates or other professionals to improve the quality of
services. Next, we turn to exceptions that involve protecting clients or others who may be in danger.
Then we look at ways that confidentiality and privileged communication are different when working
with multiple clients as opposed to individuals, and with minor clients as opposed to adults. Finally,
we note some exceptions that are legally mandated.
Client Waiver of the Privilege
Confidentiality and privilege belong to clients, not to counselors. As a result, clients can waive
their privacy. This occurs most often when clients explicitly ask counselors to give information
regarding the counseling relationship to third parties. Usually, clients who waive the privilege
have an understanding that their secrets will be revealed. In some circumstances, however, cli-
ents may unknowingly waive the privilege by their actions. For example, clients might implicitly
waive the privilege by filing a lawsuit seeking damages for emotional distress caused by an acci-
dent or by filing a malpractice lawsuit against a mental health professional, as discussed later in

-- 144 of 593 --

122 	Section 2 • Issues
this section on exceptions. In Cynthia B. v. New Rochelle Hospital (1982), the court found that
the client (rather than the mental health professional) had responsibility for any embarrassment
or inconvenience that resulted from the disclosure of privileged mental health information in a
lawsuit she had filed.
Death of the Client
According to McCormick et al. (2006), the common law doctrine is that privilege does not end
with a person’s death. In some states, statutes specify how privilege is controlled after an indi-
vidual dies. When there is no statutory language dealing with privilege and the death of the holder,
then the common law practice of allowing a legal representative of the deceased person to assert
the privilege generally is followed (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). An executor of an estate is
not always recognized by a court as a deceased person’s legal representative for the purposes of
privilege (Boling v. Superior Court, 1980). In Swidler & Berlin v. United States (1998), the U.S.
Supreme Court held that even after a client has died, communications with his lawyer that were
privileged when he was alive continue to be legally privileged after his death (Kramer, 1999). If
you believe that a deceased client’s privilege must be asserted or waived, you should contact his
or her family members, probate attorney, or executor to determine whether a legal representative
is available to deal with the matter. The ACA Code of Ethics states simply that counselors must
protect the confidentiality of deceased clients according to legal requirements and documented
preferences of the client (ACA, 2014, §B.3.f.).
Sharing Information with Subordinates or Fellow Professionals
In some situations, the umbrella of confidentiality can be extended to cover others who assist
or work with the counselor in providing services to clients. Although these situations do not
involve a breach of the client’s confidentiality, they do constitute exceptions to the general rule
that only the counselor and client are privy to information shared in sessions. Sharing informa-
tion with others to provide the best possible services to clients is permissible when (a) clerical
or other assistants handle confidential information, (b) counselors consult with colleagues or
experts, (c) counselors are working under supervision, and (d) other professionals are involved
in coordinating client care.
CLERICAL OR OTHER ASSISTANTS MAY HANDLE CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 	It is rou-
tine business practice for many types of professionals, including physicians and attorneys as
well as counselors, to employ clerical assistants and other subordinates who handle confidential
client information. Some state statutes that grant privilege to counselor–client relationships may
also specifically extend the privilege to communications when assistants are present or when
assistants see privileged information, but such specific language is rare. Knapp and VandeCreek
(1987) have concluded that common law principles most likely would extend privilege to unpriv-
ileged assistants who are involved in activities that further the treatment of the client.
Counselors should be aware, however, that they are ethically responsible for any breach of
confidentiality by someone who assists them. The Code of Ethics alerts counselors to “make every
effort to ensure that privacy and confidentiality of clients are maintained by subordinates, includ-
ing employees, supervisees, students, clerical assistants, and volunteers” (ACA, 2014, §B.3.a.).
Counselors may also be held legally responsible for breaches of confidentiality by their subordi-
nates. Under the general legal principle of respondeat superior, employers are held responsible for

-- 145 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	123
the acts of their employees. Counselors, then, can be held accountable for assistants who breach
confidentiality through the doctrine of vicarious liability. It is important for counselors to impress
on their employees the importance of keeping information confidential and to supervise them in
such a way as to ensure that they are complying with this requirement.
Counselors can take precautions to help ensure that their subordinates understand both the
importance of confidentiality and the procedures for maintaining it. Counselors are obligated to
determine whether individuals they may hire are trustworthy. Counselors could be held accountable
for hiring persons notorious for disregarding the privacy of others if these persons later disclose
confidential client information. We suggest that counselors take an inventory periodically of every-
one who may handle confidential information about their clients. This might include answering
service personnel, an office receptionist, clerical assistants, billing service staff, counselor interns or
supervisees, and paraprofessionals. The counselor can conduct training sessions for these employee
groups to ensure that they understand the importance of confidentiality and know how the counselor
wants them to handle confidential material. The federal HIPAA law (see Chapter 6) requires that
employees be trained to protect the privacy of clients. Therefore, training sessions that are held
should be documented.
COUNSELORS MAY CONSULT WITH COLLEAGUES OR EXPERTS 	Counselors are encouraged to
consult with peers or experts whenever they have questions about their ethical obligations or profes-
sional practice (ACA, 2014, §C.2.e.). If the questions have to do with clinical practice, counselors
should seek consultation from a practitioner who has experience or expertise in the particular area
of concern. If an ethical question is involved, it is a good idea to consult a fellow mental health
professional who has expertise in ethics. In a particularly perplexing ethical dilemma that involves
a difficult judgment call, it is wise to seek more than one opinion.
Consultation usually does not need to involve a breach of confidentiality because most con-
sultations can be managed without revealing the identity of the client. The ACA Code of Ethics
(2014) gives some guidance in this respect. Standard B.7.a. states that “Written and oral reports
present only data germane to the purposes of the consultation, and every effort is made to protect
client identity and to avoid undue invasion of privacy.” Standard B.7.b. cautions that, during con-
sultations, counselors should not disclose confidential information that could lead to the identifica-
tion of a client. Nonetheless, nearly 30% of the counselors in Neukrug and Milliken’s (2011) study
believed it was ethical to share confidential client information with a colleague. Although every
effort should be made to protect confidentiality, it is sometimes impossible to avoid revealing the
identity of the client because of the nature of a particular situation or because the identity of the
client might be obvious. In these instances, best practice would be for the counselor to obtain client
consent, if possible, and the identity of the consultant should be revealed to the client. Of course, in
some situations neither step might be possible.
Finally, counselors should choose consultants who have the appropriate expertise for the
question at hand. If you have an ethical or clinical question, consult with a professional colleague.
If you have a legal question, ask an attorney.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION MAY BE SHARED WHEN THE COUNSELOR IS WORKING UNDER
SUPERVISION 	While you are a counselor in training or when you are gaining post–master’s degree
experience as a counselor in preparation for licensure, your work with actual clients will be super-
vised by experienced professionals. During your practicum, internship, and other field experiences,
university supervisors and on-site supervisors will review your counseling sessions with you and

-- 146 of 593 --

124 	Section 2 • Issues
provide you with feedback about your performance. After graduation, if you are planning to obtain
a credential such as a license, your initial post–master’s degree counseling work will also be under
supervision. Experienced counselors may want to provide supervision to beginning professionals
or may need to work under supervision while acquiring skills in a new specialty area of practice.
Supervision is likely to be a part of your experience throughout your professional career.
Supervision is similar to consultation in that information about clients is shared with other pro-
fessionals who subscribe to the ethic of confidentiality. However, in supervision, unlike consultation,
the client’s identity cannot be concealed. Supervisors may observe actual counseling sessions from
behind a one-way mirror, review videotapes or audiotapes of sessions, and review case notes and
counseling records. Supervisors have the same obligations as you do: They must keep confidential
any information revealed in counseling sessions that they are supervising. Nonetheless, your clients
have the right to know that you are working under supervision. According to Informed Consent and
Client Rights (ACA, 2014, §F.1.c.), you have an ethical obligation to inform your clients that their
confidentiality is limited because your supervisor will have access to information about them. When
you are involved in group supervision, clients have the right to know that a group of your fellow
practicum students or interns may also be discussing their cases. The Code of Ethics also requires
counselors to obtain permission from clients before they observe counseling sessions or review tran-
scripts or videotaped recordings of sessions with their supervisors, faculty, or peers (§B.6.d.).
You may feel some reluctance to divulge to your clients that you are working under supervision,
or to explain to them all the circumstances in which information about them might be shared. You may
be concerned that clients will have less confidence in your professional abilities, or that they will feel
constrained about revealing personal information. These concerns must be set aside in the interest of
your clients’ right to informed consent. It is best to inform your clients about the limits to confidential-
ity in a straightforward manner and to do so at the very outset of the counseling relationship. Clients
can be told that the purpose of supervision is to help you do a better job and that the focus of the
supervision will be on you and your performance rather than on them and their problems. Sometimes
clients will be unnerved by the idea of a supervisor, who is a faceless stranger to them, sitting behind
the mirror. In these cases, it is a good idea to arrange for the client to meet the supervisor and have the
opportunity to express concerns and ask questions directly. In our experience as supervisors, we have
seen that clients typically forget their initial concerns once they become engaged in the counseling
process. You may be pleasantly surprised to find that this will happen for you, too.
The relationships between counseling students who are in supervision and their clients may
not be privileged. As a result, students may be forced to reveal the contents of counseling sessions
if ordered to do so by a judge in a legal proceeding. If the relationship between a client and the stu-
dent’s supervisor would be privileged if the supervisor were providing the counseling services, then
it is likely that privilege will exist between the client and the counselor–supervisee as well. Usually,
under the law of privilege, a privilege is extended to assistants or supervisees of professionals who
have statutory privilege with their clients.
OTHER PROFESSIONALS MAY BE INVOLVED IN COORDINATING CLIENT CARE 	In some set-
tings, such as inpatient units in hospitals or on university campuses (Moss, 2018), treatment teams
routinely work together in caring for patients or clients. Although the benefits of coordinating the
efforts of various professionals are obvious, as an ethical matter, clients need to be told what infor-
mation about them is being shared, with whom, and for what purposes (Herlihy & Corey, 2015a).
According to §B.3.b. (ACA, 2014), when client care involves a continuing review by a treatment
team, the client must be informed of the team’s existence and composition, the information being
shared, and the purposes of sharing the information.

-- 147 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	125
In numerous other situations, you might want to share confidential client information with fel-
low professionals in order to ensure coordination or continuity of care. A client might be receiving
psychotropic medications from a physician while seeing you for counseling. A client might be see-
ing you for individual counseling while participating in group counseling with another counselor.
Clients might move and later request that you send their records or communicate by telephone with
their new counselor. In all these situations, it is ethically appropriate for you to communicate with
the other professionals when the client has given permission for you to do so. Several standards in
the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) address these kinds of circumstances. Standards A.3. and B.3. both
speak to the need for mental health professionals to work cooperatively. When clients are receiv-
ing services from another mental health professional, the Code directs counselors to obtain client
consent and then to inform the other professional and develop clear agreements to prevent confu-
sion and conflict for the client. Standard B.6.g. (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to obtain writ-
ten permission from clients to disclose or transfer records to legitimate third parties and reminds
counselors that they are required to work to ensure that receivers of their records are sensitive to the
client’s confidentiality. HIPAA requires that client permission to give information to third parties be
obtained in writing and that counselors who transfer records notify the receiving third parties that
the information being transferred is confidential and should be protected. Fisher (2008) suggested
that counselors mark any records that contain identifiable client information as confidential and not
to be released. Also, it is critical that clients be informed of the consequences of disclosing their pri-
vate information to other parties, especially when they have received diagnoses (Kress et al., 2013).
From a legal perspective, situations in which counselors function in treatment teams or coor-
dinate client care are similar to situations in which counselors’ assistants or supervisors learn confi-
dential information about clients. If the relationship between a counselor and a client is privileged,
then it is likely that the privilege will continue to exist when confidential information is discussed in
treatment teams or with other professionals when coordinating client care.
Protecting Someone Who May Be in Danger
Situations sometimes arise that require counselors to breach confidentiality in order to warn or pro-
tect someone who may be in danger. Some of these situations also involve a duty to report the dan-
gerous situation to responsible authorities. These three types of duties—to warn, to protect, and to
report—constitute some of the most stressful situations you will encounter as a practicing counselor.
Because these exceptions require that you make a deliberate decision to breach a client’s
confidentiality, there must be a compelling justification for doing so. Winston (1991) suggested that
breaching a confidence can be justified by the concept of vulnerability. A duty to protect from harm
arises when someone is especially dependent on others or is in some way vulnerable to the choices
and actions of others. Persons in a vulnerable position are unable to avoid risk of harm on their own
and are dependent on others to intervene on their behalf. When counselors, through their confiden-
tial relations with clients, learn that a vulnerable person may be at risk of harm, they have a duty to
act to prevent the harm. This is a higher duty than the duty to maintain confidentiality.
COUNSELORS MUST TAKE ACTION WHEN THEY SUSPECT ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF CHILDREN OR
OTHER PERSONS PRESUMED TO HAVE LIMITED ABILITY TO CARE FOR THEMSELVES 	Counselors
have both an ethical and a legal duty to disclose confidential information when such dis-
closure is required to protect clients or identified others from serious and foreseeable harm
(ACA, 2014, §B.2.a.). Duties to protect children and vulnerable adults from abuse are discussed at
length in Chapter 11.

-- 148 of 593 --

126 	Section 2 • Issues
COUNSELORS MUST TAKE ACTION TO PROTECT CLIENTS WHO POSE A DANGER TO
THEMSELVES 	When counselors determine that clients may be suicidal, they must do something
to prevent the clients from harming themselves (ACA, 2014, §B.2.a.). A leading cause of malpractice
lawsuits against counselors is a charge by surviving family members that counselors were negligent and
therefore committed malpractice if their clients die from suicide or harm themselves while attempting
suicide. This duty to protect your clients from suicide attempts is explained and discussed in Chapter 8.
COUNSELORS MUST TAKE ACTION WHEN A CLIENT POSES A DANGER TO OTHERS 	When
counselors believe their clients may harm someone else, even when such information is communi-
cated by someone other than the client (Edwards, 2006), counselors must take steps to prevent harm
to the person who is in danger (ACA, 2014, §B.2.a.). This duty, like the duty to prevent clients from
harming themselves, could lead to a charge of negligence or malpractice. The duty to protect others
who may be harmed is explained and discussed in Chapter 8.
COUNSELORS MUST DETERMINE WHETHER TO BREACH CONFIDENTIALITY WHEN A CLIENT
HAS A COMMUNICABLE AND LIFE-THREATENING DISEASE AND THE CLIENT’S BEHAVIOR IS
PUTTING OTHERS AT RISK 	This exception to confidentiality is the same as the exception to pro-
tect others if you believe your client may harm other people (ACA, 2014, §B.2.c.). This exception
also is reviewed in Chapter 8.
Counseling Multiple Clients
Unique confidentiality problems arise when working with multiple clients. Generally, when your
client and one or more additional persons are in the room, confidentiality is compromised and privi-
lege usually is legally waived. Although you can make your own pledge not to disclose certain infor-
mation, you cannot guarantee the behavior of others, such as group participants or family members.
Despite the fact that others in the room might not keep a client’s secrets, a counselor’s responsibility
is not diminished by the presence of additional persons in a counseling session.
CONFIDENTIALITY CANNOT BE GUARANTEED IN GROUP COUNSELING 	Confidentiality is
a particularly difficult ethical issue in group counseling. Although confidentiality certainly is as
important in group counseling as it is in individual counseling, it is difficult to enforce, and coun-
selors should not offer guarantees. It appears that this caution may not be well understood—37% of
the ACA members surveyed by Neukrug and Milliken (2011) believed it was ethical to guarantee
confidentiality for group members. Group counselors frequently encounter problems with maintain-
ing confidentiality among group members, who are not bound by the same professional standards.
They may inadvertently breach confidentiality or yield to the temptation to discuss group experi-
ences with family or friends. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) gives some guidance for dealing with
confidentiality in groups in §B.4.a., which states that “counselors clearly explain the importance
and parameters of confidentiality for the specific group.” A significant portion of Association for
Specialists in Group Work’s (ASGW) Guiding Principles for Group Work (2021) is devoted to con-
fidentiality among group members (Thomas & Pender, 2008). This is an especially helpful resource
with which you will want to familiarize yourself.
A few states specifically provide for privilege to extend to group counseling situations, but most
privileged communication statutes are silent on this issue (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). It is impor-
tant, then, that you read the privileged communication statute in your state (if one exists for coun-
seling relationships) to determine whether group counseling sessions are privileged. In states where

-- 149 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	127
group counseling situations are not mentioned, at least one court has found privilege to exist (State v.
Andring, 1984). As a result of the Andring case, it is possible that group counseling sessions would be
found by courts to be privileged even if statutes do not specify that privilege exists for group counsel-
ing clients. Confidentiality dilemmas related to group counseling are discussed further in Chapter 12.
CONFIDENTIALITY CANNOT BE GUARANTEED IN COUPLES OR FAMILY COUNSELING 	When
the focus of counseling shifts from the individual to the family system, new ethical issues arise, and
existing ones become more complicated. Counselors who provide services for couples and fami-
lies encounter some unique confidentiality concerns, such as how to deal with family secrets. For
example, consider the situation in the following case example.
5-4 The Case of Haruto
Bob and Carla, a husband and wife, are seeing Haruto for marriage counseling in Zoom sessions
that Haruto does not record. Generally, when Haruto provides counseling to couples, he sees
each partner alone for one or more sessions because he believes counseling progresses better
that way. Bob shared during one of his individual sessions with Haruto that he is having an affair
with another woman and that Carla doesn’t know it. Bob doesn’t plan to tell Carla, and he insists
that Haruto not tell Carla either.
• How should Haruto respond to Bob’s insistence?
• How might this situation have been avoided?
Discussion: According to the Code of Ethics, in couples and family counseling, “Counselors
seek agreement and document in writing such agreement among all involved parties regarding
the confidentiality of information. In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, the couple or
family is considered to be the client” (ACA, 2014, §B.4.b.). From the wording of the standard,
it appears the agreement could be oral or written, but if it is oral, the agreement should be
documented in the counselor’s notes. Therefore, Haruto should have obtained agreement from
Bob and Carla before their counseling sessions began, and documented their agreement in
writing, regarding the confidentiality of information, especially because Haruto generally sees
each partner in individual sessions. Because Haruto takes that approach to couples counseling,
it is very important to establish with the couple how information that is shared individually will
be handled. Each partner should know whether or not information shared with the counselor
without the other partner being present will be told to the partner who is not present. In this situ-
ation, because the Code of Ethics states that in the absence of a written agreement the couple
“is considered to be the client,” Haruto will have to insist that Bob disclose the affair to Carla if
Haruto is to continue counseling the couple. Haruto could refer the couple to another counselor.
Haruto might have avoided the problem in several ways. He could have counseled the
couple together only, and not individually. He could have told Bob and Carla at the outset that
he would not keep any secret that would interfere with the goals or process of counseling, and if
either of them objected to disclosing the secret, he would not be able to continue the counsel-
ing relationship. Haruto could have included an explanation of his policy on family secrets in his
written disclosure statement. In addition, to comply with the ACA Code of Ethics, he should have
gotten a written, signed agreement from the couple regarding how confidential information
would be handled during their couples counseling.

-- 150 of 593 --

128 	Section 2 • Issues
This case example points out the importance of informed consent procedures. You must make
clear at the outset to both members of a couple the limitations of confidentiality and how you will
handle confidentiality issues, obtain an agreement with the couple, and document the agreement in
writing (ACA, 2014, §B.4.b.). In an analysis of the problem of family secrets, the ethical code of the
International Association of Marriage and Family Counselors (IAMFC, 2017) does not address the
issue of family secrets between partners specifically, but instead says that the limits of confidential-
ity must be agreed upon by clients and their counselor and that information learned by counselors
in individual counseling sessions may not be repeated to other family members without the client’s
permission. This frequently occurring problem is discussed further in Chapter 12.
Counseling couples or families can also lead to very difficult legal questions regarding confidenti-
ality and privilege. Under general legal principles, any statutory privilege that exists between a counselor
and a client is waived if there is a third-party present when information is being disclosed. However,
privilege laws in some states specifically cover relationships between counselors and married couples or
between counselors and family members (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). In these states, it is clear that
a counseling relationship will be privileged despite specific additional persons being present during the
counseling session. In states without such statutes, it is unclear whether an individual who is being coun-
seled with a spouse or other family members present could assert the privilege. Appellate court decisions
are split as to whether a privilege that otherwise would exist by statute would be extended to sessions
that include a married couple (Clausen v. Clausen, 1983; Ellis v. Ellis, 1971; Hospital and Community
Psychiatry, 1979; Sims v. State, 1984; Wichansky v. Wichansky, 1973; Yaron v. Yaron, 1975).
A very difficult dilemma for counselors is posed when one spouse demands that the counselor
not reveal information related in a marital counseling session and the other spouse demands that the
counsel or reveal it. Situations like this can arise when a married couple enters counseling because
of marital problems and then later engages in divorce proceedings.
The spouse who does not want the contents of the counseling sessions revealed should assert
the privilege through his or her attorney. Of course, a counselor never wants to reveal in court pri-
vate information that was related in a counseling session (ACA, 2014, §B.1.c.). Counselors gener-
ally will cooperate with the spouse and the attorney as arguments are made to maintain the privilege
of the client who does not want the private information revealed. Counselors are
quite vulnerable legally in these situations because revealing privileged informa-
tion inappropriately could lead to a malpractice lawsuit or complaints to the licen-
sure or certification boards of counselors. On the other hand, refusing to disclose
information that is not privileged could lead to being held in contempt of court
by a judge. If you find yourself in a situation like this and are unsure of your
legal responsibilities, you should consult your own attorney or the attorney for
the agency in which you are employed, who will advise you regarding your legal
obligations and rights. In addition, some national and state counseling associa-
tions offer free legal advice to members.
Counseling Minor or Legally Incompetent Clients
WHEN CLIENTS ARE MINOR CHILDREN OR LEGALLY INCOMPETENT,
COUNSELORS CANNOT GIVE THE SAME ASSURANCES OF CONFIDENTIALITY
AS THEY GIVE OTHER CLIENTS 	Minors and adults who have been adjudicated
incompetent in a court of law do not have a legal right to enter into contracts.
Thus, their parents or guardians control their legal rights. As a result, counselors
owe legal duties to the parents or guardians of minors or incompetent adults. At
the same time, counselors have ethical obligations to the clients themselves (ACA,

-- 151 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	129
2014, §B.5.). This conflict between law and ethics regarding the pri-
vacy rights of minors and incompetent adults is discussed in detail in
Chapter 11. A number of scholars have expressed concern that minors,
particularly adolescents, who could benefit from health care counsel-
ing services do not seek them because the minors are not assured of
confidentiality (Alderman, 2017; Beeson et al., 2017; Brakman et al.,
2018; Leichliter et al., 2017; Taylor et al., 2015). Health services that
adolescents might not access due to confidentiality concerns include
substance abuse, family planning, gynecological concerns, and sexu-
ally transmitted disease services.
Court-Ordered Disclosures
COUNSELORS MUST DISCLOSE CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION WHEN
ORDERED TO DO SO BY A COURT 	There will be instances when coun-
selors are called to testify in court and their clients ask them not to reveal
information shared in counseling sessions. If the relationship is privi-
leged, either the client or the counselor will assert the privilege. In cases where no privilege exists, coun-
selors should ask the court not to require the disclosure and should explain the potential harm that could
be done to the counseling relationship if the information is disclosed (ACA, 2014, §B.2.c.). If the judge
still requires the disclosure, only essential information should be revealed (§B.2.e.). Counselors who
are ordered by a judge to reveal confidential information should not worry that clients may sue them or
complain to the licensure or certification boards of counselors for violating their privacy. Complying
with a judge’s order is a defense to any charge of wrongdoing (Osborne, 2015). Remember, though, that
a subpoena that a counselor receives may not be valid. Confidential or privileged information should
not be revealed in response to a subpoena until an attorney representing the counselor has advised that
course of action. See Chapter 6 for a complete discussion of subpoenas.
Legal Protections for Counselors in Disputes
COUNSELORS MAY REVEAL CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION WHEN IT IS NECESSARY TO DEFEND
THEMSELVES AGAINST CHARGES BROUGHT BY CLIENTS 	When ethical or legal complaints are
filed against counselors by their clients, the concepts of confidentiality or privilege could become
problematic for counselors who must defend themselves. It would be odd if a client could claim that
a counselor had done something wrong in a counseling relationship, and then the same client could
claim that confidentiality or privilege prevented the counselor from explaining the details of the
counseling relationship in presenting his or her defense. As a result, the law of privileged communi-
cation requires that clients waive their privilege when they bring complaints or malpractice lawsuits
against their counselors (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987).
Other Legal Exceptions
CLIENTS WAIVE THEIR PRIVILEGE WHEN THEY BRING LAWSUITS CLAIMING EMOTIONAL
DAMAGE 	If clients claim emotional damage in a lawsuit, then the law automatically waives their
privilege associated with counseling relationships (Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). It would be unfair
to allow individuals to claim in court that they had been emotionally damaged and then to prohibit
the counselor who had treated the person for the damage from testifying. The person accused of
damaging the client must be given an opportunity in court proceedings to cross-examine the coun-
selor regarding the nature and extent of the damage.

-- 152 of 593 --

130 	Section 2 • Issues
Nonetheless, most courts have held that suits for normal distress or physical injuries arising
out of a physical trauma do not automatically waive a plaintiff’s right to privilege in counseling
relationships (Ideal Publishing Corp. v. Creative Features, 1977; Roberts v. Superior Court, 1973;
Tylitzki v. Triple X Service, Inc., 1970; Webb v. Quincy City Lines, Inc., 1966). Only when individu-
als bringing lawsuits claim that they were emotionally damaged, and that the damage required them
to seek mental health treatment, will their therapeutic privilege be waived.
PRIVILEGE IS GENERALLY WAIVED IN CIVIL COMMITMENT PROCEEDINGS 	Privilege is usually
waived by law for individuals who are being evaluated by a court to determine whether they should be
involuntarily committed to a psychiatric hospital. Obviously, the contents of an evaluation conducted
for the purpose of rendering an opinion to a court concerning the advisability of a commitment will
not be privileged. Evaluators should carefully explain the nature of the interview to individuals who
are being evaluated to ensure that the individual does not misconstrue the relationship as involving
mental health treatment (ACA, 2014, §E.13.b.; Knapp & VandeCreek, 1987). When a mental health
professional seeks a commitment of a client who initiated treatment voluntarily, privilege may also
be waived by the client by law (Commonwealth ex rel. Platt v. Platt, 1979), although in People v.
Taylor (1980), a Colorado court refused to waive the privilege. Individuals who are involuntarily
committed do not have privileged relationships with their treating mental health professionals at a
judicial review of that commitment (State v. Hungerford, 1978; State v. Kupchun, 1977). The impor-
tant distinction to remember is that evaluation interviews are different from counseling interviews
in terms of privilege. Evaluation interviews conducted to help determine whether a client should be
committed to a residential facility are not privileged. Appendix B includes an informed consent form
that may be used by counselors who conduct evaluations. See Figure 5-1 for a listing of the excep-
tions to confidentiality and privileged communication that are summarized in this chapter.
Diversity Considerations in Confidentiality and Privileged
Communication
Counselors must be sensitive to the cultural meanings of privacy and confidentiality (ACA, 2014,
§B.1.a.). Because U.S. society is becoming more diverse and the international movement in coun-
seling is burgeoning, it is more important than ever before to be aware that some clients may not
want their confidentiality upheld in the traditional manner (Tavaokkoli et al., 2015). Confidentiality
requirements in counseling have been a reflection of cultural values that emphasize autonomy and
respect for individualism (Casas et al., 2010). In collectivist cultures, the individual is seen as less
important than the family or group, and clients might not place much importance on their individual
privacy, although the privacy of their families or groups might be highly valued (Hoop et al., 2008).
In such cases, counselors might need to share confidential information with family members or
members of the client’s community, if the client so desires. There are cultural differences regarding
confidentiality when providing counseling services to minors as well (Olivari et al., 2015).
Maintaining client confidentiality becomes more complicated when the counselor and client do
not speak the same language and an interpreter is required. If a family member is used as the interpreter,
the counselor should carefully explain the purpose and importance of confidentiality and ask the inter-
preter to keep all disclosures completely confidential. It is preferable to use a professional interpreter, if
one is available, who understands the context of the client’s life. The counselor might consider holding
a pre-session meeting with the interpreter to review confidentiality, its limits, and how the concept can
be communicated to the client (Paone & Malott, 2008). During the initial session, the client should be
informed of the limits to confidentiality and privilege that are created by the presence of the interpreter.

-- 153 of 593 --

Chapter 5 • Confidentiality and Privileged Communication 	131
Confidentiality is also complicated when counselors provide services to clients dur-
ing mass trauma events and complex humanitarian emergencies (Tarvydas & Levers, 2017).
Counselors may be offering services in public or chaotic situations that make privacy impossible. In
these instances, counselors should honor the need for confidentiality to the extent possible by look-
ing for as private a space as is available and by teaching and modeling for other professionals and
non-professionals the importance of keeping survivor information confidential.
FIGURE 5-1 Exceptions to confidentiality and privileged communication
Sharing information with subordinates or fellow professionals is permissible under the following
circumstances:
• Clerical or other assistants handle confidential information.
• A counselor consults with colleagues or experts.
• The counselor is working under supervision.
• Other professionals are involved in coordinating client care.
Protecting someone who is in danger may require disclosure of confidential information when the
following conditions exist:
• The counselor suspects abuse or neglect of children or other persons presumed to have limited ability
to care for themselves.
• A client poses a danger to others.
• A client poses a danger to self (is suicidal).
• A client has a fatal, communicable disease, and the client’s behavior is putting others at risk.
Confidentiality is compromised when counseling multiple clients, including the following:
• Group counseling.
• Counseling couples or families.
There are unique confidentiality and privileged communication considerations when working with
minor clients:
• Minor clients do not have privilege under the law.
• Privilege belongs to parents or guardians.
Certain exceptions are mandated by law, including the following:
• Disclosure is court ordered.
• Clients file complaints against their counselors.
• Clients claim emotional damage in a lawsuit.
• Civil commitment proceedings are initiated.
Summary and Key Points
After reading this chapter, we expect that you have
developed a healthy appreciation for the complexi-
ties of the ethics of confidentiality and its legal
counterpart, privileged communication. Both confi-
dentiality and privileged communication are based
on the client’s right to privacy. Confidentialit y is an
ethical concept, and privileged communication is a
legal term.
Counselors encounter dilemmas of confiden-
tiality more frequently than they encounter other
types of dilemmas and find them the most difficult
to resolve. The considerable amount of information
contained in this chapter should be helpful. These
dilemmas, nevertheless, will challenge you to use
your clinical judgment and your skills in ethical
reasoning and in researching the current status of

-- 154 of 593 --

132 	Section 2 • Issues
professional knowledge and the law. We hope we
have emphasized how important it is that you do
not try to go it alone when you encounter questions
about confidentiality and privileged communica-
tion, but rather that you seek consultation from col-
leagues or an attorney.
Following are some of the key points made
regarding confidentiality:
• Although research does not clearly support the
notion that assurances of privacy are essential to
clients’ willingness to disclose, counselors view
confidentiality as a strong moral force and a fun-
damental ethical obligation.
• In general, counselors seem to do a very good
job of protecting their clients’ confidentiality. It
is easy for an inadvertent breach to occur, how-
ever, and counselors need to be zealous in safe-
guarding client privacy.
• It could be years before ethical codes, statutes,
and case law are created or revised to address
the issues of privacy, confidentiality, and privi-
leged communication that have arisen since the
COVID-19 pandemic ushered in an era of virtual
counseling.
• Generally clients have felt secure about their
privacy even though counseling often is taking
place digitally since the COVID-19 pandemic
began.
• Counselors must take reasonable steps to ensure
that digital communications, recordings, and
records related to their work with clients are
secure.
Privileged communication is a legal concept
that is closely related to confidentiality but is differ-
ent. Privileged communication means that a judge
cannot order a counselor to reveal information in
court that has been recognized by law as privileged.
Because privileged communication is antagonistic
to the entire U.S. system of justice, courts and leg-
islatures have been reluctant to extend privilege to
relationships between mental health professionals
and their clients.
• Except for cases heard in federal courts, privi-
leged communication in counseling is deter-
mined by state statutes. It is essential that you
learn your state laws regarding privileged com-
munication in counseling relationships.
• Confidentiality and privilege both belong to the
client, not to the counselor, and clients can waive
their privacy.
• Confidentiality and privilege are not absolute.
There are numerous exceptions to confidentiality
and privileged communication. You must under-
stand each exception and be able to apply excep-
tions to real situations you encounter in your
practice.
A number of exceptions to confidentiality
and privileged communication were discussed in
this chapter.
• Confidentiality and privileged communication
cease when a client waives those rights or when
a client dies.
• It is permissible to share information with subor-
dinates and fellow professionals in order to pro-
vide the best possible services to clients.
• Stressful situations for counselors often involve
decisions regarding the duties to warn, protect,
or report when a client’s condition may pose a
danger to self or others.
• Confidentiality 	cannot 	be 	guaranteed 	when
counseling couples, families, groups, minors,
or adults who have been adjudicated as legally
incompetent.
• Other exceptions exist when counselors are
court-ordered to disclose information, and when
counselors need to defend themselves legally.

-- 155 of 593 --

133
6Records and Subpoenas
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
6.1 Demonstrate an understanding of the purposes for
which counselors keep records.
6.2 Identify the various types of records that counselors
might keep.
6.3 Identify how the federal regulations included in
HIPAA and FERPA are different.
6.4 Explain how counselors should proceed when they
receive a subpoena.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. Can records that counselors create
and are seen only by themselves be
subpoenaed?
2. Why is it important to carefully
document events in emergency
situations?
3. Why should counselors consult
with an attorney if they receive a
subpoena?
Although records were mentioned in Chapter 5 in relation to
counselors’ responsibilities regarding confidentiality and privi-
leged communication and are discussed again in Chapter 11 in
relation to counseling children, records are such an important
(and somewhat complex) area of a counselor’s practice that
we discuss them in detail in this chapter. Counselors typically
receive little training in proper recordkeeping, and they tend to
dislike and neglect paperwork (Luepker, 2012; MacCluskie,
2001). Nonetheless, maintaining adequate records is neces-
sary for ethical, legal, and professional reasons. Records are
often subject to being subpoenaed, and counselors must be
prepared to respond to legal demands for their records.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
on Records and Subpoenas
The COVID-19 pandemic and the shift to virtual counseling,
teaching, and supervision had an impact on recordkeeping
in counseling and subpoenas. Prior to the pandemic, coun-
seling records were already primarily being created, stored,
and transmitted electronically, but now virtual counseling
sessions are being recorded, and other types of counseling
records are also being stored and transmitted electronically
more often. Court hearings and proceedings that had never
been held virtually switched to a virtual format, and, as a
result, the nature of subpoenas shifted as well.

-- 156 of 593 --

134 	Section 2 • Issues
As discussed later in this chapter, contemporary counseling records are primarily electronic,
although some paper records continue to be created and stored by counselors. The content of coun-
seling records has not changed since the COVID-19 pandemic, but it is critical that counselors
understand the proper ways to create, store, and transmit electronically both written and video
records. For example, virtual counseling and supervision sessions should be conducted using plat-
forms that encrypt transmissions and are HIPAA-compliant. In Chapter 4, we explained another
significant change in that electronic signatures are now legal in the United States, E-signatures are
being used in most counseling settings and in courts and have the same legal status as signatures
written on paper.
All of the requirements for responding to subpoenas received by counselors discussed in this
chapter continue despite the COVID-19 pandemic. However, since the pandemic began, more courts
are using electronic communications with parties involved in court proceedings. As a result, coun-
selors may receive subpoenas by email more frequently and may be able to respond officially using
electronic signatures. In addition, some official court hearings are being held virtually, and it may
be possible for counselors to attend depositions or hearings through telephone or video rather than
in-person. When subpoenas are issued, parties are informed whether options other than in-person
appearances are possible.
RECORDS
Records are any physical or virtual recording made of information related to a counselor’s
professional practice. When you consider the kinds of records counselors create and maintain,
you probably think of the notes that counselors take concerning sessions with clients. These
types of records are referred to as clinical case notes in this chapter. Other types of records that
might come easily to mind are administrative records related to clients such as appointments,
billing and payment accounts, copies of correspondence, intake forms, signed disclosure state-
ments, or other routine records that are created in counseling practices. Additional records that
are often generated include audio recordings or video recordings of sessions with clients. Since
the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, counselors often provide counseling sessions by video
and sometimes record those sessions, with client permission. Recordings of sessions usually
are used for supervision purposes, but they might also be created for clients to review or by
counselors for the purpose of training other counselors. Unusual records generated in counsel-
ing practices might include records of clients logging on to computerized information systems,
telephone bills indicating clients’ numbers called, computerized records that clients had used
for parking or building passes, or video recordings of clients entering or leaving a counseling
office. All of these items are records, and the privacy of clients could be compromised if any of
these records were not kept confidential.
The entire concept of records has changed during the past few decades. Before record-
keeping became computerized, records were kept on paper and stored in locked file cabinets.
And before counseling began to be delivered using video platforms, voice or video recordings
were taped, and the physical tapes also were stored in locked cabinets. Today, records kept on
paper are rare, and recordings are digital and are stored on computers and on the internet. In the
past, paper records could be shredded, and recording on tapes could be physically destroyed. But
today, documents or recordings that are digitized might continue to be accessible even after they
are deleted. The implications for counseling in our modern world of technology are discussed in
Chapter 10.

-- 157 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	135
Although records are a necessary part of a counselor’s practice, it is important that counselors
balance their need to keep records with their obligation to provide quality counseling services to
clients. Counselors who find themselves devoting inordinate or excessive amounts of time to creat-
ing and maintaining records probably need to reevaluate how they are spending their professional
time and energy.
In today’s litigious environment, many administrators and lawyers who represent counseling
agencies are requiring counselors to keep voluminous records to protect the agencies in the event a
lawsuit is filed. Although counselors are wise to document actions they take when they are fulfill-
ing an ethical or legal obligation (such as writing down how you assessed whether a client might
be at risk for suicide and the actions you took; or how you attempted to protect an intended victim
from a client’s threat of harm), it is not appropriate for counselors to neglect the counseling services
they provide to clients in order to produce excessive amounts of records that are self-protective
(Kennedy, 2003). Counselors, their administrators, and the lawyers who advise them must balance
the need to protect themselves in the event of legal claims and their duty to provide quality counsel-
ing services. It is important to note that it is possible to keep adequate records and provide quality
counseling services.
Purposes of Records
Counseling records are created for a number of reasons (Corey et al., 2024). Some of these reasons
benefit clients, whereas others benefit counselors or their employers.
One of the first standards in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors must main-
tain the documentation necessary for rendering professional services to their clients (ACA, 2014,
§A.1.b.). From an ethical perspective, this is the primary purpose of keeping records—to assist you
in providing clients with the best possible counseling services. Unless you have perfect recall, you
will find that the clinical case notes you have recorded will help to refresh your memory prior to
sessions. These notes will allow you to review the client’s progress toward goals that you and the
client have jointly determined, to know when and in what circumstances important decisions and
actions were taken, and to maintain an overall perspective on the content and process of the entire
counseling relationship.
Clinical case notes benefit the client because they allow the counselor to summarize each
interaction with the client and record plans for future sessions. The work of counselors can be more
consistent, precise, and systematic when accurate and thorough notes are kept.
Keeping good records allows counselors to stay on track by documenting which kinds of
treatments were undertaken and why. It is helpful to counselors, their clients, and the therapeutic
process when counselors work to maintain a clear conceptualization of counseling goals and the
clients’ progress toward those goals. Good records can assist counselors in helping clients measure
their change and growth. Counselors can use their notes to reference and affirm significant turning
points and successes in their clients’ work.
Clinical case notes can be particularly important when a client decides to resume counseling
with you after an extended break. It would be a daunting task to try to remember details of a client’s
life and concerns after months or even years have passed, during which so many other clients’ lives
and concerns have consumed your attention. If you can use your notes to refresh your recollections
about former issues and events that occurred during the counseling process, you will take a signifi-
cant step toward reconnecting with your returning client.
Continuity of care is a consideration as well when a client is referred from one mental health
professional to another. Records are used to transfer the information that one health care provider

-- 158 of 593 --

136 	Section 2 • Issues
has about a client’s condition to another health care provider. Health care records create a history of
a client’s diagnosis, treatment, and recovery. Health care providers can thus render better services
when they have access to information regarding a client’s past that is more thorough and accurate
than a client’s oral recall.
Write notes with enough clarity that another helping professional, by learning what you did
and did not do to help the client, can provide continuation of counseling. The receiving counselor
can get attuned to the meaningful aspects of a client’s work if records clearly describe goals, treat-
ment strategies, and progress that was made. If you are the receiving counselor, you will particularly
appreciate such records.
Counselors also keep clinical case notes for their own benefit. Counselors document any steps
they have taken in an emergency or critical situation. Later, if counselors are accused of not having
provided competent services, the records serve as evidence of their thinking, and the notes docu-
ment any actions taken. Without adequate documentation, there is no clear record of the course and
progress of counseling.
In our opinion, before you write any type of note or create a record, you should carefully con-
sider why you are taking that action. Many counseling offices or agencies routinely create records
without giving any thought to the simple question of why the records are being kept. It makes no
sense for a counselor who is keeping clinical case notes for the sole purpose of refreshing her
memory to write her notes in the same way that the counselor in the local hospital writes notes on
a patient’s chart. In a hospital, physicians, nurses, physical therapists, counselors, and others read a
patient’s chart. Each person who makes an entry on a patient’s chart is writing so that other profes-
sionals will know what types of services were rendered for the benefit of the patient. If counselors
ask themselves why they are writing a note for a client record, who will read the record, and what
those who read it will be looking for, there will be a better chance that the record will be appropriate
for its purpose.
Counselors also keep a number of business records associated with their counseling practice
for their own purposes. Counselors who work within agencies or other facilities that provide coun-
seling services often need to document the number of persons who have been served, the categories
of services rendered, and other types of information. Counselors in private practice have to keep
business records to justify the tax deductions they take in relation to their counseling business.
Regardless of whose purpose is being served in creating records, it is the privacy of clients that
dictates how records must be handled.
6-1 The Case of Paolo
Paolo has recently taken his first counseling job in the local community mental health center
after receiving his master’s degree in counseling. During his first week at work, he meets with
his section supervisor, who goes over the records the agency keeps for each client. His supervi-
sor shows him an intake form that is 12 pages long. The form requires the counselor to collect
all types of personal information on the client, including a thorough medical, health, and social
history, and detailed information regarding the client’s education, work background, and cur-
rent job. A diagnosis and treatment plan form requires the counselor to enter a diagnosis from
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 5th edition, text rev. (American Psychiatric Association,
2022), and at least five measurable and behavioral goals for counseling. Paolo’s supervisor
explains that after each counseling session, Paolo must note in the client’s folder a summary

-- 159 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	137
Ethical Standards Related to Records
Standard A.1.b. of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors include in their records
“sufficient and timely documentation to facilitate the delivery and continuity of services.” This stan-
dard acknowledges that continuity of services is an important reason for keeping records. Standard
A.1.b. also requires that counseling records document client progress and services provided and that
errors in client records be corrected according to agency or institutional policies.
Section B.6. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) includes nine standards that specifically
address counseling records. Standard B.6.b. addresses the importance of keeping records in a secure
location. Counselors must strive to keep records in a place that is not accessible to unauthorized
persons. Counselors are responsible for ensuring the safety and confidentiality of any counseling
records they create, maintain, transfer, or destroy. This caveat includes records that are written,
taped, computerized, or stored in any other medium. Keeping records digitally is discussed in depth
in Chapter 10, which focuses on technology. In Chapter 5, we discussed at some length how easy
it can be for a counselor to inadvertently breach a client’s confidentiality. That is as pertinent to
counseling records as it is to other aspects of the counseling relationship, as is evident in the case of
Vanessa, presented here.
of issues discussed in the session, the client’s progress toward each of the counseling goals
listed, and what Paolo plans to do in the next counseling session. The supervisor suggests that
Paolo write about three pages of notes for each client after each session. His supervisor also
says there are more forms to be completed after clients have their last session, but they will go
over those forms later. When Paolo asks his supervisor why so much information is collected
for each client, his supervisor replies in a patronizing tone, “This is the way all professional
counseling agencies keep records. Weren’t you taught recordkeeping in your master’s degree
program?”
• How should Paolo respond to his supervisor’s training session?
• What kinds of records do you think would be reasonable for a community mental health
agency to keep on each client?
Discussion: Because Paolo has accepted employment at the agency, he should do his best to
understand exactly what types of records he is expected to keep and to create those kinds of
records. After he has been at the agency for a reasonable period of time, he might suggest to his
supervisor and other staff members that recordkeeping procedures be reviewed to determine if
records are being kept appropriately, given the goals and objectives of the agency’s counseling
program.
Regarding the types of information that would be practical for a community mental health
agency to keep, intake information might be limited to basics, such as contact information and
current medications or health problems. A diagnosis should be rendered only if a disorder exists
and is required by third-party payers, and only after the client has consented to the diagnosis
becoming a part of the record. In addition, treatment plans and goals for counseling should be
flexible, and the number of goals should be determined individually for each client. In clinical
case notes, only information needed to refresh the counselor’s memory should be written down.
There is no need to summarize the content of sessions unless a counselor is documenting what
occurred in a session for self-protection.

-- 160 of 593 --

138 	Section 2 • Issues
Standards B.6.c. and B.6.d. (ACA, 2014) address the issue of informed consent and require
counselors to obtain client permission before they electronically record or observe sessions.
Recording or observing sessions, common practices in supervision, are discussed in more detail
later in this chapter.
Standard B.6.e. (ACA, 2014) alerts us to the fact that we have an ethical obligation to provide
clients with access to their records, unless the records contain information that might be misleading
or detrimental to the clients. There is a presumption that clients have a right to see records that coun-
selors keep related to the counseling services that the clients have received. Standard B.6.e. states,
“Counselors [should] limit the access of clients to their records, or portions of their records, only
when there is compelling evidence that such access would cause harm to the client.” You will see in
the section on the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) that only in rare cir-
cumstances can a mental health professional refuse to allow clients to see their records. See 45 CFR
164.524(a)(2)-(4). This standard also provides guidance on the tricky situation that occurs when cli-
ents have been seen in the context of group or family counseling. In situations involving multiple cli-
ents, counselors should limit access to those parts of the records that include confidential information
6-2 The Case of Vanessa
Vanessa is a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in private practice with a group that includes
three other counselors. One afternoon at 1:00 p.m., she has had a client cancellation and is using
the time to work at her computer writing clinical case notes from her morning sessions. Jasmine,
the counselor whose office is next door, pokes her head in the door and asks Vanessa for a
case consultation. Vanessa and Jasmine go into Jasmine’s office and close the door for privacy.
Unbeknownst to Vanessa, her 2:00 p.m. client arrives early, sees that her office door is open, and
goes in. The client reads the clinical case notes that Vanessa left on her computer screen.
• What actions can counselors take to ensure that a client’s records are not seen by anyone
not authorized to see them?
• What steps must counselors take to preserve client privacy when they keep case notes on
a computer?
Discussion: Counselors should use the following guidelines to prevent unfortunate situations
like the one just described:
• In your office, be extra careful not to leave records out in the open, where other people can
see them. Always put records away, even if you leave your desk for only a few minutes. If
you are working from home, as counselors often did during the COVID-19 pandemic, the
same cautions apply.
• Use a secure password for accessing client records on your computer. Always close a secure
file when you leave the room.
• If your computer is networked, be sure your client records are not accessible to others.
• Keep in mind that documents or videos that are digital might still be able to be recovered
even after they have been deleted.
• Position your computer so that others in your office cannot easily see what you have on
your screen.

-- 161 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	139
related to another client. When clients are given access to their counseling records, counselors should
provide them with assistance and consultation in interpreting the records (§B.6.f.).
Standard B.6.g. (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to obtain written permission from cli-
ents to disclose or transfer records to legitimate third parties unless exceptions to confidentiality
exist. Interestingly, this standard also makes counselors responsible for taking steps to ensure that
receivers of counseling records are sensitive to the confidential nature of those records. It is not
possible for a counselor to guarantee anyone else’s behavior, including that of a fellow mental
health professional who receives records. However, steps can be taken to promote profession-
ally appropriate transfers of records. When transferring records, either on paper or electronically,
include a cover letter that explains the confidential nature of any transferred records, mark each
page confidential, and include a statement on the records that the copy of the records is not to be
transferred to any third party.
Standard B.6.h. (ACA, 2014) provides guidelines to counselors regarding storage and dis-
posal of counseling records after a counseling relationship has ended. Although this standard could
be interpreted to imply that counselors must keep counseling records indefinitely, our suggestion is
that some records be kept and others destroyed when it is clear that a client will no longer receive
services from a counselor. The issue of whether to keep or destroy counseling records is discussed
at length in later sections of this chapter.
Standard B.6.i. (ACA, 2014) imposes on counselors the duty to take reasonable precautions
to protect their clients’ privacy if counselors terminate their practice, become incapacitated, or die.
One important client privacy issue is how much information third-party payers (health
insurance companies) should be allowed to demand from counselors and how much information
counselors should be willing to provide them (MacCluskie, 2001). Welfel (2016) has suggested
that before counselors sign a contract with a health insurance organization, they should learn the
type, frequency, and extent of patient information the organization requires in order to autho-
rize and review treatment. As an informed consent procedure, of course, this information about
the extent their insurance company will have access to their mental health records should be
thoroughly discussed with the client. Standard B.3.d. (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to obtain
authorization from their clients before disclosing information to third-party payers.
Legal Requirements
Overall, clinical health care records are created to benefit the person who is receiving the services.
In fact, legal principles indicate that the contents of the records about a particular client belong
to that client, even though the paper or recording instrument belongs to someone else (Claim of
Gerkin, 1980; People v. Cohen, 1979). Records can benefit clients in a number of ways.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) provisions regarding records do not conflict with any legal
requirements regarding counseling records. In fact, one ethical standard (§B.6.g.) goes beyond
legal requirements and indicates that written permission should be obtained from clients before
records are transferred, unless specific exceptions exist. The common law in the United States
does not require that counselors obtain written permission from clients to give copies of their
records to third parties. However, many agency policies, state statutes, and federal laws (such
as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA] and the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act [FERPA]) have such written permission requirements. In addition, it is
generally advisable that counselors, in order to protect themselves, obtain written authority from
clients before transferring records to third parties. If a client later denies that such permission
was given or is not available to say whether oral permission was granted, the counselor will have

-- 162 of 593 --

140 	Section 2 • Issues
a document as evidence that permission was obtained. Counselors should use forms created by
the agency in which they work when any client requests records. If the agency does not have a
standard form, or if a counselor in private practice does not have such a form, the sample form
provided in Appendix C can be used.
There is no common law principle, nor are there any general federal or state statutes,
requiring counselors to keep clinical case notes. On the other hand, the Code of Ethics (ACA,
2014), in §A.1.b., implies that ethical counselors must keep clinical case notes that document
services rendered to clients and client progress. Counselors do keep various types of records
for a number of legally related reasons. For example, counselors in private practice must keep
administrative records regarding their expenses and income for federal and state income tax
purposes. As is discussed later in this chapter, some specific federal statutes require counsel-
ors to handle records in particular ways if counselors work in settings in which these statutes
apply. In addition, lawyers always advise counselors to carefully document important actions
they take so that they (counselors) can protect themselves if their actions or judgments are later
questioned in a lawsuit.
Confidentiality and Privileged Communication Requirements
All the points made in Chapter 5 regarding the confidentiality and privileged communication
responsibilities of counselors related to the privacy of clients apply to records to the same degree as
they apply to oral comments. However, because records have physical properties, whereas informa-
tion may not, it is important to carefully consider the responsibility of counselors to handle records
appropriately.
TYPES OF RECORDS KEPT BY COUNSELORS
A common complaint of personnel in agencies that hire counselors and internship site supervisors
is that counselor education programs do not adequately prepare counselors regarding recordkeep-
ing (Luepker, 2012; MacCluskie, 2001). General principles regarding creating, maintaining, and
transferring records are taught in counseling master’s-level degree programs. The settings where
counseling services are rendered vary substantially, and as a result, the types of records created,
the approach to recordkeeping, record storage practices, and specific information requirements
in records vary substantially from setting to setting. For example, the records kept by counselors
employed in in-patient hospital settings are very different from records kept by counselors employed
in high schools (Shea et al., 2018). In addition, many agencies that employ counselors have pur-
chased or developed recordkeeping software that requires training for those who use the system. It
would be impossible for counselor educators to prepare entry-level counselors to keep records for
every setting in which they might become employed. Instead, orientation for new counselor interns
or counselor employees needs to include specific training in recordkeeping requirements in that
particular setting.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) provides only limited information about the types of records
that must be kept; rather, the Code allows each counselor or each entity that employs counselors
to determine which types of clinical case notes are needed to render professional services. Many
recordkeeping requirements are imposed on counselors by laws, regulations, and procedures within
a work setting, rather than being required by the Code.
Standards A.1.b., A.1.c., A.2.a., B.6.a., and B.6.g. provide guidance to counselors regarding
the types of records they must keep.

-- 163 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	141
Standards A.1.b. and B.6.a. both state that counselors maintain documentation “necessary for
rendering professional services.” This section also indicates that records must “include sufficient and
timely documentation to facilitate the delivery and continuity of services.” Records must accurately
reflect client progress and the services that counselors have provided to clients. Any amendments to
records must be made according to agency or institutional policies. From these standards, it is clear
that counselors are expected to keep some type of record for all clients and that records should be
kept in such a way that another counselor could take over the care of the client, if necessary.
Standard A.1.c. requires that counselors develop counseling plans with their clients and revise
the plans as necessary. Although the Code does not specifically require that such plans be in writing,
that expectation can be assumed.
Standard A.2.a. states that “counselors have an obligation to review in writing and verbally
with clients the rights and responsibilities of both counselors and clients.” This standard suggests
that there is an ethical obligation to have a written record of informed consent for counseling rela-
tionships and that the document must be reviewed orally with clients. The content of these written
disclosure statements is detailed in Chapter 4.
Standard B.6.g. requires a written record of permission to transfer records.
It probably would be helpful for counselors-in-training or beginning counselors to be pro-
vided with more information about the recordkeeping responsibilities that will be a part of most of
the jobs they will hold. However, it would not be wise for the profession, the ACA Code of Ethics,
or counseling faculty members to tell counselors the types of records they must keep, the contents of
such records, and the ways in which those records should be created. It is best for counselors and the
agencies that employ counselors to determine the kinds of records they need, based on their position
and the kinds of clinical notes they need to create in order to be effective practitioners. Keeping in
mind that there will be variations depending on a counselor’s style and the requirements imposed by
employment settings, we offer some general guidelines regarding three types of records: adminis-
trative records, recordings, and clinical case notes.
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORDS 	All settings that provide counseling services keep administrative
records. The type of agency and external pressures determine how many and what types of records
are kept. When counselors accept employment in an agency, school, hospital, or other setting, they
agree to conform to agency rules and procedures, which include recordkeeping requirements.
Administrative records are any types of records that would not be considered recordings of
sessions or clinical case notes. Administrative records include appointment books or electronic
appointment systems, billing and payment accounts, copies of correspondence, signed informed
consent documents, client permission to release information, intake forms, and other routine papers
that are created as a result of providing counseling services to clients. In most businesses, records
of these types are not considered confidential. Yet the very fact that someone has applied for or
received counseling services is a private matter. Therefore, business records that reveal the identity
of individuals who have had contact with the agency must be treated as confidential and must be
protected in the same way that clinical case notes or counseling session recordings are protected.
RECORDINGS 	Clinical supervision of counseling services takes place in some form in most set-
tings. Agencies often accept practicum or internship students who must record their sessions with
clients for the purposes of clinical supervision. Mental health professionals, after they have received
their graduate degrees, usually are required to practice under clinical supervision for 2 to 3 years
before they can become licensed. In addition, many practicing counselors continue supervision
throughout their careers and might record sessions for supervision purposes.

-- 164 of 593 --

142 	Section 2 • Issues
Counseling sessions could be recorded when counselors want clients to listen to or view
their own behavior or interpersonal interactions during sessions, although this is not a frequent
practice. Counselors who ask clients to listen to or view their own behavior during sessions should
emphasize to their clients that these recordings would compromise their privacy if the clients did
not keep them secure or if they failed to erase them after using them. Counselors also should
make sure clients know that until these recordings are erased or destroyed, they would be avail-
able for subpoena in some lawsuits that could arise. We suggest that counselors who give record-
ings of sessions to their clients for any purpose have their clients sign a form to ensure that they
understand the problems that might arise and their responsibility for their own privacy protection.
A number of procedures must be followed when recordings of client sessions are created.
Clients must know that recordings are being made and must agree to the process. The ACA Code
of Ethics (2014) requires that consent of clients be obtained prior to recording sessions (§B.6.c.).
The consent of clients must be informed in that clients must understand the reason the recordings
are being made and who will have access to them. It would be a violation of privacy if sessions
were recorded without a client’s knowledge, or if consent were given and then the recordings were
used for purposes not agreed to or were accessed by persons unknown to the client. Recordings,
once they are created, must be kept as secure as any other confidential record is kept. Once the
recordings have been used, they must be erased or destroyed. However, counselors must be aware
that it is possible that digital documents or recordings might be able to be accessed even after they
have been deleted.
Although there is no general legal requirement that the client’s permission be obtained in
writing, counselors often obtain written permission from clients to record counseling sessions in
order to protect themselves. This self-protection would be necessary if a client later claimed that
permission had never been given for the recording or that the client did not fully understand how the
recording would be used. In addition, many agencies require written permission before client coun-
seling sessions may be recorded. If such policies exist, counselors must comply. Any signed form of
this type obtained from a client should be placed in the client’s folder and kept until the recording is
deleted or destroyed. If you wish to obtain a client’s permission to record a session for supervision
and your agency does not have a standard form to use, a form is provided in Appendix D.
6-3 The Case of Téa
Téa counsels children in the counseling lab at the university where she is working on her mas-
ter’s degree in counseling. Before she begins her first session with Ana, an 8-year-old, Téa
explains to Ana that there is a camera in the corner of the room and that their sessions will
be recorded so that Téa’s instructor can review their counseling sessions. Ana says she under-
stands and doesn’t mind that their sessions will be recorded. After their session is over, on the
drive back home, Ana tells her mother that the counseling session was recorded. Ana’s mother
calls the director of the counseling lab and tells the director that Téa recorded the counseling
session with Ana without Ana’s knowledge and without the mother’s knowledge or permission.
• What should Téa have done to prevent this problem?
• Why is it important to obtain written permission to record counseling sessions, even though
verbal permission is adequate from a legal perspective?

-- 165 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	143
CLINICAL CASE NOTES 	Clinical case notes that counselors keep regarding their sessions with
clients are the records that concern counselors and clients most. These notes sometimes contain spe-
cific details clients have told counselors, counselors’ clinical impressions of clients, and generally
very sensitive and personal information about clients.
A problem with clinical case notes is that counselors often think of them as being personal
notes to themselves that will be seen only by them in the future. However, the reality of clinical case
notes is much different, and we have found that even seasoned counselors are sometimes surprised
to learn how many people have a right to access their clinical case notes. Counselors must be aware
of how these notes are viewed by clients, agencies, and the law.
We often have heard the suggestion that counselors simply should not take clinical case
notes so that they will not have to worry about the notes being subpoenaed or being seen at a later
time by the client or any other person. This is not sound advice. In the first place, the ACA Code
of Ethics (2014) specifically states that ethical counselors do keep records (§A1.b.). In addition,
it seems to be general practice today for mental health professionals, no matter what their creden-
tials or orientation, to routinely create and use clinical case notes in their practices. If counselors
were to fail to create these notes, it is likely that they would be accused of unprofessional prac-
tice and probably would be asked to explain how they could render quality counseling services
without taking clinical case notes (Anderson & Bertram, 2012). Second, not having clinical case
notes would not keep a counselor from having to reveal confidential information orally from
memory if someone had a legal right to that information. In addition, counselors should take the
clinical notes they need in order to function effectively as professionals. Counselors should not
feel inhibited about creating clinical case notes just because the notes may later be seen by clients
themselves or by third parties.
ASSUME NOTES WILL BE READ 	Counselors never know whether others will read the clinical case
notes they create. Thus, counselors should assume that notes they write will become public infor-
mation at some later date. Counselors who make this assumption will be very cautious in deciding
what to include in their notes. At the same time, counselors should write whatever they need to
render quality counseling services to their clients.
Situations in which others appropriately and legally read counselors’ clinical case notes are
discussed in the following sections. It is important for you to remember the following sobering
information when you are writing clinical case notes:
• Your clients have a legal right to review the notes and to obtain copies of them.
• Your clients have a legal right to demand that you transfer copies of those clinical case notes
to other professionals, including other mental health professionals, attorneys, physicians, and
even accountants.
• Your clients can subpoena the clinical case notes when they are involved in litigation.
Discussion: Because Ana is a minor, it was necessary for Téa to obtain at least verbal permission
from Ana’s mother to record the counseling session. It would have been best practice for Téa to
obtain written permission to record from both Ana and her mother. Even though written permis-
sion to record is not legally required, it is best to get permission in writing so that you have proof
that permission was obtained.

-- 166 of 593 --

144 	Section 2 • Issues
• Other parties can legally subpoena the clinical case notes when involved in litigation situa-
tions involving the client, sometimes over the client’s objection and even when the records are
privileged, if legal exceptions to privilege exist.
• The legal representatives of deceased clients, in most states, have the same rights to clinical
case notes as the clients had when they were alive.
• Clinical case notes sometimes do become public information and get published in the media.
APPROPRIATE CONTENT OF CLINICAL CASE NOTES 	Comparatively less instruction occurs in
counseling graduate programs regarding the purposes and the actual creation of clinical case notes
than in other professions such as medicine, nursing, and social work. In these other professions a
heavy emphasis is placed on how to write health records, what information should and should not
be included, and proper ways of creating such clinical notes. Most health records are passed from
one professional to another, and professionals rely on each other to record information so it can be
used in the care and treatment of a patient or client. Counseling clinical case notes, on the other
hand, generally are written by a counselor for the counselor’s own use. Sometimes, however, oth-
ers read these records, and counselors even offer such records to prove they acted professionally.
The American Psychological Association (2007), Luepker (2012), Mitchell (2007), and Merlone
(2005) have provided suggestions for keeping records. Some guidelines for counseling case notes
are included in Appendix E. We offer some recommendations here regarding the creation of clinical
case notes to assist counselors in their practices.
You should never lose sight of the purposes of clinical case notes. There are two basic reasons
to keep notes: (a) to provide quality counseling services to clients and (b) to document decisions
you have made and actions you have taken as a counselor. Both of these purposes are legitimate and
reasonable.
6-4 The Case of Jennifer
Jennifer is a high school counselor. She has just completed a brief counseling session with
April, a 14-year-old student with whom Jennifer talks occasionally. April has had trouble
adjusting to her new school after moving to the area mid-year. During the session, April
told Jennifer that a new female friend recently told April that she didn’t want to be April’s
friend anymore because April spent time with girls the new friend did not like. April said to
Jennifer, “This is horrible. I feel like killing myself.” After talking through the situation with
April, Jennifer asked April an appropriate series of questions to determine whether April
was serious about the idea of killing herself. Jennifer’s questions included asking directly,
“Are you really thinking seriously about killing yourself?” and asking whether April had ever
attempted suicide. Based on April’s responses, Jennifer decided that April was not sui-
cidal and invited April to return to see Jennifer if she ever did think seriously about suicide.
Immediately after April left her office, Jennifer had to go to a staff meeting with the other
counselors in the school and after the meeting had appointments with two sets of parents of
other students. Jennifer didn’t have time to write any notes regarding her session with April
until the next morning.
• Why is it important to document what the counselor did and said after counseling sessions
like this one?

-- 167 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	145
RECORD NOTES IMMEDIATELY 	It is critical that you take notes either during sessions or immedi-
ately after. It is inadvisable to write clinical case notes long after the counseling session occurs. The
whole purpose of the notes is to record on paper what your memory will not hold. If you wait too
long, you will be relying on your memory, which is what you are trying to avoid.
Your own personal style should dictate whether you take notes during a counseling session or
after it is over. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages. Taking notes during sessions
allows you to record accurate information immediately without having to rely on your memory.
Some counselors can take notes unobtrusively during sessions. Other counselors may have trouble
taking notes and listening to clients at the same time. Clients could be distracted or inhibited by your
note taking during sessions, if it is not done easily. Some counselors find that waiting until after
the session is over is the best way for them to take clinical case notes. We suggest that you try both
methods and adopt the approach that works best for you.
As we have emphasized, the first purpose for creating clinical case notes is to render
quality counseling services. A very important part of writing clinical case notes is to separate
objective information (what was said by anyone or observed by you during the session) from
your clinical impressions (hypotheses or conclusions you developed as a result of what was
said or observed). Quite often, you will review notes to determine what a client actually said
during a session. You must be able to separate what was actually said from what you thought
about as a result of what was said. In addition, your notes may be used someday as evidence
in a legal proceeding, and being able to determine what was actually said by a client could be
critical. A common format for clinical case notes is the use of SOAP notes, which include four
separate sections:
Subjective: 	information reported by the client
Objective: 	results of the counselor’s tests and other assessments administered
• When should Jennifer have written the notes that documented what occurred in this session?
• Why is it important to document sessions for self-protection immediately after counseling
sessions end?
Discussion: Jennifer should have taken the time to document what she and April had said dur-
ing the session immediately after the session ended, even if it meant going late to her staff meet-
ing. In the event that Jennifer’s conclusion that April was not at risk for suicide was inaccurate and
April later made a suicide attempt, Jennifer’s notes would demonstrate that Jennifer said and
did what a reasonable counselor would have done: completed an appropriate suicide potential
assessment and appropriately concluded that April was not at risk. Notes that are meant to doc-
ument what occurred to demonstrate a counselor took appropriate actions in a counseling ses-
sion must be written immediately after the session ends, or within a very short time frame. Notes
written long after a session ends sometimes are not credible because memories about details
fade as time passes. It is impossible to predict whether a client actually will attempt suicide, but it
is possible to perform suicide potential assessments and to make reasonable conclusions based
on clients’ responses to questions that are asked. Counselors must make suicide assessments
when appropriate, but counselors are not held accountable for predicting whether a client will
attempt suicide if they can demonstrate that they made a thorough assessment.

-- 168 of 593 --

146 	Section 2 • Issues
Assessment: 	the counselor’s impressions generated by the data
Plan: 	diagnosis and treatment plan, along with any modifications to them
Another format that is similar and is also used frequently is the DAP, which is composed of three
sections:
Data: 	objective description of what occurred during the session
Assessment: 	counselor’s interpretations based on the data, in the context of the presenting
problem and treatment plan
Plan: 	what the counselor intends to accomplish in the next session or sessions
DOCUMENTING DECISIONS MADE AND ACTIONS TAKEN 	The second purpose for keeping
clinical case notes is to document decisions you have made or actions you have taken. Such
documentation would be important when you determine that a client is a danger to self or
others and you take some action to prevent harm. Documentation is also important when you
consult with others regarding a client’s situation. When you make decisions that clients may
not like, you should also document your actions in your clinical case notes. If you decide to
terminate counseling over a client’s objection, instruct a client to take some action the client is
reluctant to take, or impose limits on a client’s interactions with you outside of sessions, it is
wise to document how and why you did these things and the client’s reactions. Wehrman et al.
(2010) have provided guidelines for school counselors regarding when they should document
for self-protection.
When you document decisions or actions in your case notes, it is to protect yourself in the
event that such decisions or actions are questioned later by anyone else (Mitchell, 2007). As a
result, it is important to provide as much detailed information as possible. For example, listing
the exact time a conversation took place could be vital. When you are talking to people other than
your client, it is important to include the person’s name, title, and contact information; date and
time the conversation took place; and any other information that might be needed later. Recording
exact words used by you and others often can be important as well. When documenting to protect
yourself, it is essential that you do so immediately after conversations take place. If you write notes
hours, days, or weeks after conversations have occurred, such notes will be much less helpful to
you if you are trying to prove that you made the decisions or took the actions you are claiming in
your notes to have taken.
It would be impossible to write a summary of every action you take as a counselor or to make
an audio recording or video of every counseling session. Excessive documentation can also take
away valuable time that might better be spent providing counseling services. On the other hand, in
some circumstances counselors should document their actions to create a record showing that they
have done what they should have done. Guidelines for documenting for self-protection are included
in Figure 6-1.
WRITE LEGIBLY 	Another important part of note taking is to write notes that are legible, at least to
you. For notes to be useful in the future, you must be able to read and understand them. If your notes
are transferred to clients or third parties at a later date and they cannot read them, you will be called
on to explain what you wrote. This could be very inconvenient for you because it could occur in a
court after you have been subpoenaed and put under oath to tell the truth. It is much better to write
your notes so that others can read them than to have to interpret them later. It is definitely not a good
idea to purposefully write notes so that they cannot be read by others or to use symbols that only

-- 169 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	147
FIGURE 6-1 Documentation of records can provide self-protection
Generally, counselors must provide clients with access to their records upon request (ACA, 2014, §B.6.e.).
However, if there is compelling evidence that such access would cause harm to the client, then counselors
can limit clients’ access to their records. If counselors do decide to deny client access to their counseling
records, then “Counselors document the request of clients and the rationale for withholding some or all
of the record in the files of clients” (§B.6.e.).
1. Document circumstances in which your actions or inaction may be later reviewed by an ethics panel,
licensure board, or administrator, or within the context of a legal proceeding.
2. Some of the situations in which some level of documentation is called for include the following:
• Someone accuses a counselor of unethical or illegal behavior.
• A counselor reports a case of suspected child abuse.
• A counselor determines that a client is a danger to self.
• A counselor determines that a client is a danger to others.
• A client who is being counseled is involved in a legal controversy that could lead to the counselor
being forced to testify in court. Such controversies could include but are not limited to counseling
a child whose parents are arguing about custody in a divorce case, a husband or wife involved in
a contentious divorce case, a couple contemplating a divorce, or a person involved in a personal
injury lawsuit.
3. Begin documenting as soon as you determine that the situation is one in which documentation is
important.
4. When documenting for self-protection, include as much detail as possible. Include dates, exact
times events occurred, and exact words spoken to the degree that those details are remembered.
Include only factual information. When documenting, avoid recording your thoughts, diagnoses,
and conclusions. If these must be written down, include them in clinical case notes rather than in
records kept for documentation. But remember that all notes usually have to be produced if your
records are subpoenaed.
5. The best documentation is created very soon after a conversation or event has occurred. Indicate
the date and time anything is written, and never backdate anything. In other words, do not imply or
state that something was written on an earlier date than when it was actually written.
6. If you realize that you should have begun documentation sooner, write a summary of what hap-
pened up to that point in time. Include as much detail as can be remembered, as well as the date
and time the summary was written.
7. Maintain a documentation file that includes the originals of notes written to counselors, copies of
notes written by counselors to others, copies of relevant papers that counselors cannot keep for
themselves, and other papers that might be relevant to the situation.
8. Keep documentation records safe in a locked file drawer or cabinet or in a secure computer file. If
counselors agree to provide their files, they should never release their originals, only copies.
you can understand. When clients or third parties try to read such notes, they often become irritated.
You can be put in a difficult position because it may appear that you are not cooperating with people
who have a legal right to review the notes.
Client Access to Records
It would never occur to most health care providers to have concerns about patients having access to
copies of their records. However, mental health care is different from physical health care in many
respects. Some mental health care professionals believe it is not appropriate and could even be harmful
for patients or clients to have access to information about their diagnoses of mental disorders, treatment
approaches being taken, or clinical impressions that have been formulated by the professional.

-- 170 of 593 --

148 	Section 2 • Issues
The legal perspective on health care records is that they are kept for the benefit of the patient,
and therefore the patient should have access to them and must receive copies if requested. Further,
the patient has the right to demand that one health care provider transfer the records to another
health care provider. Mental health care is not seen as different from physical health care concerning
patient or client records. It is important, then, for counselors to assume that clients will have access
to clinical case notes created, a right to copies of those notes, and a right to request that copies of the
notes be transferred to other professionals.
In the event that a client requests a copy of your clinical case notes and you have any reason
to think that it would be best if the client did not see them, some practical steps could resolve the
matter. You could explain why your client would be better off not seeing your notes, and your client
might accept your explanation and withdraw the request. You also could suggest that it might be
more helpful for the client or for the person to whom the client wants the records transferred if you
were to create a summary of your notes rather than copy the notes themselves. You might explain
that the notes were written for your own clinical purposes and that others probably would be more
interested in summaries than in day-to-day notes.
If you were to refuse to show a client your clinical case notes regarding treatment or refuse
to provide copies for the client or for a third party that the client has designated, the client probably
could take legal steps to compel you to comply with the demand. It would appear that the law sup-
ports the client’s rights to the records (Dickerson, 2022). Access to their mental health records by
clients is common practice in most countries (Blease et al., 2021). In the following section, you will
find that HIPAA requires counselors to give clients access to their records. There is an exception
in which counselors can refuse to provide client access when counselors believe a client would be
harmed by the contents of the record, but the exception is narrow, and the assumption is typically
that a client should have access.
In some circumstances, your clinical case notes may contain information about other parties
involved in sessions in which the client was counseled. Such situations could arise in couples, family,
or group counseling. If your clinical case notes contain information that would
compromise another person’s privacy if the notes were given to a client or to
someone designated by the client, you might try to convince your client to with-
draw the request, or you might suggest that you provide a summary for your cli-
ent. If your client insists, however, on having copies of your original records, then
you should copy what you have written, eliminate references to others (which is
known as redacting), and provide your client with the portions of the records that
deal only with that client. When counselors provide clients with copies of their
counseling records, counselors do not include confidential information related to
any other clients (ACA, 2014, §B.6.e.).
FEDERAL LAWS AFFECTING COUNSELING
RECORDS
It would be impossible to describe every federal law or regulation that con-
tains requirements for counseling records. The most far-reaching federal
law related to mental health records is HIPAA. Most other federal statutes
related to mental health records apply only to programs that are funded
by federal tax money. Counselors who work in settings that are adminis-
tered by the federal government or in agencies that receive federal funding
should ask their employers whether any federal laws or regulations affect

-- 171 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	149
the counseling records they keep as part of their jobs. Many private agencies as well as state
and local government programs receive federal funding. Three federal laws affect a number
of counselors: the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), and the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act of 1972. While there are addi-
tional federal statutes that affect counseling recods, these three have the most profound effect
on recordkeeping for counselors.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
Public Law 104-191, commonly known as HIPAA, caused a huge stir in the health care indus-
try in the United States when it was first enacted. According to the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS, 2014), the HIPAA rules protect the privacy of individually identifiable
health information.
HIPAA was enacted on August 21, 1996. The HIPAA statute required HHS to issue privacy
regulations governing individually identifiable health information if Congress did not enact privacy
legislation within 3 years of the passage of HIPAA. After Congress failed to act on time, HHS
issued a HIPAA rule, known as the Privacy Rule, on December 28, 2000. Final modifications to the
rule were published on August 14, 2002. A full text of the rule and modifications are located at 45
CFR Part 160 and Part 164, Subparts A and E, on the agency website.
HIPAA applies only to organizations and individuals who transmit health care information in
electronic form in connection with a health care transaction. As it would be very difficult to have a
paper-only mental health care practice (Blakely et al., 2004), we recommend that all mental health
organizations and professionals in private practice comply with the HIPAA requirements (Lawley,
2012; Wilkinson & Reinhardt, 2015).
The Privacy Rule requirements went into effect on April 14, 2003. All records and
other individually identifiable health information held or disclosed by a covered entity in any
form—whether communicated electronically, on paper, or orally—are covered by the HIPAA
Privacy Rule.
Counselors must give clients a clear written explanation of how counselors use, keep, and
disclose their health care information. Clients must have access to their records. A process must
exist and must be in writing for clients to request amendments to their records. A written history
of most disclosures must be available to clients. In addition, counselors must have available for
clients to see, if they request it, a set of written privacy procedures that include who has access
to protected information, how it will be used within the counseling office, and when the infor-
mation would or would not be disclosed to others. Under HIPAA, clients must have a means to
make inquiries regarding their counseling records or to make complaints regarding the privacy
of their records.
Counselors must obtain uncoerced client consent to release information for treatment, pay-
ment, and health care operations, purposes, and for nonroutine uses and most non–health care pur-
poses, such as releasing information to financial institutions determining mortgages and other loans
or selling mailing lists to interested parties, such as life insurers. In an interesting lawsuit, the plaintiff
argued that the fees mental health providers charge to transfer copies of records to third parties are
excessive and should not be allowed under HIPAA (Fisher, 2018).
Disclosures of treatment information without specific client authorization are allowed in certain
circumstances, including but not limited to quality assurance oversight activities, research, judicial
and administrative hearings, limited law enforcement activities, emergency circumstances, and facility
patient directories.

-- 172 of 593 --

150 	Section 2 • Issues
One unique provision could be very helpful to counselors when they provide services to clients
who need a great deal of family support. If clients are first informed and then given an opportunity to
orally object, counselors may give health care information to family members or others assisting in the
client’s care. Standard B.1.a. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) cautions counselors to maintain sen-
sitivity to cultural meanings of confidentiality and “respect differing views toward disclosure of infor-
mation.” We recommend that counselors who wish to utilize the HIPAA provision allowing private
information to be given to family members indicate in their initial client agreement form the intention
to communicate with family members when needed and to specifically ask clients orally whether that
is acceptable to them. Under this same section in the rules, counselors may provide information to the
public in the form of facility directories and to disaster relief organizations, such as the Red Cross.
When clients do give permission to transfer their personal information regarding their coun-
seling, only the minimum amount of information to accomplish the purpose may be transferred.
As a result, it is important for counselors to have on their record release form a place for clients to
specify the purpose of their request that their records be transferred. Standard B.2.e. of the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that when disclosure of confidential information is required, counsel-
ors should reveal only essential information. When clients request that their records be transferred
to another health care professional in conjunction with anticipated treatment from that individual,
then, according to HIPAA, the full record must be transferred so that the receiving professional can
provide the best-quality care.
Under HIPAA, each counseling office must designate a privacy officer. In a private practice,
the counselors would also serve as the privacy officers. The privacy officer of an agency must train
employees to handle confidential information appropriately, ensure that procedures to protect client
privacy are in place and are followed, and ensure that proper forms are used by counselors and other
health care personnel.
When counselors transfer records based on clients’ written permission, they must take steps
to ensure that recipients of the records protect the privacy of the information they have received.
We recommend that counselors record and insert statements that the contents are confidential and
should not be transferred to any other individuals.
What we have called clinical case notes are known as psychotherapy notes under HIPAA.
Psychotherapy notes that are used only by the psychotherapist, to which no one else has access,
are held to a much higher standard of protection. The rationale is that such notes are not a part of
the health care record and were never intended to be shared with anyone else. When a client wants
to have psychotherapy notes transferred to a third party, the client must specifically request their
transfer. A general request for transfer of records is insufficient. Clients must give their specific
permission and authorization for the sensitive information contained in psychotherapy notes to be
released. Health care plans cannot refuse to provide reimbursement if a client does not agree to
release information covered under the psychotherapy notes provision.
Civil penalties for violations of the HIPAA rules are $100 per incident, up to $25,000 per
person, per year, per standard. Criminal penalties for providers who knowingly and improperly dis-
close or obtain health care information include substantial fines and terms of imprisonment.
The Office of Civil Rights received more than 34,000 HIPAA violation complaints in 2021,
which was up 25% from the previous year. In 2021, the Office of Civil Rights conducted more than
570 compliance reviews that led to 83% of the entities reviewed having to take corrective action or
pay a civil penalty (Pifer, 2023). The extent to which HIPAA protects the privacy of clients is still
unclear. One state court has ruled that, under HIPAA rules, a patient who was undergoing review
for mandated, court-ordered outpatient treatment would have to be given notice and the opportunity

-- 173 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	151
to object before the patient’s records could be provided to a court through a subpoena (Gomez &
Knight, 2013; In the Matter of Miguel M. v. Barron, 2011).
HIPAA is a federal law, so it applies throughout the United States and overrides state laws
that might be more lax. However, state laws that are stricter than HIPAA about protecting consumer
health care privacy must also be adhered to if they exist.
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), which is sometimes referred
to as the Buckley Amendment, affects all public educational institutions and any private or paro-
chial educational institution that receives federal funding in one form or another (Doll et al., 2011).
Almost all private and church-sponsored educational institutions receive some type of federal fund-
ing. The penalty for violating provisions of FERPA is the loss of all federal funding, which could
be devastating for many educational institutions. Individuals cannot bring lawsuits under FERPA.
Since the HIPAA rules were enacted, school personnel have wanted to know whether
HIPAA requirements for health care records must be followed in educational institutions.
In some cases, HIPAA applies in schools, and in other situations, it does not. Under 24 CFT
164.501, health information contained within student educational records that are subject to
FERPA is exempt from the requirements of HIPAA. On the other hand, school-based health
centers may be subject to HIPAA requirements if such centers are operated by HIPAA-compliant
health organizations. Also, school nurses may be subject to HIPAA requirements if they engage
in electronic billing. Communications between schools and health care providers may be subject
to HIPAA rules as well. Administrators in charge of school counseling programs should consult
with school board attorneys if they are unsure whether their school counseling programs must
comply with HIPAA rules.
FERPA legislation basically says that minor students’ parents (and students themselves who
are 18 or older or who are in college) have two rights: (a) to inspect and review their education
records and to challenge the contents to ensure the records are not inaccurate or misleading and (b)
to have their written authorization obtained before copies of their education records can be trans-
ferred to any third party (U.S. Department of Education, 2014).
After students are 18 years old or are attending a postsecondary institution, the legal rights
under this legislation are vested in them. However, parents or guardians of dependent students may
be given copies of the records of such students without the students’ consent. Dependent students
are defined as children or stepchildren, over half of whose support was received from the taxpayer
the previous tax year (Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 26 U.S.C.A. §152). As a
result of this definition, most educational institutions give access to student records to parents who
can show they claimed their child as a tax dependant the previous year.
Education records are defined in the federal legislation as records kept by educational institu-
tions regarding students. The law specifically exempts any records that “are in the sole possession of
the maker” [FERPA, 1997, 20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(a)(B)(i)] from the right to inspect and review them.
To qualify under this exemption, counselors in schools and other educational institutions should
keep their case notes separate from other records and should not let anyone else have access to those
records. Treatment records “made or maintained by a physician, psychiatrist, psychologist, or other
recognized professional or paraprofessional” are also exempt [20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(a)(B)(iv)]. As a
result of these exemptions, clinical case notes kept by counselors in educational institutions do not
have to be shown to students, parents, or guardians under FERPA requirements.

-- 174 of 593 --

152 	Section 2 • Issues
Schools are not required by FERPA to obtain written permission from parents or students
to release a student’s records to “other schools or school systems in which the student intends
to enroll” [FERPA, 1997, 20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(b)(1)(b)]. Nonetheless, when copies of records of
transfer students are forwarded to other schools, parents must be notified of the transfer and must be
given copies of the transferred records if they desire copies.
These exemptions for access to inspect and review one’s records under FERPA do not
in any way diminish a person’s rights to counselors’ records under a subpoena in relation to
a lawsuit. A valid subpoena for records must be complied with in all circumstances. When an
educational institution intends to release records pursuant to a subpoena, the institution must
notify parents and students in advance of the release [FERPA, 1997, 20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(b)(2)
(B); Mattie T. v. Johnston, 1976; Rios v. Read, 1977], although notification is not required if the
subpoena orders that the existence of the subpoena not be disclosed [FERPA, 1997, 20 U.S.C.A.
§1232g(b)(J)(i–ii)].
An amendment to FERPA (1997) has given permission to release private information without
parent or student written permission in an emergency situation. The information must be “necessary
to protect the health or safety of the student or other persons” [20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(a)(1)(I)]. This
provision would allow counselors to release their records of students to medical personnel or law
enforcement authorities without violating FERPA, if they determined that a student was a danger to
self or others.
Educational institutions may release to an alleged victim of any violence the results of any
disciplinary proceeding conducted against the alleged perpetrator with respect to that specific crime
[FERPA, 1997, 20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(b)(6)]. FERPA also allows institutions to include in educa-
tional records any disciplinary action taken against students and to disclose such action to school
officials in other schools [20 U.S.C.A. §1232g(h)]. However, institutions may not release to news-
papers the names of students who have been found guilty of disciplinary proceedings (United States
v. Miami University, 2002).
No general common law principle requires counselors to obtain written authorization from
clients to transfer records to third parties. Oral permission is legally adequate, but obtaining writ-
ten authorization is always recommended, and under FERPA, written authorization is required to
transfer records.
Federally Funded Substance Abuse Programs
The federal government funds a multitude of substance abuse prevention and treatment pro-
grams. Private and public agencies apply for federal funds to operate many of these programs.
Programs that receive federal funds must comply with federal laws related to substance abuse
treatment.
A federal statute, the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment
and Rehabilitation Act of 1972, 1997 (42 U.S.C.A. §290dd-2), declares that records kept by any
facility that is “conducted, regulated, or directly or indirectly assisted” by the federal government
are confidential. Disclosure of records of individuals receiving substance abuse services (includ-
ing education, prevention, training, treatment, rehabilitation, or research) is permitted only in a
few circumstances. Exceptions to the nondisclosure of records requirement include the follow-
ing: (a) when the person gives prior written consent, (b) in medical emergencies, (c) for audits
or evaluations, and (d) to avert substantial risk of death or serious bodily harm if a court order is
secured. Records cannot be used for criminal charges or investigations [42 U.S.C.A. §290dd-2(c)].

-- 175 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	153
However, a counselor’s direct observations are not a record and can be used in criminal proceed-
ings against clients or patients (State v. Brown, 1985; State v. Magnuson, 1984).
The statute related to federal substance abuse programs does not prohibit exchange of infor-
mation between the military and the Department of Veterans Affairs. The statute also permits the
reporting of suspected child abuse and neglect under state laws.
Unlike for FERPA, the violation of this statute or the regulations that implement it can result
in criminal charges and a fine. As a result, clients in federally supported substance abuse treatment
programs may file complaints against counselors who violate clients’ rights to privacy, although
individuals whose confidentiality rights are violated cannot file civil lawsuits for damages (Logan v.
District of Columbia, 1978).
Other Federal Statutes
Additional federal statutes prohibit or limit the disclosure of counseling records for the follow-
ing clients who are served by federally assisted programs: (a) runaway and homeless youth (42
U.S.C.A. §5731); (b) individuals with sexually transmitted diseases [42 U.S.C.A. §247c(d)(5)]; (c)
voluntary clients in federal drug abuse or dependence programs [42 U.S.C.A. §260(d)]; (d) older
persons [42 U.S.C.A. §3026(d); 42 U.S.C. §3027(f)(1)]; and (e) victims of violence against women
[42 U.S.C.A. §14011(b)(5)]. On the other hand, statutes sometimes expressly limit privacy. A cer-
tain federal statute specifically denies confidentiality to individuals who are examined by a physi-
cian in civil commitment proceedings due to drug abuse (42 U.S.C.A. §3420).
Handling, Storing, and Destroying Records
Creating counseling records is an important process, but maintaining and ultimately disposing of
them are crucial matters for counselors as well. According to the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014),
counselors must ensure that records are kept in a secure location and that access to counseling
records is limited to authorized persons (§B.6.b.). The privacy of clients and the self-protection
of counselors both have an impact on the manner in which records are handled, stored, and
destroyed.
Because counseling records are so sensitive, agencies should develop written policies
regarding how these records will be handled from day to day. Agencies or practices regu-
lated under HIPAA must have written policies regarding records and must make those poli-
cies available for client review. Typically, counselors create and keep their own clinical case
notes. These notes should be stored in locked drawers or cabinets, or on a secure site when
the records are computerized. In offices with more than one person, an individual should be
designated as the records manager. Generally, this person would be a clerical or administra-
tive employee. The records manager should ensure that counseling records are kept secure,
checked out and back in properly, stored safely, and, eventually, eliminated according to a set
schedule and policy.
Everyone who handles counseling records should make sure that the records are not left unat-
tended in such a manner that unauthorized persons can read them. Care should be taken to promptly
return counseling records to their proper place after they have been used.
No general laws dictate how long a particular counseling record must be kept (AHIMA, 2013).
However, some federal or state statutes require that some types of records created for certain pur-
poses be kept for a particular period of time. For instance, some state counselor licensure laws dictate

-- 176 of 593 --

154 	Section 2 • Issues
that counselors’ records be kept for a particular number of years. Attorneys who advise counseling
agencies should be asked to review statutes and regulations to identify any requirements regarding
records, including the length of time they must be maintained.
Many agencies have determined that they want to keep their counseling records for a set
period of time. Generally, agencies also have rules and guidelines regarding how records should
be handled, stored, and eliminated. Counselors should always inquire as to whether the agency in
which they work has such requirements. Counselors should follow all agency rules and regulations.
Counseling records are often also affected by agency accreditation rules. Many counseling cen-
ters, hospitals, and treatment facilities are accredited by private agencies such as the Joint Commission,
the International Association of Counseling Services (IACS), and the Commission on Accreditation
of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF International). These accreditation agencies have specific require-
ments regarding counseling records, and many require that records be kept for a set period of time.
Counselors who work in accredited agencies should ask about recordkeeping requirements.
If no laws, agency rules, or accreditation standards require records to be kept for a specific length
of time, then counselors should encourage their agencies to establish a written policy and to destroy
counseling records on a periodic basis. There are a number of reasons for not keeping counseling
records indefinitely. Practically speaking, it is expensive to keep records locked away and to keep up
with logging them in and out. In addition, confidential records that exist could be compromised in some
way, whereas confidential records that have been destroyed cannot be seen by unauthorized persons.
It is wise to establish a record-destroying policy stipulating that certain categories of records
will be destroyed on a specific date each year unless one of the following applies: (a) there is reason
to believe the records may be subpoenaed in a current or future lawsuit; or (b) the records contain
documentation of actions taken by counselors that will be kept longer than the usual period of time.
There are no guidelines about how to determine whether individuals believe records may be subpoe-
naed. Common sense should dictate this determination. If records are purposefully destroyed when
someone knows or reasonably should have known that those records would be subpoenaed later,
the person destroying them can be charged with a serious crime. Records documenting actions that
counselors have taken to protect themselves probably should be kept longer than other counseling
records normally would be kept.
Voluntarily Transferring Records
Clients often request that their counseling records be provided to another professional who is
rendering services to them. In addition, professionals often request your clients’ counseling
records when they begin treating your current or former clients. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014)
requires that counselors obtain written permission from clients to disclose or transfer copies of
their records (§B.6.g.). After clients have requested or given permission in writing that their coun-
seling records be transferred to a third party, counselors have an obligation to comply. A form is
provided in Appendix C that can be used when clients wish to have their records transferred.
Counselors should make sure the written request of the client is followed precisely and that
only copies of records the client authorizes for transfer, not the originals of records, are actually
sent. Also, records located in client files from other professionals or agencies should never be trans-
ferred to a third party. If clients want those records sent, they must contact the agency that created
the records and authorize that agency to forward them.
The written and signed authorization from the client should be filed in the client’s folder. In
addition, a notation should be entered in the client’s file indicating which records were sent and
when, the method of transfer (e.g., U.S. mail, courier service, personal delivery, electronic transfer),
to whom they were sent, and the address of the recipient.

-- 177 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	155
SUBPOENAS
Receiving a subpoena can be an intimidating, and even frightening, experience for a counselor
(DeCino et al., 2019; Gutheil & Drogin, 2013). Unless counselors deal with subpoenas routinely in
their work, this reaction is justified. Dealing with a subpoena places a counselor in the legal arena,
which is a system that is adversarial in nature and operates by a different set of rules than those to
which counselors are accustomed (Borkosky, 2016). If you should receive a subpoena, the informa-
tion that follows will help guide you through the process of responding to it.
6-5 The Case of Isabella
Isabella, an elementary school counselor, has been counseling Billy Rosen, a third-grader whose
parents are going through a contentious divorce. One afternoon after school, Isabella is working
in her office when a gentleman appears at her door. He announces that he has a subpoena for
her records that has been issued by Mr. Rosen’s attorney. He offers to wait while she makes a
copy of the records of her counseling sessions with Billy.
• How should Isabella respond to the gentleman’s offer?
• What should Isabella do about the subpoena?
Discussion: Isabella should first inform the gentleman that she will confer with her supervisor
to determine how to respond to the subpoena. She should then tell him she will not produce
the records until some later time, if the subpoena is valid. Isabella should notify her immediate
supervisor that she has received a subpoena and request legal advice regarding her response to
it. If her supervisor does not provide her with access to a lawyer, then Isabella should follow the
supervisor’s directives regarding how to respond to the subpoena.
Subpoenas are legal documents that might require counselors to produce copies of records;
appear for a deposition, court hearing, or trial; or appear and bring their records with them (Barsky
& Goud, 2024; Childress-Beatty & Koocher, 2013; Cottone & Tarvydas, 2007; Levy et al., 2014).
Subpoenas are official court documents and cannot be ignored. Even though subpoenas might result
in health care professionals having to turn over records or appear in court for various reasons, coun-
selors must know whether they have a legal obligation to do what a subpoena says.
In Chapter 5, we noted that a court order is one of the exceptions to confidentiality and privi-
leged communication. Court orders might be issued in hearings or trials at which judges are present
and give verbal orders, or they might be issued when judges sign written orders in their official
capacity. All citizens must obey court orders. The sanctions for not obeying orders issued by judges
are imprisonment, fines, or both. The only alternative to obeying a court order is to appeal to a
higher court. A lawyer must file such appeals immediately. Although a subpoena is a type of court
order, some subpoenas are not valid, so counselors should always consult with their own attorneys
before turning over records or appearing at a deposition, hearing, or trial in response to a subpoena.
Discovery in Litigation
Lawyers who are representing parties in lawsuits are members of the bar in the jurisdiction in which they
are practicing. Therefore, they are considered official officers of the court. One of the privileges extended
to officers of a court is to issue valid subpoenas for information related to cases they are litigating.

-- 178 of 593 --

156 	Section 2 • Issues
One of the concepts in lawsuits of any kind is that attorneys representing the parties are enti-
tled to discovery. Discovery is the process whereby attorneys have the right to ask for and receive
information relevant to their case before the case is tried. The idea is that there should be no sur-
prises during trials. Instead, before the actual trial begins, each side in a lawsuit should know all the
information that will be entered into evidence during the trial.
Subpoenas are used extensively during the discovery or pretrial phase of lawsuits. Attorneys
from both sides ask potential witnesses to respond in writing to written questions (interrogatories),
to provide copies of records they are entitled to see, and to come to their offices for depositions.
In addition, witnesses can be subpoenaed to testify at hearings before the judge presiding over the
case, as well as at the trial.
Validity of Subpoenas
If an attorney issues a subpoena to you, your first step is to consult your own lawyer to determine
whether the subpoena is valid and whether you must respond to it. Guidelines for obtaining your
own legal advice, whether you are an employee or are in private practice, are provided in Chapter 1.
The records of counselors may be subpoenaed, as may counselors themselves for their oral
testimony at depositions, hearings, or trials. Also, written questions may be submitted with a
demand for written answers. Counselors might also be subpoenaed to appear at a legal proceeding
and instructed to bring records with them (Bowerbank, 2006). In the event you receive a subpoena
to appear at a legal proceeding but no mention is made of records, do not take records with you
unless you are instructed to do so by your own attorney.
An attorney will review a subpoena for you and will advise you regarding the proper manner
in which to respond. Attorneys might assist you in a number of ways. For example, they could ask
the attorney who issued the subpoena to withdraw it, file a motion to quash the subpoena, or advise
you to comply with the subpoena.
Attorneys who are litigating cases may not issue subpoenas for records or for witnesses to
testify if the attorneys know they do not have a right to the information. However, because attor-
neys may not realize that the material may be privileged, you could receive a subpoena that is
not enforceable because of privilege (American Psychological Association, 2006; Woody, 2007).
Subpoenas could be unenforceable or invalid for other reasons as well. You must therefore obtain
legal advice regarding your response to any subpoena you receive. If you refuse to respond to a
valid subpoena, you could be held in contempt of court and either imprisoned or fined. On the other
hand, if you provide information in response to an invalid or unenforceable subpoena, you could be
held legally accountable to a client or former client for any damages suffered.
When you receive a subpoena, you should take action immediately because most subpoenas
must be complied with within a fixed number of hours. Many counselors mistakenly believe that
subpoenas must be personally handed to them to be valid and enforceable. In fact, in most cases,
subpoenas are mailed, left with someone else at your place of work, or delivered to you in some
fashion other than being personally handed to you. If you have knowledge—through any means—
that a subpoena has been issued to you, you should immediately take the steps listed in the follow-
ing sections.
Your first step, if you are employed, should be to notify your immediate supervisor that you
have received a subpoena and to request legal advice regarding your response to it. If your employer
does not provide you with access to a lawyer, then follow the directives of your supervisor. If you are
in an independent private practice, then your first step should be to call your own practice attorney.
Your lawyer or supervisor should be informed if you think the information being requested might
be privileged. You should also inform your attorney or supervisor if you believe testifying or producing

-- 179 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	157
records regarding the matter would compromise the privacy of a former or current client, even if the
relationship was not privileged by law. You should feel free to openly discuss the situation with a lawyer
because your relationship with the lawyer is privileged. Often, it is necessary to explain to your lawyer
the general concepts of counseling, the nature of your relationship to the parties involved in the lawsuit,
and the details regarding clients who are involved or affected by the litigation. You should give complete
information to your lawyer and answer any questions regarding the situation.
Once your attorney or supervisor understands the situation and has given you advice, follow
the instructions precisely. If you have any doubts or questions, discuss them with your attorney or
supervisor, but ultimately you must follow the advice given to you.
Generally, a subpoena received from the attorney of your client or former client will not
be problematic because the individual in most cases has waived his or her privilege, if it exists,
by calling you as a witness. Nonetheless, seek legal advice to ensure that you are proceeding
properly.
Interrogatories
One of the easiest types of subpoenas to deal with involves interrogatories. Included with the sub-
poena will be a set of written questions with a requirement that you respond to each question in
writing. You must sign an oath that your answers are truthful.
If you receive a set of interrogatories and your attorney informs you that you must respond to
them, you should discuss each question and your proposed answer with your attorney before you
begin writing. After composing your answers and before you submit them, you should ask your
attorney to review your answers. Take your attorney’s advice about changes or rewording of your
answers. Again, if you are an employed counselor and do not have access to an attorney, follow the
directives of your immediate supervisor.
Appearances at Proceedings
In the event you are directed by your attorney or supervisor to appear at a legal proceeding, ask
that you be told what to expect. School counselors who have been required to appear at court
hearings have reported that the experience was stressful (DeCino et al., 2017). The school coun-
selors in this study said that in dealing with subpoenas, they relied on consultation, advice, and
support from administrators, lawyers, colleagues, educators, and consultants, but some partici-
pants said they were very dissatisfied with the guidance they received from their administrators
and school attorneys. The school counselors reported they would say less if they were forced to
testify in court again and would talk with the students involved before testifying in court. The
study participants indicated that appearing in court and sitting in the witness stand was exception-
ally anxiety-inducing and that they wished someone had been with them to advise them through
the process.
Ask your attorney or supervisor to explain in detail how such events take place. Also, ask the
attorney to tell you what questions you might be asked and request advice on responses you think
you should make to the anticipated questions. In addition, ask the attorney to accompany you to the
proceeding if possible.
Depositions usually take place in the office of the lawyer who has issued the subpoena.
Although the judge will be present at hearings and trials, the judge does not attend depositions.
Generally, depositions are attended by the attorney who issued the subpoena, the attorney represent-
ing the other party involved in the lawsuit, a court reporter, and the witness being deposed.
It is important to have your own attorney present at your deposition if possible. During a
hearing or trial, the judge will rule on controversies and will instruct witnesses whether to answer

-- 180 of 593 --

158 	Section 2 • Issues
questions. With no judge present at depositions, you need your own attorney there to tell you how
to proceed and to protect you from being pressured by the other attorneys. In some circumstances,
one attorney could tell you that if you do not answer a question, she or he will issue a rule to show
cause and require you to appear before a judge to explain your refusal to answer, and tell you that
the judge could then hold you in contempt of court and fine or imprison you. The other attorney
could then threaten that if you do answer the question, that attorney will sue you for violating his or
her client’s privacy. When situations like this arise, you need the presence of an attorney who will
advise you how to proceed.
Testimony Under Oath
Testimony that you give at any legal proceeding will be under oath, which means that you will
be required to swear to tell the truth. Once an oath has been administered, false statements usually
are considered perjury, which is a serious crime. You might be instructed by your attorney not to
answer questions at a deposition, but you should always, in all circumstances, answer questions
truthfully when you do respond under oath.
Turning Over Records
In the event that your attorney or supervisor directs you to turn over your records in response to
a subpoena, you should follow the advice you have been given. Sometimes attorneys who issue
subpoenas will accept summaries of notes rather than the case notes themselves, or other, similar
compromises may be needed. Your attorney will negotiate appropriately on your behalf.
You should never forward the originals of your records. Instead, make copies and deliver the
copies. Sometimes records of other individuals are mixed in with records that must be turned over.
In that situation, sometimes it is permissible to obliterate private information related to other parties.
Again, follow the advice of your attorney in this situation.
If your records include records that you have received from other professionals—such as
physicians, other mental health professionals, or hospitals—do not copy and forward those records.
If the attorney issuing the subpoena wants copies of those records, the individual
or entity that created them will have to be subpoenaed.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that when counselors receive
subpoenas for the counseling records of their clients, counselors must obtain
written informed consent from their clients to release the records or, if that is
impossible, must “take steps to prohibit the disclosure or have it limited as nar-
rowly as possible due to potential harm to the client or counseling relationship”
(§B.2.d.). In our experience, clients who do not wish to have their counseling
records exposed rarely agree to sign a written consent document. Usually,
clients whose records have been subpoenaed, after being informed by their
counselors that a subpoena exists, take appropriate legal steps through their
attorneys to have the subpoena quashed. It is the duty of clients to assert
their legal privilege if one exists. In the event a client is not available to be
informed that his or her counseling records have been subpoenaed and it is
believed that the relationship with the client was privileged, the counselor or
the counselor’s attorney should assert the client’s privilege on behalf of the
client and should take other steps that are legally available to avoid comply-
ing with the subpoena. If the subpoena is determined to be valid, then coun-
selors and their attorneys should do what they can to limit the disclosure of
private client information.

-- 181 of 593 --

Chapter 6 • Records and Subpoenas 	159
Summary and Key Points
This chapter familiarizes you with the complexities
of counseling records and recordkeeping. Subpoenas
were also addressed because records are often sub-
ject to being subpoenaed. With respect to records,
some key points made in this chapter include:
• With the advent of electronic recordkeeping and
virtual counseling services, the entire concept
of recordkeeping has changed over the past few
decades.
• Counselors keep records for two legitimate rea-
sons: to provide the best-possible quality of ser-
vices to clients and for their own self-protection.
• Good records can benefit clients in several sig-
nificant ways. Some benefits to clients include
continuity of care when client information is
transferred from one mental health professional
to another or when a former client returns to
counseling after an extended absence; help-
ing clients measure and affirm their growth and
change; and the creation of an accurate history of
a client’s diagnosis, treatment, and recovery.
• Records can also serve to protect counselors. If
your decisions are ever challenged, it is essen-
tial that you have documented decisions that you
have made and actions you have taken.
• Virtual counseling and the use of computers for
recordkeeping have had significant impacts on
the ways counselors create and maintain records.
However, recordkeeping principles have not
changed.
• Counselors keep three major types of records:
administrative records, recordings, and clinical
case notes. It is important for you to understand
what is involved in keeping each of these kinds of
records and for you to follow sound procedures
for securing them and protecting the privacy of
your clients.
• When you begin working with clients, you will
need to have clear and consistent policies and
procedures for creating, maintaining, transfer-
ring, and destroying your records. Although your
personal style and preferences may play some
role, many of these policies and procedures will
be dictated by your employer, laws, and accredi-
tation standards.
• Many counselors are surprised to learn how many
people can have access to their records. You
should always make records with the assumption
that they will be seen by others, including clients
who have the right to access their records.
Three important federal laws that affect coun-
seling records are the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act 	(HIPAA); 	the 	Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA); and
the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act of
1972, a statute related to federally funded substance
abuse programs. If you work in an educational insti-
tution or in an agency that receives federal funds to
provide substance abuse treatment, you will need to
understand the major provisions of these laws.
• HIPAA is a federal law that contains numer-
ous detailed provisions regarding client pri-
vacy, informed consent, and transfer of records.
Counselors in all settings must understand how
this law affects their practices.
• FERPA is a federal law that protects the privacy
of educational records. Among other things,
FERPA 	requires 	educational 	institutions 	to
obtain written permission of minor students or
of adult students to transfer educational records
to third parties and gives parents or students the
right to inspect and challenge the contents of
educational records.
The thought of receiving a subpoena might
make you quite anxious. Subpoenas are official
court documents that you cannot ignore.
• Unless you deal with subpoenas routinely in
your work, you should consult your supervisor
(if you are employed) or your practice attorney
(if you are in private practice) whenever you
receive a subpoena.
• Your attorney will be an invaluable resource in
helping you respond appropriately to subpoenas
and deal with legal proceedings such as interrog-
atories, depositions, and trials. Always seek the
counsel of your supervisor or attorney and fol-
low the advice you are given.

-- 182 of 593 --

160
7
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
7.1 Explain the processes by which counselors develop,
maintain, and increase their competence to practice.
7.2 Describe the major ethical and legal issues involved
in evaluation and assessment.
7.3 Discuss the unique ethical and legal challenges that
counselors encounter when they diagnose mental
and emotional disorders.
Competence, Assessment,
and Diagnosis
In this chapter, we explore three important areas of counselor
practice: counselor competence, assessment and testing by
counselors, and the diagnosis of mental disorders of clients
by counselors. Counselor competence is difficult to assess
because there are no absolute means to determine whether
a counselor is competent, yet counselors are required to
develop and maintain their competence to provide mental
health services to clients. Counselors engage in assessment
and testing in their practices, yet state statutes and the extent
of counselor training limit the degree to which counselors
use testing in their practices. To gain employment and have
their services reimbursed by health insurance companies,
counselors must diagnose mental disorders of their clients
even though the philosophy of counselors embraces wellness
and rejects the medical model on which diagnosis is based.
The Impact of the COVID-19
Pandemic on Counselor Competence,
Assessment, and Diagnosis
A myriad of challenges to counselor competence arose in the
immediate aftermath of the COVID-19 lockdown. Counselors
needed to develop new competencies to provide online
counseling services, including mastery of the technologies
required to deliver services in a secure manner. Burnout—an
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. If you were a prospective client
seeking counseling, how would you
go about finding a counselor who is
competent to help you?
2. How do counselors determine
whether they are competent to
counsel a particular client?
3. Do you think it is appropriate for
a counselor to refer a client whose
beliefs and behaviors conflict
with the personal values of the
counselor?
4. What do you think should be
done if a counselor becomes
overwhelmed by personal problems
and is not counseling effectively?
5. Evaluation as an end in itself is
a very different process from
counseling. Why would a counselor
want to be an evaluator?
6. To what degree do you believe
counselors are competent
to administer and interpret
psychological tests?
7. The DSM-5 system for diagnosis
is based on pathology and the
medical model of mental illness,
whereas counseling is grounded
in the wellness model. Why must
counselors learn to diagnose
clinical disorders?

-- 183 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	161
erosion of competence—became an increasing concern due to the stressors the pandemic placed on
counselors’ personal and professional lives.
During the pandemic lockdown, counselors transitioned to counseling their clients virtually.
Mental health counselors needed to continue to assess their clients and provide diagnoses, but they
were forced to do so in the absence of many of the visual, auditory, olfactory, and spatial cues on
which they relied.
In addition, counselors have changed their approaches to assessment and testing due to the
virtual counseling they are now practicing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Counselors often
assess the needs of their clients in initial interviews, which used to be conducted in face-to-face
office settings. Subtle body language information is more difficult to assess when virtual counseling
takes place. In addition, some psychological tests that counselors administer and interpret in their
practices have had to be adapted to counseling that takes place at a distance.
The process counselors use to diagnose clients has not changed dramatically with the shift
from in-person to virtual counseling. Counselors in private practices and in many other settings still
must use the DSM-5-TR (American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2022) to render professional
diagnoses. The diagnosis process can be accomplished in virtual counseling sessions. Technology is
being used to create innovative approaches to teaching diagnosis skills to counseling students. For
example, students have role-played interviews with client avatars in an online, 3D, virtual counselor
training facility and perceived this to be an effective method to develop mental health interviewing
and diagnosis skills (Lowell & Alshammari, 2019).
A new technology that has exploded onto the scene in counseling is artificial intelligence (AI).
While the potential of artificial intelligence is seemingly endless, its rapid growth raises a host of ethi-
cal concerns. Artificial intelligence is deceptively simple to use, and mental health counselors who use
psychological artificial intelligence or recommend it to clients with inadequate knowledge and train-
ing run the risk of practicing beyond their boundaries of competence (Fulmer et al., 2021). Artificial
intelligence shows great promise for improving counseling services, but further research is needed to
address the ethical and societal concerns that are raised by its use (Fiske et al., 2019). Although there
is abundant room for caution, some evidence is appearing that artificial intelligence can serve as a cost-
effective and accessible supplement to mental health counseling. For example, Fulmer et al. (2018),
in a randomized controlled test, demonstrated that the use of a particular psychological artificial intel-
ligence test (Tess) produced a significant decrease in depression and anxiety among college students.
As of mid-2023, researchers were experimenting with using AI to collect diagnostic information from
clients interactively (Roy et al., 2023) and with using ChatGPT as a diagnostic tool (Yang et al., 2023).
AI may prove to be a valuable tool for counselors to use in treatment, diagnosis, and assessment.
However, as was the case when older technologies were initially integrated into counseling, the inno-
vations are proceeding at a more rapid pace than ethical concerns can be addressed.
COMPETENCE AS AN ETHICAL AND LEGAL CONCEPT
When clients come for counseling, they invest a great deal of reliance and trust in their counsel-
ors. The client’s role in the therapeutic relationship—which involves dependency, self-disclosure,
vulnerability, and expectations of finding relief and solutions to problems in a safe environment—
underscores the counselor’s obligation to provide competent services. When clients put their trust
in counselors as professionals, one of their most fundamental expectations is that their counselors
will be competent (Pope et al., 2021). Herlihy and Corey (2015a) noted that the trust that clients
bestow on us is “a source of power that must not be abused; clients need to be able to rely on their
counselor’s competence as a helper” (p. 183).

-- 184 of 593 --

162 	Section 2 • Issues
Competence in counseling is not easy to define. According to Welfel (2016), competence involves
a combination of knowledge, skill, and diligence. Knowledgeable counselors have a thorough grounding
in the core areas of study required to practice the profession. As we noted in Chapter 2, the Council for
Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP, 2024) has identified core
areas of instruction, including professional orientation and ethical practice, social and cultural diver-
sity, human growth and development, career development, helping relationships, group work, assess-
ment, and research and program evaluation. Most counselor training programs, whether or not they are
CACREP-accredited, offer instruction in these basic areas. Knowledge is acquired through attaining a
graduate degree in counseling and is maintained through continuing education activities.
Skill building is a complex process that begins in graduate school with applied courses such
as counseling techniques, group work, and practicum and internship. Skills are then honed and
expanded through post-degree, supervised counseling experience. Skilled counselors are able to
select and use appropriately a range of basic counseling techniques and therapeutic interventions.
Diligence has been defined by Welfel (2016) as a consistent attentiveness to the client’s needs
that means putting client welfare first and foremost, above all other concerns. The first standard of the
ACA Code of Ethics (2014) reads, “The primary responsibility of counselors is to respect the dignity
and to promote the welfare of clients.” Evidence of diligent practice includes being willing to do extra
reading, research, training, consultation, and follow-up to ensure that clients are served effectively.
Counselors are neither totally competent nor totally incompetent, although legal arguments
during malpractice lawsuits might imply otherwise. Competency is not an abstract concept; instead,
it is based on performance. Neither is competency a dichotomous concept: Instead, there is a con-
tinuum of professional expertise, with gross negligence at one extreme and maximum effectiveness
at the other extreme. As discussed in Chapter 1, the difference between law and ethics is that law
demands a minimum level of practice from counselors, whereas ethics encourages counselors to
aspire to the highest possible level of practice. Competency is a parallel concept in that external
forces require counselors to demonstrate minimum competency for professionals, whereas an inter-
nal force demands that counselors strive for ideal practice. For example, state licensure boards set
the minimum requirements that counselors must meet to practice in that state, and counseling gradu-
ate programs require minimum levels of performance for students to be granted a degree. On the
other hand, counselors are constantly striving to attain maximum knowledge and skills, and national
voluntary credentialing organizations such as the National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC)
certify counselors who have distinguished themselves by going beyond the minimum in the field.
So, as we discuss competence in this chapter, keep in mind that competency is not an either/or
concept. Rather, competence is a complex construct that has many possible levels along a continuum.
Competency in counseling involves both ethical and legal considerations. From an ethical
perspective, the most salient moral principle is nonmaleficence: Do no harm. Incompetence is often
a major factor in causing harm to clients. Counselors rarely intend to harm their clients, but harm
can occur if counselors are not knowledgeable, skillful, and capable.
The most basic ethical standard related to competence in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) is that
counselors “practice only within the boundaries of their competence.” How can a counselor deter-
mine just where these boundaries lie? It is difficult to answer this question because counseling is an
exceptionally broad profession. Just as attorneys and physicians could never be competent to practice
in every area within law and medicine, counselors could never be competent to offer counseling
services in all areas of practice or to everyone who seeks their services (Barnett & Johnson, 2015).
Competence is also a legal issue because society expects professionals to be competent and
holds them to this standard through licensing boards and the courts. Legal issues relating to com-
petence include state licensure board complaints and the law of malpractice. Neukrug et al. (2001)
found counselor incompetence to be the second-most frequently reported area of ethical complaints

-- 185 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	163
(after dual relationships with clients) in their survey of state counselor licensure boards, although in a
later survey, Wilkinson et al. (2019) did not find incompetence to be a frequent cause for complaints.
When a client is harmed, the counselor could be sued for malpractice and held legally responsible in
a court of law. Many lawsuits brought by clients alleging that they were harmed focus on competence.
In this chapter, we first explore methods of developing and assessing competence to enter the
counseling profession. Next, we focus on ways to maintain competence during one’s professional
career. Competence is a fluid concept, and achieving competence at one time does not ensure that
one will remain competent over one’s entire career (Barnett & Johnson, 2015). In addition, we
address issues that arise when a counselor’s competence is questionable. These issues include coun-
selor burnout and counselor impairment.
Counselor Preparation
Competence is based on “education, training, supervised experience, state and national professional cre-
dentials, and appropriate professional experience” (ACA, 2014, §C.2.a.). To be competent, counselors
are also expected to “gain knowledge, personal awareness, sensitivity, dispositions, and skills pertinent
to being a culturally competent counselor in working with a diverse client population” (ACA, 2014).
Counselor preparation is obviously a basic component in developing competence to counsel. The pro-
cess of becoming competent to enter professional practice begins with university counselor preparation
programs. Measuring a student’s competency as a counselor has proven to be a difficult process because
of the complexity involved in assessing the interrelated domains of knowledge, skills, and dispositions
(Kimball et al., 2019). It has been suggested that students, particularly those enrolled in online counselor
education programs, need to possess digital competence as well (Dixon-Saxon & Buckley, 2020).
The initial responsibility for producing competent practitioners lies with those who do the prepa-
ration: counselor educators and supervisors. During the period of time when prospective counselors
are working toward their master’s degrees and are working under supervision toward licensure, the
responsibility for ensuring an acceptable level of competence rests with counselor educators and super-
visors. These professionals have an ethical obligation to protect the public by acting as gatekeepers for
the profession (Gilbert et al., 2019; Henderson, 2010; Kimball et al., 2019; McCaughan & Hill, 2014;
Muse-Burke et al., 2018; Smarinsky et al., 2023; Swank & Smith-Adcock, 2014). When students are
unable to demonstrate competence, there is potential for endangering or harming not only clients but
also counselor educators, the reputation of counseling programs, and other students (Teixeira, 2017).
Gatekeeping is discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
Counselor educators are keenly aware of their responsibility to select and admit to graduate
programs the individuals who are likely to succeed at developing the skills, knowledge, and char-
acteristics needed to become effective counselors. Admissions committees in CACREP-accredited
programs must select applicants based on their “relevance of career goals, aptitude for graduate-level
study, potential success in forming effective counseling relationships, and respect for cultural differ-
ences” (CACREP, 2024, p. 5).
Academic ability is one important factor. Selection criteria typically include grade point averages
and scores on standardized tests such as the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) or Miller Analogies
Test (MAT). Although some graduate programs in counseling have eliminated the GRE requirement in
the belief that it discourages students of color from applying and discriminates against minority appli-
cants, this was not a significant factor for the participants in a study by Hipolito-Delgado et al. (2021).
These researchers cautioned against the continued use of a deficit perspective in admissions standards.
Hammonds and Purgason (2022) have also called for a more holistic approach to admissions.
It is entirely possible for a student to have strong intellectual abilities and still not possess the
personal characteristics needed to be a therapeutic person. Personal characteristics such as being open

-- 186 of 593 --

164 	Section 2 • Issues
to new ideas, having flexibility, being cooperative, being open to feedback, having an awareness of
one’s impact on others, having the abilities to deal with conflict and to express one’s own feelings,
being able to reason using higher levels of cognitive development, and accepting personal responsibil-
ity have been identified as necessary for success as a counselor (Lloyd-Hazlett et al., 2017; McAdams
et al., 2007). In addition, having a tolerance for ambiguity and a willingness to explore one’s own
biases, values, and personal issues have been shown to be related to the ability to develop effective
therapeutic relationships. Counselor educators regularly assess student dispositions, which are “a
measure of functioning in the personal and professional realms composed of nine factors (cognitive,
ethical/legal, interpersonal, personal wellness, personal–professional boundaries, professionalism,
responsiveness, self-control, and suitability for the profession” (Miller et al., 2019, p. 11).
Although these characteristics are difficult to measure, most counselor preparation programs
rely on a personal interview, written essay, or other subjective criteria in selecting candidates for
admission. The admissions criteria most commonly used for master’s-program admission among
CACREP-accredited programs surveyed by Swank and Smith-Adcock (2014) were letters of rec-
ommendation (96%), GPA (95%), personal statement (89%), and interviews (82%).
Once candidates have been selected and admitted into a graduate program, the next question
that arises is “What does a master’s-degree program need to include in order to produce competent
counselors?” As we described in Chapter 2, CACREP/CORE has developed standards for preparing
counselors. CACREP/CORE accredits preparation programs that have undergone a rigorous review,
so it can be reasonably assumed that graduates of approved programs possess certain competencies
(Herlihy & Corey, 2015a). It should be noted, however, that many counselor preparation programs
are not CACREP/CORE accredited, and many competent counselors are educated in programs of
sound quality that have not sought this accreditation. Another approach to ensuring adequacy of
preparation programs is regional accreditation of universities. Regional accrediting agencies have
set the minimal standard for universities in the United States. If a university is accredited by a
regional accrediting agency, its legitimacy is assumed. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) requires
that “counselors accurately represent the accreditation status of their degree program and college/
university.” Counselors should not explicitly state or imply that the university that granted their
degree was regionally accredited if it was not accredited at the time that the degree was granted.
Although these approaches to ensuring quality of counselor preparation are both necessary
and helpful, the reality remains that successful graduation from an accredited program does not
always guarantee competence (Kitzrow, 2002). Much depends on the individual student’s moti-
vation and ability to learn, the quality of instruction, the competencies of the faculty members,
the breadth and extent of the supervised counseling experience provided by the program, and the
quality of supervision received. In our own experience as counselor educators, we have found that
most students who are about to graduate are keenly aware that they have only just begun to develop
competence as practitioners. As a novice counselor, you need not be hobbled by a concern over your
limitations and lack of experience. If you intend to seek counselor licensure, you will continue to
be supervised closely and supported in your work as a counselor until you have been endorsed for
independent private practice. Nonetheless, a healthy awareness of your limitations can help you
avoid exceeding your boundaries of competence in your eagerness to begin practicing your new
profession (Binkley & Leibert, 2015).
Credentialing
As was discussed in Chapter 2, two important types of credentialing found in counseling are
certification—which takes various forms—and licensure. These credentials provide a tangible
indicator of certain accomplishments, and, as such, they have implications for assessing the

-- 187 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	165
competence of the credential holder. Counselor credentials were discussed in Chapter 2 and are
revisited in this chapter, with a focus on how credentials are related to determining counselor
competence.
The terms licensure, certification, and registration have many different meanings but
are sometimes used interchangeably, which causes a great deal of confusion. These terms were
explained in depth in Chapter 2 and are briefly restated here. Licensure refers to the most rigor-
ous form of regulation in that only those who are licensed may practice the profession in that state.
Certification is the term used when a title, such as professional counselor, can be used only by those
who are certified; but anyone can practice the profession without being certified. Registration is a
form of governmental regulation in which members of a profession must sign up with the state gov-
ernment if they practice the profession in that state. However, anyone may sign the registry without
a review of their credentials (Anderson & Swanson, 1994). National private organizations, such as
the NBCC, offer national certification, which is a credential that is voluntary (i.e., not required by a
government for practice). In addition, state departments of education require certification of school
counselors employed in public school districts. In this chapter, we use the term licensure to refer
to state regulation of a profession generally and the term certification to refer to national voluntary
credentials and state department certification of school counselors.
LICENSURE 	In Chapter 2, we explained that all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto
Rico now license counselors, but many exemptions to the licensure requirement exist. The differ-
ences in state laws that license, certify, or register counselors were explained in Chapter 2 as well.
Licensure is related to counselor competency in that it is the most powerful type of credential-
ing and is established by state law. When state legislators determine that the public’s best interests
are best served by creating a license to practice a particular profession, the minimum standards for
practice of that profession in that state are established through a political process. Because state
governments would rather not be involved in regulating the practice of professions, legislators agree
to license a professional group only when it can be shown that members of the public (a) do not have
the ability to determine who is competent to practice within a particular profession and (b) could be
harmed by incompetent practitioners.
When a state legislature passes a statute that establishes counselor licensure or passes
amendments to an existing licensure statute, part of that statute specifies the minimum standards
for becoming licensed to practice in that state. When these bills or amendments are introduced,
political pressures are put on politicians. For example, it took many years for counselors to achieve
licensure, after working against an array of forces. Economists argued that licensing of professions
is self-serving, restricts entry into professions, and causes fees for services to rise. Organizations
whose purpose is to limit the role of government in citizens’ lives also opposed licensure statutes.
They often were joined in their opposition by other mental health professionals (including psy-
chologists, psychiatrists, and social workers) who did not want to see counselors licensed to pro-
vide mental health services because marketplace competition would increase. When these groups
of related mental health professionals realized that a bill or amendment was going to be passed over
their objection, they often demanded very high standards for licensure to keep as few individuals as
possible from being licensed as counselors. All these groups put political pressure on legislators to
set the minimum standards for licensure very high.
On the other side were pressures to set the minimum standards very low. For instance, indi-
viduals who were already practicing counseling in a state when counselor licensure statutes were
being considered or amended often lobbied for statutes that included very low standards so that they
would not lose their status and would still qualify to be licensed.

-- 188 of 593 --

166 	Section 2 • Issues
As a result of these various political pressures, states now have differing standards. A major-
ity of states require 60 educational credit hours, but some states require specific coursework, such
as family counseling, human sexuality, and addictions. States also vary in the numbers of required
post–master’s-degree supervised hours (Elliott et al., 2019).
Although there is variation from state to state, all licensed counselors (except those who were
grandparented in) have completed at least a master’s degree, have had post-master’s supervised
experience, and have successfully completed an examination or other form of screening. Thus,
when clients select licensed professionals as their counselors, they can be assured that their counsel-
ors have demonstrated certain knowledge, skills, and abilities to the satisfaction of those profession-
als who evaluated them. Nonetheless, as is true of other approaches, there are limitations to what
licensing can accomplish in terms of ensuring competence. Some have questioned whether there
is evidence that licensure actually ensures general competence, protects consumers, or promotes
higher standards of practice (Pope & Vasquez, 2021). It is also true that the licenses of mental health
professionals are sometimes revoked for incompetent practice.
Another limitation to licensure is that the possession of a license does not ensure that practi-
tioners will competently do what their license permits them to do. The counselor license is a generic
one, which leaves it up to licensed counselors, as individuals, to discriminate among professional
titles and the professional functions they are competent to perform. In addition, whereas licensure
boards can restrict or terminate the practice of incompetent practitioners against whom they have
received complaints, they are not in the business of monitoring the practices of counselors about
whom they have received no complaints.
Clearly, licensing of counselors is an attempt to ensure competent practice. Government regu-
lation may have a positive influence on competency within the counseling profession, but it falls
short of accomplishing its objective of ensuring competence. In reality, the standards set for licen-
sure are often the result of political compromises rather than of standards set by the profession for
minimum competency.
CERTIFICATION 	In addition to becoming licensed, counselors can offer evidence that supports
their competence by becoming certified. The various types of counselor certification, the history of
state agency counselor certification and national voluntary counselor certification, and the require-
ments for certification were summarized in Chapter 2. Some types of certification are mandatory for
practicing in certain settings and occur at the state level. For instance, public school counselors must
be certified by the states in which they practice. There are also national, voluntary certifications,
such as those offered by the NBCC. National Certified Counselors (NCC), like licensed counselors,
have received preparation in specific content areas and clinical instruction, have had supervised
counseling experience, and have passed an examination.
SPECIALTIES 	In addition to generic certification as an NCC, NBCC offers three specialty cer-
tifications: Certified Clinical Mental Health Counselor (CCMHC) and National Certified School
Counselor (NCSC), and Master Addictions Counselor (MAC). An affiliate of NBCC, the Center
for Credentialing and Education (CCE), offers the Board Certified TeleMental Health (BC-TMH)
credential. Specialty certifications are another means of establishing a counselor’s competence
to work with certain types of clients, in certain settings, or in specialized areas of counseling.
A host of other, narrower specialty certifications are offered by various groups in such areas as
hypnotherapy, biofeedback, or sex therapy. Specialty licensing has been a controversial issue in
counseling: Some have argued that only practitioners who have specialized preparation should be
allowed to practice that specialty. Others have argued against this, noting that other professionals

-- 189 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	167
such as physicians and lawyers may practice any type of medicine or law. The only force that
restrains counselors in limiting themselves to specialties is their own understanding that they
must be competent in the professional services they render and that no one can be competent
in all areas. Specialty accreditation of counselor education programs is another approach that
suggests that only certain counselors are qualified to practice in specified areas. CACREP has
taken this approach, accrediting CACREP (2024) master’s-degree programs in addictions; career;
clinical mental health; clinical rehabilitation counseling; college counseling and student affairs;
marriage, couple, and family counseling; rehabilitation counseling; and school counseling and
doctoral programs in counselor education and supervision.
There appears to be tension between proponents of two schools of thought regarding specialty
preparation. Some counselors believe that establishing competence boundaries should be left up to indi-
vidual professionals, who then would be accountable to licensure or certification boards if they exceeded
those boundaries to the detriment of a client. Others believe that counselors should be prevented by
licensure boards from practicing within specialty areas unless they have received specific preparation
in the form of graduate courses or supervision. The issues of specialty preparation and specialty licens-
ing and certification will likely be debated within the counseling profession for some time. Currently,
however, the prevailing school of thought is that counselors who have proven their minimal preparation
and are licensed can decide for themselves the boundaries of their competence and may practice in areas
considered specialties without holding any specialty certifications. Nonetheless, counselors have an
ethical responsibility to practice in specialty areas new to them only after they have obtained appropriate
education, training, and supervised experience; they must also take steps to ensure their competence at
their work while developing skills in new, specialty areas (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §C.2.b.).
Maintaining Competence
Once counselors have completed their formal education and are licensed or certified to practice, the
burden of determining competence shifts away from counselor educators and supervisors and onto
the counselors themselves. Counselors are autonomous professionals, responsible for monitoring
their own effectiveness. The Code of Ethics underscores this responsibility, stating that “counselors
continually monitor their effectiveness as professionals and take steps to improve when necessary”
(ACA, 2014, §C.2.d.). Even when counselors are employed in agencies or institutions, they are held
individually accountable for practicing in an ethical and professional manner. One of the indicators
of a profession that distinguishs it from a semi-profession or a non-profession is that its members
practice autonomously. In return for this privilege of independence, professionals must limit them-
selves to practicing within the areas in which they are competent. Thus, professionals must indi-
vidually determine the limits of their competence and practice accordingly.
CONTINUING EDUCATION 	Although competence can certainly be enhanced by the skillful appli-
cation on a day-to-day basis of the knowledge gained in a formal preparation program, experience
alone is no guarantee against errors. Considering the constant contributions that new research makes
to knowledge in the field, as well as the significant, ongoing changes in the environment in which
counseling is practiced, we doubt that a counselor could retain even a modicum of professional
competence over a 30- or 40-year career without further education. Counselors must therefore keep
up with new knowledge related to emerging issues; for instance, there is a growing body of litera-
ture on counseling clients who have been victims of sex trafficking (e.g., Browne-James et al., 2021;
Burt, 2019; Interiano-Shiverdecker et al., 2023; Litam & Lam, 2021).
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors must recognize the need for continuing
education to acquire and maintain awareness of current scientific and professional information, and

-- 190 of 593 --

168 	Section 2 • Issues
most counselor licensure and certification boards have established continuing education requirements
for maintaining one’s license. NBCC-approved continuing education workshops are widely available
over the internet. Wilkinson et al. (2019) found failure to acquire the appropriate amount of continuing
education to be one of the most frequent types of ethical violation leading to disciplinary action by state
licensing boards. It is likely that state licensure boards are disciplining counselors who do not prove they
have completed the minimum number of continuing education hours that the boards have set rather than
refusing to renew these counselors’ licenses. As Herlihy and Corey (2015a) have noted, however, there
are limits to what continuing education requirements can accomplish: “It is difficult to monitor the qual-
ity of continuing education offerings or their relevance to a particular counselor’s needs. The number
of clock hours obtained may have little relation to how much the counselor has actually learned and
integrated into practice” (p. 185). The focus should instead be on maintaining competence rather than
on simply accumulating the continuing education credits required to maintain a license or certification.
Many other questions could be raised regarding what constitutes a legitimate effort to maintain
competence. For instance, is attending a seminar commensurate with teaching one? Is writing an article
for a professional journal an indicator of continuing competence? What is the relative value of read-
ing books and scholarly articles about new techniques and theories? Can counselors who regularly
but informally consult with colleagues about their cases be considered as diligent in working to main-
tain competence as counselors who attend formal workshops and seminars? There may be no way to
objectively assess whether a counselor has maintained competence over time. External criteria such as
continuing education credits earned are not sufficient to ensure continuing competence. More important
are counselors’ own efforts, as autonomous professionals operating at the aspirational level of ethics, to
learn about new developments in the field, remain aware of their own limitations, recognize that these
limitations can increase over time, and seek to keep skills current by both formal and informal means.
7-1 The Case of Gretchen
Gretchen is a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in a community mental health agency.
Gretchen received her license 6 months ago. For 3 years while she was working toward
getting her license, she worked as a counselor intern at the agency. During her time as an
intern, Juanito (Gretchen’s administrative supervisor) was also Gretchen’s clinical super-
visor. Juanito expected Gretchen to attend the in-service trainings at the agency as well as
professional conferences and workshops, and Gretchen complied. Now that she is licensed,
Gretchen is irritated that the licensing board requires her to earn a certain number of continu-
ing education hours every year. Gretchen believes that because she has recently completed
3 years of supervision that included a great deal of in-service training, her knowledge and skills
are current. Realizing, however, that she must accrue continuing education hours to maintain
her license, Gretchen attends a state counseling conference. She attends sessions, sits at the
back of the room, and surreptitiously plays games on her cell phone. Gretchen enrolls in two
webinars that she can attend online and barely listens to the presenters as they cook meals and
do household chores.
• Do you believe Gretchen is correct in believing that her skills and knowledge are current
and therefore she should not be required to accrue continuing education credits during her
first year as a licensed counselor?
• Are Gretchen’s methods of accruing their required post-licensure continuing education
credits ethical?

-- 191 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	169
PEER REVIEW/PEER CONSULTATION 	Peer review, a system by which mental health profession-
als assess one another’s services, is a convenient and cost-effective approach to monitoring com-
petence (Olson et al., 2016). Peer review is useful for counselors at all levels of experience and
should continue as a life-long learning process. The many benefits include enhanced self-awareness;
opportunities to discuss a wide variety of answers to clinical and professional questions (Barnett &
Johnson, 2015); mutual support; objective feedback in dealing with countertransference issues;
information on therapeutic techniques, new research, and referral sources; and help in dealing with
difficult cases, stress, and the isolation often experienced by private practitioners. Ideally, peer
consultation or supervision groups would meet on a regular, scheduled basis to discuss practice
challenges and ethical issues. Peer consultation has been recommended as a strategy for burnout
prevention among school counselors (Brott et al., 2021), who may routinely receive administra-
tive supervision but not clinical supervision. If a peer consultation group is not available, Johnson
et al. (2012) recommended that counselors maintain close collegial relationships with several fellow
professionals who can provide consistent and honest feedback. Peer supervision and consultation,
along with opportunities to confer with an expert supervisor, have also been found to be helpful
in learning new counseling approaches (ten Napel-Schutz et al., 2017). Independent private prac-
titioners are expected to seek peer supervision (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §C.2.d.), and this is a
strategy we recommend for counselors in all work settings.
TECHNOLOGY 	The internet presents counselors with myriad opportunities for keeping current
and improving their competence as practitioners. New information technologies are developing at
such a rapid pace that any attempt we might make to describe them would be obsolete almost imme-
diately. We can, however, highlight a few key resources.
The counseling profession has established a solid presence on the internet. This offers oppor-
tunities to access virtual libraries for researching the latest information on client problems and effec-
tive counseling techniques, as well as to collaborate and consult with other professionals around the
world. Many of ACA’s divisions, NBCC, and CACREP have websites so that you can communicate
quickly and directly with professional groups that are working to strengthen counseling as a profes-
sion. Videoconferencing enables you and counselors everywhere to obtain further preparation and
even supervision without having to travel great distances. You can also subscribe to mailing lists that
allow you to share experiences, ask questions, and exchange information and ideas.
MAKING REFERRALS 	The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors should avoid enter-
ing into a therapeutic relationship when they lack the competence to counsel a prospective client. If
a counseling relationship has already begun, counselors should discontinue working with the client
and suggest alternative resources that are culturally and clinically appropriate (ACA, 2014). Ethical
counselors recognize that they will need to refer a client when accepting or continuing to work with
Discussion: Gretchen may be correct that her skills and knowledge are current; however, her
behaviors seem to suggest that she believes that she does not need to continue learning and
developing as a counselor. Gretchen is misunderstanding the purpose of continuing education,
which is not only to keep current but also to improve one’s performance as a counselor, rather
than simply accruing a required number of credits. Although her strategies for accruing hours
do not rise to a level that justifies a formal charge of unethical behavior, Gretchen’s approach to
continuing education is far from best practice and certainly could be considered unprofessional.

-- 192 of 593 --

170 	Section 2 • Issues
that client would exceed their boundaries of competence. Sometimes it can be difficult for counsel-
ors to acknowledge that they are not competent to provide professional services to every client who
might request their help because there are many sources of temptation to accept clients who might
be better served by a referral. These temptations might include a reluctance to disappoint a valued
source of referrals, financial pressures to increase your client load when business has been slow, or
the ego-enhancing nature of requests from clients who hold exaggerated beliefs about your abilities
to help them. To succumb to these kinds of temptations would not be ethical and would not be in your
clients’ best interest.
An issue that has become the focus of much controversy is the distinction between
competence-based referrals and values-based referrals. In Chapter 3, we discussed four lawsuits
that involved counseling practitioners and counseling students who refused, based on their reli-
gious beliefs, to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients regarding their same-sex relationships. These
cases brought the issue of values-based referrals into bold relief. A standard was added to the ACA
Code of Ethics (2014) that clarifies that counselors should not refer prospective or current clients
“based solely on the counselor’s personally held values, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors.” It is
important to understand that referral of a prospective or ongoing client should be based on skill-
based competence; a claim of lack of competence cannot be used as a justification for engaging in
discrimination (Kaplan et al., 2017). Standard C.5 of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) makes it clear
that counselors cannot discriminate against an entire class of people based on the counselor’s per-
sonal values (Bayne et al., 2021). As noted earlier, an example of this kind of inappropriate refer-
ral is referring all prospective LGBTGEQIAP+ clients on the basis of the counselor’s religious
beliefs. This type of inappropriate referral is not limited to conflicts related to sexual, affectional,
intersex, and gender expansive identities and religious values. For instance, because counselors
are expected to be competent to work with a diverse client population (ACA, 2014) and because
it would be unethical to refuse to counsel an entire class of people (ACA, 2014), it would also not
be acceptable for a counselor to refuse to accept clients who are older adults by claiming lack of
competence in gerontological counseling. Instead, the counselor is expected to gain competence in
working with older adults.
It can be difficult to distinguish referrals based on competence from those that are discrimi-
natory. To clarify the distinction, Kaplan et al. (2017) offered the example of a client who decides
to explore the possibility of gender reassignment. Assuming that no legal restrictions exist in the
state that would affect this exploration, the counselor must still proceed with caution. The issue of
gender reassignment surgery within a transgender developmental process is quite specialized. Thus,
a counselor with no experience with gender reassignment surgery would be justified in suggesting
a referral to another provider with experience and expertise. However, that referral would need to
be based on lack of experience and lack of competence, not on the counselor’s values and beliefs
regarding gender reassignment. The issue of appropriate versus inappropriate referrals has been
widely discussed and apparently is being covered in counselor training programs. For example,
counseling students studied by Lloyd-Hazlett et al. (2017) demonstrated nuanced understandings of
competence, values, and referral processes.
A particular type of challenge is posed when the issue of competence arises with respect
to a client with whom a counselor is already engaged in a counseling relationship. Despite the
best efforts of counselors to accept only those clients whom they believe they can provide with
competent services, the course of counseling is unpredictable. A client’s presenting problem may
be well within the counselor’s scope of competence, and the counselor might in good faith begin
working with that client, only to discover as therapy progresses that the client has unanticipated
counseling needs.

-- 193 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	171
7-2 The Case of Jing
Jing, a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in private practice, began working with Ellen, a young
woman who came for counseling to deal with what at first appeared to be moderate anxiety. Ellen
described herself as a perfectionist and sought counseling to learn to “stop being so hard on
herself.” It was only after several counseling sessions that Ellen felt safe enough in the counseling
relationship to reveal to Jing that she was so fearful of gaining “even an ounce” that she regularly
engaged in self-induced vomiting after meals, abused laxatives, and exercised excessively. Jing
recognized these behaviors as symptoms of anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa (APA, 2022), a
problem area with which Jing had no experience.
• How should Jing approach this situation with Ellen?
• If Jing decides to take workshops and do independent reading on treatment of individuals
who have eating disorders, how will Jing know when she is competent to provide counseling
services to clients like Ellen?
• What if Jing is able to find a suitable referral source but Ellen refuses, stating that she has
complete faith in Jing’s ability to help her?
• What if Jing practices in an isolated, rural community and a local referral resource or expert
consultant or supervisor is not available?
Discussion: Jing has an ethical obligation either to refer Ellen to a specialist or to another thera-
pist who is competent to work with clients who suffer from eating disorders or to ensure that they
provide quality counseling services to Ellen by obtaining educational experiences and consultation
or supervision from experts. Also, because both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa can be
life-threatening conditions, Jing will need to develop a relationship with a local physician who will
treat Ellen’s physical issues at the same time.
If Jing decides to refer, it might be difficult for her, after establishing rapport with Ellen, to
tell Ellen that she now needs to see a different counselor. Jing will have to be clear in explaining
her reasons for making the referral and, at the same time, be sensitive to Ellen’s concerns.
If Jing decides to take workshops and do independent reading on the treatment of individu-
als who have eating disorders, she will need to consider a number of issues in determining whether
she is competent to provide counseling services to clients like Ellen. There are no rules about how a
counselor adds a new area of expertise—Jing will have to decide for herself when she is competent
in this new area. Should someone later challenge her regarding this competence, Jing should be
ready to defend her new competence by providing evidence of how she developed it.
If Jing is able to find a suitable referral source, but Ellen refuses, Jing will need to be firm
in refusing to continue to work with Ellen. If Jing has trouble being firm in a situation like this, she
should seek clinical supervision for support in doing what has to be done.
If Jing practices in an isolated, rural community and no local referral resource, expert con-
sultant, or supervisor is available, then there really is no absolutely correct way to proceed in a
situation like this.
Jing might consider her options—for example, she could (a) enter into an internet super-
visory arrangement with a specialist in eating disorders and continue to counsel Ellen under that
person’s clinical supervision and in collaboration with a physician who is monitoring Ellen’s physi-
cal health or (b) investigate and find the closest and best treatment option available for Ellen and
inform Ellen that this is really her best option, despite any travel hardships.

-- 194 of 593 --

172 	Section 2 • Issues
Other situations that might raise the question of referring a client are less clear-cut. Even the
most experienced counselors will at times seriously wonder whether they have the personal and
professional abilities to work with some of their clients. Difficulty in working with some clients
does not, in itself, imply incompetence. In fact, counselors who refer all clients with whom they
encounter difficulties will probably have few clients. Instead, counselors can extend their boundar-
ies of competence through reading, participating in workshops and other professional development
opportunities, consulting, co-counseling with colleagues who have expertise in a needed area, and
working under supervision. The key is to keep a careful balance of referring when necessary and
in other situations extending your areas of competency while keeping your clients. Counselors can
prevent stagnation and can continue to learn and grow as professionals by taking on clients who
present new concerns and issues, thus extending their scope of competence. In fact, it would be
impossible to develop expertise in a new counseling specialty area without eventually accepting a
client with an issue in that area. At the same time, counselors must take care to ensure that clients
are not harmed while the counselor is in the process of learning new skills and developing new com-
petencies. You must make careful judgments regarding when to refer and when to keep new clients
as you are preparing to provide services in a new area of counseling.
Diversity Considerations
As we emphasized in Chapter 3, recognizing diversity in U.S. society and developing intercultural
counseling competence are essential to ethical practice (Byrd & Hays, 2012; Schmidt et al., 2011).
When you think of your own future practice, keep in mind that if you are not trained and competent to
work with culturally diverse clients, you are at risk of practicing unethically if you attempt to provide
services to such clients. Counselors have an ethical obligation to actively attempt to understand the
diverse cultural backgrounds of their clients and to learn how their own cultural, racial, and ethnic
identities have an impact on their values and beliefs about the counseling process. The Code of Ethics
has incorporated, throughout the document, provisions requiring counselors to be culturally com-
petent. The introduction to Section A (ACA, 2014) states, “Counselors [should] actively attempt to
understand the diverse cultural backgrounds of the clients they serve. Counselors [should] also explore
their own cultural identities and how these affect their values and beliefs about the counseling pro-
cess.” Every section of the Code reminds counselors of their duty to be aware of cultural differences
in their counseling practices. Fortunately, the counseling profession’s attention to cultural diversity
has increased dramatically. Research on multicultural competence continues to appear at a rapid pace,
and there is an abundance of up-to-date professional literature that can enhance counselor awareness
and knowledge. Research results have provided abundant support for the importance of multicultural
competence to the process and outcome of counseling (Barden et al., 2017; Dillon et al., 2016; Ivers
et al., 2016; Johnson & Williams, 2015; Matthews et al., 2018; Oh et al., 2022; Swan & Schottelkorb,
2015), particularly for Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) clients (Bathje et al., 2022).
Counselors who work in urban and suburban settings typically have numerous referral
resources available to them. Counselors who practice in rural areas, however, do not enjoy this
luxury and often practice as generalists out of sheer necessity (Welfel, 2016). The geographic loca-
tion of their practice places extra demands on them to increase their knowledge and skills to be able
to respond to the varied needs of their clientele. At the same time, they must practice diligence,
weighing the risk of causing harm if they provide services to a client who presents problems or
issues in which they are not adequately trained. Fortunately, maintaining competence is no longer
as difficult as it was in the past, now that opportunities to increase knowledge and skills are readily
available through distance consultation and supervision, interactive webinars, and online continuing
education courses.

-- 195 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	173
Erosion of Competence: Burnout and Impairment
The work of the counselor can be stressful and emotionally demanding. Counselors, as partners
in the therapeutic journey, can be deeply affected by the pain of their clients (Corey et al., 2024).
This stress can take its toll on practitioners. Ironically, the counseling relationship itself can be a
source of stress. In other interpersonal relationships, such as friendships, there is give and take and a
reciprocal meeting of needs. This balance does not exist in a counseling relationship. Counselors are
experts in one-way caring (Skovholt, 2001) who make a loan of the self to the therapeutic relation-
ship (Squyres, 1986), receive little in return, and sometimes doubt the effectiveness of counseling.
Of counselors surveyed by Farber and Heifetz (1982), 74% saw lack of therapeutic success as the
most stressful aspect of their work, and 55% felt depleted by the unreciprocated attentiveness, giv-
ing, and responsibility that the therapeutic relationship demands. Stress can lead to distress, which
can, over time, lead to burnout and impairment (Gutierrez & Mullen, 2016). The terms distressed,
burned out, and impaired have been used somewhat interchangeably in the counseling literature.
However, these terms might be better viewed as ranging along a continuum from the least to the
most serious in relation to their impact on competent professional performance.
Most counselors probably could be described as distressed at some time during their pro-
fessional lives. Distressed counselors may experience irritability, anxious and depressed moods,
somatic complaints, lowered self-esteem, and feelings of helplessness, but they are not necessarily
impaired in their professional functioning. They know at some subjective level that something is
wrong and that distress is usually a transitory and temporary condition.
When distress remains unalleviated, however, it can lead to burnout, which has been described
as “a psychological syndrome emerging as a prolonged response to chronic interpersonal stressors
on the job” (Maslach & Leiter, 2016, p. 103). Burned-out counselors, exhausted and depleted, have
little energy left for their clients. Common indicators of burnout include a decline in counselors’ self-
care, strain in personal relationships, and damage to their overall emotional health (Bardhoshi et al.,
2019; Cook et al., 2020; Maslach & Leiter, 2016). Cook et al. (2021) found that novice counselors
were also likely to experience fatigue and tiredness and feel unfulfilled in their work. According
to Zur (2011a), signs of burnout include emotional depletion, an unrelieved sense of worry, loss of
perspective, helplessness, inefficiency, and an inability to leave clients’ concerns at the office. Recent
literature suggests that burnout may be a distinct concern for school counselors (Bardhoshi & Um,
2021; Evans Zalewski, 2022; Fye et al., 2020; Hamelin et al., 2022; Mullen et al., 2020). Burnout is
not as much a state or condition as it is a process that, if not corrected, can lead to impairment.
Concerns about counselor burnout were heightened during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Counselors were dealing with the same stressors as their clients were facing, including increased
financial hardships, social isolation, and increased mental health needs (Litam & Balkin, 2021).
Research studies appeared at a rapid rate as counselors sought to understand their own experi-
ences of the phenomenon. Litam et al. (2021) found that perceived stress was positively related to
burnout and that resilience was negatively related to burnout during the COVID-19 pandemic in a
national sample of professional counselors. These researchers stressed the importance of engaging
in self-care activities and cultivating resilience. Cook and Fye (2022) examined predictors of burn-
out among pre-licensed counselors and found that COVID-19 anxiety was the strongest predictor of
burnout for their study participants.
Villares et al. (2022) compared school counselors’ burnout levels during COVID-19 by cat-
egorizing their approaches as reactive, universal, consultative/collaborative, and comprehensive.
They found that reactive school counselors, who spent most of their time on non-counselor duties,
reported the highest levels of burnout. The researchers stressed the importance of school counselors
defining their roles so that they can deliver their services during stressful times. Without a doubt, the

-- 196 of 593 --

174 	Section 2 • Issues
long-term impact of the pandemic on counselors, counseling students, and counselor educators and
supervisors will continue to be a topic of study in the post-pandemic era.
RISK FACTORS FOR IMPAIRMENT 	Even in less stressful times, it would be rare for a counselor to
never experience a frustrating week, a difficult client, an emotional overload, or occasional symp-
toms of burnout, yet counselors who are functioning well can put these experiences into perspective.
Impaired counselors, by contrast, are unable to transcend periods of stress (Stadler, 2001). Impaired
counselors are unable to perform their responsibilities appropriately, putting their clients at risk.
Impairment is often associated with alcohol and other drug abuse and with the blurring of therapeutic
boundaries that can lead to sexual exploitation of clients.
Why do some counselors become impaired whereas others manage to bounce back from periods
of distress or burnout? Sometimes environmental factors can play a key role. A counselor may experi-
ence the death of a loved one, divorce or desertion, physical or sexual assault, the severe physical illness
of a family member, or other personal loss or trauma. These events can unbalance anyone’s emotional
equilibrium. If the counselor takes time off from work, goes for counseling, or in some other overt way
practices self-care and works toward a return to full functioning, this type of impairment is usually tran-
sitory and need not be a cause for ongoing concern about the counselor’s competence.
Events of recent years such as the COVID-19 pandemic, human-created tragedies such as mass
shootings, and natural disasters such as hurricanes and widespread flooding have created a high
likelihood that most counselors will work with traumatized clients (Brown, 2018; Krennerich et al.,
2021; Pow & Cashwell, 2017; Tarvydas et al., 2017). Even when counselors’ lives are not directly
affected, these events can put counselors at risk of experiencing vicarious traumatization, also known
as compassion fatigue or secondary traumatic stress disorder (Gentry et al., 2018; Sanabria, 2018).
Counselors who fail to recognize the warning signs of vicarious traumatization in themselves may
become less skilled and less able to be emotionally present with clients who have been traumatized.
Thus, counselors have an ethical obligation to be aware of this risk and engage regularly in self-care.
In other instances, preexisting conditions may put the counselor at risk. Some individuals
enter the helping professions to work through their own unresolved problems. Personal difficul-
ties that have led some counselors to enter the profession may be exacerbated by the practice of
the profession. The practice of counseling can reactivate early experiences, open old wounds, and
reawaken unresolved issues. Counselors with a history of addictions or a vulnerability to substance
abuse seem to be predisposed to problems after entering the profession. Brown et al. (2022) found
a positive correlation between adverse childhood experiences and burnout in clinical mental health
counselors. Glickhauf-Hughes and Mehlman (1996) contended that certain personality characteris-
tics make counselors more vulnerable to impairment. These characteristics include parentification
(a willingness to take responsibility for others), perfectionism, imposter feelings and self-doubt, and
audience sensitivity (strong awareness of others’ feelings and responsiveness to them).
Stressful or traumatic events in a counselor’s personal or social life and preexisting conditions
are not the only factors that can contribute to counselor impairment. Certain kinds of clients and
client problems can promote counselor distress (Stadler, 2001). Working with clients who pose a
danger to themselves has been shown to take an emotional toll on counselors. In a survey of coun-
selors who had experienced a client suicide, Wagner et al. (2020) found that a strong supervisory
relationship at the time of a client suicide may help mitigate counselor survivors’ negative symp-
toms. Survey participants were asked what type of agency responses were helpful to them after
they had experienced a client suicide. A total of 55% indicated that receiving counseling was either
extremely helpful or very helpful. Other helpful agency responses including allowing them to take
time off from work after the suicide, debriefing discussions, and additional training.

-- 197 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	175
For counselors who work with clients with substance abuse problems, the high relapse rate
among these clients can lead to counselor discouragement and cynicism about the sincerity of clients’
desires to change. Certain client characteristics such as lack of empathy for others, manipulativeness,
and refusal to accept responsibility for one’s behavior are often present in clients diagnosed with
some personality disorders, sex offenders, and clients who abuse women or children. These charac-
teristics also can exacerbate the stress felt by counselors. As has been noted, counselors who work
with victims of trauma and abuse are at increased risk of developing secondary posttraumatic stress
symptomology. Factors that can contribute to burnout and impairment among addictions counselors
include heavy caseloads of mandated clients, staff turnover, funding cuts, low salaries, and limited
career opportunities (Vilardaga et al., 2011).
The counseling profession has been slow to recognize the problem of impairment among
its members; however, research and attention to the problem have increased in recent decades.
In 2003, ACA created the Taskforce on Counselor Wellness and Impairment, which has orga-
nized and presented information on risk factors, assessment, wellness strategies, and resources,
all of which can be accessed through the ACA’s website (www.counseling.org). In a national
survey of counselor wellness and impairment, Lawson (2007) found that counselors generally
rated themselves high in wellness, but they rated the wellness of their colleagues significantly
lower. A substantial number of counselors who participated in the study (5% to 10%) had scores
on an instrument that indicated they were at risk for burnout and compassion fatigue or vicari-
ous traumatization. More recently, Lawson and Myers (2011) surveyed more than 500 ACA
members and found that counselors scored higher on the measure of wellness (Professional
Quality of Life; ProQOL) than did populations previously studied, and they had lower scores
on compassion fatigue and burnout.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) provides clear guidance regarding counselors who may be
impaired. Standard C.2.g. states that counselors should monitor themselves for signs of impairment
from their own physical, mental, or emotional problems. If they determine that they are impaired,
counselors must limit, suspend, or terminate their professional responsibilities until they can safely
resume their work and must seek assistance to address their problems (ACA, 2014).
RECOGNIZING IMPAIRMENT 	The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) also requires counselors to assist
their colleagues or supervisors in recognizing their own impairment. If counselors believe that their
colleagues or supervisors may be harming their clients, counselors must intervene as appropriate. It
might be difficult for counselors to assist their colleagues and supervisors in recognizing their own
impairment. At what point would you decide that a colleague or supervisor was impaired? For exam-
ple, how much social drinking is too much? How many absences from work indicate impairment?
Once you have formulated in your mind that a colleague or supervisor is impaired, how do you go
about addressing the issue with them? Most individuals who are impaired go through an extended
period of denial and probably would reject your input. In our opinion, this requirement in the Code of
Ethics may be very difficult to comply with, especially if the counselor you believe is impaired is your
supervisor, who has control and authority over you. Of course, you would need to intervene in some
way to prevent harm to clients, but you should also be concerned that imminent harm will occur if you
do not intervene and, if you do intervene, you must be prepared for a negative reaction. If you ever
believe you need to confront a colleague or supervisor about your belief that they are impaired, this
would be a good time to consult with other counselors or related professionals regarding your ethical
obligations and to ensure that you have a personal support system as you move forward.
Ethical practice requires, first, that counselors be aware of warning signs of impairment.
Some of the most common symptoms of impairment are presented in Figure 7-1.

-- 198 of 593 --

176 	Section 2 • Issues
FIGURE 7-1 Warning signs of professional impairment
1. Deterioration in personal relationships, including marital problems and family dysfunction
2. Becoming isolated and withdrawn from others
3. Feelings of disillusionment with the profession
4. Emotional distancing during counseling sessions
5. Poor health habits with respect to nutrition, exercise, and adequate sleep
6. Alcohol and drug abuse
7. Changes in work habits such as increased tardiness and absenteeism
8. Moodiness, depression, and symptoms of anxiety
9. Blurring of professional boundaries with clients
10. Procedural errors and sloppy recordkeeping
7-3 The Case of Suzanne
Suzanne is an LPC who went to work at a community agency when she earned her master’s
degree. After 5 years at the agency, Suzanne resigned and opened a private practice on her own.
Now, 8 months into this venture, she isn’t sleeping well at night. Suzanne tosses and turns, wor-
rying about whether she will be able to pay the monthly bills and trying to think of new ways to
market her practice. She misses the camaraderie she enjoyed with her colleagues at the agency
and feels increasingly isolated. Suzanne has lost weight recently and is starting to have episodes
of gastric distress. She realizes that she needs a break from the stresses of her work. However,
because she feels trapped by her financial situation, she is taking on more clients during evening
hours and on the weekends rather than taking time for self-care activities.
• What are some indicators that Suzanne is experiencing problems that might lead to
impairment?
• If Suzanne does not change her behavior, what kinds of problems might you expect her to
experience?
• If you were Suzanne’s friend, what options might you suggest to her to relieve her
distress?
Discussion: There are numerous indicators that Suzanne is experiencing problems that might
lead to impairment: She isn’t sleeping well at night, is worrying about whether she can pay her
monthly bills and about finding ways to market her practice, misses her friends at her former work-
site, feels isolated, has lost weight recently, is having gastric distress, and has taken on more clients
than she really wants to serve.
If Suzanne does not change her behavior, she is at risk for impairment. The quality of her
counseling services to clients may decline. Suzanne may develop additional psychological prob-
lems or physical health problems, and she may end up in a financial crisis.
If you were Suzanne’s friend, you might suggest that she try to find another job and close
her practice after finding a new job. Other suggestions might be that she could find one or
more other counselors in private practice to share her expenses and provide Suzanne with pro-
fessional stimulation, join a peer support or supervision group, or seek counseling for burnout
management.

-- 199 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	177
Perhaps the best way to prevent burnout and impairment is for individual counselors to moni-
tor their own vulnerabilities and be aware of the ethical ramifications of practicing when they are
unable to function effectively. Many resources and strategies are available to counselors when they
recognize that they need to make changes in their lives if they are to remain competent practitioners
(Kottler & Schofield, 2001). Some of these are (a) seeking counseling for themselves; (b) seeking
supervision, especially of their work with clients who are difficult and tend to drain their personal
resources; (c) taking a break or vacation from practice; (d) joining a peer support group; (e) getting
regular exercise, meditating, and taking time to enjoy hobbies; and (f) seeking support from family
and friends. Attending to self-care is an ethical obligation that must be taken seriously: Counselors
cannot provide nourishment to clients if they do not nourish themselves (Corey et al., 2024; Culver,
2011; Patsiopoulos & Buchanan, 2011; Skovholt, 2012; Warren et al., 2010).
It is crucial that you develop self-monitoring skills so that you can stay psychologically and emo-
tionally healthy as a counselor. Because graduate school is often stressful, now is a good time to learn
and practice these skills (Roach & Young, 2007). Newsome et al. (2012) argued that counselor training
programs should provide sufficient education about self-care and that counselor trainees should view
self-care as an essential element of their professional development. Harrichand et al. (2021), noting
the importance of self-care during stressful times like the COVID-19 pandemic, have provided specific
recommendations for integrating self-care and wellness practices across the CACREP curriculum in
counselor education training programs. If you are a student, we recommend that you learn the symp-
toms of burnout, familiarize yourself with various wellness models, and periodically take the time to
assess how you are managing the stressors in your life. Corey et al. (2024) have suggested that you ask
yourself some questions if you think you might be experiencing burnout. Your questions might include
whether you ask supervisors or peers for help when you need it, whether you are willing to seek per-
sonal counseling if you think you need it (Cheng et al., 2018; Mullen & Crowe, 2017), whether you
engage regularly in self-care practices, whether you are engaged in life outside of work, and whether
you are staying connected to family members and friends.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN BURNOUT PREVENTION 	The results of a study conducted by
Myers et al. (2003) on the wellness levels of counseling graduate students bode well for the future
of the profession. These investigators found that counseling students scored higher than an adult
norm group on the Wellness Evaluation of Lifestyle (WEL) and that doctoral students scored even
higher than entry-level students.
Cause for concern in differences was found along cultural variables, however. Female stu-
dents scored higher than male students on the measure of Gender Identity, and BIPOC students
scored higher than White students on the measure of Cultural Identity. The researchers suggested
that these findings may reflect greater awareness of gender and cultural issues on the part of persons
who belong to historically oppressed groups in U.S. society. Still, the fact that doctoral students
scored higher than entry-level students on gender and cultural identity subscales may indicate that
counselor preparation programs are succeeding at developing awareness of diversity issues among
their students.
Basma et al. (2021) found that wellness was negatively related to discrimination in counseling
students who identified as Black, Indigenous, or people of color (BIPOC), suggesting that it may be
more difficult for BIPOC students to maintain their personal wellness during their graduate studies.
Challenges to maintaining wellness may continue after these students graduate. Shell et al. (2021)
found that all three forms of racism (Individual, Cultural, and Institutional) that were measured on
the Index of Race-Related Stress–Brief Version (IRRS-B) significantly predicted burnout for Black
mental health therapists, including counselors.

-- 200 of 593 --

178 	Section 2 • Issues
ASSESSMENT
In Chapter 2, we noted that psychologists and other mental health professionals have challenged
the boundaries of competence, or scope of practice, of counselors in two major areas: testing and
diagnosis. Testing and diagnosis are both components of the more general professional activity of
assessment, or evaluation. The ethical and legal pitfalls in the areas of evaluation, assessment, testing,
and diagnosis are numerous (Welfel, 2016), and an entire section (Section E) of the ACA Code of
Ethics (2014) is devoted to this topic. We begin this section with a discussion of ethical requirements
and related legal issues in evaluation and assessment generally. Then we focus on testing specifically.
Although diagnosis is a form of assessment, we discuss it separately because diagnosis involves a
unique set of complex issues for counselors.
Evaluation and Assessment
COMPETENCE IN EVALUATION AND ASSESSMENT 	Despite arguments to the contrary made by
psychologists and some other mental health providers, counselors have the education and skills
necessary to conduct certain types of evaluations. Some counselors have jobs in which they conduct
evaluations on a regular basis, and some have private practices in which they conduct evaluations
occasionally or exclusively. To conduct an evaluation, a counselor should have expertise in the area
that is being evaluated and must be prepared to serve as an expert witness in court. According to the
ACA Code of Ethics (2014), counselors should utilize only those testing and assessment services
for which they have been trained and are competent.
Counselors commonly conduct evaluations for a number of purposes. To give some examples,
counselors evaluate:
• What type of custody arrangement would be in the best interests of a child (Patel & Choate, 2014)
• The extent of an individual’s disability and the potential for future employment
• Whether an individual has a substance abuse problem and, if so, the type of treatment that is needed
• Whether a person is at risk for abusing children in the future
• Whether a person is at risk for harming others (Chambers et al., 2010; McCormac, 2014; Stutey &
Clemens, 2014; Tillman et al., 2015; Winer & Halgin, 2016)
• Whether a person is at risk of serious self-harm or other self-injurious behavior (Buser et al.,
2017; Donohue et al., 2015; Emelianchik-Key et al., 2016; Erickson & Abel, 2013; McGlothlin
et al., 2016; Rutt et al., 2016; Stargell et al., 2018; Wester & McKibben, 2016; Wester et al.,
2016, 2017; Whisenhunt et al., 2014)
• Whether a person has a diagnosable mental disorder
• Whether a person would perform well in a particular job
FORMAL EVALUATIONS 	Counseling most often involves face-to-face (or virtual) interviews
between a counselor and client that are focused on the client’s well-being and on assisting the cli-
ent in personal decision making and problem solving. Evaluations completed by a counselor might
include a personal interview, but interviews in which persons are being evaluated have a different
purpose than counseling interviews. When a counselor who is also going to treat the client com-
pletes an evaluation, the sole purpose of the evaluation should be to gain information to allow the
counselor and the client to understand the problems and establish appropriate counseling goals.
Dual roles should be avoided (ACA, 2014, §E.13.c.).
Because counselors may sometimes be evaluators, and because evaluators usually conduct per-
sonal interviews as part of the evaluation process, it is understandable that individuals may become

-- 201 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	179
confused about their interactions with evaluators. For example, a woman who goes to a counselor’s
office for an interview related to a child custody dispute may not understand that she is not entering
into a counseling relationship, even though the counselor may be asking questions about life events
that are very upsetting. The purpose of a child custody evaluation is to report findings to a judge or jury
about which parent may be best to have custody of a child, not to assist the person being evaluated in
dealing with the stressors of the situation. Child custody evaluations require that unbiased and objec-
tive recommendations be made to a judge (Ackerman et al., 2021). An evaluator must be objective and
dispassionate. Counselors, on the other hand, always have the best interests of their clients in mind
and, therefore, could not be objective evaluators if the findings might negatively affect their clients.
Before counselors begin an evaluation interview, it is essential that they fully describe the dif-
ference between being counseled and being evaluated. Counselors must ensure that the individual
understands that this is not a counseling relationship and that the counselor may use any information
gathered in the interview as the basis of a report and opinion that will be given to a third party. These
obligations are described in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014). Standard E.13.a. clarifies that when
counselors provide forensic evaluations, their primary obligation “is to produce objective findings”
to be used in reports or testimony.
When an assessment or evaluation is completed, the assessment itself is the end product.
A counselor or any number of other individuals might then use the assessment report for purposes
other than for counseling. As noted, a personal interview of the person being evaluated is quite
often a part of the process. Clients who are being assessed need to understand that the assessment
process is different from counseling, what the assessment process entails, what the final product will
be, and how and by whom the assessment is intended to be used. Counselors have a responsibility
to secure their clients’ informed consent to evaluation procedures. According to the ACA Code of
Ethics (2014), the client’s written informed consent should be secured before beginning a forensic
evaluation (ACA, 2014). Before counselors conduct any type of assessment, they must explain its
nature and purposes in language that the client can understand (ACA, 2014).
THE COUNSELOR AS EXPERT WITNESS 	Counselors should avoid conducting evaluations that
cast them in the role of expert witness unless they have agreed to do so. If your job requires that you
conduct evaluations or if you complete evaluations in your private practice, you must be prepared to
testify in court as an expert witness. There is a good chance that eventually you will be subpoenaed
and ordered to explain and defend your conclusions and recommendations.
Counselors also should be certain that they understand the circumstances when an attorney
appears to be referring a client for counseling. Such referrals may be attempted for legal purposes as
well as for clinical reasons, in that attorneys may be seeking a counselor who would later be subpoenaed
to repeat in court what the attorney’s client has said in counseling sessions, or the attorney may simply
want to demonstrate that the client has gone through the motions of seeking counseling. Counselors
should ascertain whether a referral from an attorney is related to an existing or a potential legal case and
take this information into consideration when deciding whether to accept the client (Reid, 2010).
7-4 The Case of Alejandro
Alejandro has recently completed his master’s degree in counseling and has taken a job in the
probation and parole office at the local county courthouse. Alejandro’s new supervisor has told
him that his master’s degree in counseling will be very helpful in his new position. Alejandro’s
job is to interview people after they have been convicted of a crime to determine whether they

-- 202 of 593 --

180 	Section 2 • Issues
are good candidates for probation or whether they should be put in jail or prison. Alejandro is
told that good candidates for probation are those who have never committed crimes in the past
or have had only minor violations, have a stable place to live, have jobs they have held for a
while, and are truthful. Alejandro will look over the records of each convicted person, conduct
an interview with that person, and then make a report to the judge, giving his opinion regarding
whether the person is a good candidate for probation. In Alejandro’s first interview with Tom, who
has been convicted of a crime, Tom tells Alejandro that he is really glad to be able to talk to a
counselor. Tom and Alejandro develop an easy rapport. In the course of the interview, Tom tells
Alejandro about a number of crimes he has committed that did not show up on his criminal record
and explains that he is about to become unemployed because of absenteeism, has recently been
evicted from his apartment, and doesn’t know where he is going to live. In court 2 weeks later,
Alejandro reports to the judge that, based on information he has gathered from Tom, he does
not believe that Tom is a good candidate for probation. Tom angrily tells the judge that Alejandro
misled Tom into thinking he was his counselor and was trying to help him, and now Alejandro
has betrayed Tom by telling the judge private information. Tom’s lawyer makes a motion to have
Alejandro’s recommendation stricken from the record because Alejandro has no experience con-
ducting probation evaluations and misled their client.
• When Alejandro began the meeting with Tom, what should Alejandro have said or done to
prevent this unfortunate situation?
• How should counselors react if a person they are evaluating indicates during an interview
that they believe this is a counseling session, even though the counselors have explained
that it is an evaluation interview?
Discussion: Alejandro should have carefully explained to Tom the purpose of the interview and
ensured that Tom understood the purpose before beginning. He also should have given Tom a
written document to sign that reiterated these explanations. When Tom stated that he was glad
to be able to talk to a counselor, Alejandro should have interrupted the interview and again
explained his role as an evaluator. Alejandro should have called himself an evaluator, probation
consultant, or some other title than counselor. He also should have explained to Tom that what-
ever Tom said could become a part of the report Alejandro is required to make and may be used
in determining his probation decision.
An expert’s testimony in court usually supports one side in a legal controversy and damages
the other side (Patel & Choate, 2014). As a result, the attorney for the side that is damaged has a
professional obligation to minimize the impact of the expert’s testimony. The attorney will do this
in one or more of the following ways: (a) object to the expert’s credentials, arguing that the coun-
selor is not expert enough to give an opinion in court; (b) attack the process the counselor used in
completing the evaluation, claiming that it was not adequate; (c) attempt to get the counselor to
make contradictory statements, hoping that the judge or jury will give less credibility to a witness
who is not consistent; or (d) offer another expert witness’s testimony that contradicts the counselor’s
conclusions and recommendations, hoping the judge or jury will give more credibility to the other
expert’s testimony. Aggressive cross-examinations can be challenging and uncomfortable for coun-
selors who testify in court as expert witnesses (Brodsky & Terrell, 2011).
Counselors who agree to provide expert testimony in the belief that judges, attorneys, and
juries will listen respectfully to the counselor’s opinions and be appreciative of their input are in for

-- 203 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	181
a big surprise. Some attorneys have argued that mental health, as a science, is too inexact to allow
mental health expert testimony as evidence. Ziskin (1995) has produced a three-volume set of texts
designed to assist lawyers in discrediting the testimony of mental health expert witnesses.
Counselors who plan to serve as expert witnesses should take courses to prepare themselves,
observe other experts testifying over a period of time, and read written materials (e.g., Goldstein,
2016; Schouten, 2017; Stokes & Remley, 2001; Tedder-King & Czyz, 2016).
ASSESSMENT WITHIN THE COUNSELING RELATIONSHIP 	As descri-
bed, counselor involvement in child custody determinations consists of
a formal evaluation that is separate from the counseling process. Formal
evaluations are different from the types of assessments that occur through-
out a counseling relationship. In its broadest sense, assessment is the pro-
cess of gathering information about a client (Leppma & Jones, 2013).
Counselors use assessment to ascertain information about clients such as
the nature of their problem; the severity and impact of the problem; the
interplay among family, relationships, and past experiences with respect to
the problem; the impact of environmental conditions on the problem; the
client’s challenges, strengths, and readiness for counseling; and whether
counseling can be beneficial to the client (Drummond & Jones, 2010).
Assessment is a collaborative process to which both the counselor and the
client contribute, with the aim of gaining a better understanding of the cli-
ent’s problems. An accurate assessment of the problems, in turn, increases
the likelihood that the problems will be resolved successfully in counseling.
The most commonly used method for gathering this initial information is
the unstructured clinical interview (Leppma & Jones, 2013). Other forms of
assessment often are used within the counseling relationship to provide the
counselor and client with more specific information than was gained dur-
ing the initial interview. The most commonly used forms of assessment are
tests of various types and diagnoses (Buser & Peterson, 2016; Buser et al.,
2017; Carlisle et al., 2016; Jagger & Sterner, 2016). In the following sec-
tions, we first explore the ethical issues associated with testing.
Testing
Counselors use tests in various ways. Occasionally they may be involved in developing new tests,
but more often they select existing tests, administer them, and interpret them for their clients.
Selecting and administering a test may not seem like a complicated process that has ethical implica-
tions, but formal testing is vulnerable to abuse (Welfel, 2016).
7-5 The Case of Kamau
Kathleen has sought counseling from Kamau, LPC. Kathleen’s job situation is tentative because
the company where she has worked for the past 12 years is downsizing. She is experiencing a
number of somatic complaints related to anxiety, along with a general feeling of apprehension.
By the end of their second session together, Kamau believes that Kathleen may be experiencing

-- 204 of 593 --

182 	Section 2 • Issues
depression as well as anxiety. Because Kathleen’s company’s managed health care plan allows
her only six sessions, Kamau doesn’t want to use precious time for assessment activities. He thus
gives Kathleen a standardized depression scale and tells her to complete it at home.
• What do you think of Kamau’s decision to let Kathleen complete the test at home?
• Can you identify any problems with this procedure?
Discussion: Kamau should not have allowed Kathleen to take the test at home unless it was spe-
cifically designed to be self-administered (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §E.7.d.). Counselors have
a responsibility to appropriately supervise the test-taking process. Any number of things could
happen that would produce invalid results if Kathleen takes the test at home. She might misread
or misunderstand the directions, exceed the time limits for completing the test, try to complete
the test while watching TV or being otherwise distracted, or become alarmed by feelings evoked
by the wording of some of the test items.
COMPETENCE TO TEST 	Counselors generally do not use testing as much as psychologists do in
their practices. The preparation that master’s-level counselors receive in testing usually includes
the following: (a) a three-credit assessment course, (b) some testing principles in a research class,
(c) testing information in courses such as career counseling and diagnosis of mental disorders, and
(d) supervised practice of the use of tests in practicum and internship. Because of the limited use
that counselors generally make of tests and the educational level of counselors in the area of testing,
it is important both ethically and legally for counselors to administer and interpret only the tests for
which they have been trained and are competent (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §E.2.a.).
At first glance, testing procedures might seem to be simple and straightforward. Test manuals
give detailed, step-by-step instructions for administration, and many tests can be scored and interpreted
by a testing service. In reality, however, considerable knowledge and professional judgment are needed
to select the right test for the intended purpose and clientele, to administer the test properly, and to
interpret the findings for the client. To select wisely, counselors must have a thorough knowledge of the
various tests that are available, what they measure, and their limitations. Leppma and Jones (2013) have
reminded counselors of their ethical responsibility to use multiple methods of assessment. This means
that counselors should never use a test as the sole criterion for making clinical or educational decisions.
To illustrate this point, even if Aaron (the counselor in the previous case example) had asked his client to
complete the depression scale in his presence, Aaron should not use only the client’s score on the scale
to determine whether a diagnosis of depression is warranted. Aaron should also consider his clinical
impressions and the client’s behavioral indicators, consult the diagnostic criteria for depression in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5-TR), and perhaps (with the client’s permission) interview
individuals who know the client well and have observed her general daily behaviors.
There is no absolute standard for adequate preparation to administer particular tests. Formal
educational experiences such as for-credit courses and internships are not the only methods of train-
ing. Counselors could become proficient in testing through workshops, supervised practice, and
independent study as well. The amount of training needed to develop proficiency varies greatly,
depending on the test. Developing the necessary competence to administer complex personality
tests such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory–2 requires extensive training. There
are many tests, however, that counselors can learn to use through the instruction and supervised
practice provided in a typical master’s-degree program. Competence to use a test always depends on
the individual counselor’s training and experience with the particular test.

-- 205 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	183
Although assessment, including the use of various tests, has always been an integral com-
ponent of the counseling process, the question of who is qualified to use assessment instruments
remains a contentious battleground (Watson & Sheperis, 2010). For this reason, an advocacy group,
the national Fair Access Coalition on Testing (FACT), has been formed to protect counselors’ rights
to conduct assessment and testing (FACT, 2014).
As we noted in Chapter 2, counselor licensure laws now exist in all 50 states; however, some
state laws either restrict counselors to certain testing activities or are ambiguous about whether
counselors are qualified to make assessments. For example, some states prohibit counselors from
using projective tests, and at least one state statute requires licensed counselors to be further privi-
leged to test (Louisiana Licensed Mental Health Counselor Act, 1999). Counselors should review
their state’s licensing statutes and regulations to determine whether there are any tests they cannot
legally administer and interpret. If licensed counselors exceed their statutory authority to test, they
could be accused and found guilty of practicing psychology without a license. This happened to an
LPC in Louisiana (State of Louisiana v. Atterberry, 1995).
Counselors should regulate themselves in the practice of testing. This is the position taken by the
ACA, as explained in the Standards for Qualifications of Test Users (ACA, 2014). Although counsel-
ors typically do not have extensive training in testing, many resources are available to assist counselors
in maintaining and increasing their competence to test. The website of the Association for Assessment
in Counseling and Research in Counseling (AACRC), an ACA division, offers links to a variety of
resources and testing documents. Two particularly useful documents are the Code of Fair Testing
Practices in Education and the Responsibilities of Users of Standardized Tests. As the international
counseling movement continues to grow, counselors who use tests in their work should familiarize
themselves with the international guidelines for test use (International Test Commission, 2013).
DEVELOPING AND PUBLISHING TESTS 	Most counselors are not involved in developing testing
instruments. Designing, developing, validating, and marketing a new test requires specific knowledge
and skills and is a complex and lengthy process. These factors undoubtedly deter many counseling
practitioners from undertaking the task.
Even if you are never involved in constructing a test, however, you should understand the ethical
responsibilities of test producers. Test producers must produce and market tests that have demonstrated
validity and reliability and appropriate norms, as well as provide a manual that clearly explains how to
use the test, specifies the clientele for whom it is and is not suitable, and explains its strengths and limi-
tations. They must also provide information that will help users interpret the results accurately.
Test publishers should make their tests available only to professionals who are qualified to use
them. Typically, test publishers require those who wish to purchase their tests to state their degrees,
licenses, graduate courses in testing, and training in the use of the specific test.
TEST SECURITY 	Counselors have both ethical and legal obligations to protect the security of tests
from improper usage, copying, or dissemination (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §E.10.). Almost all
tests depend on the user being unfamiliar with the test items. Therefore, counselors must keep test-
ing materials safely locked away when not in use to prevent unauthorized users from gaining access
to the materials. Of course, test security measures must also be carefully maintained when the test
materials are accessed and stored on a computer. A problem related to test security occurs when
counselors and other professionals break the law by violating copyrights of tests held by test authors
and publishers. The general principles of copyright law are explained in Chapter 16.
Test materials that are published by commercial testing companies must be purchased. Materials
include answer sheets, question booklets, report forms, instruction manuals, and other items related

-- 206 of 593 --

184 	Section 2 • Issues
to the test. Computer software of all types related to testing is copyrighted and may not be duplicated
or used without permission of the publisher. Some commercial testing companies are aggressive in
protecting their copyrights because their business profits are negatively affected by violations.
Some tests have never been published by the author or may have been published in a journal. Such
tests are not available from a commercial testing company. However, permission must be obtained from
the copyright holder before counselors can use the tests either to administer to clients or for research.
In most situations, authors transfer their rights to the owners of journals when materials are published.
RELEASE OF TESTING RECORDS 	Records of test results are the same as other counseling records.
Counselors should thus not release test data to anyone who is not qualified to receive the information.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors should release test data only to persons recog-
nized by counselors as competent to interpret the data. You may feel uncomfortable asking someone
who requests test records to verify their qualifications, but releasing test data to unqualified individu-
als carries such a high risk to client welfare that counselors must stand firm on this point (Welfel,
2016). You also need to keep in mind that any time you share private client information with a third
party, including a client’s health insurance provider, that information is at risk for theft or exploita-
tion. You will also need to maintain vigilance against threats to cybersecurity (Staton & Kielty, 2023).
Counselors also have an ethical obligation to ensure that testing records are transferred in a
secure manner. Counselors who receive test results for clients they have been counseling should
never transfer those records to another person. In the event that testing records received from
another professional are requested or subpoenaed, counselors should refer the individual asking
for the records to the professional who originally created them. Reviewing the section in Chapter 6
that deals with transfer of records in general will alert you to possible pitfalls and to recommended
procedures for ensuring the safe transfer of test data.
PROVIDING EXPLANATIONS TO CLIENTS 	Clients have the right to make an informed choice
about whether they want to participate or refuse to engage in testing procedures. They can also
expect to receive an explanation of the results of any test they take.
Standard E.3.a. of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) clearly indicates that informed consent
applies to testing. Before counselors test, they must explain the nature and purposes of assessment
and the specific use of the results in language that the client can understand. It is particularly impor-
tant that clients understand what uses will be made of their test results. They have a right to know in
advance if tests will be used as a factor in employment decisions, as a criterion for placement in a
special education program, as a device for screening potential members of a psychotherapy group,
or as a means of making other decisions that will affect their lives (ACA, 2014, §E.3.a.).
After clients have participated in testing procedures, they have a right to receive feedback about
the results (ACA, 2014, §E.1.b.). Many standardized inventories are now computer scored, and coun-
selors can receive results along with printouts that present an extensive explanation of those results.
7-6 The Case of Louis
Louis is a counselor in a university career counseling and placement center. Last week he began
counseling Alicia, a freshman who sought his assistance in deciding which major to pursue.
In their first session, Louis explored with Alicia her sense of being overwhelmed with so many
interesting options. After the session ended, Alicia sat at a computer in the next room and

-- 207 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	185
It is essential that counselors communicate test results and interpretations directly to their
clients. Counselors appreciate commercial services that score and interpret psychological tests
because the services save time and relieve them of the task of scoring the tests, but they should avoid
overreliance on them. Interpretations generated by commercial services cannot, by themselves, pro-
vide sufficient feedback to clients. They do not take into account the individual characteristics of
the test taker and cannot answer any questions the test taker may have. Counselors must therefore
exercise their professional judgment and personal knowledge of the client in using reports provided
by test interpretation services.
A face-to-face conversation with the client regarding test results can serve additional purposes.
Clients sometimes view test results—particularly elaborate, computer-generated score reports—as
being infallible. Counselors need to educate clients about the limitations of tests and to keep these
limitations prominent in their own thinking. This will help them avoid any tendency to present
results in absolute language. In addition, a dialogue with the client can shed light on any unclear or
unexpected test results.
For some clients, taking a test is an anxiety-producing event, and they may worry until they
see their results. Counselors should keep in mind that some clients have had negative experiences
with test taking. On the other hand, feedback can have therapeutic value. Finn and Tonsager
(1992) found that clients who received feedback on their Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventories (MMPI) found the feedback to be a positive experience and actually showed a reduc-
tion in symptoms.
In practice, counselors often struggle with the question of how much feedback or explana-
tion of test results they should give their clients. They want to be thorough, without overwhelming
the client with detail. For many counselors, the pressures of time-limited counseling relationships
imposed by managed care are also a factor. Welfel (2016) has suggested that the criteria for deciding
how much time to devote to test interpretation should include the following: (a) the clients’ satisfac-
tion that they understand the meaning and implications of the results, (b) the counselor’s assessment
that feedback has clarified any confusion or unclear results, (c) a mutual agreement about ways the
test results should influence the counseling process, and (d) the implications of releasing the find-
ings to others if the client has agreed to such a release.
completed a career interest inventory. Before his second session with Alicia, Louis obtains her
computer-generated score report and interpretation. Louis reads it over, is impressed with its
thoroughness, and decides to give it to Alicia to read at home. Louis decides in favor of using
their time together to explore some other issues Alicia has mentioned, which seems to Louis to be
related to Alicia’s career indecisiveness.
• What are the problems with giving a client computer-generated test results without also
providing an interpretation of the results?
• In what types of situations might you ethically use computer-based testing with clients?
Discussion: Although it is easy to understand Louis’s reasoning, it would not be wise for him to
follow his plan. Alicia might think the computer has given her the answer and may attribute too
much power to the test results. Using computer-based testing with clients is not problematic as
long as the counselor interprets the results for the client in person and puts the results in the con-
text of other information about the client.

-- 208 of 593 --

186 	Section 2 • Issues
Diversity Issues in Testing
Counselors must be cautious in using tests with culturally diverse clients. They must select
tests carefully to prevent inappropriate testing that may lack appropriate psychometric prop-
erties for a particular client population (ACA, 2014, §E.8.). It is important to be aware that
many traditional assessment instruments have been developed by theorists and practitioners
who are themselves lacking in diversity and multicultural training (Helms & Cook, 1999).
Because many tests have been validated on mostly middle-class people of European extraction,
special populations may not be represented in the norm group on which a test was standard-
ized. Therefore, the test results may be less valid for them. When you use tests, you need to be
knowledgeable about the characteristics of the norm group and recognize the limitations of the
test with other populations.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) requires counselors to recognize the effects of age, color,
culture, disability, ethnic group, gender, race, language preference, religion, spirituality, sexual
orientation, and socioeconomic status on test administration and interpretation. Especially when
working with culturally diverse clients, test results must be placed in perspective with other rel-
evant factors (ACA, 2014).
No test is completely culture free. For decades, a considerable body of literature was pro-
duced that provided examples of how assessment instruments have been misused with ethnic
and racial minority clients, women, clients with limited English proficiency, the physically chal-
lenged, and other special populations (Herlihy & Watson, 2003). The use of educational and
psychological tests, in the school setting in particular, has been challenged. Today, there is some
evidence that progress has been made in addressing this problem. Reynolds et al. (2021) traced
the history of Cultural Test Bias Hypothesis (CTBH) and found that, while more research is
necessary, the current evidence tends to support the proposition that most commercially devel-
oped, widely used tests of achievement and aptitude are not culturally biased. Nonetheless, aca-
demic placement or advancement decisions should never be made on the basis of test data alone.
Counselors need to know about the norm groups on which tests are standardized and examine
tests for content bias. When some items in a test refer to experiences that are not familiar to
certain populations, the test is content biased. For example, an item on a test that refers to milk-
ing cows may make no sense to an urban child who lives in an impoverished socioeconomic
environment. Counselors should thus always review any tests they plan to use to ensure that the
tests are sensitive to culture-specific variables associated with racial and ethnic minority group
members’ experiences.
Counselors must be alert to the passage of laws that affect testing practices. Two examples
are the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (1975) and the Americans with Disabilities Act
(1990). The Education for All Handicapped Children Act requires that tests be in a child’s language
and be appropriate for the intended use. It also requires that parents give their consent to testing and
that they be given access to test protocols after testing has been completed. The Americans with
Disabilities Act mandates that testing be appropriate for the individual being tested, that reasonable
accommodations be made in testing, and that results not be used to discriminate in employment
choices for people with disabilities.
In summary, counselors must be alert to cultural bias in tests and in test interpretation and
must use caution in interpreting results with clients who are not members of the dominant culture.
Ethical practice requires counselors both to understand how clients’ cultures and worldviews can
influence their performance on standardized tests and to place test results in perspective with other
factors in evaluating these clients.

-- 209 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	187
DIAGNOSIS
Counselors are sometimes uncomfortable with participating in the diagnosis of mental disorders.
Diagnoses usually are made using the DSM-5-TR (APA, 2022), which is the world’s most widely
used system for identifying and describing mental disorders (Gray, 2011). This system of diagnosis is
based on the medical model of mental illness. In contrast to the medical model, counselors espouse
a wellness model that focuses on client strengths (Slaiba & Barden, 2017) rather than on simply
ameliorating symptoms (see Chapter 2 to review the wellness model). Thus, there is an inherent
philosophical conflict between the DSM system and the wellness orientation of counselors (DeKruyf
et al., 2013; Frances, 2014; Kress et al., 2010).
During the 1990s, a lively conversation took place in the professional literature regarding
whether counselors, with their wellness perspective, should diagnose clients with clinical disorders
using the DSM system. Today, it is generally understood that counselors, no matter where they work,
must be knowledgeable of the DSM-5-TR so that they can participate in the diagnostic process and
be able to converse with other mental health professionals regarding its contents (Dailey et al.,
2014a; Gutierrez et al., 2018). The CACREP standards (2024) specify that counseling students must
acquire the competencies needed to effectively use the DSM-5 in their work, and many state coun-
selor licensure boards require applicants to demonstrate formal training in diagnosis.
When clients want to use their health insurance to help pay for mental health care, counselors
usually must assign a diagnosis in order for their services to be reimbursable. As we discuss more
fully in Chapter 13, health insurance companies generally will not reimburse for counseling services
unless a DSM diagnosis accompanies the insurance claim (Comer & Comer 2021). Counselors
want to serve their clients by helping them receive reimbursement for counseling services, yet their
philosophical objections make them reluctant participants in diagnosis. Braun and Cox (2005) have
warned that discomfort with diagnostic labeling can lead to problems: Some counselors may try
to diagnose most or even all of their clients as having an adjustment disorder, which is the mildest
and least stigmatizing type of disorder. Some might assign a more serious diagnosis than is clini-
cally warranted so that a client can qualify for health insurance reimbursement. These practices of
under-diagnosing, or downcoding, and over-diagnosing, or upcoding, are dishonest, inaccurate, and
unethical (Herlihy et al., 2008). Even more serious is the practice of deliberately changing a diag-
nosis for insurance reimbursement purposes. Over two decades ago, some researchers found that
approximately 35% to 44% of mental health practitioners may have been engaging in this behavior
(Danzinger & Welfel, 2001; Tubbs & Pomerantz, 2001). Today, this practice is likely less wide-
spread, as multiple computerized systems for detecting health insurance fraud are being utilized
and as counselor training emphasizes the importance of honest and accurate diagnosis. Clients can
be harmed by inappropriate diagnostic procedures, and counselors are on shaky ground both ethi-
cally and legally by engaging in such procedures. Standard E.5.a. of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014)
states that “counselors [should] take special care to provide proper diagnosis of mental disorders.”
Functions of Diagnosis
It is vital that you use the DSM-5-TR appropriately in your work as a counselor. A first step is to clarify
your own stance toward diagnosis. Diagnosis involves much more than assigning labels to clients. It
is best conceptualized in context, as a part of the overall process of assessment that helps counselors
understand their clients. Sleek (1996) has likened the diagnostic process to working a jigsaw puzzle in
that it involves putting together pieces of information about the client to build an overall picture of the
person. The primary purpose of diagnosis is to facilitate effective treatment. The relationship between
diagnosis and treatment is like a driving trip and an app that shows the route and provides directions

-- 210 of 593 --

188 	Section 2 • Issues
for arriving at the destination. Diagnosis should point the way to treatment planning and to the selec-
tion of effective treatment strategies for identified disorders (Gutierrez et al., 2018).
Diagnosis serves other important functions. First, an accurate diagnosis can help counsel-
ors make a prognosis or predict the course of a disorder. Second, the diagnostic system in mental
health care was developed to facilitate communication among professionals and provides a common
language and shared frame of reference for mental health professionals. Third, it helps counsel-
ors identify conditions that may require the attention of a physician, such as organic disorders or
medical conditions that are contributing to psychological problems, so that a referral can be made.
Finally, the diagnostic system provides a framework for research. Clinical outcome studies build our
knowledge base regarding the effectiveness of various treatment approaches.
Risks of Diagnosis
While keeping in mind all the useful functions of diagnosis, you should be aware of the risks involved,
even when diagnosis is done honestly and accurately. For clients, learning their diagnosis can be a
double-edged sword: It can be comforting for clients to learn that their condition has a name and that
they are not alone in what they are experiencing. On the other hand, clients may feel embarrassed or
ashamed of their diagnosis or feel stigmatized by a diagnostic label and refuse treatment rather than
have the diagnosis become part of their health record. It is also possible that a diagnosis can lead to a
self-fulfilling prophecy; for instance, a client who is diagnosed with depression may become even more
deeply depressed. Counselors must therefore be sensitive to the powerful effect that diagnosis can have
on clients. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) allows counselors to “refrain from making and/or reporting
a diagnosis if they believe it would cause harm to the client or others.” In most circumstances, clients
have access to their counseling records, including any diagnoses that counselors have rendered.
Diagnoses can significantly affect not only clients’ feelings and self-concepts but also their lives.
Severe diagnoses can have harmful effects far into a client’s future, including difficulty obtaining
certain kinds of employment or having their diagnosis used negatively in child custody proceedings
(Overton & Medina, 2008). Wylie (1995), in a widely quoted statement, noted that some diagnoses
can “shadow a client’s life like hounds from hell” (p. 32).
The process of diagnosing a client’s condition can have effects on the counselor as well as on the
client. It is possible that the very availability of diagnostic labels and agency or organizational pressure
to use them can bias counselors in favor of using them, even when a client’s condition does not war-
rant a DSM diagnosis. Particularly when a client’s eligibility for health insurance coverage depends on
a diagnosis, counselors may be tempted to pathologize behaviors that are developmentally normal. A
rebellious adolescent might be diagnosed as having oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder.
A very shy young adult might be diagnosed as having an avoidant personality disorder. Welfel (2016)
has cautioned counselors against jumping ahead to naming a problem before they have verified that one
exists. Carrola and Corbin-Burdick (2015) expressed the concern that a myopic focus on symptoms
and diagnoses can further stigmatize certain clients (for example, assessing for PTSD when counsel-
ing military veterans and thus failing to consider their unique experiences and needs). We agree that
counselors who use diagnosis must take care to avoid losing sight of the uniqueness of each client. Even
while using a system that is focused on mental disorders and pathology, counselors must maintain the
wellness perspective that is unique to their profession. Doing so can be a challenge, however.
Ethical Challenges in Diagnosis
The DSM-5 was published in 2013 after a lengthy revision process. Considerable controversy emerged
when it was discovered that 69% of the task force members who oversaw the development of the
manual had ties to pharmaceutical companies (Cosgrove & Wheeler, 2013). That situation raised

-- 211 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	189
concerns that client behaviors and cognitions that were formerly considered unremarkable would be
used to justify diagnoses of mental disorders that could be treated pharmacologically (Blumenthal-
Barby, 2014). On the positive side, the ACA offered input regarding proposed changes throughout
the revision process, and the leadership applauded the changes, such as reversing the pathologizing
of normal bereavement, that have reduced the dissonance between the DSM and the wellness orienta-
tion of counselors. We believe it was important for ACA to have offered input into the revisions as a
means to establish the parity of professional counselors with other mental health professionals in the
realm of diagnosis. Nonetheless, many of the changes made in 2013 were controversial, both among
counselors and within the psychiatric profession, and the DSM system remains firmly grounded in the
medical model. With the more recent publication of the DSM-5-TR, 2022 there are no DSM codes;
only ICD-10-CM (International Classification of Diseases, 10th Edition, Clinical Modification) are
used. This change more firmly cements the DSM system in the medical model. Some ethical issues
that arise for counselors when they use diagnosis are securing the client’s fully informed consent,
working with physicians, and having the qualifications to diagnose. Multicultural considerations are
also important in diagnosis. Following is a discussion of these issues as well as legal issues related to
accurate diagnosis.
INFORMED CONSENT 	Some clients do not understand the stigma that might be associated with
being diagnosed with an emotional or mental disorder, whereas others may be very concerned about
the implications of diagnosis for their future employment. Although it would be inappropriate to
overemphasize the possibility that a client may be discriminated against in the future as a result of
receiving a diagnosis, counselors do have a responsibility to raise the issue with clients. The chal-
lenge is to present a fully adequate explanation of the diagnostic process without deterring the client
from seeking counseling services (Kress et al., 2010, 2013). See Chapter 4 for a fuller discussion of
informed consent and diagnosis.
When clients are participants in managed care plans, considerable information must be dis-
cussed. Clients must understand the impact that their insurance policy may have on the types and
length of treatment that will be reimbursed. They must be aware that third-party payment might
end before they believe they have met their counseling goals. They must also know what and how
much information will be released to managed care companies, and they must give the counselor
permission to release the information. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014)
specifies that “counselors [should] disclose information to third-party
payers only when clients have authorized such disclosure.”
So that clients cannot later claim that they did not realize
they might receive a diagnosis of an emotional or mental disorder,
counselors’ disclosure statements should include a phrase regarding
diagnosis. We also recommend that, whenever possible, counselors
should disclose to clients (or their parents or guardians) their diagno-
sis when the diagnosis is recorded. If an initial diagnosis is changed
after the counseling process has begun as a result of a counselor’s
reassessment of the client’s condition, of course this change should
also be discussed with the client. As we note in Chapter 4, informed
consent should be viewed as an ongoing process, not a one-time
event. This may be particularly important to remember with respect
to diagnosis. Grover (2005) has cautioned that some clients may not
adequately understand at the time of their initial consent the full
implications of being assigned a diagnosis and having it communi-
cated to others.

-- 212 of 593 --

190 	Section 2 • Issues
CONSULTING WITH PHYSICIANS 	Counselors have a responsibility to understand that some client
behaviors or reported thoughts and feelings could have a physiological basis. Counselors are wise to
determine the physical condition of their clients when they begin the counseling process. Intake forms
or interview protocols must ask clients whether they have any negative health conditions and, if so, the
details regarding their treatment of those conditions. Counselors must also know whether their clients are
taking any medications and, if so, the purposes of the medications and the benefits and side effects that
the medications produce (King & Anderson, 2004). When clients have not had a physical exam in a long
time, or if a possibility exists that a problem may be physical in nature, counselors should recommend
that clients have a physical exam. They should also ask the clients to report the results to them or to sign a
release of information so that the counselor and the physician can communicate with each other.
When clients have physical complaints that obviously might be related to medical problems
(such as headaches, dizziness, or chest pains), counselors must insist that these clients have physical
examinations as a condition to their continued mental health treatment. Mental health professionals
who overlook or ignore the obvious need for a referral to a physician could be held negligent if a
client’s supposed mental condition later turned out to be caused by a physical problem.
The symptoms of some mental disorders can be alleviated by psychotropic medications. For
example, several medications have been demonstrated to be effective in reducing symptoms of bipolar
disorder (formerly called manic depression) in many sufferers. When counselors diagnose conditions
that can be helped by taking medication, they must make clients aware of this option. Counselors
can then refer to a psychiatrist those clients who are willing to consider taking medication. With the
client’s permission, the counselor and the psychiatrist can work cooperatively in assisting the client.
Qualifications to Diagnose
An issue that has been controversial is whether counselors are qualified to diagnose mental disorders.
Of course, counselors should not assign a diagnosis of an emotional or mental disorder unless they
have had adequate training to do so (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §C.2.a.), but there is no absolute
standard for determining adequate training. In terms of academic preparation, most contemporary pro-
grams that prepare counselors for clinical mental health or community agency practices require coun-
selors to complete a course in the diagnosis of emotional and mental disorders. Counselors should
also have had supervised experiences in diagnosing as part of their practicum or internship in their
master’s-degree programs, should continue to gain supervised experience in diagnosis while they are
working toward their licenses, and should seek ongoing consultation and supervision of their diagnos-
tic practices (Kress et al., 2010). New research about effective treatments is appearing constantly, so
counselors must continue to learn in order to stay current (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §C.2.f.).
In some states, licensed counselors have been challenged and accused of practicing outside their
scope of authority when they have diagnosed emotional and mental disorders. The DSM-5-TR (2022)
acknowledges that the diagnosing of mental disorders is applicable in a wide diversity of contexts and is
of value to all professionals associated with various aspects of mental health care. These professionals
include psychiatrists, other physicians and health professionals (including psychologists, counselors,
nurses, and occupational and rehabilitation therapists), social workers, forensic and legal specialists,
and researchers (APA, 2022, DSM-5-TR).
Accusing counselors of practicing outside their scope of authority when diagnosing emotional
and mental disorders is an example of a turf issue that can pit counselors against other mental health
professionals such as psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers, who have traditionally endorsed
the medical model. This issue is very important because if mental health professionals are unable to ren-
der diagnoses of emotional and mental disorders, some agencies may refuse to employ them, and health
insurance companies may not reimburse their clients for mental health services that counselors provide.

-- 213 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	191
Counselors have responded to this problem by introducing legislation that amends the scope
of practice in their state licensure statutes (Kassirer et al., 2013). The amendments specifically indi-
cate that licensed counselors may diagnose and treat emotional and mental disorders. In states that
do not have such specific language in their counselor licensure statutes, counselors still diagnose
emotional and mental disorders. However, they must argue that doing so is part of the counseling
process in general that is covered in other language in their counselor licensure statutes.
Diversity Considerations in Diagnosis
It is important to keep in mind when dealing with diagnosis that mental disorders are defined in a cul-
tural context. Standard E.5.b. of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states, “Counselors [should] recog-
nize that culture affects the manner in which clients’ problems are defined and experienced. Clients’
socio-economic and cultural experiences [should be] considered when diagnosing mental disorders.”
Behaviors that may seem bizarre in one culture may be considered perfectly normal in another.
The DSM system has long been criticized for pathologizing normal behaviors and for bias
against women, members of ethnic and racial minority groups, geriatric populations, children, peo-
ple living in poverty, and LGBTGEQIAP + individuals (Rapp & Goscha, 2012; Zur & Nordmarken,
2010). In the DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), an attempt was made to give more
attention to the diverse ways in which people from different cultural groups can experience and
describe their distress (Dailey et al., 2014b). A section on cultural formation was expanded to
include cultural syndromes, idioms, and explanations. Nonetheless, this cultural formulation fails to
fully address the concerns of wellness-oriented counselors because it focuses on pathology rather
than on client strengths (Comaz-Dias & Brown, 2016).
Concern has also been expressed that the DSM-5 may not be appropriate when working with
traumatized populations such as refugees (Goodman et al., 2018). Assessment and treatment based
on a Eurocentric diagnostic system may pathologize cultural expressions of distress. When refugees
have been exposed to historical or intergenerational trauma that has been passed from generation
to generation, it is even more imperative that comprehensive and ongoing trauma assessments be
made, rather than relying solely on the DSM-5 (Goodman et al., 2017).
In an attempt to address these concerns, the task force that conducted the revisions that appear
in the latest edition, the DSM-5-TR (2022), considered that “sociocultural diagnostic contexts
have been historically under-emphasized in assessment, diagnosis, and treatment” (Wilson, 2022,
p. 11480). Four cross-cutting review groups (of culture, sex and gender, suicide, forensics) reviewed
all chapters. The text was also reviewed by a work group on ethnoracial equity and inclusion to
ensure appropriate attention was given to risk factors such as racism and discrimination and the use
of non-stigmatizing language (APA, 2022, p. 1). The Cultural and Social Structural Issues section
includes subsections on the impact of cultural norms and practices, cultural concepts of distress, the
impact of racism and discrimination on psychiatric diagnosis, and attention to culture, racism, and
discrimination (APA, 2022). The DSM-5-TR also provides clinicians with updated and expanded
information on how sociocultural issues may impact how individuals present with specific disor-
ders. Nonetheless, discussion about the impact of other aspects of identity (e.g., gender identity,
religion, sexual orientation, class, ability) and the intersectionality of identities is lacking. Overall,
work remains to be done to make the DSM inclusive and affirming (Wilson, 2022).
Despite attempts to increase cultural sensitivity, it is important to remember that the DSM only
describes mental disorders. It does not consider the etiology, or possible origin, of mental disorders.
The manual does not ask clinicians to consider, for instance, why twice as many women as men are
diagnosed with major depressive disorder. Is it because women are more prone to depression than are
men? Is it because it is generally more acceptable in our society for women to express sadness and to

-- 214 of 593 --

192 	Section 2 • Issues
ask for help for symptoms of depression? Is it because women are more likely as an oppressed group
to experience feelings of hopelessness and depression? Could it be due to other reasons? Several
studies have demonstrated gender bias against women among mental health professionals, including
mental health counselors (Schwartz et al., 2011).
Herlihy and Watson (2003) identified three ethical problems in the use of the DSM system with
diverse clients. First, the DSM is based on the medical model of mental illness, which defines prob-
lems as residing within the individual. Failure to adequately consider social, political, economic,
and cultural factors in clients’ lives does a disservice to clients whose problems originate in or are
exacerbated by oppression, marginalization, and discrimination. This issue has been addressed to
some extent in the most recent revisions made in 2022.
Second, the DSM system tends to pathologize the problems of racial and ethnic minority clients, as
well as women, and adds to the stigma and oppression of individuals from nondominant groups (Banks-
Van Allen, 2023). A number of studies have demonstrated that members of minority groups tend to
receive more severe diagnoses than members of the majority culture for the same symptoms. Studies
have shown that African Americans are more likely to be diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia
(Neighbors et al., 2002, 2003), childhood disorders (Feisthamel & Schwartz, 2009), and major depres-
sion (Gara et al., 2019) than are Americans of European descent. When compared to non-Hispanic White
youth, some ethnic and racial minority youth are more likely to receive a diagnosis of a disruptive behav-
ior disorder and are less likely to receive a diagnosis of ADHD (Fadus et al., 2020); sexual minority
individuals have been found to be more likely to be diagnosed with borderline personality disorders
than are heterosexual individuals (Rodriguez-Seijas et al., 2021). Hispanics have been diagnosed with
schizophrenia at a rate 1.5 times higher than Whites; LGBTGEQIAP + individuals are diagnosed at a
3-to-4.7-times higher rate for major depression and panic disorder; women are diagnosed disproportion-
ately with personality disorders; and clients with lower educational levels are more often diagnosed with
schizophrenia than with mood disorders (Levers & Hyatt-Burkhart, 2020). These practices continue;
Garb (2021) conducted a systematic review of existing literature and concluded that race and gender bias
are present across numerous mental health diagnoses.
Third, the DSM system tends to perpetuate a paternalistic approach to mental health care
and thus to reinforce the societal oppression of women and minority clients. The medical, pharma-
ceutical, and psychotherapy industries profit tremendously from the treatment of mental disorders
(Herlihy & Watson, 2003; Rave & Larsen, 1995). Women receive more prescriptions than do men
in all classes of drugs, particularly psychotropic medications. The medical model also mirrors
the dominant/subordinate relationships between the authority who diagnoses and prescribes and
the women and minority culture clients who are the recipients of these services (Feisthamel &
Schwartz, 2009; Rapp & Goscha, 2012). Counselors who strive to avoid replicating in the coun-
seling relationship the inequities experienced by women and minority clients will reframe many
symptoms as coping mechanisms and evidence of survival skills in an oppressive culture rather
than as evidence of pathology.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) reflects the concern of counselors regarding historical and social
prejudices in the diagnosis of pathology. Standard E.5.c. states that counselors should recognize these
prejudices that have led to the misdiagnosing and pathologizing of certain individuals and groups and
should “strive to become aware of and address such biases in themselves or others” (ACA, 2014).
Despite the problems inherent in the DSM system and despite the discomfort of many coun-
selors in using this system, it would be impractical for counselors to refuse to participate in the
DSM diagnostic process. Rather, counselors have an ethical responsibility to reframe their thinking
about the DSM system in more culturally competent ways (Herlihy et al., 2008; Zalaquett et al.,
2008). Counselors must be careful to maintain their wellness and holistic orientations and to avoid

-- 215 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	193
equating clients with their disorders via applying diagnostic labels.
For example, a client should never be referred to as a schizophrenic
but, rather, described as an individual who suffers from schizophrenia
(Dorre & Kinnier, 2006).
Legal Issues in Diagnosis
Earlier in this section, we made the point that diagnoses rendered
by counselors must be accurate and honest despite any philosophi-
cal uneasiness or cognitive dissonance they may be experiencing.
We noted that some mental health professionals record what they
consider to be less serious disorders than what they believe the cli-
ent has in an effort to prevent stigma toward the client. At the other
end of the spectrum, counselors sometimes assign diagnoses that are
more serious than warranted so that their clients will receive third-
party reimbursement for counseling services. These practices are
not uncommon. However, inappropriate use of a diagnostic category
to obtain insurance reimbursement is the type of financial miscon-
duct that is frequently brought before ethics committees, licensing
boards, and courts.
7-7 The Case of Charlotte
Charlotte has been a counselor in a group private practice for 6 years. Charlotte shares office space
with other counselors but maintains her own separate private practice business. Most of the man-
aged health care companies for which Charlotte is an approved provider require the identification
of an emotional or mental disorder before they will agree to pay for Charlotte’s counseling services.
Most companies require that Charlotte diagnose each client using the DSM–5-TR. Other Conditions
That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention, sometimes called V-Codes, are not acceptable. Charlotte,
having been educated to counsel clients based on a wellness perspective of mental health,
worries about labeling clients negatively by diagnosing them with mental disorders. In reviewing the
DSM–5-TR, Charlotte has decided that “adjustment disorder” is the least objectionable diagnosis
and is the least likely to distress clients if she diagnoses clients with it. Even though many of her
clients do not meet the technical criteria for receiving a diagnosis of adjustment disorder, Charlotte
uses that diagnosis anyway. About 80% of Charlotte’s clients are diagnosed with adjustment disorder.
• Do you agree with Charlotte’s diagnostic practices? Why or why not?
• How can a counselor with a wellness perspective justify diagnosing clients with DSM–5-TR
mental disorders?
Discussion: Charlotte’s motives in diagnosing most of her clients with adjustment disorder are
understandable, but her actions are not ethical and also constitute insurance fraud because she
is lying to managed care companies to collect payments from them. Charlotte can thus be sued
by the companies and charged with a crime by a prosecutor. Charlotte must therefore make the
effort to reconcile her wellness perspective with using the DSM system so that she diagnoses
honestly and accurately.

-- 216 of 593 --

194 	Section 2 • Issues
Practices such as those Charlotte is using are identified in Chapter 13 as insurance fraud,
which can expose counselors to both civil and criminal liability. A client could bring a civil malprac-
tice suit against the counselor, and a prosecutor could bring criminal charges against the counselor
based on the fraud. A client who was assigned a false diagnosis would have an excellent founda-
tion for a successful malpractice suit against the counselor if the client later lost a job, was denied
a license, or was denied a security clearance because of the false diagnosis. If it could be shown
that a mental health professional knew or should have known that a client had a serious disorder but
recorded a less serious disorder and if that client then received inadequate treatment that led to harm
or was denied health insurance reimbursement because of the false diagnosis, the mental health pro-
fessional could be found to have committed malpractice. Obviously, you want to prevent your ever
having to face such a situation. It is thus crucial that you do not engage in the practice of assigning
a diagnosis to fit insurance companies’ criteria for reimbursement, even if you observe others doing
so or hear justifications for such fraudulent practices.
Summary and Key Points
This chapter discussed three main issues: counselor
competence, conducting assessment and testing,
and assigning diagnoses.
Counselor competence is an important con-
cept, even though it is difficult to define from an
ethical viewpoint and difficult to demonstrate in a
court of law. It is best viewed as being based on
performance and as existing along a continuum
from gross negligence to maximum effectiveness.
• Counselors must practice within their boundaries
of competence. It can be difficult to determine
just where these boundaries lie.
• The development of competence begins with
preparation and education, and the initial respon-
sibility for producing competent practitioners
rests with counselor educators and supervisors.
• Preparation standards established by accrediting
bodies help to ensure that graduates of accred-
ited programs possess certain competencies.
Nonetheless, graduation from an accredited
counselor education program does not guarantee
competence.
• Licensure is a legal process that establishes mini-
mum standards for a counselor to be able to prac-
tice in a given state. Because licensure is a political
process, counselor licensure requirements are not
uniform across the states. Certification is another
approach to attempting to ensure competence.
• Once counselors begin to practice, they are respon-
sible for determining their own competence.
• Counselors must know when and how to refer
clients when they are not able to provide compe-
tent services to these clients. Referrals must not
be made on the basis of value conflicts; rather,
referrals should be based on a lack of compe-
tence to work with a client.
• Counselors must exercise care while stretching
their boundaries of competence to include client
populations and concerns with which they have
little or no experience.
• It is essential in today’s society that counselors
possess intercultural counseling competence.
• When counselors are experiencing distress, burn-
out, or impairment, they must take steps to pro-
tect their clients from harm and to restore them-
selves to their full level of functioning.
Assessment and evaluation are collaborative
processes between counselor and client during which
they work together to gain a better understanding of
the client’s problems. An accurate assessment then
guides the treatment planning. Testing is a specific
type of assessment.

-- 217 of 593 --

Chapter 7 • Competence, Assessment, and Diagnosis 	195
• Counselors are competent to conduct many types
of evaluation.
• Evaluations must be objective, and for this rea-
son, counselors should avoid taking on dual roles,
such as counselor and child custody evaluator.
• Clients have a right to understand what an assess-
ment process will involve, what its purposes are,
and the uses to which it will be put.
• When counselors conduct evaluations, they must
be prepared to serve as expert witnesses in court.
• Counselors are responsible for maintaining the
security of tests that they use and for appropri-
ately supervising the test-taking process.
• Counselors are competent to administer and inter-
pret many tests, but they should keep in mind that
some tests require specific training in their use.
• Mental health professionals in some states have
attempted to prohibit counselors from using cer-
tain kinds of tests.
• Counselors must use caution in releasing test
records to third parties and should release the
records only to those individuals who are quali-
fied to receive them.
• Clients have the right to receive a full explana-
tion of their test results.
• Counselors must be cautious in using tests with
culturally diverse clients. They should check to
determine whether individuals similar to their
clients are represented in the norm groups on
which the tests were standardized.
• Counselors must be knowledgeable about laws
that affect testing practices.
• Diagnosis is a form of assessment that raises dif-
ficult questions for counselors, primarily because
counselors espouse the wellness model. Diagnosis
has caused considerable controversy historically, and
concerns about bias in diagnosis continue to exist.
• Counselors are often uncomfortable with diag-
nosing mental health disorders because the prev-
alent diagnostic system is based on the medical
model.
• Clients must understand the implications of any
diagnosis that might be assigned to them.
• Counselors must be prepared to work coopera-
tively with physicians when clients may have a
physical condition that is contributing to their men-
tal or emotional problems or when they could ben-
efit from taking medications for their condition.
• A controversial issue has been whether counsel-
ors are qualified to diagnose.
• Multicultural considerations are of paramount
importance in diagnosis because all mental dis-
orders occur in and are defined by a cultural
context.
• Counselors must be alert to sources of bias
against non-dominant members of society in the
diagnostic process and must take care not to per-
petuate historical and social prejudices in diag-
nosing pathology.
• Counselors are guilty of insurance fraud when they
do not diagnose honestly and accurately, and they
can be subject to both civil and criminal liability.

-- 218 of 593 --

196
8Malpractice and Resolving Legal
and Ethical Challenges
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
8.1 Demonstrate an understanding of what plaintiffs
must prove if they file a malpractice lawsuit against
a counselor.
8.2 Explain what a counselor’s duty is if they determine
that a counseling client may be at risk of suicide or
violence.
8.3 Describe how counselors should proceed differently
depending on whether they are faced with a legal
issue or with an ethical issue.
8.4 Explain how counselors should react and respond
if a complaint is filed against them with their state
licensure board.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What do you think are the most
common reasons that clients
bring malpractice lawsuits against
counselors and other mental health
professionals?
2. How does a counselor determine
whether a client may be at risk of
suicide?
3. How do you think you would react
if you were a licensed counselor
and received a registered letter from
your licensure board informing
you that you had been accused
of professional wrongdoing by a
former client?
4. Do you think it is wise to avoid
telling friends and colleagues if you
receive notification of a complaint
against you? Why or why not?
5. In what circumstances do you
think you should report another
counselor for unethical behavior?
This chapter addresses two potential events that are frightening
to counselors: being sued for malpractice and being accused
of wrongdoing in a complaint to a counselor licensure board.
Although malpractice lawsuits against counselors are rare,
they can occur when counselors work with clients who are at
risk for suicide or violent behavior toward others. This chapter
provides detailed information on steps counselors can take
when they are counseling these clients. Counselors also need
to understand the process of responding to complaints against
them that are made to state counselor licensure boards. It is very
uncomfortable for counselors to take action when they suspect
a colleague is behaving unethically or illegally, so they should
do so only after considering several factors.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
on Malpractice and Resolving Legal
and Ethical Challenges
Few counselors are sued for malpractice, but when they are,
the most common complaint is that they failed to manage
properly clients who were at risk for suicide. Assessing and
managing clients for potential suicide or violence risk has

-- 219 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	197
become more challenging for counselors who provide services through compressed video applica-
tions such as Zoom. Fewer visual cues are available to observe when clients are not in the room with
the counselor. Also, locating family members or individuals who live near the client and are willing
to take responsibility for a client who may be at risk for suicide can be problematic. If counselors
must take emergency measures such as calling the police or an ambulance to assist a client who may
be at risk for suicide or violence, doing so is much more difficult when counselors live and work
at a distance from where clients are located. Counselors who provide counseling services virtually
are aware of these issues and are taking steps to ensure they can handle situations in which they
are concerned that their clients may be at risk for suicide or violence. Ellington (2022) has offered
guidelines for school counselors to consider when they are providing virtual counseling services to
students who are exhibiting warning signs of threats to safety.
With the continued expansion of the online education of master’s-level counselors-in-training,
concerns have been expressed as to whether students who are learning online are adequately pre-
pared to manage clients who might be at risk for self-harm. Elliott and Henninger (2020) measured
the impact of three online teaching strategies on students’ self-efficacy related to providing coun-
seling services to clients who might be at risk for suicide. They found that all three of the teaching
strategies were equally effective, which suggests that online counselors-in-training can benefit from
instruction about how to handle clients who could be at risk.
MALPRACTICE
Malpractice involves professional misconduct or unreasonable lack of skill and has been
defined as the failure to render professional services to the level expected in a particular com-
munity by a prudent member of the profession, with the result that a recipient of services is
harmed (Garner, 2014).
Malpractice includes intentional wrongdoing, incompetency, or unintentional wrongdo-
ing of the professional involved. The concept of competency might be extended so that a coun-
selor guilty of professional misconduct, evil practice, or illegal or immoral conduct also could be
defined as incompetent.
Malpractice is also a type of civil lawsuit that can be filed against professionals for practicing
in a manner that leads to injury to a recipient of their services. Professionals have a legal obliga-
tion not to harm individuals who come to them for professional assistance. Although the law can-
not restore injured people to their former state of existence, it can require the person who harmed
them to compensate them financially for their injuries. If clients believe they have been harmed by
their counselors, they can file a malpractice lawsuit against the counselors. Counselors who are
sued must then defend themselves against the lawsuit before a judge or jury. For a client plaintiff to
prevail in a malpractice lawsuit against a counselor, the plaintiff must prove the following elements
(Schwartz et al., 2010):
• The counselor had a duty to the client to use reasonable care in providing counseling services.
• The counselor failed to conform to the required duty of care.
• The client was injured.
• There was a reasonably close causal connection between the conduct of the counselor and the
resulting injury (known as proximate cause).
• The client suffered an actual loss or was damaged.
Proximate cause is a difficult legal concept to understand. Actual cause means that a person
actually caused the injury of another person. Proximate cause has to do with whether the individual
would not have been injured had it not been for the action or inaction of the other person. Just because

-- 220 of 593 --

198 	Section 2 • Issues
professionals are negligent does not make them responsible for an injury. It must be proven that some
intervening event (other than the counselor’s negligence) did not, in fact, cause the injury. Foreseeability
is important in determinations of proximate cause. Foreseeability has to do with whether the profes-
sional knew or should have known that their actions would result in a specific outcome.
Counselors have become increasingly concerned about being sued for malpractice. For exam-
ple, because counselors are concerned about whether they should ever touch clients, Calmes et al.
(2013) have provided guidelines related to when touching between counselors and clients is appro-
priate or inappropriate. Although malpractice lawsuits against mental health professionals have
increased dramatically in the recent past, the total number of these lawsuits is relatively small. Few
malpractice lawsuits are filed against counselors because it is difficult for plaintiffs to establish an
adequate case. It is not easy to prove that a counselor deviated from accepted practices and that the
counselor’s act or negligence caused the harm that a client suffered.
The Healthcare Providers Service Organization (HPSO, 2014) issued a report, covering the
10-year period between 2003 and 2012, that summarized legal actions taken against counselors for
whom the HPSO provided professional liability insurance. A second edition, covering the years
2015–2019, was published later (CNA & Healthcare Providers Service Organization [HPSO], 2019).
The 2014 report concluded that the most frequent professional liability claims against counselors and
the most complaints made to licensure boards involved inappropriate sexual or romantic relation-
ships with clients or the partners or family members of clients. The second- and third-most-common
licensure board complaints against counselors were breach of confidentiality and scope of practice
issues (e.g., practicing outside the area of a counselor’s expertise or authority under licensure laws).
Some of the most significant changes from the 2014 report that were published in the 2019 report
were: (a) the total incurred costs of claims was $14.7 million, which was double the costs from the
earlier report; (b) sexual misconduct and allegations of multiple relationships with clients increased
in severity; (c) no telebehavioral health claims were filed through 2019; (d) deposition and record
request assistance increased 456%, and child custody matters comprised 37.8% of all assistance;
(e) 63.7% of license protection claims closed with no action taken by the board; (f) the average
payment of a license protection claim was $5,454, a 46.3% increase; and (g) the highest number
of license protection claims were related to complaints of failure to maintain minimal professional
standards, sexual misconduct, breach of confidentiality, and reporting to third parties.
The 2014 report, for which data were collected prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, provided
other interesting information about claims made against counselors. Almost 67% of complaints were
based on face-to-face counseling of an individual client. Even though only about 8% of professional
liability claims involved minor clients, payouts from these claims were almost three times higher than
payouts related to claims involving adult clients. More than 41% of claims against counselors were
made by clients who had sought counseling related to marriage or family discord. Almost 40% of the
claims against counselors were based on allegations of an inappropriate sexual or romantic relation-
ship with clients or a spouse, partner, or family member of clients. More than 10% of claims against
counselors were accusations that counselors had acted outside their state-defined scope of practice.
According to the 2014 report, one of the biggest payouts to an individual who had sued a
counselor was a case in which a male counselor engaged in a sexual relationship with an adult
female client while she was in active treatment. The client videotaped a counseling session (with-
out the counselor’s knowledge) in which he could clearly be seen striking her. The client filed a
complaint with the police, and the police videotaped the counselor stealing from the client’s bank
account. The claim filed by the client was settled in the $500,000 range.
Although all professional counselors know that it is unethical to have sexual relationships
with clients, this case and others demonstrate that some counselors do engage in sex with their
clients. For each documented case, there probably are many that are not reported. It is essential that

-- 221 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	199
counselors know themselves and practice self-care so that they do not allow their need for intimate
relationships to lead them into sexual relationships with their clients (Keith-Spiegel, 2014).
Insurance companies that provide professional liability insurance for counselors and attorneys
who sue and defend counselors in malpractice cases have provided guidelines for preventing being
accused of wrongdoing. An insurance company that provides professional liability to counselors,
Insureon (2023), has provided advice for preventing malpractice claims:
• Follow standards outlined in the DSM.
• Always maintain strong personal boundaries.
• Avoid inappropriate or excessive self-disclosures.
• Educate yourself on standards of care for counselors that are set by your state licensure board,
and make sure you always follow them.
• Make sure your clients have realistic expectations for the services you are providing them, and
get an agreement in writing.
• Maintain client confidentiality, but involve family members if clients may be at risk for suicide
or violence.
• Keep notes and records that are meticulous, thorough, and accurate.
• Terminate services to clients who attempt to initiate any inappropriate relationship with you,
and facilitate their transfer to another counselor.
• Avoid using methods of counseling that are not generally acceptable within the profession.
• Regularly consult with peers.
• Refer clients to specialists when they have issues outside your areas of expertise.
It appears that mental health professionals continue to be sued
most often because of sexual relationships with their clients. However,
it is likely that the next leading cause of malpractice lawsuits against
counselors revolves around situations in which clients attempt or com-
plete suicide (McAdams & Foster, 2000; Roberts et al., 2008). Whether
to have sex with clients is certainly a choice that a mental health pro-
fessional makes, and it is a situation that can be prevented. Predicting
whether a client will attempt suicide, however, is scientifically impos-
sible. Yet counselors will be held accountable in courts if they fail to
follow procedures endorsed by the profession when a client may be at
risk. We provide guidelines for managing clients who may be at risk
for suicide and potentially violent clients and discuss the duty to warn
intended victims of potential client violence in the following sections.
Clients at Risk for Suicide
When a client threatens to commit suicide, an ethical duty arises to pro-
tect the client from harm to self. The ethical standard that applies to
clients who pose a danger to others applies to suicidal clients as well,
in that confidentiality requirements are waived when disclosure is nec-
essary to protect clients or others from serious and foreseeable harm
(American Counseling Association [ACA], 2014, Code of Ethics, §B.2.a.). Evaluating and managing
suicide risk is one of the most stressful situations that you will encounter in your work (Corey et al.,
2024; Miller et al., 2013). Suicide prevention programs are an important responsibility for counselors
(Gallo, 2017). Cureton and Fink (2019) have suggested that counselors who are assessing client risk
factors for suicide also should focus on assessing client protective factors against suicide. Clients
who may be at risk for suicide can be assisted when counselors help clients increase the factors that

-- 222 of 593 --

200 	Section 2 • Issues
protect them from making suicide attempts. Suicide prevention measures begin with a thorough risk
assessment and then, depending on the level of danger, might include involving the client’s family or
significant others, working with the client to arrange for voluntary hospitalization, or even initiating
the process that leads to an involuntary commitment of the client. All of these interventions are dis-
ruptive and compromise the client’s confidentiality. Ethically (ACA, 2014, §B.2.e.) and legally under
the Health Insurance Portability and Accounting Act (HIPAA), it is important to disclose only the
information that you consider essential for someone else to help prevent a suicide attempt.
To take action to protect a client who may be at risk for self-harm, the counselor must first
make the decision that the client may be at risk. In a qualitative study of suicide attempt survivors,
Sheehan et al. (2021) found that the survivors decided to disclose their intended suicide attempts
based on individualized circumstances and the context of the survivors’ lives. The results of this
study support the concept that decisions to attempt to harm oneself are individualized and do not
follow identifiable patterns. Even though there is no sure way to predict whether a particular client
will attempt suicide, experts agree that individuals who die by suicide generally give clues before-
hand to those around them (Barbour et al., 2021; Capuzzi, 2002; Sallee et al., 2022). Day-Vines
(2007) has alerted counselors to the soaring rates of suicide among African Americans in the United
States. In a qualitative study of active-duty military spouses, Cole et al. (2021) found that the par-
ticipants had a fear of seeking mental health services and had difficulty accessing such services,
putting that population more at risk for suicide. Information such as this must guide the day-to-day
work of counselors when they assess clients for suicide potential.
In most circumstances, a counselor’s determination of a client’s level of risk must be based on
clinical observations, not on test results. If counselors were not prepared in their graduate programs to
handle crises involving the possibility of client suicide (Allen et al., 2002), they must remediate this
deficiency through independent reading, workshop attendance, post-master’s-degree course comple-
tion, and supervised practice (McGlothlin et al., 2005; Morris & Minton, 2012; Shannonhouse et al.,
2017). Results of studies have shown that preparing counselors in training to intervene when clients
may be at risk for suicide is effective (Griesbach et al., 2008; Shannonhouse et al., 2018).
As noted, determining that a client may be at risk of suicide leads to counselor actions that can
be exceptionally disruptive to the client’s life. Just as counselors can be accused of malpractice for
neglecting to take action to prevent harm when a client is determined to be at risk for suicide, coun-
selors also can be accused of wrongdoing if they overreact and precipitously take actions that vio-
late a client’s privacy or freedom when there is no basis for doing so (Hawton et al., 2022; Hermann
et al., 2011). As a result, counselors have a legal duty to evaluate accurately a client’s potential for
suicide. Counselors can be held liable for overreacting and for underreacting. So, how should a
determination be made as to whether a client is suicidal?
First, no matter where you work as a counselor, you are likely to provide services to indi-
viduals who might express suicidal thoughts (Hermann, 2001; O’Dwyer, 2012). Therefore, it is
necessary for all counselors to know the warning signs that a particular person is at risk for suicide.
Because the act of suicide is done by the client without the counselor being a party to it, courts
generally have been reluctant to hold counselors accountable for harm that results from clients who
attempt or complete suicide.
A legal case from the 1960s (Bogust v. Iverson, 1960) held that a college counselor was not a
mental health professional and therefore had no duty to assess a client’s risk of suicide. Since then,
however, counselors have established themselves as mental health professionals, and the law imposes
on counselors—practicing in all settings—the responsibility of knowing how to accurately determine
a client’s risk of suicide (Eisel v. Board of Education of Montgomery County, 1991). Some school
counselors may be reluctant to assess students for suicide (Becnel et al., 2021), thinking they can
prevent their liability by neglecting to make such assessments, but Gallo and Wachter Morris (2022)

-- 223 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	201
and Wachter Morris and Gallo (2022) have argued that school counselors are properly prepared to
conduct suicide assessments and to provide suicide prevention programs in schools and that school
counselors should not avoid working with children who may be considering suicide or choose not to
perform suicide assessments due to fear of liability. Morris et al. (2021) have provided a suggested
process for school counselors to determine how to measure the risk of potential student suicide
among their particular school’s student population and how to structure a reasonable suicide preven-
tion program. Gibson (2022) has pointed out that even though school counseling began with career
counseling and guidance, it has evolved to a point where school counselors are now being prepared
to address the growing mental health needs of school-aged children.
Much help is available in the professional literature, including research studies and articles
that provide information about warning signs of future suicidal behavior (Daniel & Goldston, 2012;
Sallee et al., 2021; Sapyta et al., 2012). Today’s counselors must know how to make assessments
of a client’s risk for suicide and must be able to defend their decisions at a later time (Linehan
et al., 2012). Binkley and Elliott (2021) found published articles about how counselors are taught to
respond to potentially suicidal clients, but the literature is lacking in articles about the process used
to prepare counselors to identify clients who may be at risk for suicide and how to respond once
at-risk clients are identified.
In recent years, the professional counseling literature has introduced considerable discussion
regarding self-injury, and the term nonsuicidal self-injury is often used, which might be a bit mis-
leading. Ross and Heath (2002) defined “nonsuicidal self-injury” as behaviors that involve inten-
tional bodily harm that causes tissue damage without an individual having the intent to die, and the
International Society for the Study of Self-Injury (2023) added to that definition “and for purposes not
socially or culturally sanctioned.” Self-injury includes activities such as cutting, burning, self-bruising,
breaking bones (International Society of the Study of Self-Injury, 2023; Zetterqvist, 2015), carving
of the skin, subdermal tissue scratching, banging or punching objects or oneself, embedding objects
under the skin (Self-Injury and Recovery Research and Resources, 2023), and excoriation, also known
as skin picking (Jagger & Sterner, 2016). The literature has explored the question of whether self-injury
is associated with suicide (Whisenhunt et al., 2014), and contains suggestions for providing counsel-
ing to clients who are engaged in self-injury (Lawrence, 2023; Nelson & Piccin, 2016; Rutt et al.,
2016; Stargell et al., 2017, 2018), developing nonsuicidal self-injury prevention programs (Stargell
et al., 2017, 2018; Wester et al., 2017), and locating detailed information regarding various forms of
self-injury (Jagger & Sterner, 2016).
Best practices in counseling individuals who self-injure have been summarized by Calvo et al.
(2022) and Turner et al. (2014), but Fox et al., (2020) have pointed out that the efficacy of such
treatments is still unclear. The goal of counseling with persons who self-injure is to reduce nonsui-
cidal self-injury by focusing on the thoughts, emotions, and behaviors that cause a person to self-
injure (International Society of the Study of Self-Injury, 2023).
The prevailing belief among mental health professionals is that self-injury is not automati-
cally a predictor of suicide attempts (Griep & MacKinnon, 2020; Kiekens et al., 2018; Ribeiro
et al., 2015; Walsh, 2006), although certainly some people who self-injure might also be suicidal,
and the risk of suicide is heightened among clients who self-injure (Brausch & Gutierrez, 2010;
Toprak et al., 2011). Kakhnovets et al. (2010) found that the rate of suicidal ideation increased from
31.8% for those who reported one episode of self-injury to 60% for those who reported more than
one episode of self-injury. Wester et al. (2016), after a review of the literature, reported that 10%
to 37% of those who engaged in nonsuicidal self-injury also attempted suicide at some point in
their lives. Nock et al. (2007) and Nock et al. (2010) found that suicidal thoughts generally do not
accompany self-injurious behavior. It seems that self-injury and suicidal ideation are two separate
behaviors and therefore should be assessed separately (Wester & McKibben, 2016).

-- 224 of 593 --

202 	Section 2 • Issues
8-1 The Case of Monica
Monica is a new counselor at a community mental health center. She has taken this position as her
first job after completing her master’s degree in counseling. Ashley is a 15-year-old client with whom
Monica has had two counseling sessions. Ashley’s mother drives her to counseling sessions and waits
for her until the sessions are over and then drives her home. Ashley told Monica in their first ses-
sion that she sometimes cuts herself with small incisions above her ankle and below her knee. Ashley
assured Monica that the cuts were never deep, rarely produced any blood, and were not in any way
dangerous. In that first session, Monica talked with Ashley about self-injury and what is known about
such behaviors. She asked Ashley questions about what precipitates her cutting behaviors; what her
feelings are before, during, and after cutting; and what her thoughts were about cutting. In the second
session, Ashley revealed to Monica that she worries that some day she might cut herself too deeply
and might start bleeding too much. Ashley begs Monica not to tell her mother what she has told her.
• What factors should Monica consider when determining how to respond to Ashley’s request
not to tell her mother?
• How do you think Ashley will respond if Monica tells Ashley’s mother about Ashley’s cutting
behavior over Ashley’s objection?
• What are the consequences if Monica does not tell Ashley’s mother about Ashley’s cutting
behavior and Ashley later cuts and injures herself seriously or attempts or completes suicide?
• In this situation, given these circumstances, do you think Monica should tell Ashley’s mother
about the cutting behavior?
Discussion: First, Monica should ask Ashley to give her more information about the cutting behav-
iors. Monica should ask Ashley if she actually has cut herself so deeply that she has bled substantially.
Monica needs to determine whether Ashley is fearful of cutting herself too deeply in the future, or
if perhaps she has already done that in the past, and if she has cut herself deeply in the past, how
many times. If Monica determines that Ashley is involved only in surface cutting and has not put
herself in danger but is only concerned about perhaps doing that in the future, Monica could deter-
mine that Ashley is not currently a danger to herself and could continue her counseling sessions
with Ashley. Monica would want to closely monitor Ashley’s cutting behaviors from week to week. If
Monica makes the determination that Ashley is not currently a danger to herself, she should consult
with her supervisor at the agency, give her supervisor complete information about Ashley, and then
follow the directives of her supervisor regarding how to proceed in her counseling sessions with
Ashley. If, after questioning Ashley thoroughly about her cutting behavior, Monica determines that
Ashley might be engaged in cutting behaviors that might constitute a danger to herself, then Monica
should consult with her supervisor immediately. Monica may decide to bring Ashley’s mother into
the session. Monica can either convince Ashley to tell her mother or tell Ashley’s mother herself what
Ashley has told her. Monica should advise Ashley’s mother to have Ashley evaluated by a physician to
determine if her cutting behaviors constitute a danger to her health.
After reviewing the literature, Whisenhunt et al. (2014) concluded that common risk
factors for both suicide and self-injury include substance misuse, low self-esteem, suicidal
ideation, disordered eating, and non-heterosexual identity. But self-injury risk factors include
factors that are not predictive of suicide, including history of abuse or current abuse, eating

-- 225 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	203
disorders, early first sexual encounter, and low socio-economic status (Whisenhunt et al.,
2014). And suicide risk factors that do not predict self-injury include broken homes, mental
illness in self or family members, female gender, risky weight control behaviors, early onset
puberty, recent suicide attempts by a friend, and behavioral problems. Wester and McKibben
(2016) explored the experiences of 88 individuals who had engaged in self-injury and con-
cluded that there was evidence that self-injury can desensitize individuals to commit suicide,
although 38% of the participants indicated that nonsuicidal self-injury delayed or protected
them from attempting suicide.
It is possible that clients who engage in nonsuicidal self-injury may unintentionally harm
themselves severely. Buser et al. (2017) concluded that individuals who self-injure and have addic-
tive qualities (which include tolerance of the pain, time-consuming nature of self-injury, and con-
tinuation despite negative consequences) are more at risk for unintentional severe harm than those
who self-injure but who do not have addictive qualities.
As a result of a qualitative study in which eight licensed professional counselors who were
experienced in working with clients who self-injure were interviewed, Whisenhunt et al. (2014)
concluded that there was a lack of consensus among the participants about the relationship between
self-injury and suicide. These researchers believed that this finding reflected the continued profes-
sional debate surrounding the topic.
The association between self-injury and suicidal ideation remains unclear. As a result, coun-
selors who treat those who self-injure should always assess for suicidal ideation (Wester et al., 2016).
Instruments are available to assist counselors in assessing clients for self-injurious behavior (Buser
& Peterson, 2016) and in assessing clients for risk of suicide (Erickson & Abel, 2013; Lotito &
Cook, 2015; McGlothlin et al., 2016).
HOW BULLYING/CYBERBULLYING CAN LEAD TO SUICIDE 	Bullying has been associated with
suicide in that some victims of bullying do attempt or die by suicide. The Pacer National Bullying
Prevention Center (2023) has defined bullying as occurring when a person aggressively uses their
power to target another individual with repeated, unwanted words or actions. Bullying can occur
in person or online. Bullies have more social or physical power than their victims. Bullying can be
repeated or can be a one-time incident. Bullying can also occur outside of schools, and adults some-
times accuse other adults of bullying.
Professionals who counsel clients who are either victims of bullies or perpetrators of bullying
should be aware that victims sometimes attempt or complete suicide. Therefore, counselors should
assess bullying victims for suicidal ideation. To help prevent suicide, counselors should consider
starting bullying prevention programs.
The Pacer National Bullying Prevention Center (2023) has indicated that cyberbullying
takes place over digital devices such as cell phones, tablets, and computers and can occur using
email, texting, social media, gaming, instant messaging, or photo sharing. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (2023) has estimated that 15.9% of high school students in the United
States were electronically bullied in the year 2021. Suggestions for preventing cyberbullying and
for counseling those targeted by cyberbullying have been developed by several scholars (Burnham
et al., 2011; Hinduja & Patchin, 2019; McCormac, 2014). The Pacer National Bullying Center
(2023) offers specific suggestions for helping youth who have experienced cyberbullying that
include talking with children about the potential for cyberbullying, giving children specific advice
about electronic communications, and providing children with steps to take when they report hav-
ing experienced cyberbullying.

-- 226 of 593 --

204 	Section 2 • Issues
MAKING ASSESSMENTS FOR SUICIDE RISK 	The law does not require that counselors always
be correct in making their assessments of suicide risk, but it is a legal requirement that counselors
make those assessments from an informed position and that they fulfill their professional obliga-
tions to a client in a manner comparable to what other reasonable counselors operating in a similar
situation would do. Because of this standard of care to which counselors are held, the very best
action you can take if you are unsure whether a client is at risk for a suicide attempt is to consult
with other mental health professionals who are similar to you. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014,
§C.2.e.) advises counselors to consult with other counselors when they have questions regarding
their ethical obligations or professional practice. It also is important to look for consensus among
your consultants and certainly to follow their advice in making your final decision about what to do
in a particular case. In situations in which you have assessed a client’s potential risk for suicide, it
is essential that you document the following items carefully, regardless of whether you determine
that the client may be or is not currently at risk. Essential items to include in your documentation
notes include:
• What precipitated your concern about the client (such as referral by another person, or some-
thing the client said or did)
• Questions you asked the client and their responses
• Individuals you consulted regarding the situation, what you said to them, and how they
responded
• Interactions you had with any other persons regarding the situation, from the time you became
concerned until you completed your work for the time being regarding the situation.
When you make the decision that a client may be a danger to self, you must take whatever
steps are necessary to prevent the harm, and your actions must be the least intrusive to accomplish
that result. Again, consulting with colleagues could be very helpful. Many counselors who have
determined that a client may be at risk for suicide require that the client submit to an evaluation by
a mental health professional who has expertise in suicide, as a condition for continuing to receive
counseling services from that counselor. For example, you might require that your client see a psy-
chiatrist on the staff at the facility where you work, if that is an option. Or you might require your
client to submit to a mental evaluation at a local hospital where psychiatric services are available.
Less intrusive options are also available, such as referring the client to a primary care physician if
the client is in a health plan that requires that step before gaining access to a specialist, such as a
psychiatrist. Of course, you should choose a less intrusive option only if you are sure the client is
not at imminent risk.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2023) maintains a website related to suicide
prevention that is continually updated with the latest research reports. Because it is so difficult to
decide what steps to take in a crisis situation, especially one in which a client’s life may be in dan-
ger, we have provided an action plan to follow if you determine that an adult client may be at risk
for suicide (see Figure 8-1). If your client is a minor, you must always notify the parents or guard-
ians (Capuzzi, 2002). Responsibilities to minors and their parents or guardians are discussed further
in Chapter 11. The steps we suggest are not the only options that counselors have. Rather, we are
providing one possible way to manage potentially suicidal clients that hopefully will yield positive
results.
If you work in an agency, school, hospital, or other organizational setting, you must always
follow the procedures established by your employer. In many cases, counselors find that their
employer does not have guidelines for how to manage potentially suicidal clients. If that is the
case, you should consider following the guidelines in Figure 8-1 until such policies are adopted. In
addition, you should ask that guidelines be established for the welfare of clients and to protect the

-- 227 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	205
FIGURE 8-1 Steps to follow if you determine that your client may be at risk for suicide
If you determine that an adult client has exhibited some behaviors that are related to suicide, but currently
does not appear to be at risk for suicide:
1. Summarize in your case notes the client’s behavior that supports your concern. Do not write that you
believe the client may be at risk for suicide. Instead, write that although you do not believe the client
may be at risk for suicide, you performed an assessment. Give details about how you assessed the
client. You could decide that the client is fine and that you do not have to tell anyone about what
the client said or did that led to your concerns. If you believe a significant person in their life needs
to be informed of the behaviors that concern you, then document that determination in your notes.
2. Consultation is recommended. If you have consulted with colleagues, experts, or supervisors in
reaching your position, document the consultations in your case notes.
3. Tell your client your concerns and, if appropriate, obtain an agreement from the client to inform a
significant person in their life of your concerns. Tell the client to have that person contact you as
soon as possible.
4. If your client is not capable of telling the significant person or if, for some other reason, asking the
client to inform the significant person does not seem like an appropriate course of action, explain
to the client that you will be contacting the significant person to share your concerns. If you are not
in independent private practice, inform your supervisor of the actions you will be taking and follow
any directives given.
5. Choose a significant person in your client’s life (such as your client’s spouse or partner, parent, adult
child, other relative, or close friend), and inform them of the situation. Choose a responsible person
who lives with the client or who is in frequent contact with the client.
6. Document in your case notes all conversations with your client, the client’s significant person, and
your supervisors.
If you determine that an adult client MAY BE at risk for suicide . . .
1. You are dealing with a very serious matter that requires immediate and decisive action. Make the
determination that an adult client may be at risk for suicide only if the client has made a suicide
gesture or attempt, has told you or someone else in a believable fashion that they plan to attempt
suicide, or has engaged in a pattern of behavior that the professional literature suggests is charac-
teristic of an adult who is at risk for suicide. Follow any agency policies that exist regarding manag-
ing adults at risk for suicide. If you are not in an independent private practice, notify your supervi-
sor of the situation, and follow any directives given. If agency policies dictate or if your supervisor
directs you to proceed differently from the following steps, follow the policies or the orders of your
supervisor.
2. Consultation is recommended. If you have consulted with colleagues, experts, or supervisors in
reaching your position, document the consultations in your case notes.
3. Explain to your client that you will have to notify a significant person in the client’s life so that the
person can help.
4. Assure your client that you will continue to help and that you will disclose only the minimum informa-
tion necessary to get assistance for the client. Try to calm the client, but do not minimize the serious-
ness of the situation. Explain what may happen in the next few hours, next few days, and long term.
5. Ensure that your client is not left alone and does not have any opportunity for self-harm before turn-
ing the client over to the significant person.
6. Contact the significant person in your client’s life, and explain that you believe their relative, partner,
or friend may be at risk for suicide. Give specific details that led to your concern. Insist that the sig-
nificant person come to pick up the client immediately.
7. If a significant person cannot be found, make sure your client is under the supervision of a respon-
sible person until a significant person is located.
8. If you cannot contact a significant person and if it is impossible to keep your adult client safe for an
extended period of time, call an ambulance and have the client transported to a hospital that has
psychiatric services. If you are not in an independent private practice, be sure to inform your super-
visor and obtain permission and support before taking this action. If your supervisor directs you to
take a different course of action, do so and document in your case notes what you were told and did.

-- 228 of 593 --

206 	Section 2 • Issues
FIGURE 8-1 (continued)
Give the ambulance attendant your contact information and offer to speak with the person at the
hospital who will be conducting the evaluation, if requested to do so. Continue to attempt to contact
the client’s significant person.
9. When you talk to the significant person, ask that person to immediately take possession of and
responsibility for your client.
10. When the significant person arrives, explain that you believe your client may be at risk for suicide,
give specific details that led to your concern, instruct the significant person what to do next, and
ask that a document be signed that acknowledges that the significant person has been informed of
your concerns, has been given directions regarding the steps to take next, and has agreed to take
responsibility for your client.
11. Have the client sign a form giving you permission to disclose any information you have to mental
health professionals who may evaluate or treat the client in the future. If the client refuses or is not
capable of signing the form, ask the significant person to sign on your client’s behalf.
12. Explain to the significant person that they must ensure that your client is not left alone, does not
have any opportunities for self-harm, and is taken for an evaluation as soon as possible to determine
whether they are at risk for suicide.
13. If the significant person refuses to sign the document or communicates to you in some way that they
will not take the situation seriously, call an ambulance, and follow the steps in item 8.
14. As events occur, detail in your case notes all the events that transpired in relation to this situation. Be
sure to date each entry and indicate the time you wrote it. Make several entries if necessary, and do
not delay in writing details in your case notes.
15. When your client returns to you or your agency for services, obtain written permission from your
client to contact the professional who determined that your client was not at risk for suicide or was
no longer at risk for suicide.
16. Contact your client’s treating physician, psychologist, or other mental health provider, and explain
that the client has returned to you or your agency for services. Ask the treating provider to summarize
their evaluation and treatment of the client. Inquire as to whether the provider will continue to treat
the client and, if so, the details of the planned treatment. Also ask the treating provider the types of
counseling services they would like you to provide to the client. Do not agree to provide any counsel-
ing services that your position does not allow you to provide. Ask the provider to tell you the circum-
stances in which you should return the client to them for further evaluation or treatment.
17. As soon as possible after you have talked to the provider, document in your case notes the details of
your conversation. Be sure to date the entry and indicate the time you wrote it.
counselors who have to make decisions in difficult situations. If your administrative supervisor is
present when you are involved with a potentially suicidal client, you must follow your supervisor’s
directives. The guidelines presented in Figure 8-1 could be adopted by your agency, or you could
follow these in the absence of any agency policies or directives from superiors.
As you can see in Figure 8-1, it is assumed that a client you refer for an evaluation will return
to you for services. Even if a client is hospitalized, the hospitalization usually is only a few days in
duration. Contacting and documenting your consultation with the mental health professional who
determined that your client was not at risk for suicide, or was no longer at risk, is vital. You prob-
ably will counsel clients who have recently been at risk for suicide. In an interesting study, Paulson
and Worth (2002) found that clients who previously had been at risk for suicide described these key
therapeutic processes that helped them to overcome suicidal ideation and behaviors: (a) experienc-
ing an affirming and validating relationship as a means of reconnection with others, (b) dealing with
the intense emotions surrounding suicidal behavior, and (c) confronting and discarding negative
patterns while establishing new, more positive behaviors.

-- 229 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	207
Clients Who May Be at Risk for Harming Others
Counselors are often responsible for violence prevention education (Banyard, 2022; Carter et al.,
2022; D’Andrea, 2004; Duarte & Hatch, 2014; Ginter, 2004; Smith & Sandhu, 2004). In addition,
there will be situations during your counseling career when you must decide whether a particular cli-
ent has the potential of harming another person or perhaps even an individual’s property (Chambers
et al., 2010; Höffler et al., 2022; McAdams et al., 2011; Radatz & Zoe Hilton, 2022; Winer & Halgin,
2016). Making the decision as to whether a client may be violent in the future is difficult, as there is
no scientific certainty for such a decision. If you do determine that a client may be a danger to another
person, then you must take the steps necessary to prevent harm to that other person (Gilbert, 2007;
Hermann & Finn, 2002). Steps may include warning intended victims by contacting them directly or
notifying authorities of the threat. In making these difficult decisions, it is essential to consult with
other mental health professionals and to include supervisors to the extent possible.
What began as a legal requirement has now evolved into an ethical duty as well. Standard
B.2.a. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that the counselor’s confidentiality requirement
“does not apply when disclosure is required to protect clients or identified others from serious and
foreseeable harm.” This particular exception to confidentiality has caused considerable confusion and
consternation among helping professionals, not only because it involves breaching confidentiality
but also because it demands that counselors be able to predict dangerousness. Human behavior is
not always predictable, and counselors may find themselves in a dilemma, both ethically and legally,
in determining whether to breach a client’s confidentiality to prevent harm to the client or to others.
8-2 The Case of Javier
Javier is a counselor in a community mental health center. For the last two weeks he has been
seeing a client named Bill, who is a junior in high school. Bill comes to the center one day each
week, walking from school to his sessions and then walking home afterward. This afternoon,
Bill tells Javier that, after thinking about it for quite some time, he has decided to shoot the
assistant principal at his school. Bill says that his father has a rifle collection in their home, and
he has access to the guns and to ammunition. Bill explains that he plans to wait outside the
assistant principal’s home until he walks out in the morning and to shoot him as he walks to
his car. Because Bill is so calm as he relates all of this information, Javier asks Bill if he is seri-
ous. Bill smiles, laughs, and then says, “No, I was only kidding. I would never do anything like
that.” Because Javier doesn’t know Bill very well, he is not sure what to do next. Javier asks Bill
to excuse him for a minute and leaves his office to look for his supervisor. He discovers that his
supervisor and all the other staff have left for the day. Javier returns to his office and finds Bill
standing by a window, looking out with tears in his eyes.
• In these circumstances, what are Javier’s options?
• What option would you choose if you were Javier?
Discussion: Javier has a number of options in this situation. He could (a) talk more with Bill and
try to assess his potential for harming the assistant principal, (b) call Bill’s mother or father to
come to the center to pick Bill up, and tell the parents what Bill told him, (c) call the police and
ask them to come over to talk with Bill, or (d) call the assistant principal and warn them of the
threat against his life.

-- 230 of 593 --

208 	Section 2 • Issues
Javier’s best option might be to talk further with Bill. If Javier determines that Bill was not seri-
ous and therefore is not a danger to the assistant principal, Javier should document what happened
in his notes and explain why he reached the conclusion he reached. Even if Javier determines that
Bill might not have been serious, Javier should call Bill’s parents and ask them to come over. He
should get them to take responsibility for Bill’s actions and the assistant principal’s safety.
If Javier determines that Bill may be at risk for harming others, in this case the assistant principal,
then Jaiver must take steps to prevent the harm. If the parents are available, Javier could have one or
both come to the center, explain what Bill told him, and ask them to take responsibility for having Bill
evaluated by a professional who could admit him to a hospital if necessary to determine whether Bill is
a danger to others. In this case, unless Javier is practicing in Texas, Javier should inform the assistant
principal about what Bill said, and if Javier cannot reach the assistant principal, Javier should call law
authorities and tell them what Bill told him and ask them to warn and protect the assistant principal.
Research indicates that it is impossible to predict whether a particular person is going to harm
someone else; yet the law and our ethical standards require counselors to determine whether a client
may be dangerous to others. How can this legal and ethical duty be fulfilled? First, it is important to
learn as much as you can about the warning signs of persons who commit violent acts against others
(Daniels, 2002; Haggard-Grann, 2007; Höffler et al., 2022; Radatz & Zoe Hilton, 2022; Truscott &
Evans, 2001; Whiting et al., 2020). For example, it appears that the best predictor of violence is past
violent behavior. However, you must be careful not to profile, or to assume that a category of per-
sons is prone to violence (Bailey, 2001). Special situations, such as those involving intimate partner
violence (Lawson, 2001, 2003) or violence committed by persons with serious mental disorders,
probably require deviations from the general guidelines offered in this chapter.
Once you have determined that a client may indeed be dangerous and might harm another
person, the law requires that you take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the harm and, further,
that the steps you take be the least disruptive. You have choices that range from the least intrusive
action (obtaining a promise from your client not to harm anyone else) to the most intrusive (having
the client involuntarily committed to a psychiatric facility). Numerous possibilities exist between
these two extremes, such as notifying the client’s family members and getting one of them to take
responsibility for keeping the client under control, persuading the client to be voluntarily committed
to a residential facility, notifying the police, or calling the client periodically. Certainly, no particular
formula of action is necessarily correct when you determine that your client may be dangerous. If at
all possible, consult with other mental health professionals, use their input in making your decision,
and be sure to document such consultations in your notes.
The guidelines in Figure 8-1 regarding managing potentially suicidal clients would work
equally well in managing potentially violent clients. You would just need to add the determination
of whether to warn intended victims, law enforcement authorities, or both.
DUTY TO WARN INTENDED VICTIMS 	Think about how you might react if you were counseling a
client who made a threat to harm someone else. If you were to decide that the client was only vent-
ing anger and was not likely to act on the threat and then later, the client carried out the threat, you
would have acted ethically in trusting your professional judgment and in preserving confidentiality
and the counseling relationship. That would be little solace, however, if someone were killed or seri-
ously injured. Also, the question might arise before an ethics committee or in a court as to whether
you could have acted, or should have acted, to avert that harm. On the other hand, if you were to

-- 231 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	209
decide that the danger might be in fact clear and imminent and you were to issue a warning, no
harm would be done to a third party. If the client did not later attempt to harm the possible victim,
however, you might have erred in labeling the client dangerous, and your actions probably will have
destroyed the counseling relationship. You could be accused of misdiagnosis, defamation of charac-
ter, or violating confidentiality (Hopewell v. Adebimpe, 1982). It is no wonder that counselors view
these as no-win situations and might be tempted to simply avoid working with dangerous clients.
Yet, it would be ethically questionable to close the doors of the counseling profession to a group of
individuals who clearly need our help. A client in any setting might become violent and dangerous.
The duty to warn an identifiable or foreseeable victim of a “dangerous client” arose out of
the landmark Tarasoff v. Regents of University of California (1976) court case, which established
the legal concept in California that if a counselor determines or should have determined that a cli-
ent presents a serious danger of violence to others, then the counselor must take reasonable steps to
protect the foreseeable victim from danger.
Although the Tarasoff doctrine has not been accepted or applied in every jurisdiction in the
United States, counselors have chosen to incorporate it into the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) and
generally assume that the concept is a national legal requirement. The only jurisdiction that has spe-
cifically rejected the Tarasoff duty-to-warn doctrine is Texas (Thapar v. Zezulka, 1999). In Texas,
counselors do not have a duty to warn intended victims if their clients threaten to harm another
person. Additionally, in Texas, a counselor may issue a warning but is not required to do so, and the
intended victim is not among those parties who can be warned. As a result, if a mental health profes-
sional in Texas did warn an intended victim, the professional might potentially be liable to the client
who made the threat for breach of confidentiality.
The facts in the Tarasoff case are important in understanding the duty that has been imposed
on counselors. Prosenjit Poddar was a 26-year-old graduate student at the University of California
at Berkeley. In the course of a session with his counselor, Poddar confided his intention to kill his
girlfriend, Tatiana Tarasoff. His counselor was Dr. Lawrence Moore, a psychologist in the university
counseling center. Because Moore believed that Poddar might be serious regarding his threat, Moore
initiated proceedings to have Poddar committed for a psychiatric evaluation: Moore orally notified
two campus police officers of his intentions to commit Poddar and then sent a letter to the police chief
requesting assistance from the police department. The police took Poddar into custody but released him
when he promised not to contact Tarasoff. Poddar never went to see Moore again. Neither Moore nor
the police notified Tarasoff of Poddar’s threat. Two months later, Poddar stabbed and killed Tarasoff on
the front porch of her parents’ home. Tarasoff’s parents sued Moore in a wrongful death action for not
confining Poddar and not warning Tarasoff of the threat against her life.
Decisions subsequent to the Tarasoff case throughout the United States have interpreted the
holding of the case in different ways. Many courts have limited its application to situations in which
the victims are readily identifiable. Other courts, however, have extended the duty to all persons
who are endangered by a patient’s condition or threats. In Lipari v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1987), a
federal court held that a psychotherapist has a duty to warn and protect unknown victims, as well as
those who are readily identifiable. This case extended a counselor’s duty to those persons who are
foreseeably endangered by a client’s conduct.
A Washington state court, following the Lipari decision, held that a psychiatrist could pos-
sibly be held responsible for injuries sustained by a traffic accident victim. The victim was hurt
when a drug-abusing patient, released by the psychiatrist, ran a red light while under the influence
of drugs (Petersen v. State,1983). Two California cases expanded the Tarasoff doctrine by no longer
requiring that a psychotherapist be able to readily identify the patient’s victim (Hedlund v. Superior
Court of Orange County, 1983; Jablonski v. United States, 1983).

-- 232 of 593 --

210 	Section 2 • Issues
In a Vermont case, the state supreme court held that a mental health professional has a duty to
take reasonable steps to protect a third party from property damage after threats are posed by a patient
(Peck v. Counseling Service of Addison County, Inc., 1985). In the Peck case, the court found that a
counselor could be held responsible for property damage when the client burned down a barn. The cli-
ent had told the counselor he intended to do so, but the counselor did not warn the owners of the barn.
Originally, the Tarasoff holding imposed a duty to warn only if the victim was specifically iden-
tifiable. Subsequent decisions have extended that duty to include warning persons who are unknown,
persons who are unintentionally injured by a patient, whole classes of persons of which the victim is a
member, bystanders who might be injured by a patient’s negligent act, and individuals whose property
a client has threatened to destroy. Fox (2010) has suggested, however, that courts now are tending to
limit a mental health practitioner’s duty to protect third parties from potentially dangerous clients.
Pabian et al. (2009) found that 76.4% of the psychologists in four states were misinformed
about their state laws regarding Tarasoff-type situations and believed that they had a legal duty to
warn intended victims even though they did not have that duty. Decision making for counselors
around the Tarasoff legal requirements is complex. One thing is clear, however: Because of the
Tarasoff case, when you determine that a client might harm an identifiable or foreseeable person,
you must directly or indirectly warn that individual of the danger, except in Texas, where you may
warn law enforcement personnel. It is important that you know what the statute and case law holds
in the state where you practice regarding your duty to warn intended victims.
CLIENTS WITH HIV 	According to the ACA (2014) Code of Ethics’ Contagious, Life-Threatening
Diseases (§B.2.b.), “When clients disclose they have a disease commonly known to be both com-
municable and life threatening, counselors may be justified in disclosing information to identifiable
third parties, if the parties are known to be at serious and foreseeable risk of contracting the dis-
ease.” This standard goes on to say that before making a disclosure of this type, counselors should
“assess the intent of clients to inform the third parties about their disease or to engage in any behav-
iors that may be harmful to an identifiable third party.” In addition, “Counselors [should] adhere to
relevant state laws concerning disclosure about disease status.”
Joe (2018) has pointed out that one problematic aspect of this standard, §B.2.b., is that what
is commonly known about HIV may make the standard outdated and incorrect. Joe suggested that
counselors might serve clients better by relying on their ethical obligation to seek continuing educa-
tion (§C.2.f.) to stay current about HIV prevention, transmission, and treatment.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) section that is related to “communicable and life-threatening”
diseases and that allows counselors to disclose the client’s having such a disease to third persons
“. . . if the parties are known to be at serious and foreseeable risk of contracting the disease” was
adopted when much less was known about HIV, which was the primary disease known at that time
that could be transmitted from one person to another and was life-threatening.
It is important to note that, according to ethical guidelines, counselors are justified in dis-
closing, but are not necessarily required to disclose, information to a third party who may be at
serious and foreseeable risk. Due to medical advances, HIV and AIDS are no longer routinely com-
municable or fatal, which makes the applicability of this standard to HIV/AIDS open to question.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2023), although there currently is no
cure for HIV, it can be controlled, and with effective treatment, those living with HIV can live long,
healthy lives and protect their partners.
An estimated 1.2 million people in the United States had HIV at the end of 2019 (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2023). In 2020, 30,635 people received an HIV diagnosis in the
United States. It is important for counselors who provide services to persons with HIV to inform

-- 233 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	211
themselves about the disease and to utilize evidence-based approaches for counseling that popula-
tion (Marc et al., 2022).
Your work with clients who may be dangerous to themselves or others will be fraught with
ethical and legal complexities. It is thus important to keep up with the literature in this area and to
familiarize yourself with guidelines for practice regarding the duty to warn. Whenever possible, you
should consult with fellow professionals (ACA, 2014, §C.2.e.) if you are in doubt about whether
you have a duty to warn, protect, or report in a given situation.
A Hypothetical Malpractice Case
Counselors might be sued for malpractice any time clients believe they have been harmed because
of actions counselors took or failed to take. To illustrate how a malpractice case might be con-
sidered against a counselor, we analyze a plausible situation in which a counselor might be sued.
Suppose that a teacher has come to Himari, a high school counselor, with a concern about Mark,
an 11th-grade student. Mark has written a paper for English class in which he discusses taking his
life because he is upset about his parents’ recent divorce. Himari calls Mark into her office and talks
with him about the paper. She asks him if he has seriously considered taking his life. After a thor-
ough discussion with Mark, Himari determines that he is not suicidal.
That same day, after school, Mark shoots and kills himself with his father’s rifle. Mark’s
mother, Sheila, finds out about the teacher’s referral and files a malpractice lawsuit against Himari,
claiming that Himari’s incompetence caused her son’s death. Sheila’s attorney probably would
name as respondents in the lawsuit Himari individually, each of her direct supervisors up through
the school superintendent, the school board, and any other individuals or groups who might be
responsible for Himari’s actions or failure to act. If Himari had her own independent professional
liability insurance policy, her insurance company would hire a lawyer who would represent Himari
individually in the case. If Himari did not have her own liability insurance policy, she probably
could not afford to pay an attorney to represent her. The average cost of a lawsuit, including legal
fees and judgments awarded, is $113,642 (Healthcare Providers Service Organization [HPSO],
2022). Himari would have to rely for her defense on the school system’s lawyers, who ultimately
represent the school system, not her. The school system would have its lawyers, or the lawyers pro-
vided by the school system’s liability insurance company, file a legal response to the case. Himari’s
lawyer, if she had one, and the school system lawyers would work together in defending the lawsuit.
Sheila’s attorney, in presenting her case in court, would first have to prove that Himari owed
a duty of reasonable care in providing counseling services to Mark. This would not be difficult to
prove because Himari is a counselor in the school and called Mark in for a counseling session.
When a counselor accepts a person as a client, the counselor then has a duty to provide the cli-
ent with professional care that meets accepted standards within the profession. Counselors have a
fiduciary relationship with clients, which is a relationship that fosters the highest level of trust and
confidence (Anderson & Bertram, 2012). Clearly, Himari owed Mark a duty of care.
After establishing that a duty of care was owed to Mark, Sheila’s attorney then would have to prove
that Himari breached that duty and failed to conform to the required standard of care. Most experts would
agree that counselors must assess whether a client is at risk for suicide, even though studies have shown
that it is impossible to scientifically predict suicidal behavior (Hawton et al., 2022). Large (2018) has
said that categorizing groups that might be more at risk for suicide results in too many errors in deciding
whether a person is at risk for suicide, misses many who do complete suicide, and therefore is not helpful
in preventing suicide. Large’s position was that the assessment of clients for suicide risk should focus on
the current situation and needs of the client rather than on probabilistic notions of suicide risk.

-- 234 of 593 --

212 	Section 2 • Issues
Despite the impossibility of predicting suicide, counselors still must determine whether an indi-
vidual may be at risk for suicide. If it is determined that the client may be in danger, action must
be taken to prevent the possible impending suicide. The question in this hypothetical case is whether
Himari was reasonable in her assessment of Mark’s risk. The only way to prove that Himari made an
error in her professional judgment is for Sheila’s attorney to bring in one or more expert witnesses
who will testify that a competent counselor would not have done what Himari did or failed to do. The
expert witnesses must compare the actions Himari took or did not take to the actions that a reasonable
counselor with Himari’s same background and preparation, practicing in the same locality, would have
taken in the same set of circumstances. This is the legal standard of care to which counselors are held.
Himari’s attorney would arrange for a different set of experts to testify that Himari did act reasonably
in this particular situation. The judge or jury would have to decide which expert witnesses to believe.
After offering evidence through expert witness testimony that Himari breached her duty of
care, Sheila’s attorney would have to prove that Mark was injured as a result of this breach. It would
not be difficult to prove that harm occurred, because Mark killed himself.
Next, Sheila’s attorney would have to prove that there was a close causal connection between
what Himari did, or failed to do, and Mark’s suicide. Sheila’s attorney would have to prove that Himari
knew or should have known that her actions would result in Mark’s death. The attorney would argue
that Himari’s failure to take action when Mark disclosed that he intended to attempt suicide was the
proximate cause of Mark’s death because she failed to take actions that would have prevented him from
attempting suicide. On the opposing side, Himari’s attorney would argue that a number of other inter-
vening factors led to Mark’s suicide and that a reasonable counselor would not and could not have pre-
dicted that Mark would take his life, given the circumstances in this situation. Further, Himari’s attorney
would argue that even if Himari did act negligently in this situation, Mark’s suicide cannot be blamed on
her failure to take action. Himari’s attorney would argue that other factors caused his suicide—factors
such as his father leaving his gun out so that Mark had access to it, no one being at home to supervise
him after school, or his distress over his parents’ contentious behavior during the divorce. The judge or
jury would have to decide whether Himari’s failure to act to prevent Mark’s suicide was the proximate
cause of his death, or whether other factors caused him to take his life.
If Sheila’s attorney was successful in convincing the judge or jury that Himari was responsible
for Mark’s death, then the damage to Sheila, expressed in financial terms, would have to be deter-
mined. If a person is damaged with a financial loss, such as a loss in the stock market or because of
investing in a deal that has no value, then it is easy to determine how much money the person needs
in order to be made whole again. When a person has a physical injury, however, or loses a loved one
through death, then it is very difficult to determine how much money it would take to compensate
the person for the loss. In fact, these are losses that cannot be compensated with money, but the law
requires financial compensation.
Damages in this situation would be determined by expert witness testimony on Mark’s life expec-
tancy, his earning potential, and the anticipated benefit of earnings that would go to his mother, Sheila.
Because the loss of a life was involved in this situation, the damages could be hundreds of thousands or
several million dollars. Judges or juries have wide discretion in setting the value in these kinds of cases.
If Sheila received a judgment in her favor, the school system’s professional liability insur-
ance carrier would most likely pay the judgment. Himari’s professional liability carrier might be
responsible for paying a portion of the judgment as well. Both the school’s and Himari’s insurance
companies would pay the attorneys’ fees and other costs of litigation, which could be as much as
several hundred thousand dollars.
At this point, you probably are wondering how often lawsuits are based on client suicide
and how often family members prevail and collect judgments. Such lawsuits are rare, and coun-
selors are seldom determined to be responsible for the deaths of their clients who died by suicide.

-- 235 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	213
Although client suicide is not the only possible basis for a malpractice lawsuit against counselors,
it is undoubtedly one of the most painful types of suits for both plaintiffs and defendants. In the fol-
lowing section, we review some actual cases related to client suicide.
Actual Malpractice Cases
In 1960, a college counselor was sued for the wrongful death of a student who had died by suicide.
The student had seen the counselor in a professional capacity (Bogust v. Iverson, 1960). The holding
in that case was that the college counselor was not a therapist and therefore had no duty to detect or
prevent a suicide of a client. Since 1960, however, the counseling profession has evolved substan-
tially, and counselors in all settings are considered mental health professionals. A similar case today
would probably have a different result.
A case that is similar to Bogust v. Iverson (1960) and to the hypothetical case of Himari was
decided in Maryland in 1991. In Eisel v. Board of Education of Montgomery County (1991), Dorothy
Jones and Deidre Morgan, school counselors at Sligo Middle School in Maryland (along with their
school board, principal, and superintendent), were sued in a wrongful death action by Stephen Eisel,
the father of Nicole Eisel. Nicole Eisel was a 13-year-old student at Sligo Middle School. Nicole
and another 13-year-old girl consummated an apparent murder–suicide pact on November 8, 1988.
The complaint filed in the lawsuit was summarized in the case report:
The amended complaint avers that Nicole became involved in Satanism, causing her to have an
“obsessive interest in death and self-destruction.” During the week prior to the suicide, Nicole told
several friends and fellow students that she intended to kill herself. Some of these friends reported
Nicole’s intentions to their school counselor, Morgan, who relayed the information to Nicole’s school
counselor, Jones. Morgan and Jones then questioned Nicole about the statements, but Nicole denied
making them. Neither Morgan nor Jones notified Nicole’s parents or the school administration about
Nicole’s alleged statements of intent. Information in the record suggests that the other party to the
suicide pact shot Nicole before shooting herself. The murder–suicide took place on a school holiday in
a public park at some distance from Sligo Middle School. (Eisel v. Board of Education of Montgomery
County, 1991, pp. 449–450. Court of Appeals of Maryland)
Attorneys for the school board and its employees argued that school guidance counselors had
no duty to recognize or prevent an adolescent’s suicide. A motion for summary judgment in favor
of the school board and its employees was granted, which means that the court, without even hear-
ing the evidence in the case, found that the counselors were not responsible. Eisel appealed to the
Maryland Court of Appeals. That court reversed the summary judgment and required that the case
go back to the trial court so that a judge or jury could determine whether the counselors would be
held responsible for Nicole Eisel’s death.
In coming to this decision, the Maryland Court of Appeals held that “school counselors have a
duty to use reasonable means to attempt to prevent a suicide when they are on notice of a child or ado-
lescent student’s suicidal intent” (Eisel v. Board of Education of Montgomery County, 1991, p. 456.
Court of Appeals of Maryland). The decision noted that the counselors could have determined that
Nicole was in danger of suicide even though she denied it when asked, that the school board had a
policy requiring counselors to notify parents despite any confidentiality concerns, and that the school
had a formal suicide prevention program in place. The decision stated, “The relationship of a school
counselor and pupil is not devoid of therapeutic overtones” (p. 452). The appeals court did not decide
that the two school counselors were responsible for Nicole Eisel’s suicide, but it did decide that a
judge or jury could determine that the facts were such that the counselors could be held responsible.
It is almost impossible to determine how many lawsuits of a particular nature are filed in court.
Most lawsuits are settled without a judgment being rendered or are determined at the trial court level

-- 236 of 593 --

214 	Section 2 • Issues
and are not appealed. Only cases that are appealed are reported in case books. From the cases that are
appealed, however, it appears that very few lawsuits are filed against counselors due to client suicide,
and few of those filed result in judgments against the counselors. Nonetheless, counselors certainly
hope to avoid experiencing the double trauma of having a client complete suicide (Stickl et al., 2021)
and being named as a defendant in a lawsuit resulting from that suicide. However, if you practice
competently, the chances are good that you will never have to respond to a malpractice lawsuit.
RESOLVING LEGAL AND ETHICAL CHALLENGES
In Chapter 1, ethical and legal decision making were discussed. Several ethical decision-making
models were described, and common elements of those decision-making models were identified
to help you recognize the key points to consider when you are faced with an ethical dilemma.
Reasoning through a dilemma before taking action to resolve it can prevent later problems, such as
being accused of improper or unethical behavior. This chapter section, by contrast, focuses on how
to deal with suspicions or accusations of unethical or illegal conduct made against you when they
do occur. Chapter 1 also presented a process for identifying legal issues when they arise and ways
to request legal advice as an employee or as a counselor in private practice. It is one thing to under-
stand rationally how to recognize legal issues and obtain legal advice, but it is quite another thing to
feel the distress of dealing with ethical and legal issues when they actually arise.
Legal and Ethical Decision Making
This section of the chapter is aimed at helping you deal with situations that directly involve you in
ethical and legal challenges that come before ethics committees, licensure or certification boards, and
courts of law. After legal and ethical decision making are briefly reviewed, two kinds of situations are
addressed: (a) what to do when you are accused of unethical or illegal behavior and (b) what to do
if you suspect that a professional colleague is behaving unethically or illegally. Some guidelines are
suggested for preventing ethical and legal problems and for maintaining your professional vitality.
PERSONAL LEGAL DECISION MAKING 	It is impossible for counselors to understand all aspects
of the law. As a result, you must rely on the advice of attorneys from time to time as you practice.
You must make every effort to fully explain a situation to your legal advisors and educate them, to
the extent possible, regarding the counseling process and the counseling profession. You can then
follow the legal advice you have been given without worrying about whether it is correct. Of course,
you should raise questions if you believe you are being given incorrect advice, but you can rely on
the advice you have been given. Lawyers are required to stand behind the advice they render. You
can sue your lawyers if you are harmed as a result of relying on their incorrect advice. An attorney
who has represented mental health professionals when they were sued (D. Gould, 1998) has stated
that the best advice he can give to those who are involved in litigation and are trying to protect them-
selves from attacks is to listen to their lawyer and do what the lawyer says.
Most legal issues faced by counselors involve acting as witnesses in litigation concerning other
people. Unless you are being sued for malpractice or have had a complaint of improper conduct filed
against you, it is important to remember that you are not being accused of wrongdoing. Reporting
what you know in legal proceedings can be a simple matter if you have been advised by your attorney.
It is important to avoid getting emotionally involved in your clients’ lawsuits or in legal proceedings
that affect others. If you lose your objectivity and professional detachment, it is easy to get inap-
propriately involved in legal matters that do not affect you directly. See Chapter 6 on responding to
subpoenas and Chapter 12 for advice on avoiding court appearances related to child custody disputes.

-- 237 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	215
PERSONAL ETHICAL DECISION MAKING 	No doubt it has become evident to you, after reading
the previous chapters, that ethical questions rarely have a single, clearly correct answer (Koocher &
Keith-Spiegel, 2016). Codes of ethics can be helpful, and certainly they should be consulted.
Remember, though, that ethics codes are written in general terms and cannot completely resolve most
of the complex ethical dilemmas that arise in practice (Johnson et al., 2022; Williams, 2001). Often,
counselors’ ethical problems are existential dilemmas. The decisions they make when attempting to
resolve an ethical issue become the right decisions only because they were taken. It is impossible to
guarantee in advance that actions, no matter how carefully considered, will have the desired outcome.
Ethical decision making is a complex process, even in the abstract. See Chapter 1 for a dis-
cussion of the ethical decision-making process. It can be very difficult to make a decision when
you are unsure about the ethics of your behavior, or you suspect that a colleague is behaving uneth-
ically. Of course, when you have an ethical question, you should consult with fellow counselors,
just as counselors who have a legal question should consult with an attorney. As was noted in the
previous section, when a counselor asks an attorney for advice, the attorney becomes responsible
for the advice given. In a parallel fashion, sometimes a counselor with an ethical question will have
an administrative supervisor to whom the responsibility for decisions can be passed. Often, though,
this option will not be available. When you have an ethical question, you can—and should—
consult with colleagues, but the consultants are not responsible for your decisions or actions.
Although an attorney can help you defend your actions later before an ethics committee or a licens-
ing board, if that becomes necessary, an attorney cannot advise you about an ethical dilemma.
Responding to Accusations of Unethical or Illegal Behavior
Neukrug et al. (2001) asked counselor licensure boards throughout the United States about ethical
complaints that had been made against licensees. Of the 2,325 complaints recorded by the boards, a
total of 1,307 were identified by type of complaint. Of the categorized complaints received by these
boards, 24% were for inappropriate dual relationships, 17% were for incompetence, 8% were for
practicing without a license or misrepresentation of qualifications, 7% were for having a sexual rela-
tionship with a client, 5% were for breach of confidentiality, 4% were for inappropriate fee assess-
ments, 1% were for failure to obtain informed consent, and 1% were for failure to report abuse. In a
study of ethical complaints against licensees in licensure boards from 2010 to 2014, Wilkinson et al.
(2019) found that the most frequent types of ethical violations included failure to attain required con-
tinuing education, both sexual and nonsexual dual relationships, and misrepresentation of credentials.
A professional liability insurance company report indicated that the highest number of license
protection claims from 2015 to 2019 were related to complaints of failure to maintain minimal
professional standards, sexual misconduct, breach of confidentiality, and reporting to third par-
ties (CNA & CNA & Healthcare Providers Service Organization [HPSO], 2019). This informa-
tion demonstrates that counselors have complaints filed against them for a variety of reasons. As
Keith-Spiegel (2014) has noted, ethics complaints sometimes get filed as a result of professionals
losing their temper, disclosing personal information, entering into a bartering arrangement, and
being involved in a vengeful act. Five times more mental health professionals have licensure board
complaints filed against them than have been the target of malpractice lawsuits (Zur, 2011b).
Individuals react in various ways to accusations of unethical or illegal behavior (Warren &
Douglas, 2012). Emotions such as fear, panic, and anger are common. It is natural to have a strong
reaction, but you must keep your emotions under control so that you can handle the situation effec-
tively. Chauvin and Remley (1996) recommend that you seek personal support by expressing your
emotions regarding the accusation to clinical supervisors, family members, friends, or your personal
counselor. However, you should avoid talking to them about the facts of the situation.

-- 238 of 593 --

216 	Section 2 • Issues
Despite the denial, embarrassment, or distress you may feel, if you are employed in an agency
or institution, you should immediately report any threatened or completed accusation of profes-
sional misconduct to your immediate administrative supervisor and to your personal professional
liability insurance carrier. If you fail to notify your insurance carrier, you might jeopardize the legal
representation your insurance policy provides, such as paying off possible judgments. When you tell
your supervisor about the accusation, you should ask the supervisor to keep the information confi-
dential and not discuss it with anyone other than other administrative supervisors within the agency
or the organization’s attorney.
In reality, it is not unusual for counselors to be threatened with ethics complaints or malpractice
lawsuits. Counselors engage in many activities that could result in ethics claims against them. They
must report cases of suspected child abuse (Ricks et al., 2022), vulnerable adult abuse, or elder abuse;
they counsel clients who are involved in litigation such as child custody disputes; and they often counsel
individuals who are embroiled in legal conflicts with others. Sometimes counselors must take actions
their clients do not wish them to take, such as informing family members, over a client’s objection, if the
client is at risk for suicide. As a result, individuals occasionally are angry at counselors and make threats.
Diesen (2008) created a new term, justice obsession syndrome, to describe individuals who believe that
the most important thing in life is to get justice in a personal situation where they firmly believe that an
injustice has occurred. An obsession occurs, according to Diesen, when the importance of retribution is
out of proportion to the circumstances. At some point in your counseling practice, you may have a cli-
ent who feels wronged as a result of what has transpired in counseling sessions with you and becomes
obsessed with seeking justice for the perceived wrong. As with other syndromes, the chances of having
such a client are not great, but this type of behavior by clients has been known to occur.
Some counselors serve as child custody evaluators. There is always a disappointed—and often
angry—parent when a child custody recommendation is made to a judge. Some parents who are upset
file ethics complaints against child custody evaluators, accusing them of being biased and unfair.
A counselor who is dealing with an angry client should respond directly to the person making
the threat, if that is possible. If you can calm the person down and listen to the concerns, you might
be able to resolve the problem immediately or through additional conversations (Keith-Spiegel,
2014). You should be careful, though, not to admit to wrongdoing and not to say anything you
would not want to say under oath or would not want repeated by others in a courtroom later. We
advise caution on your part if a client you are counseling has a history of filing lawsuits against
other people for any reason. Clients who sue other people may be more inclined to sue their coun-
selors as well. Once a formal complaint or lawsuit has been filed, it is unwise to contact a client and
try to talk them into withdrawing the complaint (O’Mahony, 2011).
INFORMAL COMPLAINTS 	The Introduction to Section I of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states,
“Professional counselors behave in an ethical and legal manner. They are aware that client welfare and
trust in the profession depend on a high level of professional conduct.” This introduction also states,
“Counselors incorporate ethical practice into their daily professional work and engage in ongoing pro-
fessional development regarding current topics in ethical and legal issues in counseling.”
Although we hope that you will always do your best to practice within the bounds of profes-
sional ethics, even the well-intended counselor occasionally can make mistakes or be accused of
wrongdoing, even if no mistake has been made. A fellow counselor might directly observe you doing
or saying something that raises cause for concern, or the concern might have come to your colleague’s
attention through the report of a client, fellow mental health professional, supervisee, or student. It
is important to take the concern seriously, make yourself available to meet and discuss the concern,
listen and respond genuinely and nondefensively, and take responsibility for your error if you have
made one. If the concern can be resolved informally in this way, it is to everyone’s advantage.

-- 239 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	217
FORMAL COMPLAINTS 	Sometimes clients or other citizens file formal complaints against coun-
selors with licensure boards, certification boards, professional associations, or other entities. When
such complaints are filed, it is vital that counselors take them seriously and respond appropriately.
8-3 The Case of Lee
Lee has been licensed by her state board as a counselor for 4 years and is employed as a coun-
selor in a community counseling center. Much to her dismay, Lee received a registered letter at
work today informing her that a former client, David, has filed an ethics complaint against her
with the licensure board, claiming that he was harmed because Lee is an incompetent counselor.
David claims that Lee counseled him for 8 months for depression, during which time she sent
him to a psychiatrist for antidepressant medication. David found out recently that he has a brain
tumor, which his neurosurgeon has told him causes people to be depressed. David claims that
if Lee were competent, she would have advised him to have a physical examination and that
the brain tumor would have been discovered earlier. Lee immediately advised her supervisor at
the counseling center and called and reported the complaint to her professional liability insur-
ance carrier. After she emailed a copy of the complaint to her insurance carrier, she received a
call from an agent telling her that the insurance company wanted Lee to see a local lawyer who
would represent Lee. Lee has never heard of the lawyer.
• How should Lee respond to her insurance carrier?
• When Lee meets with her lawyer, how should she conduct herself?
Discussion: Lee should ask her insurance carrier how that lawyer was selected. Usually, lawyers
are chosen who have expertise in defending mental health professionals or other professionals in
ethics complaints before licensure boards. Insurance companies generally select the best lawyers
in the area to represent the professionals they insure.
Lee should agree to meet with the lawyer who has been suggested by the insurance com-
pany and accept that lawyer to represent her, unless there is some compelling reason not to do
so. If Lee does not like the suggested lawyer, she can ask the insurance carrier to hire another
lawyer whom she prefers, and usually the insurance carrier will agree to do that if the alternative
lawyer has expertise in defending suits against mental health professionals.
When Lee meets with her lawyer, she should bring copies of all relevant records with her to
the meeting. She should also compile a chronological listing of her interactions with the complain-
ing client that is factual and detailed and bring a copy of that document to give to the lawyer.
Lee should tell the lawyer everything she knows about the situation even if she is concerned
that perhaps she used bad judgment or made some mistakes. The lawyer has a privileged rela-
tionship with Lee and cannot tell anyone else what Lee has disclosed. The lawyer needs to know
all details (including negative ones) in order to craft an appropriate defense for her.
If you receive notice from a licensure or certification board or from a professional association eth-
ics committee that you have been accused of unprofessional conduct, you need immediate legal counsel
(Zur, 2011b). The professional liability insurance policy offered to members of ACA provides legal
counsel to policyholders who have complaints filed against them. Generally, other professional liability
insurance companies provide the same benefit to counselors that they insure. Counselors are advised to
make sure the professional liability insurance policy they purchase includes legal representation in the

-- 240 of 593 --

218 	Section 2 • Issues
event a formal complaint is filed against them with their licensure board (Zur, 2011b). Some policies do
not include that benefit and thus are not the best professional liability insurance options.
Licensure boards, professional association ethics committees, and counselor certification
boards have adopted procedures for processing complaints against those who are licensed or certi-
fied by their boards or who are members of their association. The procedures used by ACA can be
found on the ACA website (www.counseling.org). Each set of procedures is different; however, they
have many common steps. The general process that boards and committees use in processing com-
plaints is summarized in the following (Chauvin & Remley, 1996):
• Generally, investigations and the processing of complaints are confidential.
• First, a board will determine whether it has jurisdiction over the counselor against whom the
complaint is being made. If the board does not have jurisdiction, it notifies the person mak-
ing the complaint that it does not have jurisdiction, and the case is closed. If the individual
is licensed or certified by the board (or is an applicant for a license or certification), then the
board generally has jurisdiction.
• Once jurisdiction has been established, the board determines whether the counselor may have
violated the board’s code of ethics, if the allegations against the counselor are true. If the action
(or inaction) of the counselor would not have constituted a violation, the case is closed. When
the allegation, if true, might be a violation of the board’s code of ethics, the board then begins
an investigation of the complaint.
• Investigations might range from actions that are as expensive and complicated as sending
investigators to talk to witnesses or the accused counselor, to actions as simple as asking writ-
ten questions of the accuser or the accused.
• Often, if a violation is found, informal negotiations between the board and the accused counselor
occur. A settlement of the matter may be reached on a voluntary basis that satisfies both parties.
• If a settlement is not offered by the board or is refused by the counselor, a hearing is generally
held. Members of the board (or their designees) sit as a jury. A representative of the board pros-
ecutes the case, and the accused counselor, or the counselor’s representative, defends. Usually
witnesses are called to testify, including the accuser. Accused counselors usually are allowed
to be represented by legal counsel at these hearings, but an accused counselor may not be able
to have a lawyer present in some jurisdictions.
• After the hearing, the board determines whether the counselor violated the code of ethics.
If violations are found, the board may impose sanctions. Sanctions vary but could include
a written reprimand only; probation; suspension; or revocation of a license, certification, or
association membership.
• If the counselor who has been found in violation of the code of ethics is not satisfied with the
result, the counselor can appeal. Usually, there are internal appeals in which the board reviews
the case again. Once the internal appeals are exhausted, in most states the counselor can sue
the board in a court of law if the counselor believes the treatment was unfair.
The process for responding to formal complaints against you filed with a state counselor
licensure board is different from the way you will need to respond if a malpractice lawsuit is filed
against you. If you receive official notice that a malpractice lawsuit has been filed against you, you
must notify your employer and your professional liability insurance carrier immediately.
An emotional response to being accused of wrongdoing is natural. It may help to keep in mind
that many formal complaints and lawsuits filed against mental health professionals are either dis-
missed or result in a finding in favor of the professional (Anderson & Swanson, 1994). In a study

-- 241 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	219
of complaints against rehabilitation counselors over a 9-year period, Saunders et al. (2007) found
that only 71 of the 113 complaints filed accusing rehabilitation counselors of unethical conduct were
accepted for investigation. Actions or sanctions were taken against the counselors in only 36 of the
71 cases. It may also be helpful to know that severe sanctions against counselors are rarely imposed
by the ACA Ethics Committee; for example, only two members were expelled from the association
between 1996 and 2000 (Williams, 2001). In most formal complaint or lawsuit situations, the individ-
uals being accused wish they had done or said some things differently. This is natural as well. To pre-
vent making mistakes that might be detrimental to your case, Chauvin and Remley (1996) and Herlihy
and Corey (2015a) have advised that you take the steps shown in Figure 8-2 if you are accused or sued.
WHEN YOU SUSPECT A COLLEAGUE IS ACTING
UNETHICALLY OR ILLEGALLY
Unethical Behavior
The primary purpose of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) is to guide our own behavior, not to judge
the behavior of others. However, we cannot turn our heads and ignore unethical behavior on the part
of others, particularly if such behavior is substantially harming others or has the potential of causing
substantial harm. It is each counselor’s responsibility to society and to the profession to address in
an appropriate manner the behavior of other mental health professionals that appears to be unethi-
cal. Generally, mental health professionals have been reluctant to confront the unethical behavior of
FIGURE 8-2 Steps to take if you are accused of unethical behavior or are sued
• Maintain composure and respond at all times in a professional and unemotional manner.
• Notify your employer and professional liability insurance carrier immediately.
• Once you have a lawyer, follow the lawyer’s advice precisely.
• Respond carefully to the charges. Remember that the members of the board or committee who will
be deciding the outcome of the complaint do not know you and will base their decision only on the
material they have received. Write your response as deliberately and dispassionately as you can, and
address each of the specific charges that has been made. For instance, if you have been accused of
misapplying a technique, you should submit case notes or other records that show how you deliberated
and decided to use the technique, how you were trained to use it, when you consulted others about
it, and any other steps you took to prevent harm to the client. Do not submit any responses until your
attorney has reviewed them.
• Do not agree to speak to a licensure board investigator unless your attorney is present (Zur, 2011b).
• Even if you are surprised and hurt that a client or colleague has filed a complaint against you, do not
attempt to contact the complainant directly. Doing so could be interpreted as an attempt to coerce or
unduly influence the client or colleague (Crawford, 1994).
• Seek emotional support from colleagues, friends, or family members, but focus your interactions on
dealing with your emotions. Ask anyone you speak with to keep your conversations confidential. Avoid
discussing details of the case except with your attorney.
• Seek professional counseling if being accused results in distress that interferes with your personal or
professional functioning.
• If you are guilty of having breached the code of ethics, seek assistance to help you prevent future
breaches. This assistance could take the form of professional counseling, continuing education, supervi-
sion, or a combination of these resources.

-- 242 of 593 --

220 	Section 2 • Issues
a colleague (Lowman, 2006). The role of policeperson can be very uncomfortable and runs contrary
to who we are as counselors and to our commitment to accepting and helping others rather than
judging and punishing them. Nonetheless, we must recognize that unless we police our own profes-
sion, the courts will step in and do it for us.
The Introduction to Section I of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states, “Counselors strive to
resolve ethical dilemmas with direct and open communication among all parties involved and seek
consultation with colleagues and supervisors when necessary.” This standard clearly communicates
to counselors that they should consult when they are unsure whether another counselor is behaving
in an unethical manner and should establish direct and open communication with the other coun-
selor. When consultation and confrontation do not work, counselors are advised by the ACA Code
of Ethics (2014), in serious cases, to take additional actions.
Standard I.2.a. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states, “When counselors have reason
to believe that another counselor is violating or has violated an ethical standard and substantial
harm has not occurred, they attempt to first resolve the issue informally with the other counselor
if feasible, provided such action does not violate confidentiality rights that may be involved.” Two
phrases in this standard require careful consideration. First, what constitutes a reason to believe?
And second, what constitutes resolution of the issue?
In determining whether you have reason to believe that a colleague is acting unethically,
we caution you against making a rush to judgment. You may hear rumors from colleagues that
a fellow mental health professional engages in inappropriate behaviors such as sexually harass-
ing clients or billing insurance companies for services that are not actually provided. Although
you would be justified in feeling concerned, it would be unwise for you to take on the role of
detective and investigate whether the rumors are true. Instead, urge the persons who are telling
you the rumors to talk to the professional who is supposedly behaving inappropriately rather
than talking about the individual. At other times, a client might tell you directly about unethical
behavior on the part of a former counselor. In these instances, your role can be one of helping
the client to decide whether to take action, if the client has been harmed by the former coun-
selor’s behavior. Only when you have direct knowledge of unethical
behavior on the part of a fellow mental health professional should you
feel obligated to take some type of action, but you need to be clear
what your role is in such situations.
With respect to what constitutes resolving the issue, as we have
noted, the Code of Ethics asks counselors to “attempt to first resolve
the issue informally with the other counselor if feasible” (ACA, 2014,
§I.2.b.). It appears that some confusion may exist regarding this ethical
obligation. Nearly 30% of the ACA members surveyed by Neukrug and
Milliken (2011) believed it was ethical to report a colleague’s unethical
conduct without first consulting with the colleague. Of course, you will
be uncomfortable and anxious if you must confront a counselor about
your perception that they may have violated an ethical standard. Such
feelings are understandable; however, accusing a counselor of wrong-
doing is a very serious step, and your anxiety about accusing someone
of possible wrongdoing is not a justifiable reason for not attempting to
resolve the issue directly with a counselor. It is entirely possible that
speaking informally with the other counselor will resolve the problem
and thus prevent further discomfort for both parties.

-- 243 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	221
8-4 The Case of Ramona
Ramona is a counselor educator. At her university, the counseling program is housed within a large
department that includes counseling, educational administration, and school psychology. One day
Ramona is visiting an intern at a United Way–funded agency. She notices a flyer on the bulletin
board that announces, “John Smith, PhD, will be forming a counseling group for men who are
divorced.” John is a colleague in her department at the university. He has a master’s degree in
counseling, but his PhD is in educational administration. She realizes that his advertising himself on
the flyer as holding a PhD may be a violation of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §C.4.a. and §C.4.d.).
• Do you think that Ramona can ignore the situation? Or do you think she should do some-
thing about this possible ethics violation?
• If Ramona should act, what actions should she take?
Discussion: If Ramona were to decide to report John’s behavior to their supervisor, to the state
counselor licensure board, or to the ACA Ethics Committee, she would be creating problems—
probably unnecessarily—for John and for their ongoing relationship as colleagues. Her first action
should be to seek informal resolution by talking directly with John, pointing out that §C.4.a. and
§C.4.d. in the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) are of concern. John may reply that he was unaware of
these standards and had no idea that his advertisement might be a breach of the code. Whether
or not John’s advertisement is an ethics violation is open to question, as a PhD in educational
administration could possibly be interpreted by some people as being in a field closely related to
counseling. Ramona’s goal should be to correct the problem, not to punish John. She can talk with
him about what he can do to correct the situation. This might include taking down the flyers and
printing new ones or being sure to clarify his credentials during the pregroup screening interview
with potential group participants. If John were willing to take the steps agreed upon, Ramona
probably would determine that the problem had been satisfactorily resolved.
What if the preceding scenario were different and John, rather than misrepresenting his PhD
credential, had been drinking at a bar, encountered a former client, and had become flirtatious
with the former client? What if the client had been uncomfortable seeing John in this situation and
had left the bar? We believe that the total situation would dictate Ramona’s actions. If Ramona
believed this was an isolated incident, and that the client had not been substantially harmed as a
result of the incident, then Ramona should confront John and hopefully obtain an agreement that
he had made a mistake and a promise not to engage in such actions again. On the other hand, if
Ramona believed that John had a history of sexual or romantic relationships with clients or former
clients, or had a drinking problem that was interfering with his ability to counsel effectively, and
if the client in this incident had been substantially harmed, then a confession and promise from
John probably would not satisfy Ramona’s obligation to the profession and to the public.
You will find that an informal resolution is not always possible when you have knowledge
that another counselor may have engaged in unethical practices. The offending colleague may be
unwilling to discuss your concern; circumstances may exist that preclude you from confronting your
colleague; or you may not be able to raise your concern without violating the confidentiality of an
involved party. If the privacy of an involved party is at risk, you should consult with colleagues who
are uninvolved and who will not be able to ascertain the identity of the subject of the consultation.

-- 244 of 593 --

222 	Section 2 • Issues
If someone has been substantially harmed or is being substantially harmed by the unethi-
cal behavior, and if your consultants agree that you must take action, you must go forward and
report the behavior (Gricus & Wysiekierski, 2021; Smith, 2006). These circumstances will be rare.
Standard I.2.b. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states, “If an apparent violation has substantially
harmed or is likely to substantially harm a person or organization and is not appropriate for informal
resolution or is not resolved properly, counselors take further action depending on the situation.
Such action may include referral to state or national committees on professional ethics, voluntary
national certification bodies, state licensing boards, or appropriate institutional authorities. The con-
fidentiality rights of clients should be considered in all actions. This standard does not apply when
counselors have been retained to review the work of another counselor whose professional conduct
is in question (e.g., consultation, expert testimony).” We suggest that counselors report suspected
ethics violations of other counselors to licensure and certification boards, and to association ethics
committees, only when the conditions in Figure 8-3 have been met.
The last two items on the list may come as a surprise to many counselors, but they are
understandable when the ACA Ethics Committee’s policies and procedures for dealing with
complaints and the procedures of licensure and certification boards are taken into consideration.
For example, the ACA Ethics Committee accepts only written complaints that are signed by
complainants. The committee does not accept anonymous complaints. If you believe you must
file a complaint and if the board does not provide a secure portal for submitting complaints,
you should write a letter to the Ethics Committee outlining the nature of the complaint, sign it,
and send it in an envelope marked Confidential. If the person against whom you are making the
complaint is an ACA member or was a member when the alleged violation took place, the com-
mittee will send you a formal complaint that identifies all the ACA ethical standards that might
have been violated, if the accusations are true. You will be asked to sign the complaint (after sug-
gesting modifications, if needed) and a release-of-information form. The accused member then
will receive copies of the formal complaint and any evidence or documents you have submitted
to support your complaint. (For more complete information, see the ACA Ethics Committee’s
policies and procedures for processing complaints of ethical violations, which can be found on
the ACA website at www.counseling.org.)
It is very distressing for counselors to have ethics charges filed against them by professional
colleagues. Rarely does an accused counselor simply admit wrongdoing. Instead, the counselor may
become defensive and sometimes may even make accusations of unprofessional behavior against the
accuser. Usually, a long period of time passes while a complaint is being investigated and considered.
The aftermath of the filing of an ethics complaint is stressful for both the accused and the accuser.
FIGURE 8-3 Recommended necessary conditions for reporting a colleague for unethical behavior
• It is impossible to resolve the issue directly with the counselor because of the nature of the circum-
stances or because attempts at resolution have been unsuccessful. Being uncomfortable confronting
the counselor or anxious about accusing someone of wrongdoing is not a justifiable reason for not
attempting to resolve the issue directly with the counselor.
• You are certain and have direct knowledge that a serious ethics violation has occurred that is causing
substantial harm or has caused substantial harm.
• Colleagues with whom you have consulted agree that a report must be made.
• You are willing to participate in a hearing and to testify against the counselor if a hearing is held.
• You are prepared to defend yourself if you have a counterclaim filed against you.

-- 245 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	223
If you ever decide to file a complaint, you should precisely follow the instructions for filing
the complaints. It is recommended that, before formally filing a complaint, you consult with an
attorney and follow the attorney’s advice. In many instances, depending on the circumstances and
credentials of the counselor being accused, multiple complaints may be appropriate. Complaints
may be filed at the same time with all of the following entities:
• All state licensure boards that have licensed the counselor
• All national certification boards that have certified the counselor
• Ethics committees that accept complaints of all professional counseling associations in which
the counselor holds active membership
• The counselor’s employer
Licensure boards, certification boards, and professional associations will inform indi-
viduals who inquire whether an individual comes under their jurisdiction and whether they
accept ethics complaints against members. In the counseling profession, complaints usually are
filed with and processed by ACA rather than with local or state chapters. When local chap-
ters, state branches, regions, and divisions of ACA receive ethical complaints against members,
they usually refer them to the national ACA Ethics Committee. On the other hand, the National
Association of Social Workers and the American Psychological Association (APA) process eth-
ics complaints against members on a local or state level. If an association processes complaints
at the local level, information on the proper way to file complaints is available from the associa-
tion’s national office.
Unwarranted Complaints
Standard I.2.e. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states, “Counselors do not initiate, participate in,
or encourage the filing of ethics complaints that are retaliatory in nature or are made with reckless
disregard or willful ignorance of facts that would disprove the allegation.” This standard provides a
foundation for finding counselors in violation of the ACA Code of Ethics if they purposefully file a
formal ethics complaint against another counselor when they know the complaint is false or if they
were not careful to gather and state facts accurately.
Inappropriate Discrimination Against Those Who
Have Been Accused
Standard I.2.f. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) attempts to guard against counselors being dis-
criminated against when they have had ethics complaints filed against them, even though the com-
plaints have not yet been resolved. Even the most ethical counselors could have complaints filed
against them. All it takes to file a complaint is submitting an accusation to the proper authori-
ties. In addition, the ethical standard makes an effort to guard against counselors being discrimi-
nated against because they have filed complaints against other counselors. This standard states,
“Counselors do not deny individuals employment, advancement, admission to academic or other
programs, tenure, or promotion based solely on their having made or their being the subject of an
ethics complaint. This does not preclude taking action based on the outcome of such proceedings or
considering other appropriate information.”
Despite this standard, if a complaint against a counselor is pending, employers certainly may
conduct their own investigations into alleged wrongdoing and conclude that a counselor has been
unethical, even if a complaint filed with a licensure board, certification board, or professional asso-
ciation still has not been resolved.

-- 246 of 593 --

224 	Section 2 • Issues
Illegal Behavior of Others
Individuals in U.S. society who know of illegal acts by others are not violating any laws if they choose
not to report such activities. In the same manner, counselors who know of illegal acts of other counsel-
ors generally do not have to report those illegal acts. A citizen in the United States cannot be charged
with a crime for refusing or failing to report the criminal act of another person. However, some illegal
acts by counselors might also be unethical or might violate state licensure statutes or regulations. The
previous section discusses how to proceed if you believe another counselor is acting unethically.
Counselors might become aware of the following illegal activities by other counselors:
• Lying to health care companies so that clients will get reimbursement for the counselors’
services
• Purposefully not reporting income to the Internal Revenue Service
• Engaging in a sexual relationship with a minor
• Smoking in a building in which smoking is prohibited
• Speeding while driving a car
Obviously, you might decide to report some of these illegal activities even though you are not
legally obligated to do so. Some activities might fall into a gray area, and you would not even think
of reporting others.
Although counselors do not have an affirmative duty to report illegal activities of others, if they
are questioned by police investigators or subpoenaed, they have to answer questions regarding the
matter truthfully. Counselors cannot assist individuals who have broken the law if those individuals are
attempting to avoid being questioned, arrested, or convicted of a crime they have committed.
Cases Are Often Complex
In this chapter, you have learned that you have an ethical duty to take appropriate action when you
have good reason to believe that a fellow counselor is behaving unethically in a way that could cause
substantial harm, and that sometimes you might choose to report an illegal activity. In Chapter 1, some
ethical and legal decision-making strategies were offered. Throughout this text, case examples have
been provided to help you hone your decision-making skills. You should keep in mind that most real-
world ethical and legal problems are very complex and do not lend themselves to easy solutions.
8-5 The Case of Bill
Assume that you are a licensed professional counselor in private practice. In April of the past
year, you were contacted by Bill, a counselor in the local high school. Bill was calling because
he wanted to refer Chantelle, an 18-year-old student. You made an appointment with Chantelle
and met with her in late April. You counseled her for two more sessions. In mid-May, she called
to cancel her next session. While on the phone, she told you that she wanted you to understand
why she was canceling and terminating the counseling relationship. She also wanted the reassur-
ance that you would not talk with her school counselor.
In response, you reviewed with her the limits of confidentiality and assured her that you would
not talk with Bill but said that if she told you of abuse or threatened harm to herself or others, you
would have to report it to authorities. Chantelle then disclosed that she had been having roman-
tic feelings for Bill for nearly a year and that she was upset and confused about the relationship.

-- 247 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	225
You stressed to Chantelle that this would not be a good time to discontinue counseling. Chantelle
promised to think things over and call you back.
Chantelle returned for one more session in June, soon after she had graduated from high
school. She told you that she had decided that she and Bill should just be friends. She also disclosed
that although she had not had sexual intimacies with Bill, he had talked of being attracted to her.
Chantelle recalled that she had felt confused when Bill first flirted with her and now felt that her trust
had been betrayed. When you asked her for permission to talk with Bill, she adamantly refused. You
encouraged her to talk to the school officials, but, again, she was adamant in refusing, stating that
she didn’t want to get Bill into trouble. She added that she had never told anyone, including her
parents, about what had happened and that she didn’t want anyone besides you to know about it.
You know Bill personally, although the two of you are not close friends. You see him at meetings
of professional associations and local continuing education workshops. You believe that Chantelle
is telling the truth. At the same time, Bill has always impressed you as a competent professional.
• What are your professional and ethical responsibilities to Chantelle?
• What are your professional and ethical responsibilities to Bill?
Discussion: Regarding your responsibilities to Chantelle:
• You should try to get more information from Chantelle regarding the exact behaviors of Bill
in an effort to determine whether Bill had behaved inappropriately or whether Chantelle
may have misinterpreted his attention.
• You have an obligation to respect Chantelle’s privacy, unless you determine that she may
have been subjected to inappropriate romantic overtures from Bill.
• If you have reason to believe that Bill acted inappropriately, you would have an obligation
to take some type of action to ensure that he would be held accountable.
Regarding your responsibilities to Bill:
• You should assume that Bill has done nothing wrong until you determine in your mind that
he may be guilty of inappropriate behavior with Chantelle.
• If you decide that Bill may have been inappropriate, you should talk to him directly about
the situation and hear his side of the story.
• After talking to Bill, if you believe Chantelle had been substantially harmed, or that Bill may
substantially harm other students, then you should take actions to ensure that Bill is held
accountable for his behavior.
Guidelines for Preventing Problems
No matter how carefully you practice or how conscientious you are as a professional, it is always
possible that someone will accuse you of unethical or illegal behavior. Guidelines that have been
suggested by Chauvin and Remley (1996) for preventing problem situations follow:
• Restrict your practice of counseling to your areas of competence.
• Do not sue clients for unpaid fees. Those who are sued by you may, in turn, complain about
your competency. If you don’t allow clients to run up bills with you, collecting fees from them
will never become an issue.

-- 248 of 593 --

226 	Section 2 • Issues
• Utilize a thorough and complete client disclosure statement in your practice (Wheeler &
Bertram, 2012).
• Never guarantee or imply a guarantee of outcomes.
• Establish and maintain firm professional boundaries between you and your clients.
• Always use supervision for your practice, even if it is peer supervision.
We suggest and briefly discuss a few additional guidelines:
• Stay connected with your fellow mental health professionals. Attend meetings of professional
organizations and continuing education workshops. Join a peer consultation group that meets
regularly. Isolation can create blind spots (Mascari & Webber, 2006), and counselors who are
isolated from their colleagues are more prone to burnout and to inappropriately trying to meet
their own needs through their relationships with clients.
• Monitor your self-disclosures made in counseling relationships. Check to make sure that you
are self-disclosing for the benefit of your clients rather than to have your own needs met. This
is one important way to prevent a subtle slide into blurred boundaries and inappropriate dual
relationships.
• Document carefully any circumstances and actions taken in difficult or dangerous client situations
(such as abuse or threats to harm self or others; Wheeler & Bertram, 2019).
• Keep current with developments in law and ethics. Ethical standards for the profession are not
static, and in every state, laws and rules related to the practice of counseling are constantly
changing (Hegarty, 2012). It is vital that you keep abreast of changes in requirements for practice
and advances in knowledge in the field.
• To reiterate advice we offer many times throughout this text, when in doubt, consult (Melonas,
2011). As we note, decisions made in isolation are rarely as sound as those made in consultation
with others. Choose your consultants wisely—fellow mental health professionals for ethical
questions and attorneys for legal questions—and follow their advice.
• Continually monitor your own effectiveness as a counselor. You have an ethical duty (ACA, 2014,
§C.2.e.) as well as a moral responsibility to do so. Recall the discussion of virtue ethics presented
in Chapter 1. Virtuous counselors have such an abiding commitment to the ethical values of the
profession that they hold themselves accountable even when others do not.
Be sure to take care of your own mental and emotional health. In our
view, it is often the most conscientious counselors who fall prey to mental
and emotional exhaustion. It may help to keep in mind that sound prac-
tice is not about achieving perfection; rather, it is about taking responsibil-
ity for one’s actions and keeping client welfare foremost (Welfel, 2016).
At the same time, we believe that there is an ethic of self-care (Brown,
2018; Wagner et al., 2020). As Corey et al. (2024) have stated, a key to
retaining your vitality as a person and a professional is to realize that you
do not have an unlimited capacity to give without replenishing yourself.
Attending to your own wellness is fundamental to your ability to assist
your clients in achieving their emotional health and wellness.
Counselors must take care of themselves legally as well.
Professionals who are sued or accused of wrongdoing are not able to
function to their maximum potential. We owe it to our clients to protect
ourselves legally as we practice, to seek legal advice when it is needed,
and to maintain professional liability insurance. By protecting ourselves
legally, we are able to help others as professional counselors.

-- 249 of 593 --

Chapter 8 • Malpractice and Resolving Legal and Ethical Challenges 	227
Summary and Key Points
This chapter addresses unfortunate topics related to
clients being dissatisfied with the services of coun-
selors. Counselor malpractice is reviewed. In addi-
tion, the process whereby counselors are accused
of unethical practice is discussed.
Counselors are seldom sued for malpractice,
but it is possible. In this chapter, the legal principles
of malpractice are reviewed and explained. If coun-
selors do get sued, the complaints often are sexual
misconduct or failing to prevent the suicide of a cli-
ent. Counselors could also be sued for malpractice
if they fail to prevent harm if a client is at risk for
violence.
• COVID-19 and the digital revolution in the pro-
fession of counseling have had an impact on how
counselors deal with clients who might be at risk
of suicide or violence.
• Counselor malpractice is defined as the failure of
counselors to render professional services expected
in a particular community by a reasonable member
of the counseling profession with the result that a
recipient of services is harmed. Malpractice can
include intentional or unintentional wrongdoing.
• Malpractice lawsuits against counselors are dif-
ficult for a client to win because clients must
show that counselors were guilty of wrongdo-
ing and that the wrongdoing caused some actual
harm to the client.
• Knowing how to proceed after determining that
a client may be at risk for suicide or violence is
essential for counselors who practice in all settings.
• It is important for counselors to have a good
understanding of how to assess clients for non-
suicidal self-injury, bullying, and risk for suicide.
• Counselors in all states except Texas have a duty
to warn known intended victims of their clients.
However, state laws vary widely, so it is essential
to know the law in the state in which you practice.
Counselors must be prepared to resolve different
legal and ethical challenges. Understanding how
to proceed when a legal question arises is differ-
ent from resolving ethical or counseling practice
issues.
• It is very important to consult with attorneys
when legal questions arise in your counseling
practice.
• On the other hand, other counselors, not lawyers,
should be consulted when making difficult ethi-
cal or professional decisions.
Counselors sometimes have complaints filed against
them with their state licensure board, a certification
agency, a professional association, or their employer.
Understanding how to deal with such complaints is
important. Dealing with suspected unethical conduct
by colleagues is an important situation to navigate to
prevent having counter complaints filed against you.
• If you are accused of unethical practice, you
should seek legal advice, avoid talking with oth-
ers about the accusation, and respond in a profes-
sional manner to licensure boards or association
ethics committees.
• The first step in addressing what appears to be
unethical behavior by a colleague is to address
the situation directly and to try to resolve the
problem through that process. When that fails
or in situations where direct interaction with the
colleague is impossible and substantial harm has
occurred or is occurring, you should consult with
other counselors and, if necessary, report the sit-
uation to employers, licensure boards, or certifi-
cation entities.
• You are not obligated by law to report illegal
activities of other counselors, but you might have
an ethical obligation if you believe substantial
harm is occurring because of the other counsel-
or’s behavior.

-- 250 of 593 --

228
9Boundary Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
9.1 Understand the complexities of dual relationships
and boundary issues in counseling.
9.2 Describe the risks to clients and counselors of
entering into sexual dual relationships.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. How would you define the word
boundaries as it applies to the
counseling relationship?
2. What are the differences between
a friendship and a counseling
relationship?
3. Do you think that a sexual
relationship between a counselor
and a former client is ever
acceptable? Why or why not?
4. What would you do if you found
that you felt a strong sexual
attraction to one of your clients?
Perhaps no ethical and legal issue has caused more controversy
among helping professionals than determining the appropriate
boundaries of the therapeutic relationship. Boundary issues
encompass a wide range of questions that counselors encoun-
ter on a daily basis. Just a few such questions are: Is it ethically
appropriate to accept a gift from a client? Is it permissible to
become friends with a former client after the counseling rela-
tionship has ended? Should I ever meet with a client outside
the office? Is it okay to hug a client? May I accept a friend of a
friend as a client? Is it appropriate to attend a community event
when a client will also be in attendance?
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
on Boundary Issues
Many individuals sought counseling during the COVID-19 pan-
demic due to their social isolation, particularly during the lock-
down period. Occasionally, clients who were deprived of social
contact wanted to establish close personal relationships with
their counselors, which would be inappropriate. It is the counsel-
or’s duty to maintain the boundaries in a professional counseling
relationship, especially when clients want to get their personal
needs for a relationship met in a counseling relationship.
COVID-19 caused stress for counselors as well as for
clients (Corey et al., 2024). When counselors are stressed and
their personal needs are not being adequately met, they are
more vulnerable to turning to clients for personal gratifica-
tion. Counselors were called upon during the COVID-19
pandemic to take special care to avoid developing inappro-
priate relationships with their clients and to practice self-care.

-- 251 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	229
The use of technology became more pronounced in society in general during the COVID-19
pandemic and in counseling relationships as well. The advent of Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
Snapchat, smartphones, avatar counseling, and other Web-based technologies has triggered a vast
range of boundary issues (Reamer, 2020). Counselors’ strategies for setting boundaries of their
availability are no longer limited to establishing office and business phone availability. Many of the
possible practices discussed in other chapters, such as “friending” a client on Facebook, exchanging
email or text messages with clients, or providing counseling services virtually, extend the typical
boundaries of the therapeutic relationship.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, artificial intelligence (AI) has been used in some novel
(and concerning) ways to explore various issues related to boundaries, such as self-disclosure. For
example, Lee et al. (2020) conducted an experiment in which participants conversed with chatbots
with differing chat styles, including a “self-disclosing chatbot,” and then met with a mental health
professional. These researchers reported that participants exhibited deeper self-disclosure to the
mental health professional after using the self-disclosing chatbot. The researchers themselves were
not mental health professionals. The potential for experimenting with artificial intelligence tools for
counselors is almost endless, and counseling professionals will need to be vigilant as they consider
using them.
THE COMPLEXITIES OF DUAL RELATIONSHIPS
Dual or multiple relationship issues are, in essence, boundary issues. They all revolve around ques-
tions as to where the professional boundaries of the counseling relationship should be set to best
protect clients from harm. Although the term boundary is part of the everyday language of coun-
seling, it has rarely been defined in the literature. A boundary can be conceptualized as a frame or
membrane around the therapeutic dyad that defines a set of roles for the participants in the thera-
peutic relationship (Smith & Fitzpatrick, 1995). Viewed this way, boundaries help us understand the
parameters of the relationship. Although counseling can involve a great deal of emotional intimacy,
it is a professional relationship, and therefore it has certain limits that might not apply to a personal
relationship. To give some examples, there are limits on physical contact between counselor and cli-
ent, on time and place for counseling (counseling generally takes place during regularly scheduled
appointments and in a particular setting if face-to-face), on the amount and types of self-disclosure
made by the counselor, and on the exchange of gifts. Katherine’s (1991) definition of a boundary as
a “limit that promotes integrity” (p. 3) nicely captures the purpose of setting boundaries. Limits lend
structure to the therapeutic relationship, which helps to create a safe space that is “unambiguous,
consistent, and reliable” (Jordan & Marshall, 2010, p. 345). Boundaries exist to protect the welfare
of clients, who are in a vulnerable position in the relationship.
Evolving Perspectives
Boundary issues usually have been framed in the literature as questions of dual or multiple relation-
ships. According to Herlihy and Corey (2015b), dual or multiple relationships occur when helping
professionals take on two or more roles simultaneously or sequentially with a help seeker. Stated
another way, dual or multiple relationships occur whenever helping professionals have another, sig-
nificantly different relationship with one of their clients, students, or supervisees. Dual relationships
can also involve combining the role of counselor with another professional role (such as teacher,
colleague, minister, supervisor, employer, or business partner) or combining the counselor role with
a personal role (such as friend, relative, or romantic partner).

-- 252 of 593 --

230 	Section 2 • Issues
For many decades, boundary issues in counseling were a hot topic that generated more than
1,500 books, articles, and scholarly works (Pope & Keith-Spiegel, 2008). In recent years, the litera-
ture on boundary issues has been scarce, despite the fact that counselors seem to remain uncertain
about the ethics of practices such as hugging a client, telling a client you are angry at them, texting
a client, and giving a client your personal phone number (Carlisle et al., 2022). There is some evi-
dence that dual relationships remain a type of ethical violation that leads to disciplinary actions by
state counselor licensure boards (Wilkinson et al., 2019).
Historically, dual relationships in counseling were generally prohibited or discouraged, but
the thinking of our profession has evolved during the twenty-first century. Prohibitions have been
replaced by cautions and a recognition that some dual relating can actually be beneficial to clients
(Corey et al., 2024). Early versions of the Code of Ethics (American Counseling Association [ACA],
2014) cautioned counselors that dual relationships should be avoided, whereas recent versions have
reflected a more nuanced understanding of the complexities of boundary issues. In the following
section, we discuss some factors that make dual relationships and boundary issues so complicated
and difficult to resolve.
Problematic Characteristics of Dual Relationships
Several characteristics of dual relationships make them problematic for counselors (Herlihy &
Corey, 2015b). First, potential dual relationships can be difficult to recognize. They can evolve
in subtle ways: There is no danger sign that marks the point at which a professional relationship
crosses the line into behavior that could lead to an inappropriate relationship. It is not difficult for a
counselor, or a counselor educator or supervisor, to innocently enter into a form of extraprofessional
relationship. For example, a counselor might accept a client’s invitation to attend a special event that
has meaning for the client. A counselor educator might find a friendship developing with a student
whom the educator is mentoring. A supervisor might feel attracted to a supervisee and think about
dating the supervisee after the formal supervision is completed.
When dual relationships are sequential rather than simultaneous, it can be particularly dif-
ficult to foresee potential problems. Some of the questions with which conscientious professionals
struggle are whether a former client can eventually become a friend, how a smooth transition can
be made from a supervisory relationship to a collegial relationship once supervision is completed,
and what factors must be considered in determining whether a former therapeutic relationship can
become a personal relationship of any kind.
A second complicating characteristic is that the potential outcome of dual relating ranges
along a wide continuum from extremely harmful to beneficial to clients.
9-1 The Case of Gerald
Dorothy, age 23, seeks counseling from Gerald, a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in pri-
vate practice. Her goal is to work through issues related to the sexual abuse by her stepfather
that she endured when she was a child. After 2 months of counseling, Gerald initiates a sexual
relationship with Dorothy. He rationalizes his behavior by telling himself that she can benefit
from having a healthy sexual relationship. Dorothy feels guilty, confused, and isolated by this
betrayal of her trust. She wants to end the sexual relationship but has become so dependent on
Gerald that she feels trapped. She begins to have thoughts of ending her life.

-- 253 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	231
9-2 The Case of Julian
Fiona has been coming to see Julian, her counselor, for nearly a year. Through counseling,
Fiona has gained the self-esteem and confidence to return to college and complete the last
four courses she needed to graduate. She asks Julian to attend the graduation ceremony. She
says that Julian’s attendance would mean a great deal to her because she credits the counseling
process for making it possible for her to achieve her goal. Julian agrees to attend the ceremony.
• What are the differences between Gerald’s motivation and Julian’s motivation to cross a
boundary?
• What harm do you think could have resulted from Julian attending Fiona’s graduation
ceremony?
Discussion: The first case illustrates the severe harm to a client that a sexual dual relationship
can cause. Gerald’s behavior is exploitive, and he is causing harm by revictimizing his client.
Gerald’s behavior is unethical, and in some jurisdictions, it could be criminal as well.
Near the other end of the continuum are situations like Julian’s in which a counselor
chooses to engage in a form of dual relating to benefit a particular client. Julian’s choice to
attend the graduation ceremony probably has a low risk of causing harm. As the Code of Ethics
(ACA, 2014) acknowledges in §A.6.b., current counseling relationships are sometimes extended
beyond conventional parameters. This standard offers the specific example of attending a for-
mal ceremony such as a wedding/commitment ceremony or graduation. Julian would need to
take “appropriate professional precautions” as explained in this standard, which might include
consultation and documentation.
You might agree with a counselor’s decision to attend a graduation ceremony, wedding, or other
special event. Or you might believe it is not a good idea to make exceptions like this. There is no abso-
lute right answer to this question. You will thus need to give considered thought to developing your own
stance toward boundary issues. Although the risks and benefits of nonprofessional or dual relationships
are further discussed later in this chapter, we believe it may be helpful at this point for you to keep in
mind that it is not dual relating in itself that creates an ethical problem. Rather, it is the possibility that
the counselor might exploit clients or misuse their power. Simply preventing dual relationships from
occurring will not prevent exploitation. There are many ways that counselors can misuse their power
and influence over clients even when they are not occupying more than one role with them.
A third characteristic that makes boundary issues so complicated is that some dual relationships
are unavoidable. In rural communities, it may be impossible for counselors to keep their personal lives
entirely separate from their professional lives. In addition to working in rural communities, there are
several situations in which counselors and their clients have shared social communities and in which
overlapping roles are inherent. Later in this chapter we discuss some small worlds in which some role
overlap is inevitable.
Finally, our traditional ideas of the therapeutic frame are being challenged by developments
in the profession and by new, innovative approaches to counseling. One development is that there is
greater cultural diversity among both clients and counselors in our increasingly multicultural society.
We agree with Speight (2012) and Mifsud and Herlihy (2022), who suggested that cultural compe-
tence in counseling requires a different, broader understanding of therapeutic boundaries. Speight
(2012) noted that many Black individuals place high value on affective expression and sociability.

-- 254 of 593 --

232 	Section 2 • Issues
Therefore, Black clients are likely to want counselors to be real in the counseling relationship, and
they may react negatively to counselors who maintain distance and anonymity. In Latine cultures,
where warm, close family and community bonds exist, dual relationships tend to be the norm rather
than the exception (Machuca, 2015). Sometimes the shared experiences of being members of a mar-
ginalized group form a basis for establishing a counseling relationship. For instance, it seems likely
that LGBTGEQIAP+ counselors who specialize in counseling LGBTGEQIAP+ clients may
encounter potential multiple relationship scenarios due to potential overlap in the counselors’ social
and professional lives. The participation of these counselors in social or political activities in the
LGBTGEQIAP+ community may be the very reason the clients seek them out.
New perspectives on boundaries can be found in emerging theories, such as relational cultural
theory (RCT). Proponents of RCT pay particular attention to power dynamics. Birrell and Bruns
(2016) have pointed out that all of the boundary-related standards in the ACA Code of Ethics (2014)
are based on the assumption that it is the counselor who sets the boundaries; they have advocated
for a more collaborative approach. See Chapter 1 for a further discussion of collaborative theories
of ethical decision making.
Some innovative practices also are challenging the traditional boundaries that existed
when counseling usually occurred in an office setting. For example, types of eco-therapy such as
adventure-based counseling (Zur, 2007) and walk and talk therapy (McKinney, 2011) take place
in outdoor settings that are less formal and less structured than in-the-office settings, which could
easily lead to a relaxation of boundaries. During the COVID-19 pandemic, most counseling that
had been face-to-face continued via the internet, but it is possible that remote sessions were uncom-
fortable for some counselor–client dyads, who may have found private outdoor places to conduct
sessions. As a result of all these changes, current counseling practice requires a fluid and flexible
frame that is more movable and dynamic than was once assumed.
Ethical Standards
Because the issues surrounding dual relationships or multiple relationships are so complex and
sometimes confusing and because dual relationships are not unethical per se, the ACA Code of
Ethics (2014) does not use these terms. Instead, under §A.5. and §A.6., the Code provides several
standards that address noncounseling roles and relationships as well as professional relationships.
Section A.5. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) identifies the types of noncounseling roles and
relationships that are prohibited. Three standards in this section relate to sexual and romantic rela-
tionships. Sexual and/or romantic relationships with current clients, their romantic partners, or their
families are prohibited (§A.5.a.). Counselors must not engage in electronic sexual or romantic rela-
tionships with clients (§A.5.a.). Sexual and/or romantic relationships are also prohibited with former
clients, their romantic partners, or their family members for at least 5 years after the last professional
contact (§A.5.c.). It is also not ethical for counselors to engage in counseling relationships with
persons with whom the counselors have had a sexual or romantic relationship in the past (§A.5.b.).
Some types of nonprofessional relationships that are not sexual or romantic in nature are also
prohibited. For example, counselors must not engage in counseling relationships with friends or
family members with whom they would not be able to remain objective (ACA, 2014, §A.5.d.). They
must also avoid engaging in personal virtual relationships (such as becoming friends on a social
media site) with current clients (§A.5.e.). One additional prohibition is found in §A.6.: “Counselors
[should] avoid entering into nonprofessional relationships with former clients, their romantic part-
ners, or their family members when the interaction is potentially harmful to the client.” This stan-
dard applies to both in-person and electronic interactions.

-- 255 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	233
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) does not prohibit all nonprofessional relationships. Several
standards in Section A.6. provide guidance on managing and maintaining boundaries and profes-
sional relationships. These standards clarify that not all such relationships are harmful and that some
nonprofessional relationships may be potentially beneficial to clients. The first of these standards
addresses the question of whether a counselor may accept as a client an individual the counselor
already knows in some capacity. Standard A.6.a. states:
Counselors [should] consider the risks and benefits of accepting as clients those with whom they have
had a previous relationship. These potential clients may include individuals with whom the counselor
has had a casual, distant, or past relationship. Examples include mutual or past membership in a
professional association, organization, or community.
A second standard addresses extending counseling boundaries with current clients. Standard
A.6.b. states:
Counselors [should] consider the risks and benefits of extending current counseling relationships
beyond conventional parameters. Examples include attending a client’s formal ceremony (e.g., a
wedding/commitment ceremony or graduation), purchasing a service or product provided by a client
(excepting unrestricted bartering), and visiting a client’s ill family member in the hospital.
In both types of situations—when counselors accept as clients individuals with whom they
have had a previous relationship and when counselors extend their boundaries with current clients—
the counselors must take appropriate professional precautions such as informed consent, consulta-
tion, supervision, and documentation to ensure that their judgment is not impaired and that no harm
or exploitation occurs.
Risks and Benefits
Clearly, the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) provides extensive guidance with respect to dual relationships
and role blending. As we have noted, dual relationships can range along a continuum from extremely
harmful to potentially beneficial to clients, and most questions related to professional boundary setting
defy easy answers. Thus, it is vital that counselors weigh the risks and benefits of entering into dual
relationships, exploring both the potential for harm and the possible benefits to the client.
THE POTENTIAL FOR HARM 	Some writers have taken a cautious and conservative stance toward
potential dual relationships. St. Germaine (1993) reminded counselors that the potential for harm
is always present in a dual relationship due to the loss of objectivity that accompanies that relation-
ship. Others have noted that the power differential between counselor and client makes it impos-
sible for the client to give truly equal consent to an extraprofessional relationship (Cottone et al.,
2022). It is possible that counselors may unintentionally or unconsciously exploit or harm cli-
ents who are in a vulnerable position in the relationship. Pope and Vasquez (2021) cautioned that
engaging in a dual relationship, if not done appropriately, can sabotage therapeutic gains and even
exploit or harm clients.
In determining the risk of harm in a nonprofessional relationship, Kitchener and Harding
(1990) suggested that counselors consider three factors: incompatible expectations, divergent
responsibilities, and the power differential. First, the greater the incompatibility of expectations in
a dual role, the greater the risk of harm. Second, the greater the divergence of the responsibilities
associated with dual roles, the greater the potential for divided loyalties and loss of objectivity.
Third, the greater the power differential between the two parties involved in a dual relationship, the
greater the potential for exploitation of the individual in the less powerful position.

-- 256 of 593 --

234 	Section 2 • Issues
9-3 The Case of Cora
Cora is the director of a university counseling center, and Eileen is a secretary in the center’s main
office. Eileen has been an excellent employee for many years, and Cora has come to count on her
to help keep the center functioning smoothly. One day Cora comes out of her office and notices
that Eileen’s eyes are red and puffy and that she seems sad. When Cora expresses her concern,
Eileen begins to cry. She tells Cora that she is having some personal problems and adds, “Can I
just step into your office for a minute while I pull myself together?” Cora agrees to this request,
and they both go into Cora’s office and close the door. Eileen begins to tell Cora about her per-
sonal problems. Cora listens as Eileen tells her story. After nearly an hour she suggests that Eileen
might want to seek counseling. Eileen demurs, saying that she feels better now and thinks she can
handle things.
Several weeks go by, during which time Eileen’s work is not up to her usual high standards.
She makes careless errors and forgets things. Cora calls her into her office twice to address this
problem. Each time Cora spends about 30 minutes listening to Eileen’s personal problems. At
the end of each conversation, Eileen insists that she is “getting a grip on things.” When the time
comes for Cora to complete her quarterly evaluations of her counseling center staff, she gives
Eileen a low rating on a number of the items on the form. When Eileen receives the evaluation,
she is hurt and angry. She confronts Cora, saying, “How could you—of all people—do this to
me! You know I’m a good employee but am just going through a rough time. You know what’s
going on in my life. I expected you to understand.”
• What do you think caused Eileen’s hurt and angry feelings?
• What could Cora have done differently to prevent this situation?
Discussion: It is likely that Eileen’s hurt and anger have resulted from the incompatible expec-
tations she held for Cora. On the one hand, Cora has been a caring and sympathetic listener.
Even though Cora did not intend to enter into a formal therapeutic relationship with Eileen, she
has behaved as a counselor. Eileen has come to expect her to be understanding, accepting,
and nonjudgmental while Eileen is working through her personal problems. Given this set of
expectations, the evaluation feels like a punishment and a betrayal. On the other hand, she has
been a secretary in the center for several years and is accustomed to receiving quarterly evalu-
ations from her supervisor. As an employee, she realizes that her work has not been up to par,
and in that role she would expect to receive a fair and accurate evaluation. Her expectations for
Cora as a supervisor are incompatible with what she expects from Cora as a sympathetic listener
and counselor.
Cora is faced with two divergent responsibilities in this situation. Because she has stepped
into a counselor role, she needs to be accepting and supportive of Eileen as well as patient,
while Eileen works through her problems. As a supervisor, however, it is Cora’s responsibility to
evaluate her employees and to do so accurately. It is impossible for Cora to evaluate Eileen and
be nonjudgmental at the same time.
Finally, there is a power differential in the relationship between Cora and Eileen. Cora is
in a position of power because she is Eileen’s supervisor and evaluates her work. Eileen is in a
less powerful position as an employee and has made herself even more vulnerable by reveal-
ing her personal problems. It is Cora’s professional responsibility to avoid misusing her power
and to ensure that the more vulnerable individual in the relationship is not harmed. Certain

-- 257 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	235
characteristics of the therapeutic relationship place counselors in a position of power over clients.
When clients come for counseling, they are in an emotionally vulnerable state. In the counseling
relationship, the counselor learns much about the client’s innermost thoughts and feelings, while
the client learns much less about the counselor. This unfortunate, problematic situation between
Cora and Eileen could have been prevented if Cora had not appeared to assume the role of
counselor for Eileen.
Counselors who are asked to counsel individuals with whom they have other relationships
are put in a difficult situation, and it happens quite often. When persons with whom you have other
relationships (relative, friend, employee, etc.) know that you are a counselor and ask you to counsel
them, you need to be prepared to respond in both a caring and a professionally appropriate manner.
A good approach would be to acknowledge their distress and empathize with them and then to state
that you cannot function as their counselor because of your other relationship with them. Offer to
help them locate a good counselor. If you then proceed to listen to their situation, it is wise to remind
them periodically that you are listening as a relative, friend, or supervisor rather than as a counselor.
Of course, counselors never intend to exploit their clients. Cottone (2005) has urged counsel-
ors to think in terms of detriment or harm to clients rather than in terms of potential exploitation.
He notes that the word exploitive implies malicious intent, whereas the term detrimental focuses on
outcome regardless of intent. His point is that counselors need to be held accountable for the actions
they take that cause harm to clients, regardless of intent.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS 	Whereas some scholars have focused on the potential for harm and have
urged counselors to avoid entering into dual relationships, others have argued persuasively that dual
relationships can be helpful to clients if they are implemented thoughtfully and with care and integ-
rity. Although these arguments are not new, they have raised points that are valid in today’s world
of counseling practice. Hedges (1993), presenting a psychoanalytic viewpoint, argued that there is
an essential dual relatedness in psychotherapy in that transference, countertransference, resistance,
and interpretation all rest de facto on the existence of a dual relationship. Hedges urged counselors
to remember that viewed from this perspective, all beneficial aspects of counseling arise as a conse-
quence of a dual relationship.
Greenspan (2002) described strict adherence to boundaries as a distance model that under-
mines the therapeutic relationship. In a similar vein, Moleski and Kiselica (2005) suggested that
when counselors actively maintain interpersonal distance, they unnecessarily emphasize the power
differential and promote an objectification of the therapeutic relationship. Relational ethicists (see
Chapter 1) take a similar stance. From their perspective, dual relating invites greater authenticity and
congruence from counselors and can make it more difficult for them to hide behind the protection of
a professional mask.
Lazarus and Zur (2002) have been perhaps the strongest voices among contemporary scholars
who take the position that it can be extremely beneficial for counselors to engage in dual relationships
with selected clients. They have noted that a power differential in a relationship is not necessarily
associated with harm or exploitation. They pointed out that many hierarchical relationships (such as
parent–child, teacher–student, and coach–athlete) flourish and contribute to an individual’s growth
and development. Zur (2007) has argued that rigid adherence to boundaries can weaken the thera-
peutic alliance and that rigidity, aloofness, and distance are in direct conflict with therapist attributes
known to be helpful to clients. Lazarus (2006) has asserted that counselors who selectively transcend

-- 258 of 593 --

236 	Section 2 • Issues
certain boundaries actually may provide superior help. In summing up the arguments in favor of
flexible boundaries, Moleski and Kiselica (2005) concluded that dual relationships are “not always
destined for disaster” (p. 7) and can in fact complement and enhance the counseling relationship.
Unavoidable Dual Relationships
Boundary issues in rural practice have been given a considerable amount of attention. Yet it is impor-
tant to recognize that there are other small worlds that can exist in a bounded environment or even
in an urban environment. Counselors who work in the military face many of the same challenges as
rural practitioners (Johnson et al., 2005), as do those who are members of the deaf, religious, cor-
rections and law enforcement, or addictions treatment communities (Glosoff et al., 2006; Guthmann
et al., 2019; Lazarus, 2006; Lazarus & Zur, 2002; Schank & Skovholt, 2006). In some settings, coun-
selors’ job duties require them to serve in roles that are incompatible, such as counselor and evalua-
tor. Goodman-Scott et al. (2019) reported that school counselors who participated in the 504 process
(i.e., evaluating students for accommodations required under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973) experienced relational strain with teachers, students, and families. Traditional boundaries do
not even exist in some crisis counseling situations, such as large-scale disasters. In the following sub-
sections, we identify some of the boundary issues that can arise in rural, military, pastoral, addictions
counseling, in-home service provision, disaster response settings, and counselor education programs.
RURAL COMMUNITIES 	Counselors in isolated, rural communities or very small towns may find it
impossible to prevent some overlap among roles (Bray, 2016; Cates et al., 2012; Cohn & Hastings,
2013; Fitfield & Oliver, 2016; Forester-Miller & Moody, 2015; Imig, 2014) and may find it much
more difficult to maintain clear boundaries than counselors who practice in urban areas (Herlihy &
Corey, 2008). Campbell and Gordon (2003) have argued that multiple relationship roles are inevi-
table in rural communities due to the limited number of mental health practitioners, access difficul-
ties, characteristics of rural communities, and characteristics of counselors in these communities.
The rural school counselors interviewed by DeCino et al. (2023) found dual relationships to be
unavoidable and struggled to navigate their professional dual roles. Imagine a situation in which the
local banker, beautician, auto mechanic, grocery store checkout clerk, and owner of the dry cleaner
are all clients of a particular counselor who practices in a small town located a 2-hour drive from a
major city. Would you expect that counselor to make a 4-hour round trip to receive all the routine
services that these clients provide in order to prevent any possible overlapping of roles?
On the positive side, the fact that nearly every potential client will be an acquaintance of a
rural practitioner may present an advantage to the counselor. Forester-Miller and Moody (2015) have
suggested that familiarity and trust are necessary to be an effective counselor in rural areas. On the
negative side, rural and small-community practitioners face the additional problem of dealing with
the effects that overlapping relationships have on their own families (Schank & Skovholt, 2006).
9-4 The Case of Briana
For several weeks, Marianne has been a client in counseling with Briana. Marianne’s husband
and Briana’s husband both serve on the advisory board for a charitable organization, and the two
husbands begin to develop a friendship. They decide that they would like their wives to meet
and for the two couples to go out to dinner together.

-- 259 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	237
• How should Briana respond when her husband suggests this social contact?
• Do you think Marianne should tell her husband that Briana is her counselor and that she
would not be comfortable in a social situation with Briana?
Discussion: There is no easy answer to the question of whether Briana should agree to a dinner
engagement with her client and her client’s husband. Briana will need to consider several factors:
Does Marianne’s husband know that she is in counseling? Does he know that Briana is her coun-
selor? Is the marriage a relevant issue in counseling? Does Marianne have a high need for privacy?
Would Briana feel uncomfortable in the situation if she alone went to dinner with the client and
the client’s husband?
An excellent solution to the problem would be for Marianne to tell her husband that she is
in counseling with Briana, if that is comfortable for Marianne. For now, however, Briana’s best
approach probably would be to postpone the decision without revealing to her husband her specific
reason for doing so. Then she can raise the issue with Marianne during their next session together.
If Briana would not be uncomfortable with the two couples having dinner together, then she can be
guided by her client’s wishes on the matter.
Without question, counselors in rural and small-town practice face dual relationship and
role-overlap dilemmas more frequently than do most other practitioners. Counselors in rural prac-
tice are aware that the usual rules are not always helpful and that they need to adapt creatively to
situations as they occur (Corey et al., 2024).
COUNSELING IN THE MILITARY 	Counselors who work in the military may find themselves
engaged in multiple relationships with clients on a daily basis. Johnson (2015) has described the
conflicting roles that can exist when a counselor is embedded, or deployed, with a military unit.
In this situation, counselors who are also commissioned officers have a legally binding senior–
subordinate or subordinate–senior relationship with everyone in the population. Johnson has noted
that the military is a rank-conscious culture in which it is difficult to fulfill multiple roles, such as
empathic counselor and superior officer, or mental health expert and direct subordinate. An addi-
tional complication is that counselors in embedded or isolated duty stations often cannot refer their
clients to other mental health providers when role conflicts occur. The counselor may be the only
available provider and thus may be expected to counsel all service members, including personal
friends, direct supervisors, and coworkers.
An additional type of role conflict can occur when a counselor is directed to perform a
fitness-for-duty or security clearance evaluation on a service member who is also a client. The coun-
seling relationship will almost certainly be jeopardized if the counselor determines that the service
member is not fit for deployment or is not a good risk for a security clearance.
Johnson (2015) has noted that military counselors are like rural counselors in that they find them-
selves in nonprofessional contact with many of their clients on a routine basis. “When deployed with
a unit, the counselor will find him- or herself eating, sleeping, and carrying out all the mundane tasks
of life while (literally!) shoulder-to-shoulder with clients” (p. 255). Thus, military counselors need to
be very comfortable with frequent boundary crossings and role blending (Johnson & Johnson, 2017).
PASTORAL COUNSELING 	Pastoral counselors have overlapping relationships with members of
their congregations, and they face some unique boundary challenges. Boundaries can be particularly
difficult to maintain when pastors are expected to provide 24-hour availability, when they often work

-- 260 of 593 --

238 	Section 2 • Issues
without direct supervision or in isolation from peers, and when the power differential is exacerbated
by the fact that they are idealized by their parishioners (Crisp-Han et al., 2011; Garland & Argueta,
2012). When Crisp-Han et al. (2011) reviewed the cases of 70 pastors who had been referred for
mental health treatment, they noted that clergy are expected to perform the multiple, overlapping
roles of pastor, counselor, mediator, accountant, CEO, and friend. Sanders (2018), after reviewing the
literature on boundary issues encountered by Christian therapists, concluded that multiple relation-
ships are the basis of the most frequent ethical dilemmas these therapists face and that counselors
who work in church-based settings are particularly likely to engage in multiple relationships.
Sometimes counselors are not themselves members of the clergy but provide services to
members of a congregation and may have their offices on church premises. These counselors may
be particularly challenged to establish and maintain boundaries. They will need to spend consider-
able effort to ensure that the structure of their practice protects the confidentiality and well-being of
their clients and to ensure that members of the church staff do the same (Lyons, 2015).
ADDICTIONS COUNSELING 	With the recognition of addictions counseling as an accredited
specialty in the 2009 Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Education Programs
(CACREP) standards, addictions counselors may be giving increased attention to ethical issues
in general and to boundary issues in particular (Linton, 2012). Nonetheless, the education and
credentialing of addictions counselors vary widely, and some counselors may not be receiving
consistent training in how to manage boundary issues (Veach, 2015). There may also be disparities
in how boundary questions are viewed by addictions counselors who are themselves in recovery
and by those who are not. Son (2023) described six categories of boundary issues faced by addic-
tions counselors, including revealing their own recovery status, participating with a client in a
recovery group, revealing their own relapse history, having an excessive desire to intervene in
client healing, overidentifying with the client, and hiring a former client. Hollander et al. (2006)
found that non-recovering board-certified substance abuse counselors were more likely than recov-
ering counselors to find a variety of multiple relationship behaviors to be ethically problematic.
Millikin (2017) found that addictions counselors who are in recovery struggle with role over-
lap and blurred boundaries, which can distance them from their own 12-step programs. Millikin
stressed the importance for these counselors to constantly monitor their own professional and
personal/recovery boundaries.
Some addictions counselors are members of the National
Association of Alcoholism and Drug Counselors (NAADAC), which
has its own code of ethics (NAADAC, 2021). The NAADAC standards
regarding dual relationships differ from those found in the ACA Code
of Ethics (2014). The NAADAC code takes a more stringent stance,
stating that “[counselors should] make every effort to avoid multiple
relationships with a client.” Strict adherence to this standard may be
particularly difficult for the many substance abuse counselors who are
themselves in recovery. What if there is only one 12-step program in the
area where a counselor practices? Would you expect that counselor to
jeopardize their own recovery by avoiding the meetings for fear a client
might be in attendance? Veach (2015) has noted that addictions coun-
selors encounter some unique boundary issues, particularly related to
mutual 12-step group involvement. In her view, addictions counselors
would benefit from having written agency guidelines, continuing super-
vision, and ongoing ethics training.

-- 261 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	239
IN-HOME SERVICES 	An increasing number of counselors are provid-
ing in-home services to clients who are ill, are not mobile, or do not
have the means to travel to an office. Counselors who provide in-home
counseling for people with disabilities may find that clients may ask for
assistance outside the scope of the counselor’s role, such as bringing in
the mail or looking for a needed document. In situations like these, it
can be a struggle for a counselor to act in a compassionate and humane
manner while maintaining appropriate boundaries with clients. The rural
in-home counselors studied by Bowen and Caron (2016) experienced
ethical ambiguity with respect to boundaries. The female counselors
in this study were asked deeply personal questions by their female
clients, making it more difficult for them to maintain healthy boundar-
ies than it was for their male counterparts. Connell (2015) has recom-
mended that guidelines for in-home service provision be clearly set in
advance because a natural blurring of boundaries can occur in the home
environment.
CRISIS AND DISASTER COUNSELING 	Counselors have become
more involved in disaster mental health counseling, providing trauma-
informed care (Baker et al., 2016) to individuals and communities
affected by catastrophic events that are person-made (such as mass
shootings) or caused by nature (such as hurricanes, fires, and wide-
spread flooding). Managing boundaries can be difficult because services often are provided in cha-
otic, public situations, such as in shelters or other settings where privacy is lacking. Maintaining
appropriate boundaries is especially challenging because of the acute trauma involved, the volatile
emotions of clients, the intense nature of the relationship, and the multiple demands placed upon
the counselor (Lawson, 2015). Because disaster mental health workers are activated first from the
local region, counselors may themselves be affected by the event, making them both responders
and survivors. Lawson (2015) has cautioned counselors who are affected by this simultaneous
traumatization that they must remain aware of which role they are playing and gauge whether they
are able to assist others. This advice was certainly applicable during the COVID-19 pandemic,
when counselors were themselves affected by loss, fear and anxiety, and life disruptions. Survivors
of mass trauma events are emotionally vulnerable, and their counselors may also be traumatized,
which makes it particularly important for counselors to be vigilant in preventing romantic or other
intimate relationships with survivors from occurring (Tarvydas et al., 2017).
COUNSELOR EDUCATION PROGRAMS 	Dual relationships that go beyond the traditional class-
room student–faculty relationship are commonplace in graduate programs and are often encouraged
because they expand the mentor role (Crittenden et al., 2021). In counselor education programs, dual
relationship issues are common due to the personal and experiential nature of the training. Counselor
educators navigate these dual relationships with care, recognizing that behaviors that are modeled by
faculty are likely to be perceived as ethical and appropriate by students, who are then likely to rep-
licate those behaviors when they become practitioners. One particular issue of concern to counselor
educators has been how to structure courses in group counseling. Students may learn the necessary
group counseling skills by participating as members and as leaders of groups of their peers. Because
of the potential for dual relationships, these experiential groups are not intended to be therapy groups.
Counselor educators must take care to explain that the group is a process group in which members

-- 262 of 593 --

240 	Section 2 • Issues
will discuss issues related to professional development, and students are urged to exercise caution and
intentionality regarding the nature of their personal disclosure (Chen et al., 2020). Although coun-
selor educators and students generally seem to navigate successfully the dual relationships inherent
in the structure of counselor training, it is important to keep in mind that a power differential always
exists and that educators and students perceive boundary crossings differently (Burns, 2019, 2020;
Burns & Cruikshank, 2019).
Boundary Crossings Versus Boundary Violations
At this point in your reading of this chapter, you may have a feel for some of the complexities of
nonprofessional or dual relationships. You may also be uncertain regarding your own stance toward
some of the issues we have raised. If it is any comfort, many seasoned practitioners are also uncertain
about creating appropriate boundaries. Neukrug and Milliken (2011) surveyed a large sample of ACA
members regarding a range of ethical behaviors. The respondents differed in their opinions about
several dual relationship behaviors. For example, hugging a client was judged as ethical by 67% of
counselors, whereas 33% thought this was unethical. Despite the existence of specific language in the
Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) that allows bartering in certain circumstances (§A.10.e.), 46.6% believed
that bartering was unethical. There was nearly an even split in judgment regarding whether a counselor
should sell to a client a product related to the counseling relationship (e.g., book, audiotape), with
47.6% deeming it ethical and 53.3% judging it to be unethical. Similar results were obtained regarding
the question of whether it is ethical to become sexually involved with a client at least 5 years after the
counseling relationship ended (42.9% ethical, 57.1% unethical). Obviously, experienced counselors
disagree as to whether some forms of dual relationships with clients are ethical.
Compounding the confusion around nonsexual dual relationships with clients is the fact that
counselors may engage in some behaviors with clients from time to time that have the potential to
create a dual relationship but are not in themselves dual relationships. These behaviors have been
described as boundary crossings to distinguish them from ongoing dual relationships.
Several scholars (Gabbard, 1995; Gutheil & Gabbard, 1993; Smith & Fitzpatrick, 1995) have
attempted to distinguish between boundary crossings and boundary violations. In their view, a
boundary crossing is a departure from a commonly accepted practice that occurs to benefit a client:
In a boundary crossing, the boundary is shifted to meet the needs of a particular client at a particular
moment. By contrast, a violation is a serious breach that causes harm.
An example of a boundary crossing was given earlier in this chapter in the case example
involving a counselor (Julian) who decided to attend his client’s college graduation ceremony. This
counselor’s behavior did not constitute an ongoing dual relationship, and arguably it had the poten-
tial to enhance the therapeutic relationship. You should be aware, though, that not all counselors
would agree with Julian’s decision. As Barnett et al. (2007) have noted, one counselor’s intended
crossing may be another counselor’s perceived violation. We have adapted some of the items in a
survey conducted by Borys and Pope (1989) into a questionnaire (see Figure 9-1). We encourage
you to complete the questionnaire and then discuss your responses with fellow class members or
with colleagues. Think about the rationale you would offer for your responses should a class mem-
ber or colleague challenge your decisions.
One factor that the survey does not address, and that probably will influence your decisions
regarding whether you are willing to engage in occasional boundary crossings in your practice, is
that each client is unique. Some clients have generally clear interpersonal boundaries, and an occa-
sional crossing during your relationship with them may have no repercussions. Other clients present
a real challenge to maintaining therapeutic boundaries. Clients with borderline personality traits or
who have been diagnosed with the disorder, for example, may be adept manipulators who will try

-- 263 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	241
FIGURE 9-1 	Boundary issues survey of opinion
For each of the following items, place an X in the box that best represents your opinion.
How ethical is it for a counselor to:
Never
Ethical
Rarely
Ethical
Sometimes
Ethical
Usually
Ethical
Always
Ethical
1. Barter with a client for goods or services?
2. Invite a client to a personal party or social event?
3. Provide counseling to a friend who is in crisis?
4. Accept a gift from a client if the gift is worth
less than $10?
5. Accept a gift from a client if the gift is worth
more than $50?
6. Accept a client’s invitation to a special event?
7. Go out for coffee with a client after a counsel-
ing session?
8. Become friends with a client after termination
of the counseling relationship?
9. Give your cell number to a client?
10. Share personal experiences as a member of a
self-help group when a client is in attendance?
11. Occasionally hire a client to baby-sit?
to draw their counselors into a special relationship. You will want to be very firm and consistent
in maintaining the therapeutic structure with clients who have a poor sense of boundaries in other
areas of their lives. Sonne (2005) has urged counselors to exercise extreme care in maintaining
boundaries with clients who suffer from any psychological disorder (such as narcissistic personality
disorder, delusional disorders, or dissociative disorders) that could impair their ability to understand
or negotiate boundaries. Sonne also suggested that the depth of the client’s social network outside
the counseling relationship should be considered.
In general, from an ethical standpoint, occasional boundary crossings usually can be justified
when there is benefit to the client and very little risk of harm. Counselors must take care, however, not
to let these crossings become routine. As Herlihy and Corey (2015b) have noted, “Interpersonal bound-
aries are not static and may be redefined over time as counselors and clients work closely together”
(p. 11). These authors cautioned, however, that even seemingly innocent behaviors can, if they become
part of a pattern of blurring the professional boundaries, lead to dual relationship entanglements with
a real potential for harm. As small, well-intended relaxations of boundaries become more frequent in
a therapeutic relationship or in a counselor’s practice in general, the gradual erosion of the boundar-
ies of the professional relationship can take counselors down an insidious path toward serious ethical
violations. Reasoning about boundary crossings from a legal perspective leads to similar conclusions.
THE LEGAL PERSPECTIVE ON BOUNDARY CROSSINGS AND VIOLATIONS 	Counselors who are
accused of wrongdoing for any reason may have their peers investigate complaints against them
or may even have to defend themselves in an ethics hearing or criminal court (see Chapter 8 on
responding to charges of wrongdoing generally). Once you have been accused of having done
something wrong, it is too late to undo any small indiscretions from your past. Often in the area of

-- 264 of 593 --

242 	Section 2 • Issues
boundary issues, counselors will think, “Well, maybe just this one time
it will be all right to ask my client to baby-sit for my daughter” or “This
client is particularly mature, so I’m sure we can have lunch together after
our session today.” Yet, shifting the boundaries of a counseling relation-
ship is risky; Wilkinson et al. (2019) found that dual relationships were
the second-most-frequent type of ethical violation that led to disciplin-
ary actions of state counselor licensure boards.
Unfortunately, small and seemingly insignificant boundary cross-
ings can be the very evidence that causes an ethics panel, judge, or jury to
find against you when you have been accused of having done something
wrong. When people judging you consider the small boundary crossings
that you have committed, they may conclude that you are incapable of
understanding your profession’s prohibition against engaging in multiple
relationships that are harmful to clients. Whether you have been falsely
accused or even accused of something you wish you had not done, it is
best if you have very few boundary crossings in your past.
Specific Boundary Issues
Counselors are responsible for maintaining professional boundaries in
their relationships with clients, yet these boundaries must be flexible
enough to be able to respond appropriately to specific situations. Sometimes, clients will request
exceptions to certain established boundaries, and at other times counselors may consider making
exceptions. Five types of exceptions that are discussed in the counseling literature are bartering, social
and business relationships with clients, accepting gifts from clients, counselor self-disclosure, and
touching or hugging a client.
BARTERING 	Bartering with a client for goods or services is not prohibited by the ethical standards of
the counseling profession, although it is discouraged as a routine practice. There is no consensus among
counseling practitioners as to whether they consider bartering to be ethical. As noted, counselors were
divided in their opinion on this issue when surveyed by Neukrug and Milliken (2011). Counselors who
enter into bartering arrangements with clients usually are motivated by a desire to provide services
to clients whose financial resources are limited and who cannot afford counseling without some sort
of alternative arrangement for payment. This issue may arise more frequently in communities where
residents lack the financial resources to afford mental health treatment (Barnett, 2020). This intention is
admirable, and you may choose to enter into bartering agreements with clients from time to time in your
professional career. However, you should be aware of the problems that are inherent in this practice.
One form of bartering involves the exchange of services. For example, a client might be a
self-employed interior decorator who is having difficulty paying for continued counseling because
his business has been slack lately. His counselor’s office suite needs new paint and wallpaper, so
they agree to exchange counseling services for redecorating services. It is possible that an arrange-
ment like this could work smoothly, but there are potential pitfalls. For one thing, most services
that clients can offer do not have monetary value equal to an hour of counseling. Unless clients can
devote considerable time each week to holding up their end of the agreement, they are likely to fall
further and further behind in the amount owed. They can then become trapped in a kind of inden-
tured servitude and come to feel resentful.
In addition to the question of quantity of bartered services, the issue of quality of services
provided can be problematic. To take the example of the decorator, what if the counselor thinks
the client is doing a sloppy and inferior job of painting and wallpapering the office suite? What if

-- 265 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	243
the redecorating work is excellent, but the decorator is not satisfied with the counseling services?
Feelings of resentment that build up in the counselor or in the client are bound to have a negative
effect on the counseling relationship.
Another form of bartering involves the exchange of goods for counseling services. For example,
a client who is an artist might wish to pay for counseling services by giving the counselor an oil paint-
ing. The issues of quality that arise in bartering of services apply to this type of bartering as well. In
addition, the issue of how many hours of counseling are equivalent to the value of the painting must be
addressed. What criteria should be used to make such a determination? Corey et al. (2024) recommend
that counselors work collaboratively with clients to determine the value of the goods or services being
bartered, establish an estimated length of time that bartering will continue, and document carefully.
In the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), a blanket prohibition against bartering is not made. Instead,
the code offers guidelines for counselors to help them determine whether a potential bartering arrange-
ment might be acceptable. The Code states that counselors may participate in bartering only if (a) it
does not result in exploitation or harm, (b) the client requests it, and (c) such arrangements are an
accepted practice among professionals in the community (§A.10.e.). Counselors also need to be aware
of any legal issues that pertain to bartering; for instance, licensed counselors in Texas are prohibited
from bartering (Texas State Board of Examiners of Professional Counselors, 2009).
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN BARTERING. If you establish your practice in a rural community,
you may find that bartering is common among local physicians and other professionals. In such a
setting, it would be acceptable for you to engage in bartering if your clients initiate the request and
if you believe that you and the client can work out fair and equitable terms of agreement. We believe
it would also be wise for you to consider other alternatives to bartering with clients who cannot pay
your full fee. Some of these alternatives, which are further explored in Chapter 13 in a discussion
of private practice, might include using a sliding scale fee or providing a set amount of pro bono
services.
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH CLIENTS 	Individuals who choose to become professional
counselors do not cease to be members of their communities, nor are they expected to forgo
their social lives to prevent all nonprofessional contacts with clients. As we have noted, some
social contact with clients is difficult to avoid when counselors share small worlds with their
clients. Even when extraprofessional contacts with clients can be prevented with relative ease,
however, counselors can find it tempting to develop social relationships and even friendships
with their clients. Burian and Slimp (2000) have offered a helpful social dual-role relationship
decision-making model that asks counselors to consider three main issues: motives for entering
the relationship, the power differentials involved, and the types of social activities that would
be included in the relationship.
As Glosoff (2015) has noted, individuals ordinarily look to work as one setting where they can
gratify certain psychological and social needs. For many people, their work environment is a place
to meet others with whom they can socialize and form friendships. Choosing to become a counselor
can limit these opportunities. Almost all counselors will have some clients who are likable and who
would make nice friends, but a friendship and a therapeutic relationship cannot exist simultaneously.
The therapeutic relationship is like a friendship in that it involves emotional intimacy, but it is different
in a significant way: In a therapeutic relationship, the intimacy goes one way. Friendships are co-equal
relationships in which personal disclosures, support, challenges, and other interpersonal dynamics are
reciprocal. The counseling relationship, by its very nature, is not reciprocal.
When counselors blend the roles of friend and counselor, they create a conflict of inter-
est that compromises the objectivity needed for sound professional judgment. As professionals,

-- 266 of 593 --

244 	Section 2 • Issues
counselors place the interests of their clients foremost, but the dual relationship creates a second
set of interests: those of the counselor. For example, a counselor may be reluctant to confront
a client who is also a friend, out of fear of jeopardizing the friendship. Short of an ongoing
friendship, there are many possibilities for more limited types of social contact with clients,
and a counselor’s stance toward these contacts may depend on several factors. The counselor’s
theoretical orientation might make a difference. Psychodynamic theory stresses the importance
of maintaining the structure of counseling and the attention given to transference and counter-
transference issues, so a counselor who espouses this orientation might be quite careful about
preventing out-of-the-office social contacts with clients. In contrast, relationship-oriented coun-
selors or those who espouse systems theory might be more willing to interact with clients out-
side the therapeutic setting. Another factor may be the nature of the social function: It may be
more acceptable to agree to a client’s invitation to a special occasion, for instance, than to invite
a client to a personal party.
Although there has been much debate in the literature, our opinion is that counselors have
an ethical obligation to keep their professional and personal or social lives as separate as they
reasonably can. Counselors should not get their social needs or personal needs for friendship met
through interactions with their clients. ACA members surveyed by Neukrug and Milliken (2011)
agreed with this opinion: 95.4% believed it was unethical to engage in a counseling relationship
with a friend.
Counselors and clients do, however, meet each other in social contexts without prior planning
on either person’s part. Therefore, it is essential that counselors discuss with their clients how they
might be affected by encountering the counselor outside the office and how these chance meetings
should be handled.
A closely related issue that has also been debated in the literature is the question of
post-termination friendships with clients. Counselors are often aware of clients’ attributes that
would make them desirable friends. Clients, for their part, may hope to continue the intimacy they
felt and the caring attention they received during the therapeutic relationship. The Code of Ethics
(ACA, 2014) offers no guidance regarding post-termination friendships with clients, and there is no
consensus among helping professionals regarding the advisability of such relationships.
Postcounseling friendships pose several risks. It is not unusual for clients to want to reenter
counseling with their counselor, and if a friendship develops, this option is closed. From a psy-
chodynamic perspective, it could be argued that therapeutic gains are jeopardized when a friend-
ship follows a therapeutic relationship, because a post-termination friendship would likely disrupt
a healthy resolution of transference issues (Kitchener, 1992). The power differential that existed
during the therapeutic relationship is not automatically negated when the counseling is terminated.
Salisbury and Kinnier (1996) have noted that knowledge of a former client’s weaknesses and secrets
can render a client especially vulnerable in a friendship with a former counselor.
You should thus consider a number of factors before pursuing a friendship with a former cli-
ent. These include the time that has passed since termination of the counseling relationship, trans-
ference and countertransference issues, the length and nature of the counseling, the client’s issues
and diagnosis, the circumstances of the termination, the client’s freedom of choice, whether any
exploitation might have occurred in the professional relationship, the client’s ego strength and men-
tal health, the possibility that the client might want to return to counseling, whether any harm to the
client’s welfare can be foreseen, and the counselor’s motivation for considering entering into the
friendship. It would be difficult to demonstrate that none of these factors was at play if a counselor
were challenged by a licensing board or in court. As a rule, we believe that counselors would be
wise to avoid developing friendships with both current and former clients.

-- 267 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	245
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS. Cautions against counseling friends or
close acquaintances may present difficulties for some counselors of color (Herlihy & Watson, 2003).
In the Black community, boundaries are permeable, and helpers typically engage in multiple, outside-
the-office roles (Parham & Caldwell, 2015). Having a shared primary language with a counselor can
be pivotal in the choices of some clients. For instance, there may be only one Spanish-speaking Latine
counselor in an elementary school, and that counselor may know and socialize with the families of
the Latine students. More generally in Latine cultures, boundaries between social and professional
relationships are more flexible than they are in Euro-American cultures. Machuca (2015) noted that in
his practice he often received invitations to family events of his clients because “in Latine culture, once
you get to know the family secrets you become part of the family” (p. 103).
BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH CLIENTS 	Business and financial relationships
with clients have received little focused attention in the literature, perhaps because the issues are
much the same as those raised by personal and social dual relationships. For instance, counselors
who work in rural settings may be more likely to have business-related encounters with clients.
Schank and Skovholt (2006) described a situation in which a counselor took his car to a shop to be
serviced. He thought the bill was rather high for the services performed but was reluctant to ques-
tion the charges when he realized that one of his clients had done the work. Of course, such unin-
tended encounters can happen in urban and suburban practices as well. A counselor might have an
electrical or plumbing problem at home and have a client who is employed by the electric company
or plumbing contractor show up to do the work. These occurrences, although awkward, might be
resolved through an open discussion during the next counseling session.
Other types of dual relating that involve financial considerations occur when a counselor patron-
izes a client’s place of business or when a counselor sells goods (such as a relaxation tape or a book) to a
client. In the first situation, the client could feel pressured to give the counselor a discount or some kind
of special service. In the second instance, the client might feel coerced to buy the counselor’s product.
Among mental health counselors surveyed by Carlisle et al. (2022), 64.4% thought it was unethical to
sell a product to a client. Given that approximately one-third of the counselors surveyed did not see this
behavior as unethical, however, it appears that consensus does not exist regarding this issue.
As is true of other types of dual relationships, counselors have differing viewpoints on business
relationships with clients, and the same counselor might have differing views in different circum-
stances. For instance, Sonne (2005) has noted that the degree to which the business relationship is
distinct from the counseling relationship could influence a counselor’s decision making. Employing
a client to work in one’s home might be perceived quite differently than employing a client to work
in a business in which the counselor has a financial interest but that is located in another town.
Although the practice of entering into business or financial relationships with clients needs
further study, our own recommendation is that counselors should avoid entering into these relation-
ships with current or former clients. Whenever a counselor is making a monetary profit from a sec-
ondary relationship with a client, that counselor’s self-interest is clearly involved.
ACCEPTING GIFTS FROM CLIENTS 	It is likely that most counselors have had the experience of
being offered a gift by a client. When clients offer gifts—even small, token gifts—it can make
counselors feel uncomfortable (Srivastava & Grover, 2016). They may be torn between wanting to
decline the gift to keep the relationship within proper boundaries and wanting to accept the gift so
that the client will not feel hurt or rejected. The best way to minimize such conflicts is to have a
general policy that you do not accept gifts from clients and to include a statement to that effect in
your informed consent document. This procedure will not completely solve all potential problems,

-- 268 of 593 --

246 	Section 2 • Issues
however. Clients may vary in how they interpret the idea of a gift, or they may forget or choose
to ignore your policy. For your part, you probably will not want to maintain your own policy too
rigidly. It is difficult to imagine an elementary school counselor refusing to accept a child client’s
offering of a handmade valentine, for instance.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) has a standard on accepting gifts from clients. Standard
A.10.f. states, “Counselors [should] understand the challenges of accepting gifts from clients and
recognize that in some cultures, small gifts are a token of respect and showing gratitude. When
determining whether or not to accept a gift from clients, counselors [should] take into account the
therapeutic relationship, the monetary value of the gift, a client’s motivation for giving the gift, and
the counselor’s motivation for wanting or declining the gift.”
It is certainly possible that a client may offer you a gift at some point. It is thus wise for you to
think through how you would plan to handle this event and to use the criteria suggested in the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014) to determine whether to accept or refuse a gift.
The monetary value of the gift is one obvious consideration when deciding whether to accept
or deline a gift. When you responded to the Boundary Issues Survey in Figure 9-1, did you answer
the fourth item differently than how you answered the fifth item? If so, a gift’s monetary value played
some part in your decision-making process. Apparently, many mental health professionals would rea-
son similarly. A large majority, 91%, of mental health counselors who responded to Carlisle et al.’s
(2022) survey thought it was unethical to accept a gift from a client when the value of the gift is more
than $25. While the monetary value of a gift is important to consider, we also recommend that coun-
selors take into account the affordability of the gift for the client. Some clients might consider a $25
gift as a “token” of gratitude, while others might not have the financial means to consider it that way.
It may also be useful to consider the client’s motivation for offering the gift. A client might
offer a small gift as a way of expressing appreciation. This seems different from offering a gift that
the counselor perceives to be a form of manipulation or an attempt to buy loyalty or friendship.
Sometimes a client’s need to offer gifts can become a useful therapeutic tool. For example, we know
of a client who came to each of her first three sessions bringing a small home-baked item, such as
a brownie or a small loaf of banana bread, saying that she had just finished baking and thought the
counselor might like to sample the result. She was an excellent baker, and the counselor accepted
the first two offerings with pleasure. When the client came to the third session with a treat, the coun-
selor used this as an entrée to exploring the client’s motivations. Through this exploration, the client
became aware of her need to make herself welcome everywhere she went because she believed that
she could not possibly be valued just for being herself. This became a very productive session.
It may be equally useful to consider the counselor’s motivation for wanting to accept or
decline the gift. For example, assume that your client has an extra ticket to a championship sports
event and asks you to go along. You are a great sports fan and have been unable to get a ticket to
the game. If you find yourself tempted to accept the ticket, keep in mind that you have a fiduciary
relationship with your client and that you must not benefit from the relationship. It would also be
useful to think about the implicit messages you would be sending to the client, who may think it
is now acceptable to call you at home or invite you to future social functions. What if you are not
really a sports fan but find yourself thinking that going to the game would be more enjoyable than
sitting home alone? In this case, consider your obligation to avoid using clients to meet your own
social needs. When you are determining whether to accept a gift from a client, your reasoning must
be based on consideration for the client’s welfare.
Related to the issue of motivation is the nature or stage of the therapeutic relationship. A cli-
ent might bring a small gift to a mutually agreed-on termination session as a way of saying, “Thank
you” to the counselor. Accepting such a gift might not be problematic. By contrast, accepting a gift

-- 269 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	247
during the early stages of counseling, before a stable therapeutic relationship has been established,
could set in motion a blurring of boundaries that could become problematic down the road.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN ACCEPTING GIFTS. Cultural factors must be considered because
gift giving has different meanings in different cultures. For instance, giving gifts is a common prac-
tice in many Asian communities as a means of showing gratitude and respect (Bemak & Chung,
2015). Counselors responding from a European American perspective might politely refuse an
offered gift without realizing the insult and cultural meaning of their refusal to the client.
Counselors thus need to be sure that their own discomfort at being presented with a gift does
not overshadow their sensitivity to what the gift means to the client. Although there is no single
answer to the question of whether to accept or refuse a gift, it is essential that gifts are always evalu-
ated in the context within which they are offered.
SELF-DISCLOSURE 	The extent to which counselors engage in self-disclosure depends in large
measure on their theoretical orientation and on their skill and comfort in using this technique.
Psychodynamically oriented counselors, whose tradition includes Freud’s belief that the coun-
selor should remain anonymous, are not likely to engage in much self-disclosure. Counselors who
view the therapeutic relationship as more co-equal, such as existential counselors and those who
view ethics from a relational lens, place more value on self-disclosure. Jolly (2019) interviewed
person-centered counselors, who reported that their self-disclosures helped to level the playing field
by shifting the power differential between client and counselor. It appears that most counselors are
comfortable with self-disclosure: Nearly 91% of the counselors surveyed by Carlisle et al. (2022)
deemed self-disclosing to a client to be an ethical behavior.
As a technique, counselor self-disclosure can be a powerful intervention that can strengthen
the therapeutic alliance. It is thus important that you learn the skill of self-disclosure and be able
to articulate your rationale for using it in the counseling process. It is equally important that you
understand self-disclosure as an ethical issue.
9-5 The Case of Manuel
Manuel is an LPC and a certified addictions counselor who works in a residential chemical depen-
dency treatment facility. He is in recovery and has been drug-free for more than 5 years. Today,
he is meeting for the first time with Robert, a new client who was just admitted to the facility for
the third time after he relapsed. At the beginning of the session, Robert asks Manuel if he is in
recovery. Manuel responds by explaining that the counseling relationship will focus on Robert
and on helping him find a path to lasting recovery. Robert expresses his frustration at Manuel’s
evasiveness and adds that he will have no faith in Manuel’s ability to help him if Manuel doesn’t
know first-hand the struggle involved in maintaining recovery. He insists that Manuel give him a
direct answer to his question.
• Do you think Manuel should self-disclose that he, himself, is in recovery?
• If Manuel does respond directly to Robert’s question, how can Manuel ensure that his self-
disclosure is done in an ethically appropriate manner?
Discussion: Although no consensus exists among addictions counselors regarding whether
or not they should reveal their recovery status, we believe that, in this case, a direct and hon-
est answer might be the best way to establish trust and a working relationship with the client.

-- 270 of 593 --

248 	Section 2 • Issues
If Manuel were to respond succinctly by saying that he has been in recovery for more than
5 years and then redirect the conversation back to Robert and his struggles, the self-disclosure
could be facilitative. To remain ethically appropriate, Manuel would need to ensure that the con-
versation does not continue to focus on himself even if Robert wants to ask him more questions.
Counselor self-disclosures that are ethically appropriate are done for the client’s benefit within
the context of the therapeutic process. Self-disclosures are considered unethical when they are used
to meet the counselor’s own needs for intimacy or understanding. It can be difficult for counselors to
objectively gauge their motives when their own needs are involved. Pope and Keith-Spiegel (2008)
have suggested that counselors who are considering self-disclosing to a client ask themselves two
questions: Does this particular disclosure represent a significant departure from my usual practice?
If so, why the change?
Counselors in independent, private practice may be particularly vulnerable to using
self-disclosure to counter feelings of isolation (Glosoff, 2015). Self-disclosure, used improperly or
excessively, can lead to a role reversal in which the client becomes the emotional caretaker of the
counselor. Although it would not be appropriate for counselors to disclose intimate details of their
personal lives, other disclosures may be appropriate in a specific context. For example, Krieger
Cohen and Johnson (2022) found that career counselors’ sharing of personal, relevant stories from
their own college experiences can counter first-generation college students’ feelings of isolation and
confusion, and Matise (2015) concluded that counselor behaviors such as crying in sessions or tear-
ing up could be an appropriate response depending on factors such as timing, extent of expression
of emotion, culture, and gender.
Self-disclosure has become an area of increasing ethical concern as more research has dem-
onstrated that when treatment boundaries become blurred, they usually erode gradually over time.
Simon (1991) found that inappropriate counselor self-disclosure, more than any other kind of
boundary violation, is likely to precede counselor–client sexual intimacy.
Guidelines for distinguishing appropriate from inappropriate self-disclosure may seem clear
while you read about them, but judging what may benefit the client can be very difficult in prac-
tice. Self-disclosure is a complex issue. In some cases, self-disclosure is a necessity. For example,
Cartwright et al. (2018) have explained that women counselors who are pregnant and who counsel
sex offenders are compelled to acknowledge their pregnancy. You will need to think about whether
to self-disclose, and how and when, in working with each of your clients. When you choose to
self-disclose, your primary reason must be that you believe the disclosure will benefit the client
(Stewart-Sicking et al., 2017). It is also important that you take cultural factors into consideration
in your decision making.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN SELF-DISCLOSURE. In some Asian cultures, self-disclosing to
strangers (counselors) is considered a violation of familial and cultural values. Some Asian clients
believe that personal matters are best discussed with intimate acquaintances or friends (Bemak &
Chung, 2015). Counselor self-disclosure might facilitate the establishment of the close personal
relationship that these clients need in order to feel comfortable in sharing their concerns.
Studies have shown mixed results in determining the effects of counselor self-disclosure when
counseling Black clients. However, one study provided some empirical support for greater coun-
selor self-disclosure when working with Black clients, regardless of whether the counselor is Black
or White (Cashwell et al., 2003).

-- 271 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	249
PHYSICAL CONTACT WITH CLIENTS 	The boundary question of whether counselors should touch
or hug their clients is not easy to resolve. For certain clients, at certain times, a reassuring touch or
a gentle hug can be facilitative. Yet counselors who engage in these behaviors risk having their ges-
tures misinterpreted as sexual advances or as violations of the client’s personal space.
The issue of therapeutic touch has a lengthy history. When talk therapy first began in the
Freudian era, physical contact with clients was prohibited because of its presumed negative effect on
transference and countertransference. Later, in the 1960s and 1970s, touching became an accepted
practice within the human potential movement. In more recent decades, it appears to us that con-
cerns about the consequences of physical contact with clients have been driven more by legal than
by ethical concerns. Gutheil and Gabbard (1993) related a story of a therapist who was caught by
surprise when a client suddenly hugged her on her way out at the end of the counseling session.
The therapist felt somewhat uncomfortable about the incident but left it undocumented and did not
engage in further self-reflection. Some weeks later she received a letter from the client’s attorney.
Probably because such stories are frightening, counselors usually are now trained to be cautious
about making physical contact. They are often advised to hug a client only when the client requests
it or, at the very least, when the counselor first secures the client’s permission. Certainly, profes-
sional liability insurance carriers have become concerned that clients might bring suit against their
counselors for even well-meaning instances of physical contact. Some applications for malprac-
tice insurance directly ask the question “Do you ever touch a client beyond a routine handshake?”
Counselors who answer “yes” must attach an explanation and run the risk of being deemed a risky
applicant and having their application for insurance rejected. In contrast to the legal perspective,
counselors seem to value touch for its therapeutic potential and view physical contact with clients as
ethical. Of the mental health counselors who responded to a survey by Carlisle et al. (2022), nearly
80% believed it was ethical to console a client by touching them (e.g., placing a hand on the shoul-
der), and nearly 73% believed it was ethical to hug a client.
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN TOUCHING CLIENTS. When you begin to practice as a counselor,
you will need to determine your own stance toward physical contact with your clients. Many factors
might be considered, such as the age of the client. Routinely hugging elementary school children is
probably more acceptable than giving frequent hugs to adult clients. However, counselors who hug
clients run the risk of a sexual impropriety complaint if people report having seen them hugging their
young clients. With teens and adults, you will want to assess the likelihood that the client may sexualize
or misinterpret your touch. The client’s diagnosis and history may also be relevant. For instance, hug-
ging or touching a client who has been sexually abused generally is contraindicated.
Cultures vary widely with respect to the acceptability of touch. For example, people from
some European countries routinely kiss each other on both cheeks as a way of greeting, and these
clients might think you are cold and distant if you avoid physical contact with them.
The bottom line regarding the issue of therapeutic touch is that it is a matter of professional
judgment. There are no definitive guidelines to be found in codes of ethics. In making your own
determination about whether to touch a client, you will thus need to be clear about your motivations
for doing so. Zur and Nordmarken (2010) have cautioned against avoiding touch simply out of fear
of litigation. If you do use therapeutic touch in your practice, you must be able to demonstrate that
touching has served the client’s needs and not your own.
CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS 	Cultural factors are often important variables in ethical decision mak-
ing regarding therapeutic boundaries. In this chapter, we have noted that bartering, gift giving, self-
disclosure, and therapeutic touch are viewed differently in various cultures. Also, a counselor’s own

-- 272 of 593 --

250 	Section 2 • Issues
cultural background may contribute to their perspective on therapeutic boundaries: In some cultures, it
is considered polite and respectful to adhere strictly to boundaries of personal space and roles, whereas
such behavior is considered rude and rejecting in other cultures. The counselor’s religious affiliation is
another potentially influencing factor; some religions support and encourage extended relationships
among congregants and, as was noted, some clients prefer to work with a counselor who shares their
religious affiliation. The counselor’s gender may also make a difference, as female therapists tend to be
more conservative than males in their ethical decision making around boundary issues (Sonne, 2005).
Ethical Decision-Making Models
Several writers (Burian & Slimp, 2000; Herlihy & Corey, 2015b; Pope & Keith-Spiegel, 2008;
Younggren, 2002) have offered decision-making models to assist counselors who are faced with
potential dual or multiple relationships. These decision-making models have much in common.
They suggest, as a first step, that the counselor determine whether the potential dual relationship
is potentially beneficial or harmful and whether it is avoidable. Before embarking on or declining
to participate in a dual relationship, counselors must judge whether the benefits outweigh the risks
or whether the reverse is true. They need to consider the factors that create a potential for harm,
including differences in the client’s expectations of the counselor in the two roles, the counselor’s
divergent responsibilities in the two roles, and the power differential in their relationship. Pope and
Keith-Spiegel (2008) suggested that counselors imagine what might be the best possible outcome
and the worst possible outcome of crossing a boundary or engaging in a dual relationship.
If the counselor believes that the risk of harm to the client is greater than the potential ben-
efits, the counselor should decline to enter the dual relationship and refer if needed. An explanation
should be given so that the client understands the rationale for not proceeding with the problematic
part of the relationship.
If the counselor believes that the potential benefits to the client are great and the risk of harm
is small, or if the potential dual relationship cannot be prevented, then the dual relationship can be
initiated, as long as the following safeguards are put in place:
• Secure the client’s informed consent to proceed with the dual relationship. The counselor and
the client should discuss the potential problems and benefits and reach an understanding regard-
ing how they want to handle these problems if they arise. Younggren (2002) has recommended
that the client sign an informed consent document, although he also cautions that clients can
never give truly informed consent to something that poses a severe risk to them or that violates
the prevailing standard of care. For example, even if a client were to sign a consent to enter into
a sexual relationship with a counselor, the consent document would not assist the counselor, in
either the ethical or the legal arena, in a defense of the relationship.
• Seek consultation with colleagues. Because one of the most intransigent problems in managing
dual relationships is the counselor’s loss of objectivity, it is vitally important for the counselor
to seek ongoing consultation for help in monitoring the relationship and the risk for harm.
• Engage in ongoing discussion with the client. As we discussed in Chapter 1, ethical decision
making can be a shared process, and as we discussed in Chapter 4, informed consent is not a
one-time matter. The counselor can involve the client in a mutual, ongoing monitoring of the rela-
tionship and can discuss any potential problems they might foresee and how they will bring those
problems up for discussion. A mutual decision is best in resolving any problems that do arise.
• Document and self-monitor. Although we have heard of instances in which counselors were
advised to keep any mention of a dual relationship out of their case notes, we think this is
unwise. If a dual relationship ever became an issue in a complaint proceeding before a licensure

-- 273 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	251
board or in a court of law, behavior that appears as if the counselor is trying to hide something
will not be seen favorably by the parties adjudicating the complaint. It is much better for coun-
selors to be able to demonstrate that they were aware of dualities, that they considered the risks
and benefits for the client, and that they took steps to protect the client.
• Obtain supervision. If the risks in a dual relationship seem high, if the relationship is particularly
complex, or if the counselor is concerned about their ability to assess the situation objectively, seek-
ing consultation may not be sufficient. In these instances, counselors are wise to engage a fellow
mental health professional in ongoing supervision of their work throughout the dual relationship.
It is also important that counselors remain vigilant to warning signs of potential problems
with boundary management. “Red flags” include going out of your way to extend counseling ses-
sions (e.g., scheduling them at the end of the day); self-disclosing more information than is usual for
you; allowing a client to accumulate unpaid bills or fall behind in payments; communicating with a
client via email, text, instant message, or other electronic means more frequently than you do with
other clients; acting impulsively toward a client; and feeling attracted to a client (Reamer, 2020).
Whenever you find yourself making small exceptions to your usual practices, it would be wise to
follow the guidelines suggested above.
In concluding this section, we want to emphasize that boundary issues and dual relation-
ships pose some complex and difficult questions to which there are no easy answers. Each client
is unique, each counselor is unique, and each situation is unique and constantly evolving (Pope &
Keith-Spiegel, 2008). Counselors will struggle with boundary setting throughout their professional
careers. In the absence of certainties, counselors must think carefully about the consequences of
their decisions, have a clear rationale for any boundary crossings, be open to discussing the issues
with their clients (who are equally affected by any decisions), and consult with colleagues.
SEXUAL DUAL RELATIONSHIPS
The prohibition against sexual intimacies with help seekers is one of the oldest ethical mandates
in the health care professions, predating even the Hippocratic Oath. Nonetheless, ethics codes of
mental health professions made no mention of this behavior until research began to demonstrate its
prevalence and the harm done to clients (Pope & Vasquez, 2016). Although the problem of sexual
relationships between counselors and their clients has existed for many decades, it remained unac-
knowledged in the professional literature through the 1970s. Counselor–client sexual intimacy was
the problem with no name (Davidson, 1977) because helping professionals were reluctant to con-
front the issue. The reluctance was so pervasive that Pope (1988) concluded that helping profession-
als had engaged in “massive denial” (p. 222) of the problem. It was through the pioneering work of
a few researchers—such as Gartrell et al. (1987) in psychiatry and Pope (1986, 1988) in psychology
and counseling—that helping professionals were made aware that such violations were occurring,
and in startling numbers.
Although the limitations of self-report data make it difficult to gauge how commonly counselor–
client sexual intimacies actually occur, a substantial number of studies were conducted in the 1980s
and 1990s, indicating that approximately 7% of male counselors and 1.6% of female counselors
reported sexual relationships with their current or former clients. It is safe to state that these esti-
mates are probably conservative. When Pope (1986) surveyed patients rather than counselors, as
many as 20% of them reported having had sexual contact with their counselors.
In recent years, results of studies of complaints to state counselor licensure boards consistently
have revealed that dual relationships, both sexual and nonsexual, are one of the most frequently

-- 274 of 593 --

252 	Section 2 • Issues
claimed types of violations that resulted in disciplinary action (Wilkinson et al., 2019). Wilkinson
et al. (2019) found that if sexual and nonsexual dual relationships were considered as a single cate-
gory, this would be the most frequent type of violation that led to disciplinary action. Unfortunately,
sexual relationships with clients continue to be a frequent complaint against counselors that are filed
with counselor licensure boards.
It is likely that few counselors who enter into sexual dual relationships with clients initiate these
relationships with the intention of harming the client. As is true with nonsexual dual relationships, the
onset can be insidious. Sexual boundary violations often begin as minor boundary crossings, which
are repeated and then evolve (Cruikshanks & Burns, 2017) into serious boundary violations.
The Offending Mental Health Professional
Mental health professionals who engage in sex with their clients have not been well studied. Results
of the few studies that were conducted prior to the year 2000 seem to suggest that offending coun-
selors do not fit a single profile, although they do seem to share characteristics with other impaired
professionals, including professional burnout and a pattern of attempting to meet their own personal
needs through their clients.
It is natural to feel compassion for some offenders who feel remorse for their behavior, but it
is important to remember that ignorance is never a valid excuse, nor is blaming the client for being
seductive. It is always the responsibility of the helping professional to ensure that sexual intimacies
do not occur.
Harm to Clients
It has been amply demonstrated that sexual relationships with counselors are extremely detrimental
and sometimes even devastating to clients (Moleski & Kiselica, 2005). The harm is deep, lasting,
and occasionally permanent.
Pope (1988) suggested that clients are likely to suffer from therapist–patient sex syndrome,
with reactions similar to those of victims of rape, spouse battering, incest, and posttraumatic stress
disorder. He described a range of associated symptoms: Clients often experience a deep ambiva-
lence toward the offending counselor. They are trapped between extreme dependency on and fear
of separation from the counselor and a longing to escape from his power and influence. Like many
victims of incest and battering, clients vacillate between wanting to flee from the abuser and want-
ing to cling to and protect him.
Clients often suffer from feelings of guilt, believing that they are to blame for the relationship.
They may think that they did something to invite the counselor’s behavior. Although they may be
deeply angry with the counselor, their rage remains suppressed due to their feelings of ambivalence,
their sense of guilt, and the counselor’s continuing power. This guilt and rage, when turned inward,
lead to an increased risk of suicide.
Because the offending counselor insists that the client keep their sexual relationship secret,
clients feel isolated and cut off from the normal world of human experience. Not surprisingly, many
victims manifest a profound confusion about their sexuality and about appropriate roles and inter-
personal boundaries. When roles are reversed and the client becomes the counselor’s emotional
caretaker, the client does not know where safe and appropriate boundaries lie.
Counseling involves a high degree of trust, and violation of that trust can have life-long
consequences. Clients’ impaired ability to trust often prevents them from seeking help from other
counselors and may impair their ability to form other close relationships.
In addition, many clients display symptoms similar to those experienced by victims of post-
traumatic stress disorder. These symptoms include difficulties with attention and concentration, the

-- 275 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	253
reexperiencing of overwhelming emotional reactions when they become involved with a sexual
partner, and nightmares and flashbacks.
The harm to clients caused by sexual intimacies with their counselors is now well recognized.
The ethical standards of all mental health providers’ professional organizations, including the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014), prohibit sexual relationships with clients. There are no credible voices in the
profession arguing that sexual relationships with clients should be allowed.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) prohibits counselors from having sexual or romantic interac-
tions or relationships with current clients, their romantic partners, or their family members (§A.5.a.).
Romantic or sexual relationships with former clients (and their romantic partners or family mem-
bers) are prohibited for at least 5 years following the last professional contact (§A.5.c.). These pro-
hibitions extend to electronic or online interactions.
Typically, codes of ethics for mental health professionals prohibit sexual relationships with for-
mer clients for a minimum of 2 years. As just noted, the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) specifies a mini-
mum of 5 years. However, it is doubtful that a court of law would require a 5-year interval. Ethical
standards reach for the ideal, and legal standards define the minimally acceptable behavior that society
will tolerate from a professional counselor. A board of ethics might find a counselor in violation of the
ethics code for having had a harmful romantic relationship with a former client’s sister-in-law 4 years
after the counseling relationship ended, but it is doubtful that a judge would find that the counselor
had committed malpractice for the same behavior. Interestingly, lawyers are still debating whether it is
acceptable for attorneys to have sexual relationships with their clients (Buckner & Sall, 2008).
Legal Consequences for Offending Counselors
The harm caused to clients by sexual dual relationships is universally recognized and can have
severe legal as well as ethical consequences. As Kaplan et al. (2009) have noted, the fact that sexual
relationships with clients are the only exclusion contained in most professional liability insurance
policies is an indication of just how harmful these relationships are. Most professional liability poli-
cies will provide an attorney to defend a counselor against an accusation of sexual improprieties
with a client, but if the counselor is found guilty, the insurance company will not pay for damages
and will also expect to be reimbursed by the counselor for any legal fees incurred.
CIVIL LAWSUITS 	Because the impropriety of sexual intimacies with clients is universally recog-
nized, clients who sue counselors for having been sexually involved with them have an excellent
chance of winning their lawsuits if the allegations are true. These lawsuits are civil, which means
that one citizen must sue another for action to be taken against a person who does something wrong.
Clients who were sexually victimized by their counselors and who are ashamed, uneducated,
or lacking in self-confidence might choose not to file formal complaints or civil lawsuits against their
perpetrators. When that happens, counselors who violate our ethical standards and violate the rights of
their clients are never held accountable. In fact, many believe that the lack of accountability encour-
ages offending counselors to sexually violate other clients. When some counselors observe that others
are getting away with having sexual relationships with clients, they may be inclined to do so as well.
Counselors who engage in sexual relationships with their clients may be sued on a number
of grounds. Jorgenson (1995) has listed the following causes of action that victimized clients might
allege in their lawsuits: malpractice, negligent infliction of emotional distress, battery, intentional
infliction of emotional distress, fraudulent misrepresentation, breach of contract, breach of warranty,
and spouse loss of consortium (love, companionship, and services). As discussed in Chapter 8, one
of the elements a client must prove in a malpractice suit is that a counselor behaved in a manner that
breached the standard of care expected or required of counselors.

-- 276 of 593 --

254 	Section 2 • Issues
To encourage clients who are victimized by their mental health professionals to sue, a number
of state legislatures have now passed laws that automatically charge negligence for certain catego-
ries of mental health professionals who have sexual relationships with their clients (e.g., Cal. Civ.
Code sec. 43.93; Ill. Ann. State. Ch. 70, secs. 801–802; Minn. Stat. Ann. Sec. 148A; Wis. Stat. Ann.
Sec. 895. 70(2)). Those who sue must still prove they were harmed because of the sexual relation-
ships, but harm can be emotional and financial as well as physical.
Some of these statutes have unusual and forceful components. For example, the Wisconsin
statute (Wis. Stat. Ann. sec. 895. 70(5)) forbids accused mental health professionals from settling
their cases without public disclosure. In other words, mental health professionals (or their profes-
sional liability insurance companies) who are sued by their clients for having engaged in sex with
them cannot agree to an out-of-court settlement that is never reported to the public.
CRIMINALIZATION OF SEX WITH CLIENTS 	U.S. society has become so convinced that counselor–
client sexual relationships are wrong that some states have now passed statutes that make it a crime
for mental health professionals to engage in sex with their clients. Each state statute varies its in
language, but the following professionals have been included in some of the laws: psychotherapists,
counselors, marriage and family counselors, clergy, social workers, psychiatrists, and psychologists.
Losing a civil lawsuit for having sex with a client can be distressing for counselors, but going to jail
for the same thing is a much more dramatic result.
Some of these criminal statutes take unusually tough positions with mental health profes-
sionals. For example, the Colorado statute (Colo. Rev. Stat. secs. 12-43-708 [b & c], 1988) permits
prosecutors to file injunctions that will put a mental health professional out of business even before
the individual has been found guilty, if it can be proven that the professional presents a risk to clients
by continuing to practice.
Postcounseling Sexual Relationships
Ethical standards of the various mental health professions are divided on the issue of whether it is
ever ethical for professionals to have sexual relationships with former clients. Social workers are
forbidden from ever having a sexual relationship with an individual after a professional relationship
has been established (National Association of Social Workers, 2021). However, counselors (ACA,
2014) and psychologists (American Psychological Association [APA], 2017) have determined that
after a set period of time following termination, sexual relationships may be permissible with for-
mer clients. ACA has set 5 years after termination as an acceptable period before a sexual relation-
ship with a former client might be acceptable, and APA has set 2 years. The APA and ACA codes
should not be interpreted as blanket permission to engage in post-termination sexual relationships,
however. Counselors who consider entering romantic or sexual relationships with former clients,
even after several years have passed, still have an ethical responsibility to ensure that no harm is
done. Not only do all the risk factors for post-termination friendships apply to post-termination
sexual relationships, but because of the severity of potential harm, it is even more important to
put safeguards in place. The ACA Code states that before counselors engage in sexual or romantic
interactions or relationships with clients, with clients’ romantic partners, or with clients’ family
members, even after 5 years, counselors must “demonstrate forethought and document (in written
form) whether the interaction or relationship can be viewed as exploitive in any way and/or whether
there is still potential to harm the former client” (ACA, 2014, §A.5.c.).
Just as professional associations disagree about whether sexual relationships are acceptable
after a waiting period, there is some evidence that counselors are also divided on the issue. Among
the mental health counselors surveyed by Williamson et al. (2019), nearly 40% believed it was

-- 277 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	255
ethical to become sexually involved with a client at least 5 years after the counseling relationship
has ended. In our opinion, sexual relationships with former clients are not appropriate under any
circumstances. The risk of harm is far too high.
Sexual Attraction to Clients
Although the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) explicitly forbids sexual relationships with clients, it
does not address more subtle ways that sexuality can become part of a counseling relationship. It is
not at all unlikely that, at some point in your professional career, you will find that you are sexually
attracted to a client. When this happens, it is natural to react with feelings of guilt or self-doubt.
Sexual attraction to a client is not aberrant or unusual, however (Pope et al., 2021). What is impor-
tant to understand is that feeling a sexual attraction to a client is not unethical. What is unethical is
to act on that attraction.
When you feel a sexual attraction to a client, you have an ethical responsibility to acknowl-
edge and deal with it appropriately. Some useful strategies include consulting with colleagues,
carefully considering issues of client welfare, seeking supervision, and self-monitoring to ascertain
whether you are feeling particularly needy or vulnerable. If your own needs and issues seem to be
causing you to act in ways that are uncharacteristic of you, you will be wise to seek counseling for
yourself to resolve those issues. Koocher and Keith-Spiegel (2016) emphasized the importance of
counselors discussing a sexual attraction with a trusted colleague, a supervisor, or a counselor.
We often hear from counselors that their graduate programs gave little if any attention to the
issue of sexual attraction to clients. If counselor educators do not discuss this, they may be implic-
itly reinforcing the idea that sexual attraction is unethical or inappropriate, or that it is a rare occur-
rence that doesn’t warrant attention. Counselors will be better equipped to handle sexual attractions
if they have opportunities to discuss them as students and as supervisees, in a safe and accepting
environment (Corey et al., 2024; Jacob & Prikkhidko, 2022; Jacob et al., 2022).
Sometimes it will be the client who develops and expresses an attraction to the counselor. The
counselor must handle such client disclosures with tact and work to ensure that the client under-
stands that a dating or sexual relationship is not possible. Counselor educators can role-play this
type of encounter so that students develop skill and comfort in managing these client disclosures.
Counseling Clients Who Have Been Abused
by Previous Counselors
In your practice, you should be prepared to counsel clients who report that a previous counselor has
sexually exploited them. Welfel (2016), after reviewing prevalence studies, concluded that between
22% and 65% of mental health professionals have encountered such clients.
Counselors who provide services to individuals who have been sexually abused by mental
health professionals are put in awkward positions. Most counselors feel obligated to take some
action to bring attention to the wrongdoing of a fellow mental health professional. These counselors
are afraid that if they do not take some action, more clients may be abused.
We caution you, though, that if you are ever put in this situation, you should be respectful of your
client’s wishes in the matter. Clients must be willing not only to allege that a mental health professional
has abused them but also to testify at formal hearings, where they will probably be cross-examined in a
hostile and accusing manner and will have to deal with the emotional strain of the process.
Your role, as a counselor, is to assist your client in meeting the counseling goals that the two
of you establish together. If the client decides to proceed against the perpetrator in some manner,
you can be helpful in assisting the client with this very difficult situation.

-- 278 of 593 --

256 	Section 2 • Issues
It most likely will do no good for you to file an ethics complaint against another mental
health professional if the victim refuses to participate. You would be violating your client’s privacy
if you disclosed the client’s identity without his or her permission. In addition, most licensure
boards, criminal prosecutors, or certification groups will not proceed in a case without a witness
who was a victim.
Your role as a counselor is not to push your client toward accusing the mental health profes-
sional. You must guard against intrusive advocacy in your zeal to ensure that the wrong is redressed
(Wohlberg, 1999). Rather, your job is to provide appropriate counseling services, to avoid imposing
your own values, and to assist clients in meeting their personal goals.
It is important to be aware that clients who have been sexually exploited by a previous mental
health professional tend to be especially vulnerable to revictimization when their counseling needs
are not recognized and addressed. Counseling these clients requires sensitivity and expertise. If you
undertake a counseling relationship with such a client, you should read the literature on the topic,
get qualified supervision, and be prepared to have strong emotional reactions to the client’s disclo-
sures (Welfel, 2019).
To avoid becoming inappropriately involved if a client is trying to decide whether to accuse a
former mental health professional of inappropriate sexual activity, you might consider referring the
client to an advocacy group. Many such groups are available to assist clients in making the initial
decisions and then to support them once the process begins.
Summary and Key Points
Therapeutic boundaries and dual relationships are
among the most controversial of all ethical issues in
the counseling field. A boundary can be conceptual-
ized as a frame around the therapeutic relationship
that defines the participants’ roles in that relation-
ship. Counselors enter into dual relationships when-
ever they take on two or more roles, simultaneously
or sequentially, with their clients.
Codes of ethics discourage nonprofessional
or dual relationships, except for those relationships
that potentially could benefit a client. The only type
of dual relationship that is absolutely forbidden is
sexual intimacy in most circumstances. Counselors
must consider a number of factors when they are
contemplating entering into a nonsexual dual rela-
tionship, in order to determine the potential for
harm to the client.
Most 	counselors 	occasionally 	engage 	in
boundary crossings, which are departures from
usual practice that are made to benefit a particular
client at a particular time. For instance, a counselor
would not routinely meet clients at out-of-the-office
functions but might choose to attend a client’s
graduation or other special occasion. From a legal
perspective, counselors who develop a pattern of
frequent boundary crossings are at risk.
Several specific boundary issues were dis-
cussed in this chapter. These included bartering,
social and business relationships with clients,
post-termination friendships, accepting gifts from
clients, counselor self-disclosure, and physical
contact with clients. Throughout the discussion
of these issues, multicultural considerations were
highlighted. Guidelines for ethical decision mak-
ing completed the first section of this chapter. Key
points with respect to nonsexual dual relationships
are as follows:
• Dual relationship issues are complex and can be
difficult to resolve.
• The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) provides exten-
sive guidance on the types of roles and relation-
ships that must be avoided due to potential harm
to clients.
• The ACA Code of Ethics also acknowledges that
some nonprofessional relationships can poten-
tially be beneficial.

-- 279 of 593 --

Chapter 9 • Boundary Issues 	257
• With the exception of sexual dual relationships,
the thinking of the counseling profession has
evolved toward more flexibility in determining
boundaries.
• Counselors who are considering entering into
dual relationships should carefully consider the
risks and potential benefits.
• Dual relationships may be unavoidable in some
settings, such as rural communities, the mili-
tary, pastoral counseling, addictions treatment,
in-home counseling, disaster response envi-
ronments, and counselor education programs.
• A number of counselor behaviors do not by
themselves constitute dual relationships but have
the potential to create dual relationships. These
behaviors can be termed boundary crossings
to distinguish them from boundary violations,
which are harmful.
• From both an ethical and a legal perspective, coun-
selors are well advised to avoid developing a pat-
tern of frequent boundary crossings with clients.
• Bartering with a client for goods or services
is fraught with potential problems and should
generally be avoided, unless certain criteria are
clearly met or it is common practice among pro-
fessionals in a community or culture.
• Although counselors may be tempted to develop
social relationships or even friendships with cur-
rent or former clients, counselors should not get
their own social needs met through their interac-
tions with clients.
• Business or financial relationships with clients
should be avoided.
• Although counselors should be cautious about
accepting gifts from their clients, there may be
instances when accepting a gift is appropriate.
Counselors should consider a number of factors
when deciding whether to accept or refuse a gift
from a client.
• Self-disclosure on the part of counselors is
appropriate only when it is done for the benefit
of the client.
• The issue of physical contact with clients is dif-
ficult to resolve, and many factors must be con-
sidered. Today’s legal climate tends to discourage
counselors from the practice of therapeutic touch,
although counselors do not tend to see touching
as unethical.
• Decisions about dual relationships require con-
sideration of cultural variables.
The second section of this chapter focused on
sexual dual relationships. Sexual intimacies with
clients are probably the most harmful of all types
of dual relationships. The following are key points
about sexual dual relationships:
• Pope (1988) has described the harm to clients as
a therapist–patient sex syndrome that is similar
to posttraumatic stress disorder.
• Legal consequences for offending counselors
can be severe. They can be prosecuted in civil
court and, in an increasing number of states, in
criminal court as well.
• Counselors who provide services to clients who
have been sexually abused by their former coun-
selors face some difficult decisions. They must
therefore keep in mind that their role is to assist
these clients in meeting goals that are chosen by
the clients themselves.

-- 280 of 593 --

258
10Technology in Counseling
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
10.1 	Demonstrate an understanding of why it is
important for counselors to understand how their
clients are using technology and social media.
10.2 	List advantages and disadvantages of counselors
providing virtual counseling instead of in-person
counseling.
10.3 	Describe advances in counselors’ use of technology
and discuss potential concerns.
10.4 	Explain the ethical issues involved in counselors
using electronic means to communicate with their
clients.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What do you think about
counselors providing counseling
services to clients using Zoom or a
similar type of compressed video
technology?
2. What problems do clients bring to
counseling sessions that are directly
related to their use of social media
or other forms of technology?
3. What steps do counselors need
to take to ensure that counseling
records kept electronically are
secure and that client privacy is
maintained?
4. What do you think about the idea
of an avatar or a robot that mimics
human interactions counseling a
client?
Counselors’ use of a variety of technologies has increased
significantly during the current decade. The use of com-
pressed video technology to provide counseling services is
too new for the popular or professional literature to have set-
tled on terminology that will be used regarding the phenom-
enon. Counseling using compressed video is being referred
to as virtual counseling, telemental health counseling, tele-
therapy, online counseling, remote counseling, e-counseling,
and many other terms. In this chapter we use the term virtual
counseling to refer to the phenomenon of counselors pro-
viding services to clients where both can see and hear each
other while they are located in different places.
The Impact of the COVID-19
Pandemic on Technology in
Counseling
Since the last edition of this textbook, the world of counseling
has changed dramatically due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Using compressed video and electronic communications
rather than in-person sessions for counseling, supervision,
and the teaching of counseling to graduate students had
been considered experimental and a questionable practice.

-- 281 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	259
Then suddenly, almost overnight, when the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown occurred, that practice
became the norm. The pivot from traditional to digital approaches in the counseling profession was
surprisingly successful, but many concerns were expressed by counselors, supervisors, and counselor
educators about whether the transition from in-person to online counseling was ethical, legal, or pro-
fessional (Becnel et al., 2023; Lipschitz et al., 2022).
Professionals continue to question whether counseling delivered virtually is as effective as
in-person counseling (McCord et al., 2022; Uhl et al., 2022). However, research studies are being
published that suggest virtual counseling is as effective as in-person counseling with specific popu-
lations and client concerns. Despite uncertainties about the effectiveness of virtual counseling, the
practice is taking place everywhere. Even though in-person counseling services have resumed to
some degree, it appears that virtual counseling is here to stay in the United States. Artificial intelli-
gence has been introduced into the counseling profession, and in some instances, avatars that mimic
humans instead of human counselors are interacting with clients.
In this chapter, we summarize the ethical and legal issues surrounding the use of technology
in counseling and pay particular attention to guidelines that have been developed by professional
associations, certification boards, state licensure boards, and governmental agencies regarding the
use of technology in the delivery of mental health services. The COVID-19 pandemic has had an
impact on clients’ use of technology and virtual counseling and on counselors’ use of technology.
We discuss each of these areas in this chapter.
THE IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY ON
THE COUNSELING PROFESSION
Even before COVID-19, technological advances in society, especially the internet, were having a sig-
nificant impact on the profession of counseling (Hertlein et al., 2014; Kraus et al., 2010; Ziv, 2014).
The counseling profession has established a substantial presence on the internet: Technology offers
counselors abundant opportunities to access virtual libraries for researching the latest information on
client problems and effective counseling techniques, as well as to collaborate and consult with other
professionals around the world. The National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC), the Council for
Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP), and many of the divisions
of the American Counseling Association (ACA) have homepages on the internet, which means that you
can communicate quickly and directly with professional groups that are working to strengthen counsel-
ing as a profession. Videoconferencing on the internet enables you and counselors everywhere to obtain
further preparation without having to travel great distances. You can also subscribe to mailing lists that
allow you to share experiences, ask questions, and exchange information and ideas.
Technology is being used today in mental health in ways that were previously unimagined. In a
study completed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Steele et al. (2020) found that school counselors
have increased their use of technology for student planning and are continuing to use technology in
responsive services. Counselors are providing real-time, two-way virtual counseling sessions to clients
who are on the other side of the world; clients are presenting issues related specifically to their social
media activities such as being addicted to the internet, being the victim of cyberbullying, and leaving
current relationships for ones they found online. In addition, counselors are utilizing biofeedback in
their practices (Crockett et al., 2017), and clients with dementia are being tracked with GPS devices
(Landau & Werner, 2012). Virtual reality interventions and smartphone apps are being used to treat
clients with anxiety disorders (Firth et al., 2018) and other conditions. Smartphones allow counselors
to utilize multiple forms of technology in their practices (Epstein & Bequette, 2013). Legal and ethical
challenges abound as counselors utilize technology in creative ways in their practices each day.

-- 282 of 593 --

260 	Section 2 • Issues
The various forms of technology that have been developed and are still being created all have
the same basic purposes—to facilitate the transfer of information and enhance the ability to commu-
nicate with others. In this transfer and communication process, situations inevitably occur in which
sensitive or confidential information might be inappropriately accessed. Every form of technology
discussed in this section creates records or recordings of information that, if not treated carefully,
could lead to the privacy of clients being compromised.
Certainly, counselors want to maximize their effectiveness by utilizing as many forms of
technology as possible (Sampson & Bloom, 2001). It is also imperative that counselors educate
themselves regarding the subtle ways in which their clients’ privacy might be affected by the use
of technology (Cottone et al., 2022). When the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) was last revised, an
entirely new section was added to address technology issues (i.e., Section H: Distance Counseling,
Technology, and Social Media). Many other standards related to technology issues are found
throughout the 2014 Code.
The introduction to Section H of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), which is devoted
to ethical issues related to technology, states that counselors, whether or not they want to,
must adapt: “Counselors actively attempt to understand the evolving nature of the profession
with regard to distance counseling, technology, and social media and how such resources may
be used to better serve their clients. Counselors strive to become knowledgeable about these
resources.” Standard H.1.a. continues, “Counselors who engage in the use of distance counsel-
ing, technology, and/or social media develop knowledge and skills regarding related technical,
ethical and legal considerations (e.g., special certifications, additional course work).” So, the
Code of Ethics requires that counselors actively attempt to understand the new issues related to
technology in counseling, and further, that if they engage in the use of technology, they develop
knowledge and skills for doing so.
In the following discussion, we identify a number of areas in which technology is having an
impact on the counseling process, and we provide guidelines for ensuring that the privacy of clients
is protected. In addition, counselors’ personal and professional use of technology is reviewed in
relation to ethical and legal obligations.
Client Use of Technology
Clients use technology in numerous ways of which counselors need to be aware. Clients go online
to use various types of social media and entertainment technology and to engage in self-monitoring
and self-improvement, all without counselor supervision.
SOCIAL MEDIA 	The 	Code 	of 	Ethics 	(ACA, 	2014) 	Glossary 	defines 	social 	media 	as
“ technology-based forms of communication of ideas, beliefs, personal histories, etc. (e.g., social
networking sites, blogs).” Social media have been categorized by a number of experts, without
consensus regarding what is included in social media (Boundless, 2014; Grahl, 2014; White, 2014).
Grahl (2014) has listed six types of social media: (1) social networks, (2) bookmarking sites,
(3) social news, (4) media sharing, (5) microblogging, and (6) blog comments and forums. These
categories are not discrete, and sometimes they overlap in content and function.
• Social networks allow you to connect with other people and usually include a user’s profile
and various ways to interact with other users. The most popular social networks are Facebook,
X (formerly Twitter), Instagram, WhatsApp, TikTok, and Snapchat.
• Bookmarking sites offer services that allow you to save, organize, and manage links to websites
and resources on the internet. The most popular bookmarking sites are X (formerly Twitter),
Pinterest, Pocket, Google Bookmarks, and Mix (previously StumbleUpon).

-- 283 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	261
• Social news includes services people use to post various news items or links to articles. Users
then vote, and the items receiving the most votes are displayed the most prominently. The most
popular social news sites are Reddit, Digg, and Propeller.
• Media sharing allows users to upload and share media, including photos and videos. The most
popular media sharing sites are Facebook, YouTube, and WhatsApp.
• Microblogging is characterized by short updates that are sent to those who subscribe.
The most popular microblogging sites are X (formerly Twitter), Tumblr, Mastodon, and
LinkedIn.
• Forums allow members to post messages that are available to other members. Blog comments
are similar, except that they are attached to blogs and include discussions about the blog. There
are too many popular blogs and forums to identify the most popular ones.
Despite the lack of consensus about what is included in social media, everyone agrees that it is
very popular and that people of all ages are involved in social media in a variety of formats. Client use
of social media is a pressing concern for school counselors (Casares & Binkley, 2022; Giordano et al.,
2022; Mullen et al., 2014) and child and adolescent counselors. As social media began to be devel-
oped, some counselors were unsure as to how to respond to their clients’ posts. Counselors questioned
whether they had an obligation to view what their clients were posting or were not supposed to pry into
their clients’ social media posts. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) takes the position that “Counselors
respect the privacy of their clients’ presence on social media unless given consent to view such infor-
mation” (ACA, 2014, §H.6.c.). As a result of this standard, it generally is not appropriate for coun-
selors to view posts made by their clients. If clients give their permission for their counselors to view
their social media posts, however, counselors may look at them. Even if counselors have been granted
permission by their clients to view their social media posts, doing so could lead to liability problems. If
counselors view their clients’ social media posts and see that a minor is engaging in behaviors that are
concerning, the counselor might have a responsibility to notify their parents or guardians.
Many of the problems that clients now bring to counseling are directly related to the phenom-
enon of social media. A few of these problems include social media addiction, the fear of missing
out (FOMO), social isolation, cyberbullying, sexting, and identity theft.
Social media addiction or digital addiction occurs when the personal and professional lives of
individuals are negatively affected because they cannot stay away from social media sites (Didelot
et al., 2012; Griffiths, 2013). Social media use has been directly related to social isolation (Primack
et al., 2017), reduced productivity, unhealthy social relationships, and reduced life satisfaction (Sun
& Zhang, 2021). Hormes et al. (2014) concluded, in a study of undergraduate students, that the use
of social networking sites is potentially addictive. Carlisle et al. (2016) have suggested that internet
addiction is a process addiction, or a compulsive behavior that targets a particular activity (such as
gambling or binge eating). Chibbaro et al. (2019) indicated that counselors need to be able to iden-
tify young people who have developed digital addiction. They noted that the signs and symptoms of
individuals who have digital addiction include loss of control over time, cravings for engagement,
and social problems. Young (2023) has developed an instrument to help assess internet addiction
and has identified these symptoms: neglecting friends and family; losing sleep to stay online; feel-
ing ashamed, anxious, or depressed as a result of online behavior; backaches, headaches, or carpal
tunnel syndrome; and withdrawing from social or pleasurable activities. Researchers are continuing
to investigate how social media addiction develops so that prevention approaches can be developed
(Sun & Zhang, 2021).
Younger clients who have been using technology their entire lives are sometimes referred
to as digital natives (Gallo et al., 2016). Some adults may not have heard of FOMO, but
youngsters have (Blackwell et al., 2017; White, 2013). FOMO, the fear of missing out, occurs

-- 284 of 593 --

262 	Section 2 • Issues
when people are anxious because they believe everyone else is having more fun than they are
(Wortham, 2011). A result of FOMO is people wanting to stay continually connected to those
they know and monitoring what others are doing (Fioravanti et al., 2021; Gori et al., 2023).
Results of studies indicate that those in the age range from 18 to 30 have the highest rates of
FOMO. Researchers at universities in England (University of Essex, 2013) and the United States
have developed a test that allows individuals to determine the extent to which FOMO negatively
affects their ability to enjoy what they are doing rather than worry about what others are up to
(Przybylski et al., 2013).
Social networking sites such as Facebook have been identified as causing social isolation (Parigi
& Henson, 2014). However, Grieve et al. (2013), after completing two studies on the topic, concluded
that Facebook use could lead to developing and maintaining relationships and to positive psychologi-
cal outcomes. Further research is needed to determine the effects, both positive and negative, of cli-
ents’ use of Facebook.
CYBERBULLYING 	Cyberbullying has been identified as a problem that some clients bring to coun-
seling sessions (Burnham et al., 2011; Florang, 2020; Güllü et al., 2023; Kowalski et al., 2014;
Lanzillo, 2021; Olenik-Shemesh et al., 2012; McGuckin et al., 2013; Wright, 2012). Florang (2020)
has suggested that past mistakes and misconceptions have hindered efforts to prevent cyberbully-
ing. Perpetrators of cyberbullying have been found to be deterred more by the threat of punishment
from their parents and the school and less by the threat of punishment from the police (Patchin &
Hinduja, 2018). Helping youngsters understand that adults need to know when they are being bul-
lied is important in helping victims. According to Olenik-Shemesh et al. (2012), victims of cyber-
bullying often feel hopeless and are reluctant to report the abuse because they fear their parents
will take away their access to social media. Florang (2020) has advised administrators and parents
to avoid minimizing the impact cyberbullying has on victims, stop punishing victims by taking
away their privileges and freedom, and teach them the skills necessary to overcome cyberbully-
ing. After investigating the bullying policies on nine social media platforms, Tinstman et al. (2019)
concluded that the terms used vary and are unclear, the language used was punitive and negative,
cultural awareness was limited to anti-discrimination, and mental health
concerns were addressed but seldom associated with cyberbullying.
SEXTING 	An area of concern that has emerged for adolescent prob-
lems related to technology is the practice of sexting, which involves
sending sexual messages or images through text messaging (Ibtisam,
2017; Kosenko, 2017; McEachern et al., 2012), along with sextortion.
Sextortion has been defined by O’Malley and Holt (2022)
as a threat to distribute intimate, sexual materials unless a victim
agrees to some type of demand such as paying money. The prac-
tice of youth sexting and sextortion has been increasing over time
(Mori, 2022). After analyzing 39 studies of youth under the age of 18,
Madigan et al. (2018) reported that 14.8% had sent sexts and 27.4%
had received sexts. In addition, 12% of the young people studied had
forwarded sexts without the consent of the persons who had originally
posted them. Utilizing a national sample of adolescents between 12 and
17 years old, Giordano et al. (2022) found that approximately 53% had
seen pornography, almost 15% had sent a sext, and 24.3% had received

-- 285 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	263
a sext. There is thus a need to provide youngsters with information about the legal consequences
of sexting and advice about what to do if they receive a sexting image (Mitchell et al., 2012; Wolfe
et al., 2014). Lunceford (2011) observed that despite the highly publicized suicides that have
occurred as a result of sexting, teenagers seem to be unaware of the potential for embarrassment and
humiliation when sexts are shared with unintended viewers or even posted on the internet.
VIRTUAL COUNSELING
The traditional process for counseling involves a counselor and one or more clients meeting face-to-face
in a professional office. When the internet came into existence, some counselors began offering vir-
tual counseling. After the COVID-19 pandemic arrived, almost all counseling services were delivered
virtually through compressed video, and today clients can find virtual counseling services easily if
they prefer that approach over meeting in person with counselors. In addition to virtual counseling,
counseling is being provided through telephone calls (Dadfar & Lester, 2021; Rowen et al., 2022);
synchronous online interaction, better known as ChatGPT (Dowling & Richwood, 2013); and text
messages and email exchanges (Fang et al., 2018; Nieuwboer et al., 2015).
A growing number of telehealth platforms, also known as practice management software,
afford counselors a range of features for delivering virtual counseling services to clients. Popular
platforms include Doxy.me, SimplePractice, thera-LINK, TheraPlatform, and TherapyNotes. When
selecting a platform, counselors should identify their essential technology needs and consider the
suitability of various platforms for serving the broadest range of clients. Some other important con-
siderations include monthly cost, ease of use for client and clinician, BAA- and HIPAA-compliance,
functionality for individual and multi-person sessions, dependability of technology and customer
service, and optional features such as electronic session notes, scheduling, billing and payment
processing, and secure file sharing.
10-1 The Case of Abby
Abby specializes in counseling individuals who have experienced the death of a twin brother
or sister after reaching adulthood. Abby has written many popular magazine articles about her
work and has appeared on national television talk shows. She lives in a small town. She has been
getting many requests from all over the United States to counsel clients who have lost an adult
twin brother or sister. Abby has been counseling clients locally using Zoom since the COVID-19
pandemic began, but she has never counseled anyone from out of state. She now wants to offer
virtual counseling services for a fee to clients who do not live in her state.
• What are some of the ethical and legal considerations Abby should address before begin-
ning to offer virtual counseling services to out-of-state clients?
Discussion: First, Abby should be licensed for independent private counseling practice in the
state in which she lives. In addition, she should investigate state laws and regulations in the
states in which potential clients whom she wishes to serve are located to determine if she is
eligible to offer residents counseling services without being licensed in that state. Most states
require that counselors be licensed to practice in that state to offer counseling services to
residents of the state or that counselors meet exceptions that have been created in licensure

-- 286 of 593 --

264 	Section 2 • Issues
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) includes a number of standards related to providing virtual
counseling to clients. To begin, counselors must ensure that clients understand that they have a choice
and do not have to engage in virtual counseling if they prefer not to (ACA, 2014, §H.2.a.). This stan-
dard also requires that counselors allow clients to determine whether they are willing to use social
media or technology within the counseling process. During the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown
period, many clients were not able to choose between virtual counseling and in-person counseling
because in-person counseling was suspended. Today, clients still may have to accept virtual counseling
because that is the only option offered. This standard requiring that clients be given a choice between
in-person and virtual counseling most likely will be revised when the ACA Code of Ethics is updated.
Informed Consent
When virtual counseling, social media, or other types of technology are used in counseling, the informed
consent obtained from clients must go beyond the typical requirements and must include, according
to the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), the following elements: “distance counseling credentials, physi-
cal location of practice, and contact information; risks and benefits of engaging in the use of distance
counseling, technology, and/or social media; possibility of technology failure and alternate methods of
service delivery; anticipated response time; emergency procedures to follow when the counselor is not
available; time zone differences; cultural and/or language differences that may affect delivery of ser-
vices; possible denial of insurance benefits; and social media policy” (ACA, 2014, §H.2.a.).
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) also contains a provision that assumes that electronic records
are less secure than paper records. Standard H.2.b. states, “Counselors acknowledge the limitations
of maintaining the confidentiality of electronic records and transmissions. They inform clients that
individuals might have authorized or unauthorized access to such records or transmissions (e.g., col-
leagues, supervisors, employees, information technologists).” It is possible for electronic records to
be accessed by unauthorized persons, but counselors who use standard precautions such as encrypted
communications and password-protected records storage will be able to keep their clients’ privacy
board rules. An example of one narrow exception is the rule in Ohio that allows counselors
licensed out of state to provide counseling services to Ohio residents for a short period of time
(https://cswmft.ohio.gov/). As more states pass statutes to participate in the interstate coun-
seling compacts, the problem of providing counseling to clients across state lines will lessen.
However, Abby probably will have to restrict her practice to clients living in her state unless she
is willing to become licensed as a counselor in other states as well.
It will be important for Abby to determine whether her present professional liability insur-
ance policy covers virtual counseling activities. If not, she should obtain a policy that does. Abby
should also review all of the virtual counseling standards in the 2014 ACA Code of Ethics to
ensure that she is practicing in an ethical manner. These standards are discussed in detail later
in this chapter. Finally, Abby should consider taking continuing education workshops or courses
that focus specifically on virtual counseling to increase her awareness of the issues and to gain
skills in that area. To increase her credibility in this new area of practice, she should consider
earning the Board Certified-TeleMental Health Provider (BC-TMH) credential from the Center for
Credentialing and Education (www.cce-global.org), an affiliate of the NBCC (www.nbcc.org). For
best practice, and prior to accepting virtual counseling clients, it would be wise for Abby to seek
clinical supervision from an experienced virtual counselor.

-- 287 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	265
secure to the extent possible. Even when only in-person counseling took place and records were kept
on paper, client privacy could never be 100% guaranteed by counselors. Counselors are expected
only to take reasonable measures to protect client privacy.
Despite a number of concerns regarding virtual counseling that are discussed later in this
chapter, ever since the COVID-19 pandemic, the practice has become an accepted approach to
counseling in the United States. Training in virtual counseling is now required by some state licen-
sure boards such as Louisiana’s (https://www.lpcboard.org/), and virtual counseling training pro-
grams are readily available to counselors. NBCC (2018), through the Center for Credentialing and
Education, offers the Board Certified-TeleMental Health Provider (BC-TMH) credential for coun-
selors who wish to demonstrate their skills in this particular area of counseling (https://www.cce-
global.org/credentialing/bctmh).
Advantages of Virtual Counseling
Virtual counseling presents several advantages compared to face-to-face counseling in the same
physical space. These advantages include: (a) increased accessibility of services for those who would
otherwise find it difficult to receive services, such as low-income clients; elderly persons whose
mobility is limited; individuals who are chronically ill or severely physically disabled; rural or iso-
lated individuals; and clients who suffer from agoraphobia, social phobia, extreme introversion, or
serious physical illnesses; (b) perceived anonymity may decrease client anxiety, thus encouraging
people to ask for help and increasing the extent to which clients are willing to share intimate issues;
(c) greater freedom in scheduling; (d) a reduction in lost work time and travel time for clients; and
(e) facilitation of improved preparation by allowing better choice of written words over spoken ones
(Bouchard et al., 2000; Haberstroh et al., 2007, 2014; Hamburger & Ben-Artzi, 2000; Heinlen et al.,
2003; Kiriakaki et al., 2022; Lawson et al., 2022; Lee, 2010; Lin et al., 2022; National Alliance on
Mental Illness, 2014; Reeves, 2011; Rummell & Joyce, 2010; Schultze, 2006; Shaw & Shaw, 2006).
After reviewing the results of numerous surveys completed after the COVID-19 epidemic
began, Moreno et al. (2020) concluded that the general public is experiencing increased symptoms
of depression, anxiety, and stress. These symptoms are attributed to stressors including life disrup-
tion, fear of illness, and fear of negative economic effects. According to Egede et al. (2020), impor-
tant challenges in the United States since COVID-19 have been slow implementation of telemental
health services and state licensing laws that forbid practitioners from servicing clients across state
lines. These laws in most states were lifted during the pandemic, and there is a call to make changes
permanent that would give access to virtual counseling services to all citizens.
Several researchers have studied clients’ reactions and attitudes toward virtual counseling.
Some scholars have noted positive responses by clients to virtual counseling services (Cook &
Doyle, 2002; Day & Schneider, 2002; Frye et al., 2022). Manhal-Baugus (2001) reported that 90%
of clients surveyed believed that their online therapists had been helpful to them. Lee et al. (2023)
found that clients in a Midwest community counseling center rated virtual counseling favorably
when they were able to apply counseling sessions to real-life circumstances and had frequent coun-
seling sessions, and when they perceived that their counselor had skills that helped them in their sit-
uations. Scott et al. (2022) found that persons with depression reported no difference in satisfaction
between virtual counseling and face-to-face immediately post-treatment, or after 3 or 12 months,
and Lee et al. (2023) concluded that virtual counseling may be a viable alternative for persons
with depression. Reese et al. (2006) found that 58% of 186 survey respondents who had received
both virtual counseling and physically present, face-to-face counseling preferred virtual counsel-
ing. Further, 96% of their respondents said they would seek virtual counseling again, whereas only
63.1% said they would seek face-to-face counseling in the future. The results of this study suggest

-- 288 of 593 --

266 	Section 2 • Issues
that some clients prefer virtual counseling over face-to-face counseling. Other researchers have
found that although clients were satisfied with virtual counseling, they preferred face-to-face coun-
seling (Leibert et al., 2006; Rochlen et al., 2004).
In addition to client satisfaction research, outcome research is beginning to demonstrate the
clinical effectiveness of virtual counseling (e.g., Barak et al., 2008; Griffiths & Christensen, 2006;
Labardee, 2009; Richards & Vigano, 2013). Results of studies suggest that virtual counseling is as
effective as in-person counseling. Studies have also concluded that virtual counseling is effective
in counseling combat veterans (Brief et al., 2018); treating persons with depression (Königbauer
et al., 2017); counseling persons with binge-eating problems (Rom et al., 2022); treating individuals
with substance use disorders (Sistad et al., 2023); and group counseling using dialectical behavior
therapy (Bean et al., 2022). Gerton et al. (2023) found that clients who transitioned from in-person
counseling to virtual counseling fared well.
Limitations and Boundaries
In the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), §H.4. focuses on distance counseling relationships—now com-
monly called virtual counseling relationships—that are delivered through the use of technology
applications. These applications are listed as including, but not being limited to, “computer hard-
ware and/or software, telephones and applications, social media and internet-based applications
and other audio and/or video communication, or data storage devices or media.” This section of the
2014 Code gives counselors guidelines related to boundaries, the ability of clients to use technology,
the effectiveness of technology services rendered, access to services, and communication differ-
ences when using technology.
Standard H.4.b. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to “discuss and estab-
lish professional boundaries with clients regarding the appropriate use and/or application of tech-
nology and the limitations of its use within the counseling relationship (e.g., lack of confidentiality,
times when not appropriate to use).” It would appear that the boundaries to which this standard is
referring might include setting limits on when clients may or may not communicate by email mes-
sages or texts, for example.
Counselors are required to make reasonable efforts to ensure that clients with whom they use
technology understand how to use it and have the capacity to use it (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics,
§H.4.c.). This standard requires that counselors “follow up with clients to correct possible mis-
conceptions, discover appropriate use, and assess subsequent steps.” Counselors must also provide
information regarding gaining access to technology applications when they are being utilized in the
counseling relationships.
When counselors or clients determine that virtual counseling services are not effective,
§H.4.d. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) requires that “counselors consider delivering services
face-to-face. If the counselor is not able to provide face-to-face services (e.g., lives in another state),
the counselor assists the client in identifying appropriate services.” This section of the ACA Code
of Ethics needs to be updated. During the lockdown period of the COVID-19 pandemic, no face-to-
face counseling services were available, and today face-to-face counseling services may be difficult
to locate or may not be available to some clients.
Standard H.4.f. (ACA, 2014) requires that counselors warn clients about possible misunder-
standings when virtual counseling is being utilized. This standard states, “Counselors consider the
differences between face-to-face and electronic communication (nonverbal and verbal cues) and
how these may affect the counseling process. Counselors educate clients on how to prevent and
address potential misunderstandings arising from the lack of visual cues and voice intonations when
communicating electronically.”

-- 289 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	267
The virtual counseling provisions of the 2014 ACA Code of Ethics provide ethical guidelines
for practice. However, there are many issues in virtual counseling that are unresolved and are being
discussed in the literature. A legal question exists as to where virtual counseling takes place: in the
location of the counselor, the location of the client, or both locations. Which laws govern the counsel-
ing process related to issues such as reporting abuse is another question. Because virtual counseling
is still relatively new, these questions will not be resolved until lawsuits are filed for cases in which
virtual counseling was used. Counselors who provide virtual counseling services need to ensure that
their professional liability insurance provides coverage for virtual counseling (Reeves, 2011).
Counselors who consider offering counseling services over the internet should ensure that
they are not violating state laws (in the state of the counselor or of the client) that require counsel-
ors to be licensed. Standard H.1.b. (ACA, 2014) provides this guidance regarding following legal
requirements when using technology in counseling: “Counselors who engage in the use of distance
counseling, technology, and social media within their counseling practice understand that they may
be subject to laws and regulations of both the counselor’s practicing location and the client’s place
of residence. Counselors ensure that their clients are aware of pertinent legal rights and limitations
governing the practice of counseling across state lines or international boundaries.”
A Rapidly Changing Environment
A potential problem with virtual counseling is related to the fact that the field is changing so rapidly.
The pace of change will make it difficult for counselors to maintain a full measure of competence
in its use. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Trepal et al. (2007) suggested that counselor educa-
tors prepare counselors to provide virtual counseling because it had become so accepted in society.
Since the pandemic, all counselor education programs are preparing counselors to provide virtual
counseling services because that type of training is essential. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014,
§H.1.a.) says, “Counselors who engage in the use of distance counseling, technology, and/or social
media develop knowledge and skills regarding related technical, ethical, and legal considerations
(e.g., special certifications, additional course work).”
Although guidelines for the use of technology in health and mental health are proliferating,
not all guidelines are helpful to counseling practitioners. Many guidelines related to the use of
technology in counseling overlap and are repetitive. For example, Anvari et al. (2023) reviewed
60 existing guidelines for the provision of virtual medical care. About half of the guidelines were
published after the COVID-19 pandemic began. Most of the guidelines (92%) specified the prac-
tice area in which their guidelines applied. Many of the guidelines addressed confidentiality issues,
technology requirements, and patient consent. The researchers concluded that the quality of the
published guidelines was poor. Anvari et al. concluded that best practices for telemedicine include
paying attention to confidentiality, patient consent, preparation before a visit, and clear patient
communication. The review of virtual medical care completed by Anvari et al. (2023) provides
some insight into similar guidelines that are being published regarding virtual counseling in that
guidelines for the use of virtual counseling that will be developed in the future also need to be as
client-focused as possible.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) includes a section on the use of technology in counseling
entitled, “Section H: Distance Counseling, Technology, and Social Media.” However, since this
code was adopted in 2014, the COVID-19 pandemic occurred and the use of technology in coun-
seling has exploded, which has necessitated the development of additional recommendations. A
number of professional associations, certification bodies, and other entities have developed guide-
lines for the use of technology in mental health counseling. Figure 10-1 lists some of the docu-
ments that are providing guidance to counselors in their use of technology.

-- 290 of 593 --

268 	Section 2 • Issues
Title of Guidelines & Date
Adopted or Updated
Entity & Link 	Description
Social Media: 10 Tips for
Professional Counselors
(date not available)
American Counseling Association
(ACA)
https://www.counseling.org/
Suggestions for counselors
who post on social media
to help them prevent
ethical problems.
NBCC Policy Regarding
the Provision of Virtual
Professional Services
(February 6, 2016)
National Board for Certified
Counselors (NBCC)
https://www.nbcc.org/
A list of requirements for
counselors who are
certified by NBCC when
they provide virtual
professional services.
Recommendations for
the Use of Technology
Assisted Counseling for
Clinical Mental Health
Counselors: AMHCA
White Paper Series
(date not available)
American Mental Health
Counselors Association (AMHCA)
https://www.amhca.org/home
Twelve recommendations
for counselors who use
technology-assisted
counseling.
The School Counselor and
Virtual School Counseling
(2017)
American School Counselor
Association (ASCA)
https://www.schoolcounselor.
org/
This ASCA position paper
lists situations in which
virtual services might
be offered and provides
appropriate roles for
school counselors in
delivering services to
students.
Guidelines for the Practice
of Telepsychology
(2013)
American Psychological
Association (ACA)
https://www.apa.org/
Guidelines that address
eight areas, including
security and transmission of
data and information and
interjurisdictional practice.
Technology and the Future
of Mental Health Treatment
(April 2021)
National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH)
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/
Focuses on the pros and
cons of mental health
apps.
Practice Guidelines for
Telemental Health with
Children and Adolescents
March, 2017)
American Telemedicine
Association (ATA)
https://www.americantelemed.
org/
A 46-page document that
includes guidelines for
the practice of telemental
health with youth.
Ethical Use of Social
Networking Technologies
in Career Services
(2015)
National Career Development
Association (NCDA)
https://ncda.org
Includes benefits,
challenges, and ethical
issues related to social
networking technologies
and provides strategies
and recommendations for
ethical practice.
FIGURE 10-1 Published guidelines for technology use by counselors

-- 291 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	269
With virtual counseling, there is no reliable method of regulating the services offered, of ensuring
the competence of the providers, or of protecting consumers from ill-advised internet-based services
(International Society for Mental Health Online, 2008; Peterson et al., 2007; Shaw & Shaw, 2006).
On the other hand, advances are being made in regulating virtual counseling services delivered across
state lines. The Telehealth Certification Institute (https://www.telementalhealthtraining.com/), a private
company that delivers telehealth training and consultation services, offers a website where counselors
can determine whether a particular state has specific regulations on telemental health services, laws
regulating insurance reimbursement, or provisions for out-of-state counselors to practice in that state.
See https://telementalhealthtraining.com/states-rules-and-regulations.
Despite the possible advantages of virtual counseling and the prevalence of its use (Lee et al.,
2023), some mental health professionals believe that virtual counseling services have multiplied
more quickly than the evidence that such services are safe or effective (Welfel, 2016). A number of
concerns have been raised (Froehlich, 2023; Kiriakaki, 2022; Lawson et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022),
including: (a) the possibility exists that counselors may operate from erroneous assumptions due
to the absence of visual and auditory cues; (b) lack of security of communications could lead to
breaches of confidentiality; (c) a relationship-building human presence between counselor and cli-
ent is lacking; (d) issues that are interpersonal in nature cannot be addressed effectively using this
medium; (e) counselors may not be able to discern when a client’s condition poses a threat to self
or others; (f) counselors may find it difficult to determine an appropriate fee structure for virtual
counseling; (g) the health of counselors may suffer; and (h) protecting clients from incompetent or
unqualified virtual counselors may be difficult. Disadvantages to virtual counseling from the client’s
perspective include the absence of personal warmth (Leibert et al., 2006), frustration with the pace
of online counseling, and problems with using the technology (Haberstroh et al., 2007).
Whether clients’ health insurance providers reimburse for virtual counseling services is an
important consideration. Despite problems obtaining insurance reimbursement prior to the COVID-19
Title of Guidelines & Date
Adopted or Updated
Entity & Link 	Description
Suggested Principles for
the Online Provision of
Mental Health Services
(2000)
International Society for Mental
Health Online (ISMHO)
https://ismho.org/
These principles list
suggested benefits and
potential risks of online
mental health services,
counselor responsibilities,
and emergency
procedures.
ACES Guidelines for
Online Learning in
Counselor Education
(May, 2017)
Association for Counselor
Education and Supervision
(ACES)
https://acesonline.net/
These guidelines include
sections on course quality,
faculty qualifications, and
ethics.
Telehealth for the Treatment
of Serious Mental Illness and
Substance Use Disorders
(2021)
Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA)
https://www.samhsa.gov/
This 70-page document
summarizes research on tele-
health related to
treating substance abuse
and mental health disorders.
FIGURE 10-1 (continued)

-- 292 of 593 --

270 	Section 2 • Issues
pandemic, Foley and Lardner, LLP (2014) reported that health care providers were actively pursu-
ing virtual medical practices, which they term telemedicine, because they see that reimbursement
will be forthcoming. Before the pandemic, Behavioral Health Innovation (2014) reported that reim-
bursement of virtual counseling had increased dramatically. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, health
care companies have relaxed restrictions on reimbursing patients and clients for medical and mental
health care services delivered virtually. In telemedicine, the legal system in the United States in areas
such as state licensure and malpractice lags behind the technology that is available to deliver medi-
cal services (Brous, 2016). Legal issues related to the delivery of virtual counseling most likely will
emerge first in the practice of telemedicine. Parimbelli et al. (2018) have provided guidelines for
avoiding legal problems in telemedicine, which include compliance with existing regulations.
COUNSELOR USE OF TECHNOLOGY
In addition to virtual counseling, most counselors use technology in rendering counseling and clini-
cal supervision services. Counselors also might send clients or supervisees to the internet to find
information or might offer virtual clinical supervision services to supervisees.
During the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, counselors exclusively used technology in teach-
ing, providing clinical supervision, communicating with clients, communicating with consultants,
and keeping records. Despite the worst of the pandemic having ended, counselor use of technology
has continued to expand. In addition, some counselors use social media as a part of their practices,
and others use technology to help clients monitor their behavior.
Using the Internet to Educate Clients
Counselors sometimes ask clients to read online materials relevant to the issues they are discussing
in counseling. The explosion of information that is available over the internet is phenomenal.
Counselors who send their clients or supervisees to the internet for information must understand
the nature of the materials found there (Wu et al., 2022). First, sites on the internet are not monitored
for content or quality. As a result, clients must be cautioned to keep in mind that what they are reading
or reviewing may not be accurate or helpful to them. In addition, sites that counselors have reviewed
can be changed and may be different by the time they are seen by clients. Therefore, counselors who
use the internet to educate their clients should always review beforehand any materials that clients will
be reading to ensure the materials’ accuracy and professionalism (Casares & Binkley, 2021).
Communicating with Clients
Traditionally, counselors had little or no communication with clients between counseling sessions.
Clients arrived at their counselor’s office and met face-to-face with the counselor for 50 minutes,
left, and went back the next week. In a typical counseling agency, any communication regarding
setting or changing appointments, paying fees, or filing necessary forms was completed by an office
manager. With the advent of technology and due to the COVID-19 pandemic, counselors—much
like physicians and other health care providers—are sometimes interacting differently with their
clients today, often through email messages or texts (Norcross et al., 2022; Sude, 2013).
Many contemporary clients prefer to schedule and change appointments through websites or
by using text or email messages. Counselors and their assistants may request insurance information
from clients through email messages. Discussions regarding fee payments may take place by email
or text messages. Cepelewicz (2014) and Tigertext (2014) have cautioned that texts must be secure
in order to protect the health records of patients when health care providers text or email patients.

-- 293 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	271
Even though it is controversial, some counselors communicate with their clients regard-
ing their treatment plans or daily coping strategies between appointments using text or email
messages. Establishing and maintaining appropriate personal boundaries with clients could
become a problem if counselors allow such communications to take place. It is thus important
that counselors clearly outline the purpose and parameters of text and email correspondence in
their Professional Disclosure Statements. This written document provides a starting point for
establishing appropriate communication and, when necessary, a reference point for reestablishing
clinical boundaries.
When any communication with clients takes place, counselors must ensure that the means of
communication is secure. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §H.2.d.) states, “Counselors use cur-
rent encryption standards within their websites and/or technology-based communications that meet
applicable legal requirements. Counselors take reasonable precautions to ensure the confidentiality
of information transmitted through any electronic means.” This standard places the burden on coun-
selors who use communication technology to ensure that their clients’ privacy is not compromised.
Standard H.2.c. requires that “counselors inform clients about the inherent limits of confidentiality
when using technology.”
Taking emergency calls or texts from clients is a practice that could lead to liability for coun-
selors. If an agency employing a counselor has emergency services, clients should be directed to
contact the emergency telephone numbers if needed. When no emergency services are available in
a counselor’s private practice or agency, clients should be informed in writing as to what to do in an
emergency. Generally, the best procedure is to have the client contact a hospital emergency room
or community emergency service. If counselors allow clients to contact them in emergencies, the
counselors could be held accountable for resulting harm to a client if the counselor does not respond
to telephone calls, telephone messages, or text messages.
Standard H.3. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that counselors who communicate
with clients through technology applications “take steps to verify the client’s identity at the begin-
ning and throughout the therapeutic process. Verification can include, but is not limited to, using
code words, numbers, graphics, or other nondescript identifiers.” When counselors communicate
with consultants or other professionals regarding their clients, §B.3.e. of the Code of Ethics (ACA,
2014) states that “counselors take precautions to ensure the confidentiality of all information trans-
mitted through the use of any medium.”
Telephone Use by Counselors
Although telephone calls are being replaced in society by text messages (Norcross et al., 2022),
some counselors communicate periodically with their clients by telephone. Counselors must be cau-
tious when discussing confidential or privileged information with anyone over a telephone or cell
phone. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) addresses this need for caution, reminding counselors that
they must discuss the private information of clients “only in settings in which they can reasonably
ensure client privacy” (§B.3.c.). A second standard, §B.3.e., advises counselors to “take precautions
to ensure the confidentiality of all information transmitted through the use of any medium.” There
is no way to ensure that the person with whom you are talking over the telephone or cell phone is
the person they claim to be. Also, these conversations can be monitored or intercepted in many ways
without counselors realizing it. As a result of these problems, counselors are advised to be very
careful when discussing confidential information over the telephone. Clients who choose to discuss
personal information over the telephone must be informed about the possibility of interception by
others.

-- 294 of 593 --

272 	Section 2 • Issues
Many counseling offices in community mental health centers, hospitals, schools, private prac-
tices, and other settings use voicemail or answering services to conduct their business. In fact,
because of the high cost of secretarial or reception services, most counseling agencies and counsel-
ors in private practice use voicemail or answering services. Client messages may not be retrieved
immediately, which underscores the importance of ensuring that clients are provided with informa-
tion on whom to contact in an emergency when they try to contact their counselors via voicemail or
any other medium that does not connect directly to a person.
Counselors must strive to protect the privacy of their clients both when receiving messages
and when leaving messages for clients. Counselors who use voicemail or answering services must
ensure that access codes to their messages are not disclosed to unauthorized persons. It is unwise
to write access codes in personal books that could be misplaced or stolen. It is common practice
for counselors to make written notes as they listen to their messages from voicemail or answering
services. Because such written messages to themselves could contain confidential information, they
must be handled as carefully as any other confidential record.
Two important factors should be considered when using voicemail. First, a recording is being
created that will exist until it is erased or destroyed. Second, there is no way to ensure that the
intended person will be the one who retrieves a message that is left, so counselors should not reveal
anything that is confidential when leaving such messages. Because the fact that a person is a coun-
seling client is itself confidential information, counselors must be very cautious when leaving voice
messages for clients.
From a practical perspective, counselors or their assistants often have to reach their clients
by telephone. Appointments sometimes have to be cancelled or rescheduled, clients need to be sent
forms that they must sign either in person or electronically, and other matters come up that need to
be handled by telephone. It is wise for counselors who leave messages for their clients to identify
themselves by name and state their message in such a manner that third persons would not hear any-
thing that the clients would not want them to hear. Remember that clients often have others present
when they retrieve their messages.
Because cell phone conversations are transmitted by airwaves, there is a chance of a conver-
sation on a cell phone being accidentally or purposefully intercepted by an unauthorized person.
In addition, cell phones are carried around wherever individuals go. As a result, persons with cell
phones often have conversations in public places or in their automobiles. When talking on a cell
phone with a client, it is wise to assume that the person is not in a private place.
Counselors also have an ethical obligation to ensure that the staff members in the agency in
which they work are educated regarding proper telephone use. Answering service personnel should
also be trained to protect the confidentiality of messages. Standard B.3.a. of the Code of Ethics
(ACA, 2014) states, “Counselors make every effort to ensure that privacy and confidentiality of
clients are maintained by subordinates.” You should make sure that anyone who works for you is
trained to maintain confidentiality of clients, that their actions are monitored, and that corrective
action is taken when breaches occur.
Electronic Mail Communications
In addition to texting, emailing has become the preferred method of communication by those indi-
viduals who have access to personal computers in their work or home environments. In addition,
written documents, video images, or audio messages may be attached to email messages that are
sent to another person. Email messages seem secure because a password must be used to send or
read them.

-- 295 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	273
10-2 The Case of Amahd
Amahd works as a counselor in a busy community college mental health center. Many of his
clients are very adept at electronic communications. As a result, he encourages clients to send
him email or text messages if they need to schedule or change appointments or need to com-
municate with him between appointments for some reason. Amahd had intended all email or text
communications with clients to be strictly appointment or business related. Recently, however,
several clients have begun to add short personal messages to their email or text notes to him.
Mark, a client Amahd has been counseling for 3 months, has even begun to write long notes to
Amahd about thoughts and feelings Mark has been experiencing between counseling sessions.
Amahd isn’t sure how to handle this situation.
• What problems could you foresee if Amahd allows clients to continue sending him notes
and messages like the ones being sent by Mark?
• What advice would you give Amahd?
Discussion: Amahd might experience several problems if he continues to allow clients to send
him personal notes and messages. Clients might try to reach him in crisis situations, believing they
have instant access at all times to their counselor. Some clients may push personal boundaries and
attempt to continue the counseling relationship by email between sessions. If Amahd does not insist
on his clients using email or text communications appropriately, he could be accused of unprofes-
sional interactions with his clients. He should tell clients that it is acceptable for them to use email
or text messages only for changing appointments or notifying him of an unexpected absence from
a session. He should also include guidelines regarding email and text communications in his written
client agreement and disclosure statement.
A primary advantage of email is that it is free once access to the internet is secured through
a subscription that usually does not involve a service fee. Many employers provide internet access
to their employees. Today, it is common to have free internet access via WiFi at universities, public
places such as libraries and government buildings, coffee shops, and restaurants. Other advantages
to email over other methods of communication are that individuals can retrieve their messages at
their convenience rather than being interrupted by telephone calls; printed copies of messages can
be easily created; and replies to messages can be sent quickly and efficiently.
Disadvantages of email communications, when compared to telephone conversations, are:
• Communication usually is one-way—it is not interactive.
• Each message is recorded electronically in the memory of the sending computer or other device
and perhaps on the server of the email service.
• Communication is not complete until the recipient actually accesses the messages and reads them.
• Once sent, messages cannot be retrieved, although recalls can be requested.
Usually, messages are sent between individuals with periods of time passing between com-
munications. This type of interaction resembles a letter-writing exchange. However, it is possible
to send and receive messages instantly if both persons are on computers, smartphones, or tablets at
the same time. Instant communication by email simulates a conversation and is similar to texting.

-- 296 of 593 --

274 	Section 2 • Issues
• The quick nature of the communication can lead to sending messages that are not well
conceptualized.
• Recipients may misinterpret messages and do not have the benefit of asking for clarification
or of noticing a person’s tone of voice or inflection.
• It is easy to make errors and send messages to the wrong person or to many persons at
once.
• Messages can easily be forwarded to others.
• Messages can be altered before being sent on to another person.
• The ease of using email seems to encourage an informality that may not be well suited for
professional communications.
The use of email can be deceptive. Those who use email type their message and press a but-
ton, and the message disappears. Although it appears to be private between the message sender and
the receiver, in reality there are a number of opportunities for email messages to be intercepted or
read by others.
The primary legal concern for counselors who use email is that a record exists in com-
puters and on servers of every message that is sent or received. Each message can also be
recorded in several computers and retrieved. As a result, an email message creates a record that
is vulnerable to exposure. Although an email message record is secured by the passwords of the
sender and the receiver, it can be retrieved by individuals who operate the computer systems
through which the message is sent. As a result of the many ways in which email messages can
be accessed or compromised, counselors who use email should be extremely cautious about
disclosing confidential information to clients or other professionals in email communications
and should warn their clients about the possibility that their email messages to the counselor
could be compromised, even when email servers are secure. Popular encrypted email services
that counselors can purchase to increase the security/confidentiality of client communications
include ProtonMail, HushMail and Sharefile. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) includes a
number of standards related to informing clients of limitations to privacy, including §§A.2.a.,
A.2.b., and B.1.d.
Counselors sometimes belong to email communication groups. When a message is sent by a
member of the group, it is received by all persons in the group. Counselors should thus understand
that the increased number of individuals receiving such messages increases the possibility that a
message may be sent to others or become public. Also, belonging to
such groups increases the possibility of mistakes in which a private
message intended for a specific individual is sent instantly to a very
large group of people.
Some counselors use listservs and internet-based discussion
groups to communicate and exchange ideas with fellow mental
health professionals. These can be a convenient means to share
information on topics of mutual interest, such as private practice
management or dealing with third-party payers. They can also be a
resource for obtaining case consultations. If you join any of these
discussion groups, remember that you must fully disguise any cli-
ent data you share or, if that is not possible, ensure that you have a
signed release from the client for this purpose. Keep in mind, too,
that you may not know the extent to which any advice you receive is
truly expert (Welfel, 2022).

-- 297 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	275
Testing
Some counselors ask clients to complete tests or checklists online. Standard E of the Code of Ethics
(ACA, 2014) provides guidelines regarding the use of tests in counseling generally.
However, some standards in the Code are specifically related to the use of technology in testing.
Counselors are advised in §E.7.c. to “ensure that technologically administered assessments function
properly and provide clients with accurate results.” In addition, §H.7.d. states, “Unless the assessment
instrument is designed, intended, and validated for self-administration and/or scoring, counselors do
not permit unsupervised use.”
Technology in Teaching
When the COVID-19 lockdown occurred, universities in the United States immediately switched
exclusively to online instruction. Prior to the pandemic, some totally online counseling degree pro-
grams already existed, and most counseling graduate programs were offering some online learning
opportunities for students (Snow & Coker, 2020; Snow et al., 2018). Controversy existed within
the counseling field about the quality or appropriateness of teaching students to be counselors
through online courses, but it was already being done before the pandemic. The lockdown brought
all counseling graduate programs into the online instruction mode despite any reservations faculty
members or students might have had about it. For example, Elliott and Henniger (2020) have
expressed concern that online students may not be adequately prepared to provide services to
clients who might be at risk for suicide. Haddock et al. (2020) compared traditional and online
counselor training programs and concluded that despite different instructional practices than those
that occur in traditional classrooms, research supports online counselor education programs as
effective for skills and professional identity development. Online programs have greater diversity
and have higher numbers of non-traditional and underserved populations, but these programs also
have higher attrition rates. Sheperis et al. (2020a), after interviewing students in online degree
programs, concluded that online counselor education is functional and effective and is preferred
by students who are already working in the field of counseling. Since the worst of the pandemic
has ended, most in-person counseling graduate programs have returned to in-person courses, but
many have retained the online approaches that were instituted during the pandemic or have moved
to a hybrid structure. Sheperis et al. (2020b) have pointed out that counselor educators who teach
online should be concerned about several legal and ethical issues, including vicarious liability,
gatekeeping, licensure laws in the states in which their students live and expect to practice in the
future, cybersecurity, privacy (including federal privacy statues), the need to warn intended victims
of violence, and variations in state ethics requirements for licensed counselors.
Counselors who teach or offer clinical supervision to trainees or other counselors often
use technology. Those who teach use many forms of technology in classrooms, and counsel-
ors who provide clinical supervision sometimes provide virtual supervision and usually use
technology to record sessions with clients for review (Carlisle et al., 2017). Some counselor
educators are now using technology tools including virtual reality, augmented reality, and
360-degree videos (Sacco-Bene et al., 2022). In a review of articles published on online teach-
ing in counselor education, Li and Su (2021) found that few articles have addressed teaching
strategies or best practices and the effectiveness of online counselor education. In addition,
few articles have focused on doctoral online education. Other areas that warrant additional
investigation include selection and retention of students, student learning outcome assess-
ment, student self-care, gatekeeping, international online education, and student use of AI to
produce written assignments.

-- 298 of 593 --

276 	Section 2 • Issues
10-3 The Case of Shaneeka
Shaneeka has been using virtual counseling in her private practice for about 5 years. She and her
clients have been very satisfied with the use of compressed video and audio for client sessions.
Recently, Shaneeka began supervising Marshall for pre-licensure supervision following Marshall’s
completion of his master’s degree in counseling. Shaneeka has been supervising Marshall using
Zoom. Marshall informed Shaneeka that he read on the state licensure board website that only
face-to-face supervision is allowed, and Marshall is now wondering whether his supervision with
Shaneeka by Zoom will be acceptable to the board.
• How should Shaneeka respond to Marshall?
• Is virtual supervision acceptable to state licensure boards?
Discussion: State licensure board prohibitions related to counseling or supervision in modali-
ties other than face-to-face that existed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic may still exist on licen-
sure board websites but may have been lifted or modified since the pandemic began. Shaneeka
should inform Marshall that she will read the materials on the state licensure board website to
see if she is able to determine whether the board’s requirement for face-to-face supervision has
been lifted and the board now allows virtual supervision by Zoom and that she will let Marshall
know, as soon as possible, what she found. In the event Shaneeka cannot determine from read-
ing the website whether virtual supervision via Zoom is acceptable to the board, Shaneeka
should contact the board and ask an administrator whether Zoom supervision is acceptable.
Some state boards require that supervision for licensure occur only in person; however, many
other boards are open to virtual supervision arrangements. It is vital that Shaneeka resolve this
issue to ensure that her supervision sessions with Marshall will count toward the pre-licensure
supervision requirements in the state where they reside.
Technology in Clinical Supervision
Counselors who provide clinical supervision to counselors in training or to counselors who are
working under supervision to gain licensure use technology quite often. Counselors who would like
to provide virtual clinical supervision to supervisees working toward licensure should check state
counselor licensure laws and regulations to determine whether there are any prohibitions against
virtual clinical supervision or any rules related to the use of technology in clinical supervision.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §F.2.c.) requires that counselors who use technology in super-
vision have competency in technology and take precautions to keep client information confidential.
The standard states, “When using technology in supervision, counselor supervisors are competent in
the use of those technologies. Supervisors take the necessary precautions to protect the confidential-
ity of all information transmitted through any electronic means.”
The Introduction to Section F of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) acknowledges that coun-
selor supervisors, trainers, and educators use electronic formats in their work. In §F.7.a., counselor
educators are reminded, “Whether in traditional, hybrid, and/or online formats, counselor educators
conduct counselor education and training programs in an ethical manner and serve as role models
for professional behavior.” According to §F.7.b., counselor educators are expected to be competent
in the use of technology when using it to deliver instruction.

-- 299 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	277
In §F.7.h. of the code, counselor educators are encouraged to use innovative procedures or
techniques (such as the use of technology in supervision), but they are cautioned to explain to super-
visees the potential risks and ethical considerations.
Social Media Use by Counselors
Some professional counselors use social media to advertise their services or
to maintain regular and immediate access to their clients (Birky & Collins,
2011; Méndez-Diaz et al., 2023; Triplett, 2022). When they use social media,
they must ensure that they are not causing problems related to their work as
counselors. Standard H.6.a. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) acknowl-
edges that some counselors use social media themselves and sets the fol-
lowing standard: “In cases where counselors wish to maintain a professional
and personal presence for social media use, separate professional and per-
sonal web pages and profiles are created to clearly distinguish between the
two kinds of virtual presence.” It is important that counselors do not mix
their personal and professional virtual presence if they use social media.
Thompson (2008) has cautioned that counselors who post per-
sonal profile sites may create potential ethical difficulties. Clients
might find the counselor’s profile and try to communicate with the
counselor through the site or add the counselor as a friend, thus blur-
ring professional boundaries. Potentially, clients could learn about aspects of the counselor’s per-
sonal life. Thus, it is vital that counselors keep their personal digital footprint separate from their
professional online presence and be diligent about security controls (Jencius, 2015).
Keller et al. (2010) identified ethical standards associated with the use of profile sites and
offered the following suggestions for ensuring ethical practice: (a) invest the time to ensure that the
information remains accurate when you create a profile page for professional use; (b) list all pro-
fessional licenses and certifications held and provide the links; (c) do not accept clients as friends,
and do not accept current or former friends as clients; (d) set privacy settings to the highest level to
prevent nonprofessional interactions; and (e) establish a method for verifying client identity and for
obtaining informed consent before providing any services.
Counselors who use social media for advertising their services must be careful to proceed in
an ethical manner. In the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §C.3.a.–c.), specific guidelines are provided
regarding advertising in social media. When counselors advertise, they must ensure that whatever
they say is accurate and not deceptive in any way (§C.3.a.). The use of testimonials in advertis-
ing is a touchy matter, and §C.4.b. cautions, “Counselors who use testimonials do not solicit them
from current clients, former clients, or any other persons who may be vulnerable to undue influence.
Counselors discuss with clients the implications of and obtain permission for the use of any testi-
monial.” The Code further advises the following regarding testimonials: “When feasible, counselors
make reasonable efforts to ensure that statements made by others about them or about the counseling
profession are accurate” (§C.4.c.). Another standard (H.6.d.) indicates that counselors must be care-
ful to prevent disclosing clients’ confidential information when counselors use public social media.
Office Security Systems
Many modern offices have security systems designed to protect the individuals who work there.
These security systems can include cameras that film each person who enters the building, guards
who require identification from visitors, or voice systems that require those who wish to enter to
request that a door be unlocked for them. All these measures could compromise the privacy of

-- 300 of 593 --

278 	Section 2 • Issues
a counselor’s client. Counselors who practice in environments where security measures are used
should make efforts to minimize the intrusive nature of these systems. Also, clients should be
informed of security measures being used that may not be readily observable.
Electronic Recordkeeping
Some potential problems of maintaining counseling records electronically may be resolved
as new technologies that increase the security of transmitted messages come into wider use.
Maintaining the confidentiality of client records will continue to be problematic for some time,
however, due to the ease with which unauthorized access can be gained and the unresolved ques-
tions regarding the number of individuals, agencies, and government entities that might make
a case for having a right to access internet databases (Lawley, 2012; Wilkinson & Reinhardt,
2015). See Chapter 6, which discusses records that are kept electronically, including federal
requirements.
Records, once they are created in any form, are never totally secure. It is always possible for
an unauthorized person to gain access to records or for mistakes to occur that cause the privacy of
records to be compromised. Just as files kept on paper can be accessed by unauthorized persons,
records kept electronically can also be seen by others if not kept secure.
Keeping counseling records electronically has become a common practice. Shea et al. (2018)
surveyed school counselors prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and found that only one-third of
them kept electronic notes, but that percentage probably has increased since then. An advantage
of electronic records for counselors is that, by not having to retain hard copies of records, they do
not have to make storage space available or worry about securing physical files and file cabinets.
Disadvantages are that many ways exist to compromise computers and that some counselors are
not yet adept at electronic recordkeeping or are unfamiliar with the computer security measures
that are available.
The preferred method of storing information in agencies and offices today is through elec-
tronic means. File cabinets and paper copies of documents will eventually become obsolete because
computers allow incredible amounts of information to be contained on a storage device. Computers
have made business environments more efficient and cost-effective.
Counselors used to think in terms of locks and keys when they considered methods of keeping
confidential information secure. With so much data being stored on computers in modern counsel-
ing settings, though, it is important that counselors understand the security problems and solutions
associated with keeping information on computers. Cloud computing is a significant advance in
computing that offers convenient storage and ease of access to files from any computer the coun-
selor is using. However, questions remain regarding confidentiality risks and security of client files
as well as whether it is advisable to store client data on a system that the counselor does not own or
control (International Legal Technology Association, 2023).
Access to confidential computer files is one of the first issues to consider. It is important for
counselors to set up their computers so that a password must be used to access sensitive files. One of
the problems with using passwords, however, is the danger that the passwords will become known
to unauthorized persons. Password holders tend to be anxious about the possibility of forgetting
their passwords. As a result, they make notes to themselves with the password on them, and the
notes are sometimes seen by others. Some people have even been known to post their password
directly on their computer. Offices often will change passwords from time to time to help with secu-
rity. But, again, this makes computer users nervous about forgetting their passwords, so they record
them in a way that leads to their disclosure. Counselors who practice in offices where passwords are

-- 301 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	279
used for confidential computer files should be careful not to disclose the passwords to unauthorized
persons and not to record the passwords in places where they might be seen by others. In addition,
counselors should train office personnel about the importance of password security and alert staff
members to the problems that exist in keeping passwords secure.
Steps should be taken to prevent confidential counseling records kept on computers from
being compromised. Listed in Figure 10-2 are some suggestions for counselors who use computers
for their records.
Printing paper copies of documents from confidential computer files can also cause problems.
Printed confidential information should therefore be filed in locked cabinets or destroyed when no
longer needed.
Disposing of confidential computer files is an additional problem area. Some people believe
that when they delete a file in a computer, they have destroyed that information. However, most
deleted computer files can be retrieved by computer experts. Counselors should understand that all
information entered into a computer has the potential to eventually be seen by unauthorized persons
even after the information has been deleted. As when creating any type of record, counselors should
assume that what they have written will someday become public information, despite their best
efforts to keep records confidential or to delete or destroy them.
Client Behavior and Technology
Counselors have only scratched the surface of what is possible in using technology to monitor and
help clients change their behavior. Some very savvy counselors are creating innovative ways to
assist their clients through the use of cutting-edge technology. Some counselors are experimenting
with using ChatGPT to write brief informational materials to share with clients. Counselors will
undoubtedly continue to find creative ways to use AI to serve clients, although they should always
read AI-produced materials carefully for accuracy and edit them if necessary.
FIGURE 10-2 Guidelines for computerized records
1. Try to avoid using a computer to which others have access. If this is not possible, store your records
in a section that only you and other authorized persons may access.
2. Use passwords for accessing the files in the computer. Keep the passwords secure, limit the number
of individuals who know the passwords, and change the passwords periodically.
3. Any time a confidential record is printed from the computer, ensure that it is handled as other con-
fidential materials would be.
4. Avoid placing computers with monitors in public areas where unauthorized persons might acciden-
tally see confidential information.
5. Limit access to computer equipment that is used to enter and retrieve confidential records.
6. Delete computer-stored records on the same basis that traditional records would be destroyed in
the agency or office. Keep in mind, though, that deleted files usually can be retrieved by computer
experts from a computer’s hard drive even after they have been deleted.
7. When information is downloaded from a computer’s hard drive to a storage device or is transferred
electronically, make sure that confidential material is not accidentally included.
8. Be careful when networking a computer used for confidential information. The more computers that
can access information, the greater the chance that confidential information will be compromised.
9. Use a coding system rather than client names on storage device labels so that the client’s identity is
not obvious to anyone who might see the labels.
10. Regularly update virus protection software.
11. Make a backup copy of all files, and keep them in a location that is secure but separate from the originals.

-- 302 of 593 --

280 	Section 2 • Issues
Researchers are investigating using signals from clients that can be tracked electronically to alert
clients themselves or their counselors that they are experiencing mental health problems. For example,
by electronically tracking speech patterns or facial expressions, mental health professionals might be
able to identify clients whose conditions are deteriorating and need assistance with their depression or
bipolar disorder (Ziv, 2014). Cell phone apps that are available are numerous (Lagan & Torous, 2021)
and can do amazing things such as: track mood by asking clients to complete surveys, give tips on
breathing or thinking positively, remind clients to take their medications, or create a game out of a cog-
nitive behavioral change treatment program. A virtual reality program is available for clients who have
body weight and shape concerns (Matsangidou, 2020). However, many clients are not motivated to use
the apps or do not possess enough self-awareness to appreciate their usefulness. Some physiological
changes within clients that clients might not be able to identify within themselves and that are directly
related to their mental health could be tracked with technology. Some examples are increased heart rates
in clients who suffer from panic attacks or muscles tightening as a client becomes anxious or angry.
Haniff (2007) has produced an app for clients who are depressed that presents media designed
to lift a person’s mood. A music program that includes subliminal relaxing music has been used to
block out the noise of everyday living. In addition, a computer game has been created that helps to
determine a client’s triggers for depression.
Coyle et al. (2005) and Merry and Stasiak (2012) have described computer games designed to
provide counseling for adolescents. Young people who are reluctant to talk to counselors can some-
times be convinced to play computer games that are fun, anonymous, and accessible. These games
convey advice about their depression or other mental health issues. A clinical trial with one game has
shown that such games for adolescents are about as effective as face-to-face counseling. Moreover,
researchers have advocated for integrating popular video games into the clinical process as a creative
approach for clients to practice their social skills and explore their concerns (Erickson & Monk,
2018; LaFleur et al., 2018). However, given the increased prevalence of technology-based behavioral
addictions (Giordano et al., 2023), counselors must carefully deliberate about the potential benefits
and drawbacks of utilizing technology with clients (Robinson & Robertson, 2010; Scott et al., 2017).
In today’s sophisticated world of technology, counselors may have a tendency to focus on
complex gadgets when they think about counseling and technology. Muench (2010) has reminded
counselors that some basic technologies are being used regularly to increase access to mental health
care. For example, telephones are being used in rural areas to provide mental health counseling by
connecting clients to counselors who are located thousands of miles away. Internet-based screening
tools and interviews also are helping many people to identify and begin the process of change on their
own. Text messages can remind or encourage clients to avoid negative behaviors or engage in posi-
tive behaviors. Additionally, clinicians are beginning to utilize podcasts as homework assignments
for the purposes of educating clients about pertinent mental health issues and promoting growth and
reflection between sessions (Caoilte et al., 2023; Casares, 2022; Casares & Binkley, 2021).
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to be proficient in the technology used in
counseling relationships (§H.1.a.) and to ensure clients are agreeable to using technology (§H.2.a.).
Thus, many responsibilities come with the use of technology in counseling. One of these responsibilities
is to ensure that new technological interventions have been proven effective through research studies.
Artificial Intelligence in Counseling
Artificial intelligence (AI) basically refers to a computer’s ability to use the large amount of data
stored in it to mimic human responses (Lukpat, 2023). There are many words and phrases in the lit-
erature associated with artificial intelligence, including robotic interactions, deep learning, machine
learning, machine listening, and large language models. All of these terms are associated with a

-- 303 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	281
computer having access to extensive data that are used to answer questions. Despite the increasing use
of artificial intelligence in all areas of society, many are concerned that it could grow out of control.
Through an organization created to reduce artificial intelligence risks, the Center for AI Safety (see
https://www.safe.ai), technology executives have warned that artificial intelligence could pose untold
threats to humanity (Lukpat, 2023).
Arguments in favor of using artificial intelligence in counseling include the abilities to provide
counseling to more populations, including rural clients; to overcome people’s hesitancy to seek mental
health services due to embarrassment or concerns about stigma; to make new and more effective mod-
els of treatment available more quickly; and to save time for mental health professionals (Fiske et al.,
2019; Zhou et al, 2022). The results of a study in Turkey (Aktan et al., 2022) indicated that although
55% of highly educated people preferred artificial intelligence–based psychotherapy, the majority of
those same individuals had more trust that human psychotherapists would respect their privacy. After a
review of 30 studies of robot-assisted counseling published between 2004 and 2020 from 14 countries,
Riches et al. (2021) found that results were positive and indicated positive therapeutic engagement.
The concept of a robot as a counselor interacting with a client is still in its early stages (Singh,
2022), but it offers a possibility that could help counselors assist more clients in the future. For example,
Anisimova et al. (2022) have proposed a robotic artificial psychologist assistant that would allow clients
to interact with a robot. Initial screening for counseling would take place, and the results would later
be used as a follow-up session with a mental health professional. ChatGPT, identified as an artificial
intelligence resource website, was launched in 2022. (See https://ai-pro.org.) It is a free service that
allows users to type in questions and receive responses that are similar to those a human might create.
(ChatGPT can even write stories, poems, and songs.) Hale (2023) reported that users have received
advice about anxiety and other mental health conditions from the website. Some who have used the
service for their emotional concerns have reported good results. However, the service is incapable of
replicating the rapport between counselors and their clients, which research has shown leads to effective
counseling results. Also, computer-generated responses sometimes are inaccurate or wrong.
Some mental health professionals are alarmed that human professionals might someday
be replaced by machines (Satran, 2022; Stade et al., 2023). Sedlakova and Trachsel (2023) have
emphasized that while a machine may simulate a therapeutic conversation with a client, it is impos-
sible for a machine to have a human-like therapeutic interaction with a client.
Most counselors think about artificial intelligence being used to replace human counselors by
allowing clients to receive counseling services from machines. However, by feeding huge amounts
of data and information into a computer, artificial intelligence also can be used to help counselors
improve their skills or predict which clients can benefit most from particular interventions. For
example, artificial intelligence can be used to determine whether counselors are practicing cogni-
tive behavioral therapy using evidence-based approaches (Creed et al., 2022). Counselors can have
their sessions evaluated by artificial intelligence and can be provided with feedback to help them
improve their skills when utilizing cognitive behavioral therapy. And machine learning can be used
to predict which clients will benefit most from particular cognitive behavioral therapy approaches
(Taubitz et al., 2022). Goldberg et al. (2020) have explained how artificial intelligence was used to
help clinicians understand what they were doing and saying, which helped the clinicians create the
necessary critical therapeutic alliance in counseling sessions.
Ethical concerns about the use of artificial intelligence in counseling and mental health
services are being explored in the literature (Fiske et al., 2019; Knox et al., 2023; Stroud et al.,
2023). Bertoncini and Serafim (2023) have suggested that an entirely new vision of ethics needs
to be developed, one in which there is something similar to an ethics code for artificial intelligence
machines in addition to the ethics codes for human professionals that currently exist.

-- 304 of 593 --

282 	Section 2 • Issues
Certainly, counselors will see artificial intelligence applications used more in the near future,
and additional research will help determine how useful, or how dangerous, artificial intelligence is
to the counseling profession. Horn and Weisz (2020) have predicted that artificial intelligence is
not likely to transform psychotherapy research or practice the way it has impacted fields such as
pharmacology and medicine because factors that affect treatment success in psychotherapy are so
different from areas that do not rely on human relationships for success.
Diversity Considerations in the Use of Technology
A major problem with the use of technology in counseling is that technology is not equally avail-
able or evenly distributed across cultures in the United States. Statistics published by the U.S.
Census Bureau (2021) revealed that in 2018, 92% of households in the United States had a least one
type of computer, and 85% had a broadband internet subscription. Households headed by someone
under 35 years of age or having a Black or Latinx householder were more likely to be connected
to the internet only through a smartphone. A total of 99% of households earning $150,000 or more
had some sort of computing device, while only 77% of households making less than $25,000 had
a computing device. Those living in households with low levels of income or education, without
children, and in rural areas were less likely to own computers or have internet access.
Due to this digital divide, not all clients will have access to such services as virtual counseling
or email communications with their counselors. A legitimate concern is that the poor and under-
served will be increasingly left behind as technology in counseling advances (Kennedy & Baker,
2014; Young, 2022). Counselors who use technology in their work with clients should be careful not
to assume that clients have access to or expertise in using computer applications. Some clients with
disabilities may not have access to the assistive devices that would allow them to use technology
that requires the use of senses such as sight, or hearing or the ability to speak.
On the positive side, technology can be of use to counselors who want to increase their multi-
cultural counseling competence. Numerous websites offer information on various cultures that can
be accessed using a search engine. It may be difficult for an individual counselor to assess whether
the information is valid, however. Counselors can also join listservs and discussion groups to gain
understanding of cultures that are different from their own.
Technology undoubtedly will continue to develop at a remarkably rapid pace. Challenges for
the counseling profession will include ensuring equal access, addressing the differences in culture
and learning style that are inherent in technology use, producing outcome research on equitable
ways to utilize technology, and including a cultural lens as we continue to develop and assess the
uses of technology in counseling (Egede et al., 2020; Jencius, 2003; Kiriakaki et al., 2022).
Summary and Key Points
This chapter presented a discussion of technology
and counseling. Advances in technology have had
a significant impact on the practice of counseling.
Although you certainly will want to use as many
forms of technology as you can to maximize your
effectiveness, it is important that you adhere to eth-
ical standards, particularly those in the 2014 ACA
Code of Ethics, Section H: Distance Counseling,
Technology, and Social Media.
It is also important for counselors to be aware
of the ways in which their clients are using social
media and other forms of technology.
• Counselors must be aware of client use of social
media because social media affect clients’ lives

-- 305 of 593 --

Chapter 10 • Technology in Counseling 	283
in significant ways. Counselors must refrain from
looking up, without permission, social media
information posted by their clients.
• Clients use other forms of technology, such as
texting and emailing, that also affect their lives
and their relationships with their counselors.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic, virtual counsel-
ing is now being offered by most counselors. This
development has led to important ethical and legal
challenges.
• Virtual counseling has become the norm since
the COVID-19 pandemic. Counselors who offer
virtual counseling must ensure that clients are
agreeable to its use and are competent to use the
technology. Counselors must also ensure that the
privacy of clients is maintained.
• The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) offers many
useful guidelines to counselors who provide
virtual counseling. Because this version of the
Code was adopted prior to the COVID-19 pan-
demic and the widespread use of virtual coun-
seling, some sections of the Code need to be
updated to reflect current practices in virtual
counseling.
In addition to virtual counseling, counselors are
using technology in other ways, including commu-
nicating with clients using email and texts, moni-
toring client behaviors, and suggesting that clients
use apps to help them with mental health issues they
struggle with. In addition, students in counseling
graduate programs are now frequently being taught
online and supervised virtually.
• Counselors are using technology increasingly,
some in novel and innovative ways.
• Counselors who use the internet to educate clients
must be careful to ensure that clients understand
that not all information on the internet is accurate.
• Communicating with clients using technology
has some risky elements, and counselors must
ensure that they are professional and responsible
when using technology for communication. Even
telephone use by counselors requires caution. In
addition, email exchanges with clients can lead
to problems if clients are given too much latitude.
• Many counselors are using technology for testing,
teaching, and clinical supervision.
• When counselors make personal use of social
media, they must be careful not to mix personal
use with professional use.
• Using technology for recordkeeping has a num-
ber of challenges, but electronic recordkeeping
has become the norm.
• Technology advances are being used by counsel-
ors to monitor client behavior and help clients to
achieve their therapeutic goals.
• Artificial intelligence is being used within the
counseling profession despite the concerns of
some that robots, who cannot establish human
relationships, might be used to provide counsel-
ing services in the future.
• Some client populations may be disadvantaged by
counselors’ increasing reliance on technology.

-- 306 of 593 --

284
11Counseling Children
and Vulnerable Adults
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
11.1 	Describe how counselors need to balance their
ethical obligations to minor clients with parents’
legal rights.
11.2 	Explain how counselors should respond when a
parent involved in a child custody dispute asks
them to appear in court to advocate for that parent.
11.3 	Explain how counselors can balance a child’s
interest in privacy in counseling with their parents’
right to information about their child’s treatment.
11.4 	Explain how counselors have a legal obligation to
report the abuse or neglect of vulnerable adults,
and discuss the role of counselors when asked
to guide physician-assisted suicide decisions for
adults facing imminent death or excruciating pain
with no hope for improvement.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. How do you think legal and ethical
requirements might come into
conflict with each other when
counseling minor clients?
2. How has counseling children
changed since the advent of the
COVID-19 pandemic?
3. How do you think counselors can
be helpful to victims, perpetrators,
and parents in bullying situations?
4. How can a counselor determine
whether an adolescent client’s
risk-taking behaviors present a
sufficiently serious risk for harm
to warrant breaching the minor’s
confidentiality?
5. What is your opinion of laws that
make it a crime for a counselor to
fail to report cases of suspected
abuse of a child, elder, or
vulnerable adult?
We stated in Chapter 1 that legal and ethical requirements
regarding counseling generally do not conflict with one
another. Unfortunately, exceptions to this general rule occur
when counselors provide professional services to minor cli-
ents or vulnerable adults. Counselors who counsel children
and adolescents under the age of 18 or adults who do not
have the legal capacity to care for themselves may be more
likely than any other counselors to experience conflicts
between what they consider to be their ethical or moral obli-
gations and what the law dictates that they do (Salo, 2015).
These conflicts often concern confidentiality of client disclo-
sures made during counseling sessions or parents or guard-
ians making decisions for dependent children or adult clients
with which the clients do not agree. The legal perspective is
that counselors are obligated to parents or guardians when
counseling minor children. Yet counselors believe that their
primary ethical obligations are to their minor clients. This
discrepancy between the legal and the ethical perspectives
causes problems, especially in the area of privacy.

-- 307 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	285
The Code of Ethics (American Counseling Association [ACA], 2014) offers very little guid-
ance that is specific to counseling children (Corr & Balk, 2010); therefore, counselors must rely
heavily on their professional judgment in dealing with ethical dilemmas involving minor clients.
The numerous areas of conflict between ethical and legal requirements further complicate the work
of counselors. In this chapter, we explore these conflicts between law and ethics and suggest ways
to resolve them. Because many of the issues that arise with minor clients also apply when counsel-
ing dependent or vulnerable adults, this chapter includes a discussion about working with these
clients as well. Counselors who provide services to minors and to others who lack legal competency
must pay attention to the legal rights of parents and guardians. In addition, counselors who counsel
clients who may be unable to protect themselves from harm, such as children and vulnerable adults,
must take steps to prevent abuse or neglect of these clients.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Counseling
Children and Vulnerable Adults
Counselors who provide services to children and vulnerable adults have found that COVID-19 has
had a significant impact on their work. Counselors have been creative in delivering counseling ser-
vices virtually. New, virtual counseling approaches that have been successful probably will become
a permanent part of the delivery system of counseling services in the United States. Nonetheless,
many are concerned that the emotional needs of children and vulnerable adults were neglected dur-
ing the pandemic and believe that long-term effects may manifest themselves in years to come.
Most schools in the United States were closed for extended periods of time during the
COVID-19 pandemic. During that time, school counselors did their utmost to provide counseling
services to students as best they could under the circumstances. Teachers and counselors in schools
were asked to continue their work virtually with children who were at home during the pandemic.
Teachers and counselors quickly discovered that younger children cannot easily be engaged virtu-
ally due to their short attention spans and their need for structure. Many counselors in agencies and
private practices who specialize in counseling children found themselves moving back to in-person
counseling sessions as soon as COVID-19 health situations would allow.
Many professionals who counsel vulnerable adults provide services in the clients’ homes.
In-home counseling services ceased altogether at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, and only
slowly did counselors return to visiting homes to provide counseling services to vulnerable adults.
COUNSELING MINOR CLIENTS
Conflicts between law and ethics occasionally arise very clearly in situations where the client is a
minor. One issue that causes tension between law and ethics is whether children should be allowed to
enter into counseling relationships without parental knowledge or consent. Also, every child, regard-
less of age, has a moral right to privacy in the counseling relationship. From a philosophical view-
point, many counselors would argue that children should have the same rights to confidentiality as
adult clients. The legal rights to confidentiality and privilege of minors, however, are more limited.
Basically, counselors have an ethical obligation of privacy to minor clients and a legal obligation to
the parents or legal guardians of those same minor clients to keep their children safe and to protect
the privacy rights of the parents or guardians.
Counselors who provide counseling services to children must understand the legal rights of
parents or guardians and appreciate their ethical obligations to children as well. Balancing these
sometimes-competing interests can be quite challenging (Lazovsky, 2008). Counselors must con-
tend with the issue of children’s access to counseling and with situations in which children may

-- 308 of 593 --

286 	Section 2 • Issues
object to their parents being given confidential information they disclosed in counseling sessions. In
addition, counselors must decide who has the authority to give permission to disclose confidential
information to third parties.
Counselors want to offer an appropriate degree of privacy to the children whom they counsel
(Isaacs & Stone, 2001). They want children to feel free to disclose aspects of their lives that trouble
them, in an atmosphere of trust and confidentiality. It may be helpful for counselors to consider the
following facts about children and privacy:
1. Young children often do not have an understanding of confidentiality or a need for privacy, which
is a socially learned concept. Young children may not be nearly as concerned about confidential-
ity as the counselor is (Huey, 1996) and may not need reassurances of confidentiality (Corr &
Balk, 2010).
2. Preadolescents and adolescents may have a heightened desire for privacy that is appropriate to
their developmental stage of growth.
3. Some children may not be concerned about their privacy. It is inappropriate to assume that
children do not want their parents or guardians to know information they have told counselors.
4. Children sometimes tell an adult about their concerns, hoping that the adult will act as an interme-
diary in telling their parents.
5. The reasoning capacity of children is limited, and because of their age, they may not be able to
make decisions that are in their own best interests.
Answers to confidentiality questions may vary, depending on the age of the client and on the
setting in which the counseling takes place (Trice-Black et al., 2013). Very young children are often
not very concerned about confidentiality, whereas confidentiality concerns may be paramount for
adolescent clients. According to Hendrix (1991), community mental health counselors tend to favor
giving minors the same confidentiality rights that adults have, whereas school counselors (particu-
larly those at the elementary school level) feel more oriented toward releasing information to parents.
Legal Status and Rights of Minors
When the United States was established as a country in 1776, the government adopted English com-
mon law as its legal foundation. This common law holds that minors must exercise through their
parents any legal rights they may have and that minors have no legal standing to contract or bring
lawsuits (Kramer, 1994).
The law with respect to minors has seen significant changes since the beginning of the nineteenth
century. Before legal reforms, children were treated almost the same way as the property of their parents
(especially the father), and the government seldom interfered with parents’ control and authority over
their children. In Massachusetts during the 1600s, children could be executed if found to be stubborn
and rebellious (Kramer, 1994). Reforms have included laws that prohibit child labor, require compulsory
school attendance, and, more recently, require professionals to report suspected child abuse.
It appears that the legal rights of children include the right to be supported by their par-
ents and the right not to be abused or neglected. Today, even though minors have more govern-
mental protection and are beginning to be recognized by courts as individuals with their own
legal rights, the law still favors biological parents’ rights over their children. The legal system
in the United States usually requires that children assert any legal rights they have through their
parents or guardians.
Due to their legal status in our society, children are not able to enter into contracts. Because
the counseling relationship is contractual in nature, minors cannot legally agree on their own to be
counseled. Thus, minors usually need parental consent before they can receive counseling services.

-- 309 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	287
Several exceptions to this requirement, however, have been created by statutes enacted by federal
and state legislative bodies.
Clients who cannot comprehend what is being requested in a consent for disclosure or who
are unable to make a rational decision are not able to give valid informed consent (Huey, 1996). As
a general rule, the law stipulates that clients under the age of 18 are not adults and, therefore, are
not competent to make fully informed, voluntary decisions (Davis & Mickelson, 1994). Although
counselors may believe that many minor clients are developmentally capable of making these deci-
sions for themselves, the law does not support this belief. The privacy rights of minor clients legally
belong to their parents or guardians.
Female clients under the age of 18 sometimes become pregnant and seek counseling, so
we discuss recent changes in abortion law here. In 2021 the U.S. Supreme Court, in the Dobbs
v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization (2022) decision, overturned Roe v. Wade (1973), a U.S.
Supreme Court case handed down 50 years earlier that determined that women in the United States
had a constitutional right to an abortion (Brennan Center for Justice, 2022). Because Roe v. Wade
has been overturned, states can now enact legislation that can prevent women from having abortions
or limit their access to abortions, but abortions are not illegal in all states due to state constitutional
law or state statutes. A website known as Abortion Finder (2023), which was created by several
organizations related to reproductive and sexual health, provides information on current state laws
on abortion at https://www.abortionfinder.org.
Several writers (Mnookin & Weisberg, 1995; Reppucci et al., 1984) have taken the position
that some children should be able to exercise legal rights on their own, and they have advocated for
making 14 the age at which children may legally give their informed consent for counseling or other
health-related treatment. In all states (Phillis, 2011), this right is given by statute to mature minors—
adolescents over a specified age (usually 16) who are able to understand the nature, risks, and benefits
of counseling. Laws in some states allow minors themselves to give informed consent to counseling
when there is an emergency situation or when they need treatment for use of dangerous drugs, sexually
transmitted diseases, pregnancy, or birth control (Lawrence & Robinson Kurpius, 2000). A number of
states have enacted statutes that lower the legal age (to an age lower than 18) for obtaining counseling
services, health treatment, or even abortions if they are legal in the state. Some federal laws and stat-
utes also allow minors to consent specifically to counseling services at specified ages prior to age 18.
Phillis (2011) has brought attention to the issue of minors below the age of 18 engaging in
sexual activity and becoming pregnant. Phillis pointed out that although most states allow minors
to consent to sex at age 16, few states where abortion is legal allow minors to consent to abortion
without parental consent. In fact, she found that minors in these states did not treat lightly their deci-
sion to abort and their decision not to involve their parents. Stone (2002) has warned counselors to
be careful when counseling minors to avoid advocating for a particular position regarding abortion
or assisting a minor in obtaining an abortion. Emancipated minors—those who are under the age
of 18 but live separately from their parents, manage their own finances, and have been adjudicated
legally emancipated by a judge—can enter into a contract for counseling.
With so much variation in state and federal laws and regulations regarding minor clients and
informed consent, it is essential for counselors who work with minor clients to know the relevant
laws and regulations that apply in settings where they practice. It is also important for administra-
tors who supervise counselors to alert them when there are exceptions to the general legal principles
that require parent or guardian consent for treatment of minors or give parents or guardians access
to confidential information regarding the treatment of their children or wards.
When a minor is the client who will be receiving counseling services, the consent form that
is included in Appendix B should be modified to indicate that the minor is the client and that a legal

-- 310 of 593 --

288 	Section 2 • Issues
parent or guardian is verifying his or her consent to the counseling relationship. For therapeutic rather
than legal purposes, counselors may also want to obtain the minor’s signature on the form, depending
on the minor’s level of development and ability to understand the meaning of the document.
The Rights of Parents
In the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), several provisions relate to includ-
ing parents or guardians when counseling minor clients. The wording of
§A.2.d. acknowledges the need to balance the rights of minor clients with
the rights of their parents or guardians and to include minor clients in
decision making, as appropriate. In addition, §B.5.b. advises counselors
to “respect the inherent rights and responsibilities of parents/guardians
regarding the welfare of their children/charges according to law.”
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) recognizes that it is often helpful to
include parents and other family members when working with minor clients
and reinforces the fact that parents can be valuable allies in the counseling
process. Standard B.5.b., which encourages counselors to work to establish
collaborative relationships with parents and guardians, allows counselors
some latitude to use their professional judgment in determining whether and
when to involve parents or guardians in the counseling process. Conflicts
often can be prevented if counselors approach parents as allies in the coun-
seling process, rather than as adversaries in a struggle over privacy.
Corey et al. (2024) have suggested that counselors also have an
ethical obligation to provide information to children and adolescents that
will help these clients be active partners in their treatment. These authors
pointed out that counselors demonstrate respect for client autonomy when
they involve minor clients in defining counseling goals and choosing
among treatment alternatives. Such an approach is supported by the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014). Standard A.2.d. advises counselors, when work-
ing with minors, to seek the agreement of minor clients to services and to
include them in the decision-making process as appropriate. A cooperative approach might also help
to minimize some of the reluctance or resentment that minor clients often feel when they are sent to a
counselor by their parents, their teachers, or other adults in authority.
Counselors who work with minor clients need to respect parents’ rights and responsibilities
toward their children, yet counselors also feel the need to honor the confidentiality rights of their
clients. Counselors should understand that any time they decide to withhold information from a
parent, they assume responsibility for harm caused if that information later leads to injuries for the
client. Examples of such potentially injurious information include minors disclosing that they are
using controlled substances, engaging in sexual activity, breaking laws, or engaging in other risky
behavior that their parents do not know about.
Parents or guardians probably have a legal right to know the contents of their children’s coun-
seling sessions, although a court may hold otherwise because of specific state or federal statutes or
regulations or because of legal precedent from case law in that jurisdiction. Of course, it would be
complicated and expensive for parents to enforce their rights, but given the status of the law regard-
ing parent and child relationships, they probably do have that right.
To prevent situations in which parents demand information and minor clients refuse to
authorize counselors to provide it, it is wise to establish a comprehensive understanding with
all parties regarding the issue of confidentiality before the counseling relationship is initiated.

-- 311 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	289
The use of written informed consent agreements among counselors, their minor clients, and the
parents of those minors would be helpful to prevent misunderstandings. Counselors must balance
the ethical rights of minor clients to make choices, their capacity to give consent or assent to coun-
seling, and the rights and responsibilities of parents or families to protect minor clients and make
decisions on their behalf (ACA, 2014, §A.2.d.).
RESPONDING TO PARENTS WHO DEMAND CONFIDENTIAL COUNSELING INFORMATION 	Many
professionals who counsel children report that they have never faced situations in which a parent
or guardian demanded to know the contents of counseling sessions and the child felt strongly that
the parent or guardian should not be told. Other counselors, however, have had to deal with such
situations (Mitchell et al., 2002). If you are ever presented with such a challenge and decide that
the child’s desire for the parent or guardian not to be told is reasonable, we suggest you consider
following these steps:
1. Discuss the inquiry with the minor, and see if the minor is willing to disclose the content of
the counseling session to the adult. Sometimes counselors are more concerned about privacy
than a child is. If that doesn’t work, go to step 2.
2. Try to persuade the adult that the child’s best interests will not be served by revealing the
information. Attempt to educate the inquiring adult about the nature of the counseling relation-
ship and assure the adult that information will be given if the child is in danger. If that doesn’t
work, go to step 3.
3. Schedule a joint session with the adult and the minor. Assume the role of a mediator at this
session. Hope that the adult’s mind will be changed about wanting the information or that the
minor will be willing to disclose enough information to satisfy the adult. If that doesn’t work,
choose step 4 or step 5.
4. Inform the child before you disclose the content of the session to the inquiring adult. If the adult
is not the parent or guardian, inform the parent or guardian before disclosing the information to
that adult.
5. Refuse to disclose the information to the inquiring adult. Secure approval from your direct admin-
istrator before doing this. Remember that the adult may have a legal right to the information.
11-1 The Case of Brittany
At the request of second-grader Nathan’s mother during the COVID-19 pandemic shutdown,
school counselor Brittany has been meeting briefly with Nathan virtually each week to talk with
him about his parents’ separation and impending divorce. Nathan’s mother told Brittany that she
and her husband share joint custody of Nathan. Brittany had never met Nathan’s father, but one
day he emails Brittany and says that he understands that Brittany has been counseling his son,
and that he does not want Brittany to see his son for counseling in the future.
• What are the rights of noncustodial parents regarding their children’s counseling in school?
• How should Brittany respond to Nathan’s father?
Discussion: Generally, unless a school or school district has a contrary policy, school
counselors do not have to secure oral or written permission from a parent prior to providing
counseling services to children. Because counseling is a regular part of programs in schools,
when parents enroll their children in schools, they are implicitly giving permission for their

-- 312 of 593 --

290 	Section 2 • Issues
RIGHTS OF NONCUSTODIAL PARENTS 	Counselors who provide services to children often coun-
sel minors whose parents are separated, going through a divorce, or divorced. Special challenges for
counselors occur when parents attempt to pull counselors into their custody disputes.
A typical challenge presents itself when one parent wants the counselor to take his or her
side in a court proceeding related to child custody. We recommend that counselors of children of
divorced parents focus on their role of counseling the child and consulting with parents as necessary
for the benefit of the child, avoiding becoming embroiled in custody battles in the process.
Counselors should refuse to support one parent over the other in a child custody controversy. The
reasons are many: (a) The counselor must be able to maintain working relationships with both parents to
be an effective counselor for the child; (b) counselors of children know very little about what goes on in
a home or in a marriage, so it would be inappropriate for counselors to support one parent over the other;
and (c) child custody evaluators, not the child’s counselors, should be giving advice to judges related to
custody matters. Counselors could be child custody evaluators, but they cannot serve in that role when
they are a child’s counselor. See Chapter 7 for a discussion of counselors as expert witnesses.
If counselors of children are subpoenaed to testify in a child custody hearing despite express-
ing their position that they do not want to become involved in that controversy, the counselors must
be careful how they conduct themselves in the legal proceedings. Any time counselors receive a sub-
poena, they should obtain legal advice (see Chapter 6). Generally, in child custody situations, one
parent waives the privacy of the counselor–child relationship, so counselors must provide information
through depositions or testimony in hearings or trials. When counselors are in such situations, they
should answer any factual questions asked of them. If they are asked opinion questions, especially
regarding the fitness of a parent, they should decline to give an opinion, maintaining that they do not
have enough information to form a judgment on that matter, which is true. Counselors know only what
is told to them. They do not have in-depth knowledge regarding the parents of their child clients.
Children’s counselors generally have a responsibility to provide requested information to
noncustodial parents. Some states, however, do not require health care providers to provide noncus-
todial parents with information regarding the treatment of their children. If there is a controversy
over whether a noncustodial parent should have information about the counseling of his or her child,
counselors are advised to seek and follow legal advice that is based on the laws in their state.
children to engage in school activities such as counseling. On the other hand, some school
districts or school principals have policies in place stating that school counselors must secure
parental permission, either orally or in writing, before counseling may take place. School counsel-
ors might consider requesting that such policies be changed, but when such policies are in place,
school counselors must follow them. If a parent objects to their child engaging in school activities
that are not required of all children, then schools must defer to the parent’s wishes. In this situa-
tion, it would be wise for Brittany to explain to Nathan’s father the nature of her interactions with
Nathan. Brittany could explain that she has been helping him cope with his feelings about his
parents’ separation, and she could assure Nathan’s father that her interactions with his son are con-
fidential. If Nathan’s father continues to insist that Brittany discontinue her counseling sessions with
Nathan, Brittany should agree to his request. If Nathan’s mother tells Brittany she wants Brittany to
continue seeing Nathan despite Nathan’s father’s objections, Brittany should explain that if either
parent objects to counseling, school counselors cannot continue to provide counseling services.
Brittany can explain to Nathan’s mother that she cannot continue seeing Nathan without his father’s
consent or an order from a judge that would overrule the father’s objection.

-- 313 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	291
COUNSELING CHILDREN AT RISK FOR HARM
TO SELF OR OTHERS
As noted, a minor client’s confidentiality might need to be breached due to parental demands.
At other times, it will be the counselor who determines that parents or guardians must be given
information that a child has disclosed in counseling sessions. If counselors determine that a child
is at risk of harm to themselves or others, they must inform the child’s parents. School counselors
must also consider whether they should report student risk-taking behaviors to an administrative
superior, who usually is the school principal (Moyer et al., 2012). See Chapter 8 for a detailed
discussion of the responsibilities of counselors when their clients may be at risk of endangering
themselves or others. Because deciding whether a child is at risk can be a difficult judgment to
make, consultation with other counselors is recommended. In a survey of school counselors,
Becnel et al. (2021) found that 38% reported they had not been prepared during their graduate
training for engaging in suicide prevention. They also reported that school counselors who had
been aware of a student suicide attempt had higher suicide assessment self-efficacy scores than
those who had not. Donohue et al. (2015/2016) have described a school district’s pilot program
of systematic universal screening and the role of school counselors in the identification of stu-
dents in need of social–emotional support. In addition, Erickson and Abel (2013) have reported
on a program in which all students have been screened for depression and suicide risk. McFarlin
and McGough (2021) have developed a comprehensive model for suicide prevention tailored
for school systems and known as the Research-Informed Adaptable Model for the Prevention of
Suicide in Schools (RAMPSS).
If a counselor tells parents every time their child engages in any risky behavior, the child
will not be willing to disclose important information to that counselor. On the other hand, if a
counselor decides not to inform a parent when a child is engaged in risky behavior, that counselor
could be held legally accountable if the child is later harmed or harms someone else (Gilbert,
2002; Hermann & Finn, 2002; Hermann & Remley, 2000). In a study of 11th-grade students in
Oregon, 18% of the students reported considering suicide, and 6.6% reported having attempted
suicide (Sallee et al., 2022). Students who reported suicidal ideation (i.e., either considering or
attempting suicide) were found to have poor emotional/mental health, to have been feeling sad
or hopeless for at least 2 weeks, and to describe themselves as “not straight.” Using the results
of a survey instrument like the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide (IPTS; Joiner et al., 2009), which
was used in this study, could be useful in identifying high school students who might be more at
risk for suicidal ideation. Most contemporary school counselors have implemented some type of
suicide prevention program in their schools, but if they have not, they should do so (Granello &
Zyromski, 2018). Stutey et al. (2021) have suggested that school counselors use the mnemonic
SHORES to introduce suicide protective factors to school students. SHORES stands for Skills
and strategies for coping (S), Hope (H), Objections (O), Reasons to live and Restricted means (R),
Engaged care (E), and Support (S).
When a child client is at risk of suicide, a counselor’s duty to notify the parents is clear.
Much less clear are instances when children and adolescents engage in self-injuring behaviors
(such as delicate cutting). There is a growing body of professional literature related to counsel-
ing both children and adults who engage in self-injury activities that are considered to be non-
suicidal (e.g., Hoffman & Kress, 2010; Nelson & Piccin, 2016; Peterson et al., 2008; Simpson
et al., 2010; Stargell et al., 2017; Wester et al., 2017). Counselors who are not familiar with
nonsuicidal self-injury activities of clients often are alarmed when they learn that their clients
may be involved in activities such as cutting, burning, hitting, pinching, banging or punching

-- 314 of 593 --

292 	Section 2 • Issues
walls to induce pain, breaking bones, ingesting toxic substances, and interfering with the heal-
ing of wounds (Peterson et al., 2008). Barbour et al. (2021) have supplied guidelines for school
counselors to provide services to students who have engaged in nonsuicidal self-injury.
School counselors sometimes are either actively counseling students who have attempted sui-
cide or have counseled students who completed suicide, and it is difficult for these counselors to deal
with such situations. Stickl Haugen et al. (2021) found that school counselors who experienced the
death of a student by suicide had higher self-efficacy scores related to suicide interventions than those
who had not experienced a student’s suicide. They also found that dealing with the aftermath of the
death of a student by suicide is a common experience for school counselors during their careers and
that school counselors utilize a variety of sources of support following the death of student by suicide.
When situations arise in which counselors do have to inform parents or guardians of potential
harm to their child or others, counselors should make efforts to maintain the counseling relation-
ship with their child clients. Steps that might help in that regard are having the child tell his or her
parents himself or herself, telling parents with the child present, or—at a minimum—informing the
child about your intentions before telling the parents. If you were Mary’s counselor in the following
case example, would you tell her parents about her marijuana use?
11-2 The Case of Benjamin
Mary, age 14, reveals to Benjamin, her school counselor, that she once smoked marijuana with
her friends on a weekend. She states that she has never tried any other drugs and insists that she
knows better than to “get hooked on marijuana or even try the hard stuff.” Mary also insists that
the counselor must not tell her parents and that to do so would be a betrayal of her trust.
• What are the arguments for and against Benjamin informing Mary’s parents of her one-time
marijuana use?
• What factors should Benjamin consider in making his decision?
Discussion: Of course, if his school system has a policy that parents must be informed in situa-
tions like this, Benjamin would be unwise to ignore the policy. If no such policy exists, however,
Benjamin must weigh the risks to Mary and to himself: How serious is the danger involved in the
one-time use of marijuana? Is it better to honor the client’s wishes and not tell the parents in the
hopes of maintaining a trusting counseling relationship in which the issue of marijuana use can
be further explored? Or is informing the parents a wiser choice?
Benjamin should consider several factors in making his decision. First, he should check out
any values issues of his own that might be involved: Is his decision-making process being influenced
by his own liberal or conservative attitudes toward marijuana use, for instance? What are the prevail-
ing standards and attitudes in the community? Is marijuana use legal for adult use in this state?
He should also consider factors such as the age and maturity of the student involved, his
judgment about whether the parents’ response would harm the student if they were told, the
student’s willingness to consider informing her parents in the near future, any applicable school
policies, and any relevant ethical standards and state of federal laws.
If Benjamin decides that the parents must be informed, he should let Mary know that he
cannot keep this particular secret and try to negotiate a procedure for informing the parents that
will be acceptable to her.

-- 315 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	293
This case is an example of a situation that requires a counselor to make a judgment call
about informing parents. There are no easy answers to these questions. Benjamin would be well
advised to consult with other school counselors who are likely to have dealt with situations like
this one.
Release of Records
Ethically conscientious counselors work hard to respect the rights of minor clients to control access
to personal information divulged during counseling, to the extent that is possible. It is important to
remember that confidentiality is not absolute for clients of any age. As has been noted, a legal con-
sideration that limits the confidentiality of minors is that confidentiality and freedom of choice are
both predicated on the ability of the client to give voluntary, informed consent.
Minor clients should have some control over the release of information that results from their
choosing to engage in the counseling process. However, parents or guardians must exercise any
legal rights children have up until they reach the age of 18 (unless a statute allows a younger age)
or until the child is emancipated by a court of law. As was discussed in Chapter 6, parents do not
have access to counseling case notes kept in the sole possession of the maker on demand under the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (1974), but parents would have access to such notes
under a subpoena or specific court order.
Generally, a parent or guardian has a legal right to assert the privilege that would belong to a
minor. In some circumstances, however, courts have found that parents did not have the best inter-
ests of the child in mind and have refused to allow the parents to assert a child’s privilege (People v.
Lobaito, 1984). Courts have also appointed a guardian ad litem to determine the best interests of a
child related to privilege (Nagle v. Hooks, 1983).
Confidentiality in School Counseling
Unless there is a federal or state statute to the contrary, school counselors do not have a legal
obligation to obtain parental permission before counseling students. When parents enroll their
children in school, they know or should know that their children will be participating in a num-
ber of obligatory and optional services, and one of those optional services is counseling in most
schools. School systems or school principals who require counselors to obtain parental permission
to counsel students are imposing that requirement because they feel it is an appropriate or politi-
cally correct thing to do, not because it is required by law. These administrators may be concerned
that community support for the school and its counselors would be negatively affected if parents
believed that the counselors were withholding information regarding the fact that their child is
being counseled (Glosoff & Pate, 2002).
Because most counseling services are not required of all school students, however, parents who
object to their child’s participation in counseling probably have a right to do so. In extreme circum-
stances, school counselors should think about whether a child might be a victim of abuse or neglect
when the parents object to their child’s participation in counseling. However, counselors are cautioned
to avoid jumping to the conclusion that parents or guardians have something to hide because they
object to their child being counseled. Counselors should entertain the suspicion that a child might be at
risk for abuse or neglect only if there is some compelling evidence that abuse is occurring.
School counselors routinely encounter situations that call on their professional judgment to
decide whether student risk-taking behaviors are of sufficient intensity, frequency, and duration to war-
rant breaching a student’s confidentiality (Florang, 2020; Giordano et al., 2022; Johnson et al., 2022;
Liang et al., 2022; Moyer & Sullivan, 2008; Olenik-Shemesh et al., 2012; Stanger-Hall & Hall, 2011;

-- 316 of 593 --

294 	Section 2 • Issues
Tinstman et al., 2019). After reviewing the approach that various federal court districts have taken in
determining whether minors have a legal right to keep information, such as a pregnancy, secret from
their parents, Gilbert (2007) concluded that district court judges should take into account whether
requiring disclosure to parents by health care providers would keep minors from seeking help. Prober
(2005) has argued against school districts enacting requirements that school health personnel notify
parents when minors report pregnancies to them so that students will continue to seek assistance from
adults in the school environment. According to Prober (2005), such rules requiring mandatory reporting
to parents are illegal and unconstitutional.
Results of one survey of school counselors (Isaacs & Stone, 1999) indicated that school
counselors would breach confidentiality for the following issues: impending suicide or suicide
pact, violent retaliation for victimization, use of crack cocaine, sexual intercourse with multiple
partners when HIV-positive, armed robbery, and signs of serious depression. Isaacs and Stone
(1999) also found that the age of the child was the most significant variable that counselors con-
sidered in their decision making. Younger children were seen as more dependent and in need of
protection, whereas high school students were viewed as being more capable of giving informed
consent and making mature decisions. Sallee et al. (2021) found that students who reported hav-
ing the following traits were more likely than other students to experience suicidal ideation:
increasingly poor emotional/mental health; increased school days missed due to feeling unsafe;
and feeling sad or hopeless for 2 or more weeks. Research results such as these can help coun-
selors identify adolescents who are more at risk for experiencing suicidal ideation and can allow
counselors to intervene early.
Moyer and Sullivan (2008) also surveyed school counselors to determine whether they would
breach confidentiality to report risk-taking behaviors of student clients. They found that only one
behavior (suicidal behavior) was perceived almost unanimously as posing an immediate threat and
that there was little consensus regarding a range of other risk-taking behaviors.
Many misunderstandings can be prevented if counselors take proactive steps to inform
students, parents, and school personnel about confidentiality and its limits (Huss et al., 2008;
Keim & Cobia, 2010). Counselors in schools might consider publishing information about
their services in the documents given to parents when they enroll
their child in the school. A modified version of the information
addressed to students might be published in student handbooks as
well. Glosoff and Pate (2002) offered the reminder that there are
many stakeholders in the school counseling program. They recom-
mended that counselors conduct in-service programs for teachers
and administrators, make presentations at PTA meetings, and visit
classrooms early in the school year. All of these activities have the
goal of educating interested parties about the role of the school
counselor and the parameters of confidentiality.
Counselors who provide services to young adults in colleges and
universities have to manage the fact that most college students are 18
or over but are often financially and emotionally dependent upon their
parents. Digal and Gagnon (2020) found a lack of support for the per-
ception that parents stand in the way of college students seeking mental
health treatment. Although college students are reluctant to seek mental
health treatment (Gallagher, 2015), it does not appear that their parents
are keeping them from asking for services.

-- 317 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	295
CONFIDENTIALITY IN WORKING WITH MINORS IN NONSCHOOL SETTINGS 	The work setting of
counselors often determines the types of confidentiality issues they encounter in working with minor
clients (Salo, 2015). Counselors in private practice may encounter fewer issues involving confidenti-
ality because parents usually have given legal consent for the counselor to work with the client and
because the number of people involved in the counseling process may be limited to the counselor, the
minor client, and the parents or guardians.
By contrast, children who are being counseled in an in-patient facility will likely have been
placed there by a parent or by child protective services. These minors, regardless of their age, usu-
ally are considered incapable of making important decisions for themselves (Salo, 2015), as the
caregivers are assumed to be operating in the minor client’s best interest. Parents may be consulted
over the course of the minor client’s stay in the facility, and treatment teams will also be involved in
determining the treatment plans.
CONFIDENTIALITY IN CONSULTATIONS 	Many counselors who provide services for children
work in schools, treatment facilities, or social services agencies. Staff members often must consult
with each other for the benefit of the children being served. It is important for counselors to educate
non–mental health staff members that they must keep confidential any personal information they
learn about children as a result of their professional positions. If professionals disclose confidential
information outside the institution and the reputations of parents or guardians are damaged, the par-
ents could have the basis for a lawsuit.
School counselors, in particular, are in a precarious position because they have responsibilities
as consultants to other educators. Because teachers and administrators may not have the same obliga-
tions to uphold student privacy, school counselors must constantly balance the potential benefits to a
student of divulging private information to teachers or administrators during a consultation versus the
potential harm that might be caused by sharing that information (Isaacs & Stone, 1999).
Reporting Suspected Child Abuse or Neglect
Every state now has a statute that requires counselors and other professionals to report cases of sus-
pected child abuse or neglect to a governmental agency (Child Welfare Information Gateway, 2023),
which can be viewed at https://www.childwelfare.gov.
Although the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) does not specifically address child abuse reporting,
we have seen that counselors do have a general ethical duty to protect vulnerable persons from harm
(§B.2.a.). McEachern et al. (2008), for example, have discussed the responsibility of school coun-
selors to include discussion of the problem of emotional abuse in their classroom guidance lessons.
It appears that many mental health professionals do not routinely report child abuse or neglect and
that confidentiality is the crucial variable that causes them to fail to make such reports (Corey et al.,
2024). Tillman et al. (2015) found in a study using vignettes that school counselors were more likely
to suspect defensive parents of abuse than cooperative or non-involved parents and, not surprisingly,
that they suspected abuse more often when children had bruises or broken bones than when there was
no physical evidence of abuse. Counselors may be reluctant to report for several reasons, including
their desire to avoid betraying a child’s trust, fear that a child protective services investigation will be
poorly handled, fear of retaliation from the alleged perpetrator, or hope of maintaining the counseling
relationship with the family so that the abusing adults can be helped to learn more appropriate parent-
ing skills (Sikes et al., 2010). After surveying school counselors with 6 or more years of experience,
Ricks et al. (2022) found that participants chose to report suspected child abuse because of their
sense of professional obligation, to follow school protocol, and due to their concern for the safety
of children. The most-often-cited reason for choosing not to report suspected abuse was a lack of

-- 318 of 593 --

296 	Section 2 • Issues
evidence, even though suspected abuse reporters do not have to have evidence that abuse or neglect
has occurred. They need only a suspicion to have the obligation to make a report.
STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 	Because all states and U.S. jurisdictions now have mandatory
reporting statutes of some type in the area of child abuse and neglect and because the statutes vary
in their wording, it is vital for counselors to know the exact language of statutes that require them to
make reports of suspected abuse or neglect. All states, the District of Columbia, American Samoa,
Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands have enacted statutes that
require certain categories of professionals to report suspected child abuse or neglect (Child Welfare
Information Gateway, 2023). Mandatory child abuse or neglect reporting statutes for each state and
U.S. possession can be found at www.childwelfare.gov.
Counselors must know which categories of professionals must make reports of suspected
abuse or neglect and whether reports must be made only for suspected current abuse or for sus-
pected past abuse as well. Reporting statutes protect mandatory reporters from lawsuits that might
be filed against them by those who have been reported, but sometimes only if the report is man-
dated by law. If reports of suspicions of past abuse are not mandated by law, then counselors mak-
ing such reports may not be protected. Furthermore, if state statutes require that reports be made
when the perpetrator is the child’s caretaker and a report is made when the suspected perpetrator is
not the caretaker, again, counselors making such reports may not be protected. Where counselors
work, their job titles, their licensing status, and other such factors may determine whether they are
mandated by statute to make suspected abuse reports. Counselors who are unsure whether they are
mandated reporters in their states should request clarification from their administrator where they
work, who, in turn, should seek legal counsel if necessary.
The protective clauses of mandatory-abuse reporting laws protect counselors who make
reports in good faith. In other words, as long as counselors sincerely believe that child abuse or
neglect may have occurred or is occurring, they will be protected from lawsuits that might be filed
against them by individuals who have been reported. This means that lawsuits against a counselor
for defamation of character or some other type of tort would not prevail as long as the counselor
genuinely believed that abuse or neglect might have occurred, even if it was later proven that no
abuse or neglect had occurred. In a 2010 New York case (Cox v. Warwick Valley Central School
District, 2010), courts supported a middle school principal who was sued by parents after they
were reported for suspected abuse in the course of suspending the student from school for submit-
ting an essay in English class that included violence. Despite the ruling in Cox, if a counselor has
been involved in a conflict on some other matter with a suspected perpetrator, it would be wise to
ask another professional to gather evidence of the suspected abuse directly and make the report.
Otherwise, the suspected perpetrator might be able to convince others that the counselor made the
report in bad faith: that is, the counselor knew that the report was untrue but made it to cause prob-
lems for the suspected perpetrator because of previous conflict regarding another matter.
The language of the statute in your state tells you who must make an actual suspected child
abuse or neglect report and where and how the report must be filed. In some states, counselors can
fulfill their legal obligation by telling their supervisors that they suspect child abuse or neglect,
and then it is the supervisors’ legal obligation to file the report. In other states, the counselor who
suspects child abuse or neglect has the legal obligation to personally file the report. Some statutes
require oral reports only; others demand that written reports be filed; still others require reports to
be filed within certain time frames. You are encouraged to locate and read carefully the mandatory
child abuse and neglect reporting statutes in your state and then to ask for interpretations from your
administrator or an attorney if there is something you do not understand.

-- 319 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	297
Important language in the statutes includes the following: (a) who must make the report to the
governmental agency (the person with the suspicion or the supervisor), (b) when the report must
be made (immediately, within 24 hours, within 48 hours, or some other time frame), (c) whether
the oral report must be followed by a written report, (d) what specific information is required when
the report is made (such as age of the child, name and address of the child, specifics of cause of
suspicion, names and address of parents), (e) whether past abuse must be reported, and (f) whether
specific categories of suspected perpetrators must be reported (parents or guardians only, caretak-
ers, siblings, other people), whereas other categories of suspected perpetrators do not have to be
reported. In situations where only specified categories of suspected perpetrators must be reported
(for example, only caretakers must be reported), counselors may still report other categories of sus-
pected perpetrators (such as neighbors or relatives).
Statutes vary in reporting requirements for past child abuse when the victim is no longer in dan-
ger. The statute may say specifically that past abuse must be reported or that only currently abusive
situations must be reported, or the statute may be silent on the issue. Laws are constantly changing
with respect to reporting child abuse, and existing laws are being interpreted. For example, in May
2012 the attorney general of Texas issued an opinion that the state child abuse reporting statute does
not require professionals to report abuse or neglect that occurred during the childhood of an adult cli-
ent. Some statutes mandate that only suspected abuse by parents or guardians be reported. However,
all statutes allow non-mandated reports to be made as well. Statutes that require only caretakers to
be reported leave counselors in doubt as to whether to report issues such as sibling or peer (or even
neighbor) child abuse (Phillips-Green, 2002). The problems associated with sibling abuse have been
highlighted by Kiselica and Morrill-Richards (2007), Stutey (2015), and Stutey and Clemens (2014).
In the event that more than one person suspects that abuse is occurring and that all of those involved
are mandated reporters, the person making the report should indicate that the report is being made on
behalf of others as well and ask that their names also be recorded as reporters.
Singley (1998) has argued that mandatory suspected child abuse reporters should be given civil
good faith immunity for failing to report suspected abuse, just as they are given immunity in state statutes
for good faith reporting of suspected abuse. Singley has suggested that changing the laws would signifi-
cantly reduce the number of unnecessary reports of suspected child abuse that are made out of fear of
civil liability. At this point, however, mandated reporters can be sued by injured children or their parents
if the mandated reporters fail to make reports of suspected abuse when they are required to do so by law.
DETERMINING WHETHER A REPORT MUST BE MADE 	The duty to report suspected physical,
sexual, or emotional child abuse or neglect is a legal requirement. This reporting obligation is clear,
but counselors still must exercise clinical judgment in making a determination that a child has been
or is currently being abused or neglected.
Before counselors determine whether they have a legal obligation to file a report, they must
form a clinical opinion that a possibility exists that a child has been or is being abused or neglected.
Suspicion regarding abuse or neglect might arise as the result of something a counselor observes,
such as seeing marks on a child, observing behavior that indicates abuse, or noticing something a
child says in a counseling session. Also, clients may make verbal or written statements that they have
been abused or that they have perpetrated abuse on others. If you are unsure whether you have enough
information to form a suspicion that child abuse or neglect is involved, consult with colleagues.
Counselors must first exercise their judgment as to whether they suspect that abuse or neglect
might be occurring or might have occurred in the past. Responsible counselors would consider the
following factors in exercising their judgment: (a) the credibility of the alleged victim, (b) prevail-
ing standards for discipline in the community, and (c) information that is known about the alleged
victim and the alleged perpetrator.

-- 320 of 593 --

298 	Section 2 • Issues
11-3 The Case of Taraji
As a result of a play counseling session, Taraji, an elementary school counselor, has come to
suspect that Arielle, a second-grader, is being physically abused by her father. Taraji realizes that
the law in her state requires her to report the suspected abuse within 24 hours. Taraji is hesitant
to do so, however, because her experience with the local child protective services agency is that
it is ineffective in responding to such reports. Taraji fears that the agency’s social worker will visit
Arielle’s home but take no further immediate action. Her additional concern is that the father will
escalate the abuse, placing Arielle in even greater danger.
• What should Taraji do when she believes that following the dictates of the reporting-abuse
statute might endanger her child client?
• What problems could occur if Taraji decides not to make a report?
Discussion: Even though Taraji believes that filing a report might endanger Arielle, she should
consider the importance of compliance with the law that requires her to report. Taraji should
think about actions she might take to help ensure the child’s safety. These might include enlist-
ing the assistance of the child’s mother or other relatives or teaching the child self-protection
strategies.
She might also emphasize her concerns for the child’s safety to the child protective ser-
vices personnel and request that they take steps to protect the child. Taraji should document her
contact with the agency and should inform her principal (or other immediate supervisor) of the
situation.
She should talk with Arielle after the report has been made to determine what has hap-
pened thereafter. She should make additional reports if she believes the abuse has continued. If
Taraji decides not to make a report and if Arielle is harmed by further abuse and if it is learned
that Taraji knew about but did not report the abuse, Taraji could face legal repercussions. Taraji
could also face disciplinary action by her school administrator.
Taraji would have to deal with her feelings, which could include regret and guilt, if Arielle
were harmed when a different decision on Taraji’s part might have prevented the harm.
MAKING THE REPORT 	In addition to adhering to statutory requirements in making mandatory
suspected child abuse or neglect reports, counselors must follow any procedures in effect in their
employment setting. For example, a school district might require that a building principal be noti-
fied and a written report be filed before a report is made to state authorities, even when the coun-
selor is mandated by law to make the report personally. Although school or agency policies cannot
interfere with a counselor’s obligation to make a report, policies can specify that school or agency
administrators be notified simultaneously or after a report has been made. An employed counselor
should always inform the supervisor before or immediately after making a report, even if supervisor
notification is not required by policy.
It is important that counselors not forget their professional obligations to clients in fulfilling
their legal obligations to make suspected child abuse or neglect reports. Child abuse or neglect
reports are very disruptive to families. The lives of victims, perpetrators, and family members
can be changed significantly when such reports are made. Although making a report of suspected
child abuse or neglect may end your legal duties, your ethical and professional responsibilities as
a counselor in the situation may continue for a long time after a mandatory report has been made.

-- 321 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	299
Although most statutes allow suspected abuse reports to be made anonymously, professionals
should give their names when they make reports. In addition, to protect themselves, reporters should
always make a note to themselves indicating the date and time they made the oral report and the
name of the person who took the report, along with a written summary of what was said when the
report was made.
AFTER A REPORT HAS BEEN MADE 	The procedural aspects of making suspected child abuse or
neglect reports are important from a legal perspective. However, counselors always must exercise their
professional judgment before and after making such reports. Reporters should have several goals in
mind: (a) maintaining, to the extent possible, any counseling relationship they have with the parties
involved, (b) being concerned about the welfare of the alleged victim before and after the report is
made, (c) helping the parties deal with the process that follows reports, and (d) fulfilling their statutory
legal obligations. Buser and Buser (2013) have provided suggestions for counseling children who have
been emotionally abused to address these children’s issues such as self-injurious behaviors, emotional
dysregulation, eating disorders, depression, anxiety, and pessimistic explanatory style.
After making a report, counselors must again exercise their professional judgment in deter-
mining whether to tell the alleged victim that a report has been made; whether to tell the alleged
perpetrator; and how to interact with the alleged victim, parents or guardians, and the alleged perpe-
trator after the report has been made.
State agency personnel or police officers may contact the reporter to gather further infor-
mation after a report has been made. These individuals have investigatory powers and a right to
question witnesses. Agency personnel or police officers need to determine whether a child abuse
or neglect report reflects actual abuse or neglect and the degree to which a child may be in danger.
Counselors should not discuss the case with unknown persons on the telephone. They should ask to
see credentials of investigators, and they should be cooperative with state child protection agency
investigators or police officers. Counselors may request that interviews be scheduled at times that
are convenient for them. If investigators want to speak to alleged victims, the director of the agency
or principal of the school should respond to such requests. Some states have specific statutory lan-
guage that governs interviews with possible child abuse or neglect victims in school settings.
State agencies that investigate suspected abuse reports often are inundated with reports and
may be understaffed. They must decide which cases are the most severe, and they usually pay par-
ticular attention to those situations. Whenever counselors are frustrated because they do not believe
the state agency handles investigations properly or they believe children are put at risk after reports
are made, they should report additional incidents and should request a meeting with governmental
agency representatives to discuss the perceived problems.
School Violence
Multiple incidences of shootings and other acts of violence in schools have highlighted the need
for school personnel to intervene to prevent students from causing harm to others (Chambers et al.,
2010; Hermann & Finn, 2002; Hermann & Remley, 2000; Sandhu, 2000). Even though schools were
closed during the COVID-19 pandemic, school shootings are happening again, now that schools
have reopened. Violence prevention programs are being implemented in schools throughout the
country (Duarte & Hatch, 2014; McAdams et al., 2011). In response to the problem of widespread
school violence, some school districts have created policies that require counselors to report students’
destructive impulses or contemplation of illegal acts (Sandhu, 2000). These policies sometimes can
put school counselors in a difficult position. If students, particularly adolescents, know that counsel-
ors will routinely be reporting any disclosures of their thoughts about hurting someone, they may

-- 322 of 593 --

300 	Section 2 • Issues
decide not to reveal that information to their counselors. This, in turn, could reduce the opportunity
to address the risk of violence (Welfel, 2016). School counselors need to work with administrators to
ensure that school policies do not create a barrier to access to counseling services for students who
are at risk for committing violent acts.
On a day-to-day level, school counselors also have an ethical obligation to work to prevent
bullying (Espelage et al., 2000; Hazler, 2001; Neufeld, 2002; Renshaw, 2001; Roberts & Morotti,
2000) and harassment of students by other students (King et al., 1999). Counselors can address this
duty through classroom guidance activities aimed at helping students understand the effects of bul-
lying, intimidation, and harassment.
Increased attention is being given in the professional literature and at counseling confer-
ences to preventing bullying in schools and counseling bullying victims and perpetrators, as well
as their family members (Blake et al., 2014; Juhnke et al., 2013; Kolbert et al., 2014; Lamanna
et al., 2010; Mariani et al., 2015; McCormac, 2014; Midgett et al., 2015, 2017). Many models
of bullying prevention have been developed and are being implemented in schools throughout
the country.
Survivors of Sex Trafficking
An area of counseling that has begun to receive more attention is providing counseling services to
survivors of sex trafficking. Children often are victims of sex trafficking. The U.S. Department of
State (2019) has defined sex trafficking as the forceful or coercive process of recruiting, harboring,
or supporting individuals for commercial sex acts.
Chiara et al. (2022) determined that some interventions help trafficking survivors achieve post-
traumatic growth and other interventions are not helpful. Helpful interventions include recognizing the
survivors’ sense of responsibility toward the family members they are supporting and helping them
imagine a positive future. Barriers to post-traumatic growth include discussing memories of the migra-
tory journey or of sexual experiences on the street. Mumery et al. (2020) recommended that coun-
selors who provide services to sex traffic survivors build trust, discuss safety, allow clients to discuss
shame, avoid judging clients, and develop knowledge regarding this population.
Kenny et al. (2023) found that those who work with sex trafficking survivors can experience
burnout and vicarious trauma. They discovered that establishing boundaries, receiving personal
counseling themselves, taking advantage of supervision, and experiencing team support helped
manage the negative results of counseling survivors of sex trafficking.
The U.S. Department of Justice (2023a) has developed a list of steps that children and parents
can take to stay safe online, especially related to sex trafficking (https://www.justice.gov/coronavirus/
keeping-children-safe-online). The website also provides a guide to federal laws related to the sexual
exploitation of children. Through federal statutes, the U.S. government has asserted its right to prose-
cute sex offenses against children even if the crimes took place outside the border of the United States.
Multiple Roles of Counselors in Schools
Ethical dilemmas can be created by the job description and work environment of school counselors
(Huey, 1996). School counselors play multiple roles, and there are inherent conflicts in some of
these roles. Sometimes counselors are expected to serve, along with teachers, in duty assignments
such as bathroom monitor, lunchroom supervisor, or chaperone at extracurricular events. If counsel-
ors must carry out the disciplinary functions that accompany these duties, this will compromise their
ability to function effectively as personal counselors to their students. It would be unreasonable to
expect students to trust and confide in a counselor who assigned them to detention or reported their
misbehavior to the principal.

-- 323 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	301
School counselors sometimes voluntarily take on additional roles, such as coach for an ath-
letic team or club sponsor. Counselors can justifiably argue that these extra roles provide them with
opportunities to know their student clients better outside the formal setting of the counselor’s office.
They should also be cognizant, however, that there is potential for misunderstandings and conflicts
because these roles involve evaluation and supervision.
Occasionally, school policies impinge on counselor effectiveness. If policies require coun-
selors to inform parents about details of counseling sessions involving issues of birth control, preg-
nancy, abortion, sexually transmitted diseases, or other sensitive matters, some students will avoid
discussing these issues with their counselors (Herlihy & Corey, 2015b).
School counselors, especially those who work in small towns and rural communities, are
likely to have friends who are teachers as well as friends who are parents. Both of these situations
can lead to uncomfortable, dual-role conflicts. Friendships between teachers and counselors seem
inevitable, given their shared interest in children’s welfare, their daily contacts, and the fact that
some school counselors were teachers before they became counselors. Teachers are accustomed to
the sharing that occurs among colleagues, and they value open communication with other school
personnel regarding the students with whom they all work. Counselors, on the other hand, come
from a position of honoring the confidentiality of their child clients. This clash of cultures compli-
cates the work of the school counselor (Welfel, 2016).
School counselors are equally likely to have friends who are parents, and it is possible that
a friend’s child might also be a student client of the counselor. In such instances, counselors must
be careful to keep boundaries around the professional relationship with the child and the personal
relationship with the child’s parents. This can pose difficult challenges (Herlihy & Corey, 2015b).
In addition, there is great potential for dual-role conflicts when counselors deal with child
abuse. Counselors are required to report suspected abuse, yet their role is rarely limited to that of
reporter. They are often asked to perform many other functions, including that of school system
employee; court witness; liaison with social services; and counselor to the victim, perpetrator, or
family. Because most children are left in their parents’ custody after a report is made, the school
counselor is likely to have the ongoing task of providing counseling for the child. Treatment of
abuse victims is an intense and lengthy process that can strain a counselor’s resources during a
period when the counselor must also remain involved with the court system. The counselor will
need to work with caseworkers from the child protective services agency, with police and prosecu-
tors, and perhaps with other attorneys. These simultaneous, multiple roles can severely test a coun-
selor’s ability to handle conflicting demands.
It is a challenge for caring counselors to maintain appropriate professional boundaries when
they work with children who have been abused or who, for other reasons, are clearly in need of help.
11-4 The Case of Jeffrey
Jeffrey is a high school counselor who is well liked and respected by his student clients. He has a
reputation among his clients for being willing to go out of his way to help them, and this reputa-
tion appears to remain intact even though the school has been physically closed for months due
to COVID-19. One morning at 2:00 a.m., 16-year-old Edmund, who is a member of one of the
weekly counseling groups that Jeffrey conducts virtually, shows up at Jeffrey’s home. Edmund
claims that he has been kicked out of the house by his parents and that he has nowhere else to
go. It is raining, and Edmund is soaking wet. He begs Jeffrey to let him stay there for just one
night and promises that he will call his parents in the morning.

-- 324 of 593 --

302 	Section 2 • Issues
• What would happen if Jeffrey were to allow Edmund to spend the night and later Edmund
accused Jeffrey of making sexual advances toward him during the night he stayed at
Jeffrey’s home?
• What would be the wisest thing for Jeffrey to say and do in this situation?
Discussion: If Jeffrey allowed Edmund to spend the night and later Edmund accused Jeffrey of
making sexual advances toward him during the night, Jeffrey might face the following problems:
• Jeffrey would appear to have been unprofessional in allowing a student to spend the night
with him.
• No matter what Jeffrey said or did in response to Edmund’s claims, people would still wonder
whether Edmund was telling the truth.
• Jeffrey might get fired from his job for allowing Edmund to spend the night with him.
• The school district probably would deny any responsibility for what happened that night
because Jeffrey was at home and not on duty.
Jeffrey should consider the following steps:
• Jeffrey could take Edmund in and give him a towel to dry off with and require Edmund to
stay in the public parts of his home, such as the kitchen or front porch.
• He could call Edmund’s parents and ask them to pick Edmund up. Other relatives, such as
grandparents or aunts or uncles, might also be called to intervene.
• If Jeffrey determines that he should not call the parents, he could call a local crisis hotline
or the police and ask for assistance for Edmund.
Diversity Considerations with Minors
Working with children requires specialized knowledge and skills. Counselors who counsel minor cli-
ents must have a thorough understanding of child and adolescent development so that they can design
interventions to match a child’s developmental level (Lawrence & Robinson Kurpius, 2000). This
knowledge base includes a solid understanding of the development of gender role, racial identity, and
sexuality. Counselors must be careful not to impose their own values onto minor clients regarding
gender identity, race or ethnicity, or sexual orientation, especially during adolescence, when young
people are forming their own unique identities.
Bemak and Chung (2007) have noted that school counselors are uniquely positioned to
address the societal inequities and injustices that affect many economically disadvantaged students
and students of color in U.S. schools. They have suggested that school counselors, serving as advo-
cates for students, can play a significant role in reducing academic achievement gaps.
School counselors must be cognizant that female, gay and lesbian, or trans students are
likely to be subjected to sexual harassment and violence in the school environment. A solid body
of research indicates that LGBTGEQIAP+ students experience high rates of verbal and physical
assault (Abreu et al., 2020; McFarland & Dupuis, 2001; Pilkington & D’Augelli, 1995). Abreu et al.
(2017), Kurt (2017), Little (2001), Simons (2021), and Welfel (2016) have offered several strate-
gies that school counselors can employ when counseling gay, lesbian, and trans youth. Welfel has
suggested the use of inclusive, nonsexist language; challenging antigay and antifemale comments
made by students and school personnel; educating students and staff about sexual harassment and

-- 325 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	303
homophobia; and having a repertoire of appropriate referral resources for students and families
who need them. School counselors can serve as advocates for other stigmatized groups of students
as well, including children who are HIV-positive, children whose parents are imprisoned, children
who are medically obese, or children who have experienced a family suicide (Corr & Balk, 2010;
Lee, 2001).
In working with parents and families of child clients, it is important for school counselors to
have an understanding of systems theories. Often, a child’s behavioral, social, or academic prob-
lems are reflective of family dysfunction. In addition, it is crucial for counselors to have an aware-
ness of cultural differences in child-rearing practices. Some of the most complex and difficult
situations that counselors encounter in their work with clients involve a convergence of the duty
to warn exceptions to confidentiality and privilege with questions of counselor values and cultural
diversity. An issue that can be particularly problematic in this regard is child abuse reporting.
In determining whether to make a report of child abuse, it is important to keep in mind that
norms regarding acceptable child-rearing practices and punishment vary by culture (Fontes, 2002).
11-5 The Case of Tonya
Tonya, a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in a community counseling agency, has begun
counseling the Hernandez family. The parents, Guillermo and Anabella, emigrated from
Guatemala 6 years ago. They are experiencing some family conflict in their relationships with
their three children: two teenage girls and a 7-year-old boy. Today, as Tonya is walking down the
hallway to the reception area to greet the Hernandez family, she sees Guillermo grab the young
boy roughly by the arm and slap him across the face. She is alarmed to see this abusive behavior
and thinks she may have to report it to child protective services.
• Do you believe that child-rearing practices that are acceptable in another culture should be
tolerated by the U.S. legal system?
• What do you think Tonya should do in this situation?
Discussion: Within the concept of familismo, family is a source of pride in Latine cultures,
and it is very important for children to be well-behaved and represent the family well in pub-
lic. When children misbehave publicly, Latin parents may respond immediately with physi-
cal punishment, which places them at greater risk for reports to child protection agencies.
Knowing this information may make a difference in whether Tonya believes that what she saw
was child abuse.
If Tonya believes, after considering cultural values, that what she saw Guillermo do (roughly
grab his son by the arm and slap him across the face) constitutes child abuse, she is legally obli-
gated to make a report. She should explain to him that, by law, she has to make a report.
If Guillermo cannot understand or speak English very well, Tonya should obtain an interpreter.
She should explain to him that although his behavior might be common and acceptable in his native
country of Guatemala, it may not be acceptable by law in the United States.
She could explain to him how American parents might discipline their children in public
in a way that is culturally acceptable here and help him understand how his behavior might be
viewed by the majority culture. If she makes a report, she should explain to him what might
happen after she does so, and she should make a sincere attempt to continue her counseling
relationship with him and his family.

-- 326 of 593 --

304 	Section 2 • Issues
Tonya may decide that what she saw did not constitute child abuse, or that it is questionable
as to whether Guillermo’s behavior met the threshold to be so considered. If she determines that it
was not abuse, she will not make a report. She might attempt to speak with Guillermo to see if he
is willing to attend a parenting class to learn about U.S. parenting norms.
Counselors who provide professional services to culturally diverse populations of children
and adolescents must continually examine their own values in determining the most appropriate
actions when confronted with risk-taking behaviors. They must be clear about their own stances
toward such issues as drug and alcohol use, premarital sex, abortion, and appropriate discipline, and
they must be cognizant of community standards.
VULNERABLE ADULTS
All of the issues related to minor clients apply equally to any adult clients who have been legally
adjudicated mentally incompetent or who have had legal guardians appointed based on their dimin-
ished capacity. Just as counselors have an ethical and legal obligation to protect children when
there is suspicion of abuse or neglect, they have a duty to protect adult clients who are vulnerable
to maltreatment due to diminished capacity to protect themselves from harm. Adults who might be
considered vulnerable include developmentally disabled, severely mentally ill, elderly, and physi-
cally disabled individuals. All 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the
Virgin Islands had enacted statutes that provided protective and social services for victims of elder
abuse (U.S. Department of Justice, 2023b). The statutes vary widely regarding the definition of
“elder abuse”; the age of protected elders; the types of abuse, neglect, and exploitation that are
covered; whether abuse is a criminal or civil offense; and the remedies for abuse. State elder abuse
reporting laws and updates have been collected by the Stetson University College of Law (2023).
Elder or Vulnerable Adult Maltreatment
Numerically, the elderly are by far the largest group of adults who are vulnerable to abuse or
neglect. Elder maltreatment is a growing but underrecognized problem in our society. The popula-
tion of citizens in the United States over the age of 65 was 46 million in 2016 and is projected to
reach 98 million by 2060 (Mather, 2016).
It is difficult to estimate the incidence of elder maltreatment because it so often goes unre-
ported. It is possible that as few as 1 in 14 cases is reported (National Council on Aging, 2023).
According to some estimates, it is likely that as many as 5 million older adults suffer abuse or
neglect every year (National Council on Aging, 2023).
Reports of resident-to-resident abuse in 10 nursing homes in New York were recorded and
analyzed by Lachs (2016). Lachs found that 20.2% of the residents in the nursing homes studied
had experienced resident-to-resident abuse. Forms of abuse included verbal (9.1%); other forms of
abuse such as menacing gestures or invasion of privacy (5.3%); physical (5.2%); and sexual (0.6%).
Mogul (2016) reported that it appears that resident-to-resident abuse is an accepted part of the culture
of nursing homes and is seldom reported. Lachs and Pillemer (2015) found that perpetrators of elder
abuse tend to be adult children or spouses, be male, have a history of or currently are involved in
substance abuse, have mental or physical health problems, have a history of trouble with the police,
be socially isolated, be unemployed or have financial problems, and be experiencing major stress.

-- 327 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	305
Elders who have experienced abuse are more at risk for physical health problems and even
death (Yunus et al., 2017). Dong et al. (2009) found that elders, even those who had experienced
only modest abuse, had a risk of death 300% higher than those who had not been abused. After
reviewing the literature on community-based interventions for elder abuse and neglect, Fearing
et al. (2017) concluded that limited studies show evidence that interventions decrease elder abuse
and neglect, and that there is a scarcity of community-based interventions for elders. Clearly, there
is a role for professional counselors both in preventing maltreatment and in helping victims to
recover from its effects, which can include depression; posttraumatic stress symptomology; learned
helplessness; and feelings of isolation, alienation, and mistrust.
Elder abuse manifests itself in many forms. The National Council on Aging (2023) has indi-
cated that elder abuse includes physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse, confinement, and
passive neglect. Elder abuse may also include willful deprivation of medication, medical care,
shelter, food, therapeutic devices, or other physical assistance.
Financial exploitation is nearly as prevalent as physical and psychological abuse, and it is
estimated that there are 5 million cases of elder financial abuse each year (National Center on Elder
Abuse, 2023). This form of abuse occurs when someone (often a caretaker) misuses an older per-
son’s income or resources for his or her own personal gain. Abusers may deny elderly adults things
to which they are entitled, steal their possessions or money, or coerce them into signing contracts
that are not in their best interest.
11-6 The Case of Marjorie
Jerome is 89 years old and lives with his 58-year-old son, Tyler. Tyler is an accountant whose
wife divorced him after many years of attempting to get him to kick his cocaine habit. Jerome
suffers from mild dementia and is partially paralyzed as a result of a stroke. He needs assis-
tance with bathing and dressing, but he is able to get around the house using a walker.
Tyler often leaves for work before Jerome awakens in the morning, which results in Jerome
being forced to spend the day unbathed and in his pajamas. It is not uncommon for Tyler
to fail to come home after work because he is out looking to buy cocaine. On several such
occasions, Jerome has burned himself while trying to cook his dinner. Tyler cashes Jerome’s
Social Security checks for him, but more often than not he spends the money on drugs.
When Jerome tries to discuss these problems with his son, Tyler yells at him and threatens
to put him into a nursing home. Jerome is so terrified by this possibility that he withdraws
into silence.
Marjorie is a home visit counselor from the local mental health center. The first time she visits
Jerome in his home, she is disturbed by his grooming and physical condition. Very reluctantly,
Jerome tells Marjorie about some of Tyler’s behaviors. Marjorie becomes even more concerned
about Jerome’s welfare.
• What should Marjorie say to Jerome?
• What do you think Marjorie should do?
Discussion: Marjorie should inform Jerome that he does not have to endure the conditions in
which he is living. She should assure him there are alternatives that he might find acceptable and
explain to him what those alternatives are.

-- 328 of 593 --

306 	Section 2 • Issues
If you will be counseling older adults or families whose concerns include taking care of
elderly relatives, you should be aware that elder abuse is difficult to detect. As is true in the case
example just described, the perpetrator is usually a family member, and neither the victim nor mem-
bers of the family want to reveal the problem. If you are alert to the possibility, however, you may
find yourself confronted with the question of what to do when you suspect elder maltreatment. You
must consider both your legal and your ethical obligations.
All states, the District of Columbia, and some territories have enacted some form of legislation
aimed at reducing elder maltreatment (U.S. Department of Justice, 2023). In many ways the laws
are similar to child abuse reporting statutes, but they are different in that not every state mandates
that professionals report suspected abuse to authorities. Another difference is that elder abuse report-
ing statutes usually allow older adults to refuse protective services if they do not want them. To
compound the problem, there is little uniformity across the states in elder abuse reporting statutes.
Statutes vary with respect to age requirements for qualifying as elderly, types of abuse that are report-
able, procedures for reporting, and whether counselors and other mental health professionals are
considered to be mandated reporters. Obviously, you will need to learn the specific requirements of
the relevant statutes in the state and community where you will be practicing.
As an ethical obligation, reporting of elder maltreatment arises from the principles of nonma-
leficence and beneficence. When counselors suspect that a vulnerable person is being harmed in some
way, they have a duty to intervene to prevent the harm from continuing and to promote client wel-
fare. If, after careful exploration, you believe that you must make a report,
you will want to try to accomplish this in a way that will not destroy the
counseling relationship. You should involve the client in the reporting pro-
cess, thoroughly discuss the logistical and emotional consequences of the
report, report only essential information to preserve confidentiality to the
extent possible, and follow up to ensure that needed services are being
offered (Welfel et al., 2000).
Other Issues in Counseling Older Adults
Schwiebert et al. (2000) identified two issues in addition to abuse or
neglect that pose difficult ethical questions for counselors who work with
older adults. When older adults have cognitive impairments, for example,
questions regarding informed consent arise. If a client begins counsel-
ing during the early stages of a progressive, deteriorating disease such as
Alzheimer’s, at what point is that client no longer able to consent to con-
tinued counseling? Can the counselor continue to work with the client, or
must the counselor wait until permission is granted by a legal guardian?
Marjorie should consider taking the following actions:
• If her state law requires counselors to report cases of suspected elder abuse, Marjorie
should make the report.
• If there is no statutory requirement, then Marjorie should decide whether it is in Jerome’s
best interest to report the suspected abuse to authorities even though there is no legal
requirement to do so.
• Marjorie should try to arrange an appointment with Tyler to determine whether she can be
of assistance in helping him care for his father and perhaps persuade him to seek treatment
for his drug addiction.

-- 329 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	307
A second circumstance that can present agonizing dilemmas for counselors arises when clients
have a terminal illness. Counselors are confronted with ethical and legal quandaries when these clients
want to end their suffering by hastening their own deaths. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) §B.2.b.
is related to end-of-life decisions of clients. The standard states, “Counselors who provide services
to terminally ill individuals who are considering hastening their own deaths have the option to main-
tain confidentiality, depending on applicable laws and the specific circumstances of the situation and
after seeking consultation or supervision from appropriate professional and legal parties.” Bennett
and Werth (2006) have concluded that these types of ethical guidelines provide counselors with more
latitude when counseling terminally ill clients who have a desire to die. Werth and Crow (2009) have
offered the opinion that, due to the guidelines in the Code of Ethics, counselors are in the safest ethical
and legal position of all mental health professionals with respect to working with clients on end-of-life
decision making. The issue of counseling terminally ill clients was discussed briefly in Chapter 4 as it
relates to value conflicts. That topic is discussed in more detail in the following section.
END-OF-LIFE DECISIONS 	Due in large part to the aging of the U.S. population and to continu-
ing developments in life saving and life-sustaining medical technology, death in U.S. society now
commonly occurs at an advanced age or after a prolonged illness. Thus, it is likely that increasing
numbers of individuals will consider making a request for aid in dying through physician-assisted
suicide. As a result, counselors will be called on more frequently to work with clients who are con-
sidering this action and with their clients’ families and significant others (Herlihy & Watson, 2004).
As of 2023, only 10 jurisdictions (California, Colorado, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, Maine,
New Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Vermont, and Washington) have legalized physician-assisted
suicide through legislation (Britannica ProCon.Org, 2023). Montana allows physician-assisted suicide
as the result of a court ruling (Britannica ProCon.Org, 2023). In other states, physician-assisted sui-
cide is a criminal act, or the law is ambiguous. In 2023, 40 states consider medical aid in dying to
be illegal.
After reviewing the results of officially sanctioned physician-assisted suicide in Oregon and
the Netherlands in the context of laws and statutes, Stern and DiFonzo (2007) concluded that there
is still much to be learned about palliative care, societal beliefs about dying, and laws that eventually
might be passed related to this topic. They stated that physicians need to take an unambiguous stand
on physician-assisted suicide to prevent uninformed legislators from enacting laws that are not in
the best interests of those who are dying.
In 1997, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Washington v. Glucksberg, considered the legality of
assisted suicide. The Court heard appeals to two circuit court decisions that had struck down crimi-
nal prohibitions against assisted suicide in the states of New York and Washington. The Court held
unanimously in both cases that there is not a constitutional right to physician-assisted suicide, leav-
ing it up to individual states to determine whether to allow the practice (Werth & Gordon, 2002).
Even though the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) reflects support for a person’s right to choose the time
and manner of ending suffering caused by terminal illness as well as support for counselor involve-
ment in such decision making, you must decide for yourself whether you are able and willing to
work with these clients. This will entail carefully examining your beliefs and values about living
and dying, quality of life, and the right to die (Herlihy & Watson, 2004; Jamison, 2012). Do you
believe that people have the right to hasten their own death? If so, in what circumstances? When
they have a terminal illness? If so, must death be imminent? When their condition is not terminal
but their lives are filled with pain and suffering and there is no hope for improvement? In some
circumstances, such as when clinical depression is clouding a client’s judgment or when a client is
being pressured by others to consider physician-assisted suicide, you may need to invoke your duty
to warn and protect that client (see Chapter 5 for a discussion of this duty).

-- 330 of 593 --

308 	Section 2 • Issues
You must also be aware of cultural issues, as some scholars have asserted that if
physician-assisted suicide were more broadly legalized, it would have the greatest effect on the most
vulnerable members of our society—those whose autonomy is already compromised by poverty,
lack of access to quality medical care, advanced age, or membership in a stigmatized group (New
York State Task Force on Life and the Law, 1994). Thus, if you counsel terminally ill clients con-
sidering physician-assisted suicide, you will need to carefully self-monitor to guard against making
assumptions based on the client’s race, socioeconomic status, religious and spiritual beliefs, or age.
11-7 The Case of Karen
Karen is a counselor who works in a hospital, and her job is to counsel patients and families
while the patients are hospitalized. Weldon is a 73-year-old widower with a grown daughter.
Although Weldon has been diagnosed with terminal cancer, his doctors tell him that he might
expect to live more than another year with further surgery and chemotherapy. Weldon wants to
request physician-assisted suicide, stating that he doesn’t want to die a lingering death or to
consider hospice care. He adds that he doesn’t want to be a burden to his daughter, who is a
single mother and works long hours to support her two children. He insists that he would find it
humiliating to be cared for by strangers in a hospice. He doesn’t want to involve his daughter in
his decision-making process because she would never accept the idea of a hastened death for
him and because he wants her memories of him to be happy ones.
• How should Karen proceed in her counseling relationship with Weldon?
• Do you believe that other states should follow the example of the 10 U.S. jurisdictions that
have passed laws that permit physician-assisted suicide? Why or why not?
Discussion: Karen’s first action should be to determine whether her state allows physician-
assisted suicides. If they are allowed in her state, Karen should learn as much as possible about
the requirements for a person to choose that option. If she feels competent to counsel Weldon
regarding physician-assisted suicide, she can use her counseling skills to help him review his
options and make his final decisions. Karen might assist Weldon by helping him to examine his
motives for wanting physician-assisted suicide and to explore other alternatives. She also could
work to facilitate an open dialogue between him and his daughter.
Arguments for physician-assisted suicide laws include the following:
• Persons should have a right to choose to die with dignity.
• It is inhumane to keep people alive when their quality of life has diminished beyond reason.
• Physicians have been assisting people with dying throughout history. It is time now to make
it legal.
Arguments against such laws include the following:
• It is impossible to know whether a person who wants to commit suicide is able to make
such a choice.
• Vulnerable individuals would be at the mercy of others who might want them to die.
• Only God should decide when a person will die.
Counselors are well qualified to assist terminally ill clients with end-of-life decision mak-
ing and may be called on more frequently to provide these services, particularly if other states
follow the example of the 10 jurisdictions that have enacted death with dignity laws. Bennett and

-- 331 of 593 --

Chapter 11 • Counseling Children and Vulnerable Adults 	309
Werth (2006) have advised counselors who work with clients making end-of-life decisions to
take several steps to ensure that clients receive quality care: First, counselors should determine
whether they have the competency and training to work with such clients. Second, they should
conduct a thorough assessment of the client or refer the client to a competent provider. Third,
they would be wise to consult with other professionals. Fourth, counselors should document
carefully the assessment, consultations, and treatment options that were considered and chosen.
Diversity Considerations in Counseling Older Adults
In working with older adults, counselors must guard against clinician age bias. Stereotyping and
discriminating against older people appear to be significant problems among mental health coun-
selors. Danzinger and Welfel (2000) reviewed the research and found evidence that counselors are
reluctant to work with older people, tend to view them as having poorer prognoses, and see them
as being more set in their ways and less able to change. Clients with Alzheimer’s disease or other
cognitive impairments are as deserving of respect for their autonomy in decision making as are any
other clients. When counseling with an older person or a client with a pervasive developmental dis-
ability or severe mental illness, counselors must take care to avoid the paternalistic assumption that
others (including the counselor) know what’s best for the client.
Clients Who Have Been Declared Legally Incompetent
All of the legal issues that apply to children and elderly persons also apply to individuals who
have been declared incompetent by courts. Although very few individuals are declared by courts
to be legally incompetent, adults who are developmentally disabled, critically ill, seriously injured,
mentally ill, or elderly could be declared incompetent by a court. If such individuals are declared
incompetent, the court appoints a legal guardian, who has the same legal powers over the individual
that a biological parent or a legal guardian would have over a child.
Counselors must be careful to distinguish between adult clients who have actually been
declared incompetent and those who still maintain their legal rights but are dependent on oth-
ers. Dependent adults maintain their legal rights until a court, upon a petition filed by some party,
declares them incompetent and appoints a guardian.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) addresses the informed consent and confidentiality rights
of clients who have been declared legally incompetent. Standard A.2.d. reminds counselors to seek
the assent of clients to counseling services and to include them in the decision-making process as
appropriate. Standard B.5.a. requires counselors to protect the confidentiality of clients who lack the
capacity to give voluntary, informed consent.
Summary and Key Points
This chapter focuses on the legal and ethical con-
siderations in working with children and vulner-
able adults. There are discrepancies between legal
and ethical perspectives regarding certain issues in
counseling minors, such as privacy and confiden-
tiality rights. These discrepancies pose some diffi-
cult challenges for counselors. Many of the same
issues that arise in working with minor clients also
apply when providing services to vulnerable adults.
Some of the key points made in this chapter
about counseling children include:
• Minor clients have an ethical right to privacy and
confidentiality in the counseling relationship, but
the privacy rights of minors legally belong to
their parents or guardians.
• Counselors should not automatically assume
that all minor clients do not want their parents

-- 332 of 593 --

310 	Section 2 • Issues
to know information they have shared with their
counselors. The stance that minor clients take
toward privacy will vary according to their age,
developmental stage, and motivation for sharing
information with the counselor.
• The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) allows coun-
selors latitude to use their professional judg-
ment in determining whether and when to
involve parents or guardians in the counseling
process.
• Generally, clients under the age of 18 are not
considered legally competent to give informed
consent to counseling, although there are excep-
tions to this rule.
• Parents or guardians probably have the legal
right to know the contents of counseling sessions
with their children.
• Noncustodial parents have certain rights and
might be included in the counseling process if it
is in their child’s best interest.
• Counselors can follow a sequence of steps in
resolving a situation in which a parent or guard-
ian demands information and the minor client
feels strongly that the information should not be
divulged to the parent or guardian.
• Counseling is a contractual relationship into
which minors cannot legally enter on their
own. Nonetheless, school counselors do not
have a legal obligation to obtain parent permis-
sion before counseling student clients, but may
be employed in schools that have policies that
require parental permission. Parents who object
to their child’s participation in counseling prob-
ably have the legal right to demand that services
be discontinued.
• For legal purposes, informed consent to coun-
sel a minor should be obtained from the par-
ents. As an ethical matter, the child client
should be actively involved in giving assent
and determining treatment goals and strategies.
Issues related to counseling children who are
at risk of harm to self or others were reviewed in
this chapter. Key points include:
• Counselors are required by law to report sus-
pected child abuse or neglect. Counselors need
to be very familiar with reporting requirements
in the state where they practice because statutes
vary considerably from state to state.
• The reporting of suspected child abuse requires
counselors to exercise their professional judg-
ment before and after making a report. A host of
factors must be taken into consideration through-
out the process.
• School violence has become an increasing con-
cern that raises questions for counselors regard-
ing reporting threats and how to prevent bullying
and harassment of children.
• School counselors often play multiple roles.
Conflicts can occur between the role of coun-
selor and other roles such as bathroom or
lunchroom monitor, coach or club sponsor, and
friend to teachers and parents of student cli-
ents. Difficult challenges are posed by the need
to maintain appropriate boundaries around dual
professional roles or simultaneous personal and
professional roles.
Counseling vulnerable adults and clients who
have been legally declared incompetent was also
addressed in this chapter. Key points include:
• Counselors have an ethical and legal obligation
to protect adult clients who are vulnerable to
abuse or neglect due to a diminished capacity to
protect themselves.
• Elder abuse and neglect are underreported and
are common problems in today’s society.
• As the U.S. population ages, counselors will
be confronted more often with requests to
assist clients in their end-of-life decision
making.
• All of the legal issues that apply to minor
clients apply to individuals who have been
declared by courts to be legally incompetent.
Counselors need to be careful to distinguish
between legally incompetent clients and cli-
ents who are dependent on others but who
retain their legal rights.
• Counselors who work with individuals who
are considering hastening the end of their lives
need to be aware of the correlated laws in their
states and need to examine their own beliefs
about the issue before offering such counsel-
ing services.

-- 333 of 593 --

12Counseling Families and Groups
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
12.1 	Understand the unique ethical issues involved in
counseling families.
12.2 	Explain the special ethical considerations that arise
in group counseling.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. How are informed consent and
confidentiality different when
counseling couples, families, or
groups as opposed to counseling an
individual client?
2. What do you think are the most
value-laden issues that often arise
in counseling families or groups?
3. Why do you think marriage and
family counselors end up embroiled
in their clients’ lawsuits so often?
4. Why should counselors screen
potential counseling group
members before admitting them to
the group?
Ethical and legal issues can be complex when counselors
work with more than one client at a time, as they do in fam-
ily counseling and group counseling. Many of the same
issues apply when counseling individuals, but these issues
often are more complicated and difficult to resolve when
more than one client is involved.
This chapter begins with a focus on counseling families.
Today’s families are very diverse and include single-parent
families, blended families, adoptive families, foster families,
interracial or multiple-heritage families, LGBTGEQIAP+
families, and multigenerational families (Watts et al., 2018),
to name just a few examples. Ethical concerns that are par-
ticularly challenging when counseling families are consent,
protecting the welfare of all family members, confidential-
ity, family violence, dealing with family secrets, divorce
and child custody, the potential for imposition of counselor
values, and counselor competence. Some of these topics are
familiar but are revisited from a family systems orientation.
The second portion of this chapter focuses on group
work. The issues of client welfare and informed consent, pro-
tecting clients from harm, privacy and confidentiality, dual
relationships, counselor values, and counselor competence
take on new dimensions when applied to group counsel-
ing. Additional ethical and legal rights and responsibilities
must be addressed when conducting group counseling, such
as members’ freedom to exit a group, screening potential
members, protecting confidentiality of minors in groups,
and dealing with outside-of-group socializing among group
members.
311

-- 334 of 593 --

312 	Section 2 • Issues
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Counseling
Families and Groups
Lebow (2020) aptly noted that the COVID-19 pandemic presented an opportunity to study a
once-in-a-lifetime social experiment about family life. As COVID-19 reached epidemic propor-
tions, families faced multiple disruptions to their daily lives. As family members attempted to adjust
to the close physical and emotional contact enforced by the stay-at-home mandate, they struggled to
manage fears and anxieties related to contagion, to deal with increased unemployment and financial
vulnerability, and to find safe ways to accomplish basic tasks like obtaining groceries. Some house-
holds experienced the death of family members, and their grief was compounded by being unable
to hold and attend a funeral.
Additional challenges were faced by some families. Lebow (2020) noted that couples and
families with histories of violence, conflict, or other forms of relational difficulty were at height-
ened risk for these problems to escalate. New conflicts arose in divorced and remarried families
where the frequency of contact between parents and children already was at issue. Families that
depended on rituals for connection, whether through church or self-help group meetings or family
dinners, found those supports to be inaccessible. As was discussed in Chapter 3, the pandemic also
took a disproportionate toll on some members of our society, including African American families
and families that had the least financial resources.
The switch to providing family counseling online created a host of new questions related
to ethical practice. For instance, how can the counselor guarantee the privacy of family members
who are in treatment from those who are not? How can sessions be adapted when they involve
young children? What should the counselor do when a family abruptly disconnects from the
online platform in the midst of a conflict between members? To some extent, virtual family coun-
seling will continue in the post-pandemic environment, and these kinds of questions will continue
to emerge.
At the same time, virtual counseling is being found to have unique advantages in family work.
First, having fewer constraints on time and distance enables more members of the family system to
participate. Second, it allows the counselor to see the family in their living space, with all the cues
this provides (Burgoyne & Cohn, 2020). Family members themselves appear to welcome the new
modality. Maier et al. (2021) found that although clients in family counseling initially were reluctant
to switch to online sessions, they came to believe that the benefit was worth the discomfort that
came with this change. The perceptions of couple and family therapists were also positive: Hardy
et al. (2021) found that they generally experienced a positive shift from traditional in-person therapy
to telehealth therapy and that 74% reported they would continue providing teletherapy after the
pandemic ended.
Group counseling is perhaps the counseling modality that was least suited to the transition
to online services during the pandemic. Weinberg (2020) noted that there is not enough research
yet to evaluate its effectiveness and that no clear guidelines exist to explain how to do it well.
Difficult issues still need to be addressed, including establishing cohesion and therapeutic pres-
ence in a virtual environment and learning how the working alliance and cohesion are different
online when compared to face-to-face meetings. Counselors in some settings may have been
unable to initiate or continue counseling groups after it became impossible to meet in person.
School counselors interviewed by Savitz-Romer et al. (2021) reported that their schools and dis-
tricts eliminated group counseling sessions outright, prohibited them from using video platforms,
or required parents to give consent or be present for online sessions. However, we are aware of
some school counselors who did continue to provide group counseling using videoconferencing

-- 335 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	313
platforms. Virtual groups for other client populations have proved to be effective. Saloner et al.
(2022) interviewed clients who were in drug treatment before and after the pandemic; these
clients reported a substantial reduction in in-person service use, including a significant reduc-
tion in participating in group counseling. Nonetheless, these clients reported that they were
able to receive the treatment they needed by taking advantage of telehealth adaptations. Other
online groups, such as a career counseling group for unemployed young adults (Santilli et al.,
2021), also proved to be efficacious. We anticipate that virtual group counseling will continue
post-COVID, although many counselors who facilitate therapeutic groups have returned to an
in-person format.
COUNSELING FAMILIES
Counselors who provide services to couples or families should have knowledge of two special-
ized codes of ethics. One code has been developed by the International Association of Marriage
and Family Counselors (IAMFC, 2017), a division of the American Counseling Association
(ACA), and can be found at www.iamfconline.org. This code is aligned with the ACA Code of
Ethics (2014) and provides guidance specific to counseling couples and families. The other code
has been developed by the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy (AAMFT),
which is not affiliated with ACA. The AAMFT Code of Ethics (2015) has some differences from
the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), such as a greater emphasis on forensic work; it can be found at
www.aamft.org.
Family counselors use a systems perspective in working with their clients (Bitter, 2021;
Watts et al., 2018). From this viewpoint, the family provides the context for understanding its
individual members and their problems. Family counselors believe that actions taken by any
family member will influence the other members and that their reactions in turn will have a
reciprocal effect on the individual. Counselors often work with couples, parents and children,
nuclear families, families of origin, extended families, and nontraditional families. Therefore,
the first question that the counselor needs to answer is “Who is the client?” Although fam-
ily counselors see the entire family system as their client (Young et al., 2021), the answer to
this seemingly basic question is not that simple. If the counseling goals of one family mem-
ber are different from or even antithetical to the wishes of another member, whose interests
does the counselor serve? Family counselors need to consider their responsibilities to each
of the parties involved in the counseling process. The IAMFC Code of Ethics (2017) states
that counselors “advocate for the family as a whole system while considering the uniqueness
of each family member” (Preamble). Balancing the interests and fostering the well-being of
everyone in the family is one of the most challenging ethical mandates for family counselors
(Corey et al., 2024).
Sometimes counseling begins as individual work, and the family is included later. The
ACA Code of Ethics (2014) encourages counselors to recognize that families are usually
important forces in clients’ lives. The Code says that counselors “consider enlisting the sup-
port, understanding, and involvement of others, including family members, when appropri-
ate and with client consent” (§A.1.d.). When counseling begins with an individual client and
then includes family members, to whom does the counselor have primary responsibility—the
individual family member who originally sought counseling or the family as a whole? Standard
A.6.d. states that when changing from individual to relationship or family counseling, or vice
versa, counselors obtain informed consent from the client and “explain the right of the client to

-- 336 of 593 --

314 	Section 2 • Issues
refuse services related to the change.” This standard further advises that clients must be fully
informed of any anticipated consequences of counselor role changes. Therefore, when counsel-
ors begin counseling with an individual client and then change the focus to family counseling,
they will need to revisit issues related to goals, informed consent, parameters of confidentiality,
and treatment planning.
Problems can arise when these questions are not resolved at the beginning of the counseling
relationship. Standard A.8. of the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) states that counselors clarify at the
outset “which person or persons are clients and the nature of the relationships the counselor will
have with each involved person.” The standard provides guidance in the event the counselor is
called upon to perform conflicting roles and requires that, in such circumstances, “the counselor
will clarify, adjust, or withdraw from roles appropriately.” In addition, “Counselors seek agreement
and document in writing such agreement among all involved parties regarding the confidentiality of
information” (§B.4.b.).
The Legal Perspective
Because the law and the counseling profession have different perspectives on the family, the
two are sometimes in conflict. Family counselors often view the family system as their client
and treat the entire family, as opposed to treating individual members of the family. The law,
on the other hand, always views family members as having separate and distinct rights and
responsibilities that are individual in nature. To further complicate the situation, the law states
that any minor or legally incompetent family member can exercise rights only through parents or
legal guardians. These legal requirements pose problems when one family member wants a fam-
ily counselor to uphold confidentiality and another family member demands that the counselor
reveal in court conversations that took place during counseling sessions. A family counselor
generally favors the family member who wants privacy, whereas the law usually favors the fam-
ily member who wants the information revealed. This problem is discussed in greater depth later
in this chapter.
Informed Consent
When working with families, the issue of informed consent is complicated. The counselor must
attempt to ensure that consent to counseling is given freely after clear and sufficient information has
been provided and must also address the following questions:
• Who gives consent on behalf of the family?
• Who in the family is seeking counseling, and are any participants reluctant to participate?
Can family members who feel pressured to join in the counseling process give truly free
consent?
• What happens when one of the adults in the family refuses to give consent for family counseling?
• How capable are potential participants—particularly children—of understanding what they
are getting into?
• How can counselors adequately address the reality that there will be changes in the family
system, as well as in individual members, as a result of counseling?
Obtaining informed consent from all members of a family sometimes is not possible. In mar-
riage and family counseling, the desired procedure is to have all adults and legally competent family
members give consent to counseling. A difficult situation arises if one such individual refuses to do so.

-- 337 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	315
The issue of what to do about nonparticipating family members raises some difficult ethical
questions. A controversial procedure used by some family counselors is to withhold services until
all family members agree to participate in counseling. The problem with this practice is that the
counselor thereby cooperates with the resistant family member by keeping the rest of the family
from receiving counseling. Willing family members are then put in the unfair position of being
denied services (Wilcoxon et al., 2013). Of course, coercion of reluctant family members would be
unethical, but some family counselors are comfortable exerting some pressure on a resistant fam-
ily member to participate in one or two sessions. These counselors hope that the resistance can be
overcome when the reluctant family member sees that he or she is not going to be scapegoated or
blamed for the family’s problems (Welfel, 2019). Another strategy would be to invite the reluctant
family member to attend one individual session in which the counselor explains the counseling pro-
cess and addresses any fears the person may have. The family counselor could also invite the willing
family members to engage in individual counseling with other providers until the entire family is
ready to enter into counseling.
Another point of view is that when individual family members refuse to participate, counsel-
ing still should be made available for those who desire counseling. Counseling should also be made
available to family members who are mandated by courts to attend counseling.
Although children cannot legally give informed consent, counselors are wise to involve them
in the decision-making process. It is hard to imagine that family counseling would be successful if
it included a resistant, resentful teenager who felt left out of the decision to engage in the process.
Counselors must be able to communicate with adolescents and children in a way that enables them
to understand their role in the family counseling process and to then request their consent or assent
to participate.
12-1 The Case of Omar
Omar is a private practitioner who is licensed as a professional counselor and as a marriage and
family therapist. He receives a telephone call from Mr. Marquez, who wants to make an appoint-
ment for himself and his two children, ages 10 and 12. He states that he and his wife have been
having serious marital difficulties, which are taking their toll on the children, who are beginning
to act out both at home and at school. He adds that his wife is supportive of their wish to seek
counseling but that she refuses to participate in the process because she believes the marital
problems are entirely his fault.
• How do you think Omar should respond to this request from Mr. Marquez?
• If Omar begins counseling with Mr. Marquez and his two children, what issues should he
keep in mind?
Discussion: Omar might agree to see the family members who are willing to engage in coun-
seling. If he does so, he should explain to Mr. Marquez the problems that exist when one family
member is unwilling to participate. If Omar begins counseling with Mr. Marquez and his children,
he will need to be careful to avoid allowing the three attending family members to blame the
absent wife/mother for the problems that are occurring in the family. He should, instead, keep
the focus on helping Mr. Marquez and each child examine their own behavior and how it contrib-
utes positively and negatively to the family dynamics.

-- 338 of 593 --

316 	Section 2 • Issues
Just as counselors have an ethical obligation to alert individual clients to life changes that
might occur as a result of counseling, family counselors must describe potential changes in family
relationships as well as adaptations that individual family members might make in conjunction with
shifts in the family system (Herlihy & Corey, 2015a). It can be very difficult to anticipate the direc-
tions that these reciprocal changes might take, and it is possible that counseling outcomes viewed
as desirable by one participant, such as a wife’s decision to divorce, might be seen as disastrous by
other participants, such as the husband or children. Nonetheless, family counselors have an obliga-
tion to explain that the family system will be the focus of the counseling process and that no one
family member will be treated as the identified patient who is the source of the family’s problems
(Bitter, 2021).
Client Welfare
Family counseling gives priority to the good of the family and, thus, may not be in the best interests
of an individual in the family. Ethical practice demands that family counselors make every effort to
minimize the risks to individuals. One way to accomplish this is to encourage family members to
question how counseling relates to their needs and goals as well as to those of the family. This kind
of discussion should take place as part of the informed consent process and throughout counseling,
as needed.
Although family counselors may consider the family as a whole to be their client, the law
would demand that all clients within a family group be able to rely on the counselor to act in a man-
ner that furthers their best interest and protects them from harm. Legal problems might arise, for
example, if a client in family counseling were financially harmed after a counselor encouraged the
family to make decisions that excluded the family member from the financial support of the family.
The changing nature of families raises another legal concern for family counselors. Few
families seeking counseling today consist of a biological mother and a biological father and their
children. Instead, families reflect a number of societal trends: Single parents are raising children;
a stepparent is in the family; single parents have partners to whom they are not married living with
the family; extended family members such as grandparents live with the family; adult siblings,
uncles, aunts, or cousins reside with the family and may be responsible for raising the children;
and LGBTGEQIAP+ couples are raising children. Family counselors must keep in mind, when
working with nontraditional families, that only biological parents or court-appointed guardians have
legal rights of control and authority over children. Often, one or more biological parents who are
not present in a family have legal rights that must be considered when family decisions regarding
children are made.
According to a U.S. Census Bureau (2023) statistic, approximately 2.4 million children are
living in stepparenting situations. Stepparents, nonmarried partners, grandparents, other relatives,
and friends have no legal rights to confidential information or other privileges held by biological
parents. In the event that a counselor wants a person other than a biological parent to have confiden-
tial information regarding a child client, a solution is to have a biological parent sign a form allow-
ing the counselor to disclose information to the other person.
Risky Techniques
Any time counselors use techniques that are out of the ordinary, they must ensure that clients are
protected. If a client is harmed as a result of a nontraditional or unusual technique, the client or the
counselor’s colleagues could claim that the counselor was operating outside the scope of accepted
practices in the field.

-- 339 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	317
Family members often enter counseling feeling vulnerable and fragile, and they may relin-
quish some of their own authority and allow the counselor to be very influential (Reamer, 2020).
The ethical obligation to reduce client dependency and foster autonomy can be particularly problem-
atic in marriage and family therapy because, in most marriage and family therapy approaches, the
counselor is seen as an active and directive agent of change (Wilcoxon et al., 2013). The AAMFT
Code of Ethics (2012) cautions therapists not to abuse their power in therapeutic relationships.
Family counselors sometimes become quite active in directing family members to take, or to refrain
from taking, certain actions. For example, counselors who practice a type of therapy known as stra-
tegic family therapy may give prescriptions or directives (Watts et al., 2018). A professional who
prescribes behavior must ensure that no one is harmed as a result of the directives.
One controversial technique used by some family counselors is known as paradoxical direc-
tives or interventions or prescribing the symptom. The concept behind this technique is that if
authorities instruct persons to do things that are against their best interests, the persons will defy
the counselor and correct the behavior on their own. When paradoxical directives are used in the
strategic family counseling model, the therapist encourages clients to continue or increase the prob-
lem behavior. As an example, assume that a teenage daughter is in an inappropriate role reversal
situation with her parent. The parent is acting like a teenager, and the daughter is acting like a dis-
approving parent. The family counselor tells the daughter to work harder at correcting her parent’s
irresponsible behavior and to take on even more household responsibilities. In this situation, the
counselor would hope that the daughter would recoil, defy the counselor’s directive, and recognize
that she was taking on a parenting role that was inappropriate for her.
Ethical concerns regarding this technique have been raised. One concern about paradoxical
directives is that they are manipulative and deceptive. Even though the counselor may ultimately
debrief the target of the intervention (the daughter in the previous example), the counselor delivers
the intervention without revealing these intentions. A second concern involves the risk of negative
outcomes. Some applications of this technique that are potentially dangerous are (a) a parent who
is overly strict is told to become more strict in disciplining the children and (b) an employee who is
frantically worried about not performing up to an employer’s expectations is told to be more con-
cerned about pleasing the boss. In these two examples, it is clear how problems could occur: The
parent could physically harm the children, and the employee could become so distressed as to lose
their job.
Paradoxical techniques are not the only type of powerful intervention used in family counsel-
ing. Family sculpting, a psychodrama technique, also can have powerful and unpredictable effects.
Other interventions that evoke strong feelings or uncover feelings that have been kept secret in the
family can leave clients vulnerable to harm. As a result, family counselors must carefully consider
the ramifications of such interventions (Bitter, 2021) and ensure that no one is harmed.
Family Violence
According to the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence, 1 in 4 women and 1 in 10 men in
the United States will experience sexual violence, physical violence, and/or stalking by an intimate
partner during their lifetime (https://ncadv.org). During the COVID-19 pandemic, the risk for fam-
ily violence or intimate partner violence (IPV) was elevated due to a combination of factors such as
increased social isolation for the survivor, increased stress in the household due to financial hard-
ship, and decreased opportunity for the survivor to leave the situation and find shelter (Lyons &
Brewer, 2021). Cappa and Jijon (2021) reviewed the literature on the impact of the pandemic on
children. Among their findings were a decrease in police reports and referrals to child protective

-- 340 of 593 --

318 	Section 2 • Issues
services, an increase in violence-related injuries, and a perceived or actual increase in family vio-
lence as reported by service providers or parents/caregivers. Intimate partner violence is a serious
problem that affects all members of a family, including children, who are its most vulnerable mem-
bers, and occurs across all racial/ethnic and socioeconomic groups and in same-sex and hetero-
sexual relationships (Corey et al., 2024).
Some scholars, and feminist counselors in particular, have been critical of the idea of applying
systems theory to abusive relationships. They note that most victims of physical abuse are women,
and they assert that blaming the relationship or relationship dynamics for the abuse is inexcusable.
They believe strongly that the male abuser must be held responsible for his behavior.
Several difficulties are inherent in attempting to conduct family counseling with couples when
abuse is occurring in their relationship. When one partner in a relationship is being abused by the
other, the foundation for successful counseling is absent. The partner being abused cannot express
feelings honestly in counseling sessions or risk behavior change. The perpetrator can evade personal
responsibility when the problem is framed as a family issue. It might be unsafe to bring both parties
together if the abuse is ongoing (Lebow & Stroud, 2016). For these reasons, it is generally recom-
mended that family counselors see the partners individually, at least initially.
Wilcoxon et al. (2013) have presented a thoughtful discussion of ethical dilemmas that coun-
selors face when intimate partner violence is present in the relationship of a couple in counseling. For
example, if counselors encourage or advise the victim to leave a violent relationship, are the counsel-
ors imposing their own values and infringing on the client’s right to autonomy in decision making?
On the other hand, not encouraging a victim to leave a dangerous situation would seem to violate the
moral principle of do no harm. We caution counselors not to encourage a victim to leave a violent
relationship until a safety plan is in place to ensure that this individual does not come to further harm.
When children are present in a domestic violence situation, the counselor’s ethical obligations
become more complex. The harm that these children experience has been well documented (Buser &
Saponara, 2011; Callaghan et al., 2017) and includes emotional and behavioral health difficulties,
problems with relationships, and educational challenges. Thus, counselors need to attend to safety
concerns for these children and to give the children’s perspectives and disclosures the same respect
and credibility that are given to adults.
Family counseling, like individual counseling, moved to online platforms with the onset of the
COVID-19 lockdown. Burgoyne and Cohen (2020) found some advantages to virtual counseling
with couples at risk for domestic violence: Teletherapy appeared to help high-conflict couples to
reduce emotional intensity, perhaps because videoconferencing inserted a useful sense of formality
and a need for turn-taking (a restriction imposed by the technology, not the counselor). Burgoyne
and Cohen also noted that encouraging the couple to look at the screen may have reduced tension
even more effectively than directing the partners to speak to the counselor in an office setting.
Privacy, Confidentiality, and Privileged Communication
Challenges to confidentiality increase exponentially when counselors counsel more than one per-
son at the same time. Counselors can guarantee confidentiality only on their own parts. They must
encourage confidentiality but make it clear that it cannot be guaranteed on the part of all family
members. You might review the statement regarding privacy in family situations that is included in
the client information and agreement found in Appendix B to see how this might be accomplished.
The legal counterpart to the ethic of confidentiality is privileged communication. The gen-
eral rule regarding privileged communication is that privilege is waived if a third party is present
(Knapp &VandeCreek, 1987). Most licensed counselors practice in jurisdictions where privilege

-- 341 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	319
exists between counselors and their clients but there is no specific guarantee of privilege for family
situations. In these circumstances, clients who wish to bring family members into counseling ses-
sions must be told that the privilege that normally would exist between the counselor and the client
probably would be lost in a family counseling session.
Some privilege statutes specifically grant privilege to family members individually and to
their counselor (Arthur & Swanson, 1993; Huber & Baruth, 1987). In these situations, an individual
client could prevent a counselor from being forced to testify as to what occurred in the sessions, but
there is a question as to whether the client would be able to prevent other family members from tes-
tifying if they were inclined to do so. As a result, counselors who practice in states where privilege
does exist in family counseling situations should assure clients that they (the counselors) would not
willingly disclose information from their sessions. However, they also should inform clients that
other family members may not have the same obligation to keep the information confidential.
In Perez v. City of Chicago (2004), a federal court found that family members had a right to
demand that their private information revealed in family counseling sessions be kept private even
when a family member who was a party in a lawsuit had waived his privilege. The court noted that
it would be very impractical for a counselor to redact information from family counseling notes to
preserve the privacy of the family and therefore held that the family counseling records did not have
to be produced in response to a subpoena. This is an unusual result, but it demonstrates how privacy
rights could be unexpectedly preserved by courts.
Counselors who provide professional services for married persons are often confronted with a
problem related to privileged communication and married couples. In a typical scenario, the couple
comes to the counselor because they are experiencing problems in their marriage. In the course of
the counseling relationship, a number of stressful topics are discussed, and either the husband or the
wife admits engaging in negative behaviors such as excessive drinking, infidelity, abusive behavior, or
violent acts. Later, the couple decides to divorce. One of the parties wants the counselor to repeat in
a legal deposition or hearing the admissions the other party made in the course of the counseling ses-
sions. The other party, for obvious reasons, wants the counselor to keep the information confidential.
12-2 The Case of Sanjeev
Sanjeev recently began counseling a couple, Margaret and Jason, who were having marital
problems after 3 years of marriage. They have one child, a daughter who is 1 year old. During
the first two sessions, Jason tearfully admitted to having had an extramarital affair with one of
Margaret’s good friends during their first year of marriage. The affair lasted 6 months. Margaret
had suspected that Jason was romantically involved with her friend, but she was not sure about
it until Jason admitted it in the counseling session. Before the third counseling session occurred,
Margaret told Jason that she could no longer live with him because of his affair with her friend
and that she was filing for divorce, alimony, and child support. Jason called and cancelled the
third session and reported to Sanjeev what Margaret had said to him.
Now, 1 year later, Margaret’s attorney has subpoenaed Sanjeev to attend a deposition to
discuss Jason’s admission of the affair in the counseling session. Yesterday, Sanjeev received a
call from Jason saying that he did not want Sanjeev to reveal what he had said in the counseling
sessions because what he said was confidential and privileged.
• What should Sanjeev do now?
• If Sanjeev does attend the deposition, how should he respond to questions?

-- 342 of 593 --

320 	Section 2 • Issues
The situation described here occurs frequently for counselors who provide couples marriage
counseling. When counselors find themselves in such dilemmas, they must consult an attorney
where they are employed or a private practice lawyer if they are private practitioners. If the coun-
selor refuses to testify at a deposition after a subpoena has been issued and if the spouse who made
the negative admissions has legally waived privilege under state law, the counselor could be held
in contempt of court. If, on the other hand, the counselor does testify and the relationship with
the spouse who made the negative admissions was privileged under state law, the counselor could
be legally accountable to that person for violating the spouse’s privacy. Reading the state statute
on privilege is not sufficient because legal arguments could be made for and against disclosure,
whether or not a privilege statute exists and regardless of the wording in the statute. This is a situ-
ation in which counselors must seek legal counsel and must follow the advice of their attorneys.
Of course, counselors should tell their attorneys whether they want to testify and their reasons for
feeling that way. This will help the attorney review the situation from the counselor’s perspective.
Confidentiality of records can be a problematic issue when counseling couples or families.
Adams (2010) has raised the question of what happens to records when the original counseling rela-
tionship is altered, either by the addition of a spouse or partner to a previously individual counseling
relationship or when members of a couple are seen separately as individuals for some but not all
sessions. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) in §B.6.e. states, “In situations involving multiple clients,
counselors provide individual clients with only those parts of records that relate directly to them
and do not include confidential information related to any other client.” According to the AAMFT
Code of Ethics (2015), therapists do not release records of couples counseling without the consent
of both parties. These two codes differ regarding the release of records, which could be problematic
for counselors who are members of both associations.
New privacy issues arose when family counseling transitioned to a virtual format during the
COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. Burgoyne and Cohn (2020) described client concerns about being
overheard by family members not engaged in treatment or in a particular session. They found that
some parents struggled to honor requests for privacy when a child was having an individual session.
They also reported that many clients resorted to receiving individual counseling sessions in their car
or on a walk to ensure that they were not overheard. At the same time, these authors found ways to
use the new technologies to resolve privacy issues, such as asking family members to take a break in
the Zoom waiting room in order to reduce tension and improve communication.
Family Secrets
A confidentiality issue that emerges frequently in family counseling is how to deal with family
secrets: information that one family member has shared with the counselor but has withheld from
a spouse, children, or other family members. There is no consensus among couples and family
Discussion: Sanjeev should obtain legal advice immediately. An important question with which
his attorney can help him is whether a statute exists in Sanjeev’s state that extends privilege
to family counseling situations. If there is such a statute, Sanjeev’s attorney will tell him that
he cannot reveal confidential information at the deposition. If there is no statute, the law may
require him to reveal what Jason said. Sanjeev’s attorney will attempt to preserve Jason’s privacy
if Sanjeev asks the lawyer to do that. How Sanjeev conducts himself in the deposition depends
on how his attorney has advised him. He should ask his attorney to accompany him to the
deposition.

-- 343 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	321
therapists as to whether counselors should keep such revelations in confidence. One position is
that secrets should be kept. A rationale for this stance is that the counselor, by agreeing to uphold
the confidentiality of individual family members, will be more likely to obtain honest and com-
plete information from each family member, which will help the counselor better understand family
dynamics and conduct an accurate assessment.
A differing position is that counselors should refuse to keep secrets. Butler et al. (2010), in a
survey of relationship mental health professionals, found that most believed that healing and attach-
ment security were best achieved through disclosure. These researchers supported facilitated disclo-
sure of infidelity. In their view, secrets are seen as being counterproductive to the open and honest
communication that is necessary for family counseling to be successful. In addition, by refusing to
keep secrets, the counselor can prevent triangulation. Triangulation is a kind of subgrouping created
when the counselor and the family member with the secret collude in withholding information from
the other family member(s) (Shaw, 2015). Some family counselors make it a policy to refuse to see
family members individually to avoid becoming recipients of secrets (Bitter, 2021).
Still others have argued a third, middle-ground position. They stress the need for flexibility
and propose that counselors should exercise their professional judgment, divulging or maintaining
a confidence in accordance with the greatest benefit for the family. They argue that the criterion
should be the effect on therapeutic progress and family welfare. A problem with this approach is
the likelihood that family members will discover that the counselor is divulging some secrets but
not others. One or more family members will feel betrayed, thus destroying the trust necessary for
therapeutic progress. Mark and Schuman (2020) reviewed the empirical evidence regarding family
secrets and found support for this middle ground in which counselors can use their discretion about
whether to disclose a secret on behalf of a client. Zazzarino et al. (2021) recommended that family
counselors create, at the onset of the counseling relationship, a document describing what types of
information will be shared and when.
One type of secret that has received a great deal of attention is
marital infidelity. Rosaline and Kasaraneni (2022) found that deal-
ing with this highly emotionally charged issue amidst the COVID-19
pandemic created extreme anxiety for the couples as well as the family
members, adding to the complexities of treatment planning. Snyder and
Doss (2005) have suggested that conflicts of interest may be unavoid-
able for counselors, who must work to ensure that improvement in one
spouse does not occur at the expense of the other. When one partner
in a relationship discloses an affair that remains unknown to the other,
effective counseling may be impossible (Whitman & Wagers, 2005).
Counselors have several choices regarding how to deal with a disclo-
sure of infidelity: They can inform the couple in the initial session that
anything revealed outside of conjoint sessions becomes a part of the
couple’s therapy; they can also treat the information as confidential on a
temporary basis but insist that the individual who committed the infidel-
ity disclose it to the partner; or they can keep the revelation confidential
(Snyder & Doss, 2005).
Another type of secret that has received attention relates to
LGBTGEQIAP+ adolescents who divulge to the counselor that they
have kept their sexual identity secret from their parents and express a
desire to come out during a family counseling session. Ryan et al. (2015) found that family mem-
bers’ negative reactions to the adolescent’s coming out have a strong deleterious effect on the

-- 344 of 593 --

322 	Section 2 • Issues
adolescent’s well-being. What should counselors do if they doubt that the disclosure will be met
with openness or at least an absence of negativity? In situations like these, counselors should be
guided by a desire to prevent harm, no matter what their usual policy regarding family secrets is.
The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) allows counselors some discretion in how to deal with fam-
ily secrets. Standard B.4.b. says that counselors should first clearly define who is considered the
client and states, “Counselors seek agreement and document in writing such agreement among all
involved parties regarding the confidentiality of information. In the absence of an agreement to the
contrary, the couple or family is considered to be the client.” If you believe that no secrets should be
allowed within the context of family counseling, you could include a policy in your disclosure state-
ment that each individual gives permission to the counselor to disclose to other family members
anything said in any interactions between family members and the counselor.
You should keep in mind that your promise to uphold confidentiality is not absolute. When
securing informed consent from family members, tell them that if you learn about activities going on
in the family that put family members in danger (such as spouse battering, child abuse, or incest), you
may need to take steps to prevent further harm. You must also let your family clients know that you
must breach confidentiality when you are required by law to do so.
Divorce and Child Custody
It appears that about 40–50% of the marriages in the United States end in divorce and that the divorce rate
of second marriages is even higher (U.S. Census Bureau, 2023). Many children are affected by divorce.
An increasing number of children are born in the United States today to parents who are not married.
DeParle and Tarvernise (2012) have reported that the majority of children born in the United States are
born to unmarried women under 30. Fathers of children who are not married to the mothers of their chil-
dren have the same legal responsibilities and rights as men who father children within marriages. An area
of counseling that is quite challenging, then, is coparent counseling (Fridhandler & Lehmer, 2014), in
which counselors work with separated and divorced parents as they try to raise their children.
It is important for counselors to understand the nature of child custody so that they will not
be tempted to involve themselves inappropriately in custody battles (Patel & Choate, 2014). The
Children’s Rights Council (2014) provides information regarding custody and parenting that is help-
ful to parents and those who help parents. Some basic information regarding custody is offered here
to give you some sense of the difficulties involved in trying to make decisions regarding your role.
Generally, a custody order by a court defines the nature of the rights and responsibilities, in
relation to a child or children, of the parents who are separated or divorced. Pruett and DiFonzo
(2014), in distinguishing between physical and legal custody, have indicated that legal custody is
focused on parental decision making, whereas physical custody is related to time spent with a minor
child. Physical custody dictates living arrangements for a minor child and determines which par-
ent is responsible for the day-to-day decisions regarding the child. When the parent who was not
granted legal custody has physical possession of the child, that parent usually has the authority to
make decisions concerning the child’s welfare.
The primary components of a custody order specifically define which parent has physical
possession of the child at which times and order child support payments when appropriate. Unless
a parental right is specifically altered, modified, or terminated in the custody order, a parent main-
tains that right, even without the right to physical custody. As a result, noncustodial parents might
have the rights to receive correspondence that schools send to parents, to review their child’s school
record, to contract for counseling for the child, to demand that the child discontinue counseling ser-
vices, and to take other actions that the custodial parent would have the right to take.

-- 345 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	323
Whether a child’s preferences will be considered when making custody decisions varies
greatly from court to court. Appellate courts have done everything from allowing judges to base
custody decisions entirely on the expressed preferences of the child to allowing judges to disregard
those preferences entirely. The most important factor that courts consider is the best interest of the
child. Courts will consider evidence regarding the child’s needs and each parent’s ability to meet
those needs (American Bar Association, 2018). Most judges will consider the wishes of a child
regarding custody, particularly if the child is older (Kramer, 1994).
Generally, courts give custody preference to natural parents over others who have an interest
in obtaining custody. If a caretaker who is not a biological parent wants to obtain custody over the
objections of a natural parent, usually a court would have to find the natural parent unfit in order to
grant custody to the caretaker (Kramer, 1994).
There are many forms of child custody, including sole custody, split custody (in which one
parent is awarded custody of some of the children, and the other parent receives custody of the
remaining children), divided custody (in which each parent is awarded custody for part of the
year), and joint custody. Awarding custody to both parents (joint custody) is a controversial prac-
tice, yet all but seven states in the United States have statutory provisions that allow joint custody
as an option (Children’s Rights Council, 2014). Some experts believe
that joint custody is a positive concept in that it allows natural parents
to participate equally in raising their children. Others believe that joint
custody is usually detrimental to children because children suffer when
parents disagree and no one seems to be in charge.
It is difficult for nonlawyers, including counselors, to determine
whether a parent has a legal right to possession of a child at any given
moment. Parents often agree to modify the times that they have posses-
sion. Some custody orders even stipulate that the parties may mutually
agree to modifications. If parents are in conflict over who should have
possession of a child, counselors should insist that administrators, law-
yers, or even the police become involved in resolving the dispute, rather
than trying to resolve it themselves.
Courts sometimes, although rarely, issue an order terminating
parental rights. This order severs the legal relationship between a child
and the biological or legal parent. Custody and termination of parent
rights orders vary greatly in their structure and language and must be
drafted to comply with state law. In addition, court orders should always
be interpreted by attorneys if there is a question regarding their meaning.
When a divorce has been contentious and child custody has been
disputed, parents sometimes make demands that put school counselors
in an awkward position.
12-3 The Case of David
Mrs. Jones brings her 12-year-old daughter to school and enrolls her midyear. As she is
enrolling her daughter, Mrs. Jones produces a legal document that she says gives her
full legal custody of her daughter and terminates all of her husband’s parental rights. She
instructs David, the school counselor, that if her former husband inquires about his daughter,

-- 346 of 593 --

324 	Section 2 • Issues
Counselor Competence
Marriage and family counseling is based on a theoretical perspective that is philosophically quite
different from the foundations of individual counseling (Bitter, 2021), and as a result, the needed
skills and techniques are different from those required of individual counselors. Developing com-
petence to practice marriage and family counseling requires more than the completion of one or
two specialized courses. The American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy (AAMFT,
2015) has established educational requirements that are quite extensive and include, in addition
to academic training, supervised experience in working with couples and families, work on one’s
own family of origin, and personal therapy. In addition, the AAMFT has adopted an extensive set
of core competencies (AAMFT, 2004). The Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related
Educational Programs (CACREP, 2024) has also promulgated a set of core competencies that are
considered necessary for counselors who hold themselves out as specialists in marriage and fam-
ily counseling.
There is debate among helping professionals as to whether marriage and family counseling
is a separate discipline or a specialty area of counseling. Marriage and family counselors in most
states have succeeded in getting separate licensure bills passed that set them apart from licensed
professional counselors. This diversity of opinion is reflected in the ethics arena: The codes of
ethics of the AAMFT (2015) and the IAMFC (n.d.) provide guidance that is more specific to
working with couples and families than does the ACA Code, which is focused primarily on indi-
vidual counseling.
We believe that counselors who are trained generically as professional counselors can
appropriately include family counseling in their practices as long as they have acquired addi-
tional training. This training should include specific coursework, supervised experience, and
some personal work on understanding one’s own family of origin issues. The potential for coun-
tertransference reactions intensifies when counselors have unresolved family of origin issues
(Corey et al., 2024). The bottom line is that professional counselors must stay within the bound-
aries of their competence when providing services to couples and family clients. Considering
the vast societal upheaval that occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly the Black
Lives Matter movement and the pandemic’s disproportionate effects on Black, Indigenous, and
People of Color (BIPOC) families, counselors also have an obligation to stretch their boundar-
ies of competence so that they possess the skills needed to address the specific needs of diverse
families (Watson et al., 2020)
the school should give him no information and certainly should not allow him to see or pick
his daughter up from the school.
• How should David respond to Mrs. Jones’s request?
• What should the school officials do in this case?
Discussion: David should not try to deal with this matter; he should instead refer Mrs. Jones to
the school principal. The principal should read the court order to determine what the language
actually says about the custody rights of Mrs. Jones and her former husband. If the language is
unclear, the principal should ask the school district’s attorney to interpret it. The principal would
also be wise to ask the attorney how to handle the situation if the former husband shows up at
the school and demands to see or take his daughter from the school.

-- 347 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	325
LGBTGEQIAP + Couples and Families
Marriage between persons of the same sex became legal in 2015, yet LGBTGEQIAP+ couples and
families continue to encounter social disadvantages and mental health disparities that may have been
exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic (Salerno et al., 2020). Internalized homophobia and difficul-
ties accepting one’s sexual identity negatively affect the relationship satisfaction of LGBTGEQIAP+
couples (Pepping et al., 2019), so it is vital that counselors provide LGBTGEQIAP+–affirming
counseling. Counselors also need to remain aware that gay men are particularly vulnerable to inti-
mate partner violence (Roy et al., 2023). Levinson et al. (2023) noted that individuals with diverse
sexual orientations, gender identities, and gender expression are at greater risk for trauma, discrimi-
nation, and victimization, and they emphasized the need for trauma-informed care.
Counselors may provide services to families that are struggling with accepting their child’s or
adolescent’s LGBTGEQIAP+ identity. Unfortunately, parents continue to seek conversion therapy
in hopes of changing their son or daughter’s sexual/affectional orientation. Research has shown that
attempts at conversion therapy are associated with profound emotional distress, depression, suicidal
thoughts, suicidal attempts, and lower educational attainment, underscoring the need for parental
education and guidance (Glassgold, 2022; Goodyear et al., 2021; Higbee et al., 2022; Ryan et al.,
2020). Family counseling is essential, as family acceptance plays a pivotal role in diminishing these
risk factors (Nealy, 2019). Counselors are well positioned to provide affirming therapy, which has
been shown to be effective and associated with positive outcomes (Przeworksi et al., 2021)
Counselor Values
The personal values of counselors undeniably have an influence on how they conduct individual
counseling (see Chapter 3). The role of counselor values may be particularly critical in the practice
of marriage and family counseling (Bitter, 2021; Corey et al., 2024). Although very few family coun-
selors deliberately attempt to impose their own values on clients, it is impossible for counselors to
avoid using their influence in subtle ways—sometimes without being aware that they are doing so.
Marriage and family counseling often involves some of the most value-laden issues in our society.
Just a few examples of these issues are offered in Figure 12-1.
Counseling is never value free, and all family counselors have their own definitions of healthy
and dysfunctional families, effective and ineffective ways of communicating, and affirming and
destructive relationships. As Welfel (2016) has so aptly pointed out, no therapeutic work could take
place without these definitions. It is not unusual for couples and family clients to espouse values
different from those of the counselor, and it is in these instances that counselors are the most chal-
lenged to avoid imposing their own agendas.
FIGURE 12-1 Value-laden issues in marriage and family counseling
• Cohabitation, marriage, and divorce
• Marital fidelity and extramarital affairs
• Parenting and disciplining of children
• Birth control, abortion, and adoption
• Relationships between couples of different races or cultures
• Roles of stepparents or intimate partners in families with children
• Relationships of LGBTGEQIAP+ individuals
• Sex roles and gender roles
• Unorthodox sexual practices, such as sadomasochism, bondage, partner swapping, or fetish arousal

-- 348 of 593 --

326 	Section 2 • Issues
Family counselors must work to achieve a balance with respect to gender roles and
therapeutic change. They are likely to cause harm to both partners in a relationship if they
urge change in gender-prescribed roles solely because they believe such changes are needed.
Conversely, it is equally irresponsible to condone emotional abuse or intimidation by being
silent. Of course, we are exposing our own biases when we suggest that some goals worth striv-
ing for, in your work with couples and families, might include the following: (a) practicing in
a gender-aware manner, (b) being open to nontraditional roles and relationships, (c) helping
family members identify ways that their views on gender roles may be contributing to their
problems, and (d) continually monitoring your own behavior for unintended bias, such as look-
ing more at the wife when discussing child rearing and more at the husband when discussing
financial issues.
You probably have identified some of your own values and assumptions as you reflected on
the issues we have raised in this section. Over the course of your career as a counselor, you will
inevitably encounter couple and family clients whose values, lifestyles, and choices are very differ-
ent from your own. It will thus be important for you to be aware of your own values and biases and
keep clearly in mind that it is not your role to decide how couples or families should change. Couple
and family counselors need to remain neutral (Watts et al., 2018) and avoid aligning with any one
family member. Alignment may be more likely to occur when the beliefs and values of one family
12-4 The Case of Charlotte
George and Victor are a couple who have sought counseling from Charlotte to help them decide
whether to make a big change in their lives. A number of years ago, George was married and
had a son with his wife. He has been divorced and in a committed relationship with Victor for
5 years. George has been thinking about seeking joint custody of his son, who is now 13 years
old and with whom he has maintained a parental relationship, although his son has not lived with
him. Victor is generally supportive of the idea but admits to some apprehension about having to
help parent a teenage son, having to deal with George’s ex-wife, and having to share George’s
affection and attention.
• What assumptions do you think Charlotte might hold that could influence how she works
with George and Victor?
• What if you were George and Victor’s counselor? Do you hold certain ideas about the
morality of same-sex relationships? Do you have assumptions about how enduring same-sex
relationships are likely to be? Do you have preconceptions about what makes a healthy role
model for a 13-year-old boy? Do you have certain beliefs about the impact that a partner’s
jealousy or possessiveness might have on child rearing? Consider how your values, beliefs,
and biases might affect your work if you were the counselor in this scenario.
Discussion: Charlotte might be assuming that two men cannot parent effectively, that they
would not be good role models for a teenage boy, or that same-sex relationships are morally
wrong. If she holds any of these biases, she will not be an effective counselor to George and
Victor. It is important for counselors to give careful thought to their own values and assumptions
regarding what constitutes a healthy relationship so that they are better prepared to counsel
LGBTGEQIAP+ clients and less likely to impose their own values.

-- 349 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	327
member are similar to the counselor’s beliefs and values. You will be better able to make informed
ethical decisions when you know your own values and understand and respect the values of the
families with whom you are working.
GROUP COUNSELING
Most of the ethical and legal issues that were discussed in relation to family counseling apply to
group counseling as well. A primary difference between family counseling and group counseling
is that group members usually do not know each other and do not have personal relationships with
each other outside the group counseling environment.
This portion of the chapter addresses the issues of informed consent, screening, client wel-
fare and protection from harm, privacy and confidentiality, dual relationships, socializing among
members, counselor values, and competence as they pertain to group work. Included in the dis-
cussion are some ethical and legal considerations unique to group counseling, such as members’
freedom to exit a group and the counselor’s screening of potential members. The Association for
Specialists in Group Work (ASGW) is the division of the ACA that addresses professional issues
in group counseling. ASGW has published three documents that can be very helpful to counselors
who provide group counseling services: the Guiding Principles for Group Work (ASGW, 2021),
the Best Practice Guidelines (ASGW, 2007), and the Professional Standards for the Training of
Group Workers (ASGW, 2000). According to the Best Practice Guidelines (2007), group workers
are viewed as ethical agents who pay careful attention to the intent and context of their actions.
This vigilance is necessary because group workers’ “attempts to influence human behavior through
group work always have ethical implications” (Preamble). These guidelines emphasize group work-
ers’ obligation to practice ethical surveillance and use an ethical decision-making model (B.9.)
It is important for group counselors to engage in pre-planning before they form a group.
Planning must be done carefully with attention given to multiple factors: Jacobs et al. (2016) dis-
cussed 15 therapeutic factors to consider, including leader’s readiness, clarity of purpose, relevance
to members of that purpose, leader’s attitude, members’ levels of trust and commitment, and (if
applicable) co-leadership harmony. Additional decisions must be made about group size, frequency
and length of sessions, setting, format (open or closed), and voluntary or involuntary membership.
Informed Consent
Potential members of a counseling group have the same rights to informed consent as do prospective
clients who are seeking individual counseling. See Chapter 4 for a review of these rights. Because
the group format differs in some significant ways from individual counseling, counselors need to
address additional elements of informed consent for group participation, preferably in a pre-group
or screening interview. It is good practice to provide prospective group members with a professional
disclosure statement that explains the nature of the group, the counselor’s qualifications to lead the
group, the techniques likely to be used, the rights and responsibilities of members, and the potential
risks and benefits (Corey et al., 2024).
The purpose of counseling is an issue that must be addressed in both individual and group coun-
seling, but clients in a group setting have less freedom to determine the topics or process of counseling.
Typically, group leaders have already established a general theme or purpose for the group, such as
adjusting to divorce, dealing with bullying, coping with losses caused by COVID-19, or succeed-
ing in college. Therefore, the aim in discussing the group’s purpose is to help prospective members

-- 350 of 593 --

328 	Section 2 • Issues
determine whether their goals in seeking counseling have a reasonable chance of being met within a
group context, and if so, whether the particular group is compatible with their goals and needs.
There are psychological risks involved in individual counseling as well as in group participa-
tion, but in group counseling the risks are increased because the group leader has less situational
control over events. Therefore, informed consent must include a full discussion of this topic. Group
pressure or coercion is one such risk that has received considerable attention from specialists in
groupwork. Risks are discussed further in a later section on client welfare.
Informed consent should include a discussion of responsibilities the counselor and client must
fulfill in order for counseling to be successful. In a group setting, regular attendance and being on
time for sessions are particularly important client responsibilities because other members and the
group as a unit are negatively affected when an individual does not meet these obligations. In individ-
ual counseling, clients can choose to share information they have discussed in sessions, but in group
counseling they have a responsibility to maintain the confidences of other members. Taking interper-
sonal risks and giving feedback to others are further responsibilities that pertain to group counseling
participants. The ASGW Best Practice Guidelines (2007) contains a detailed list of the elements of
informed consent. Counselors would be wise to review these elements before forming a group.
When group members are minors, obtaining informed consent raises some of the same issues
discussed in Chapter 11 on working with minors individually. Whether the minor or the parent has
the right to make the decision for the minor to participate in a group is a thorny issue. There are
potential problems with either requiring or not requiring parental consent. It is possible that parents
might not give consent for their children to participate in some groups, such as groups for children
whose parents have been reported to a state agency that protects children from abuse. However, if
parental consent is not sought and parents later are upset to learn that their child has been participat-
ing in such a group, this also could present problems. In schools, group counseling programs are
part of the counseling program delivered on a regular basis, so there is no requirement that school
counselors obtain parental permission for students to participate in groups. However, some school
districts or school principals require parental permission anyway.
Screening
In addition to securing informed consent of potential group members prior to implementing a coun-
seling group, group counselors should screen potential members to determine whether any of them
should be excluded. The ACA Code of Ethics (2014) requires that counselors screen prospective
group participants and do their best to select members whose needs and goals are compatible with
the goals of the group. Counselors should also select members whose well-being will not be jeop-
ardized by the group experience and who will not impede the group process (§A.9.a.). The primary
criteria for inclusion should be whether potential members are likely to contribute to the group and
whether they are likely to be compatible with each other. During the screening process, group coun-
selors must remain self-aware to ensure that they are not including or excluding potential members
based on their own discomfort or biases (M. Corey et al., 2018).
Unless the group has a very specific purpose, it is much easier to decide whom to exclude than
it is to decide whom to include. Prospective participants who generally should be excluded are those
who are likely to dominate or monopolize group time, are hostile or aggressive in their style of inter-
acting with others, are in a state of severe crisis, are suicidal, or are lacking in ego strength (Corey
et al., 2024). Individuals diagnosed with traumatic brain injuries, paranoid or highly suspicious
individuals, people who are acutely psychotic, and those with antisocial personalities are considered
poor candidates for group counseling (Yalom & Leszcz, 2020).

-- 351 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	329
Generally, highly motivated clients whose concerns are interpersonal in nature will profit
most from a group experience (Yalom & Leszcz, 2020). Of course, the purpose of the group will be
an important factor in determining whether prospective members should be included or excluded.
Some additional issues must be considered when recruiting and screening minor clients for
groups in school settings. If school counselors ask teachers to refer potential members for groups
on topics such as children of divorce, neurodivergent children, or children who display disruptive
classroom behaviors, counselors run the risk of labeling such students as well as violating their pri-
vacy. Some school counselors do not give their groups a name that would label children or imply a
diagnosis and allow students to see the counselor at their own discretion to discuss their interest in
participating in a group (Ritchie & Huss, 2000).
Client Welfare and Protection from Harm
Participating in a counseling group, like any catalyst for personal change, can pose psychologi-
cal risks. Group counselors have an ethical responsibility to take precautions to protect group
members “from physical, emotional, or psychological trauma” (ACA, 2014, §A.9.b.). They need
to have a solid understanding of the forces that operate in groups and how to mobilize those
forces in a constructive manner (Corey, 2016). Four potential dangers to which group leaders
need to be alert are the scapegoating of members, the subjection of members to undue pressure,
the misuse of confrontation, and any injury resulting from group exercises or activities that
involve physical contact.
Sometimes an individual member of a group is singled out as a scapegoat and is made the
object of the group’s frustration or hostility. When this happens, it is the responsibility of the group
leader to take firm steps to stop this behavior. Group counselors have an ethical responsibility to
avoid coercing participants into changing directions that are not chosen by the participants them-
selves and to intervene when members use undue pressure or coercion.
Confrontation is a valuable and powerful tool in a group, but it can be misused by members
who have not developed the skill of confronting constructively. When members are inappropriately
confrontational, it is the group counselor’s responsibility to intervene. It is also critical that group
counselors model appropriate confrontation.
Although the possibility of a group member physically harming another group member is
remote, it could happen. Counselors who conduct group counseling sessions are expected to ensure
the safety of all members. Group members who have the potential for harming others either should
be excluded from group sessions or should be monitored carefully. Warning signs of potentially
dangerous clients are outlined in Chapter 8.
Some group counseling approaches involve group members interacting with each other physi-
cally. The law of assault and battery requires that individuals not be touched or put in apprehension
of being touched without their permission (Swenson, 1997). Counselors who use group exercises
that involve touching should explain in their disclosure statements to clients that touching among
members will take place. They should prevent touching that might be considered offensive or sex-
ual, and they should not use any activity that might result in a physical injury.
Privacy and Confidentiality
As noted, counselors can guarantee only their own behavior with respect to upholding confidential-
ity. Counselors must therefore inform clients that they cannot guarantee confidentiality on the parts
of group members. It is important for counselors to understand how confidentiality promises in a
group differ from those that can be offered in individual counseling.

-- 352 of 593 --

330 	Section 2 • Issues
Confidentiality should be explained during the screening pro-
cess, during the first group meeting, and throughout the group sessions
(Vernon & Davis-Gage, 2018). It is important for group counselors to
communicate to group members the importance of keeping information
shared in groups private and to explain the limits of confidentiality. A
limit that members need to understand is that the group leader can guar-
antee only his or her own behavior (Vernon & Davis-Gage, 2018). Some
group counseling situations bring special challenges regarding confiden-
tiality. For example, when groups are held virtually, counselors need to
carefully guard against all the potential risks to confidentiality that come
with the use of online platforms.
Confidentiality with Minors
The ethical and legal complexities of conducting groups with minors
are accentuated when group members disclose some risky behavior that
their parents should know about. There is no satisfactory answer to how
such situations should be handled. The counselors must assess each
unique situation, given all that is known about the minor and their family
and what is known about the risky activity in which the minor is involved. Consultation with other
counselors before making a decision is always the best course of action for counselors.
12-5 The Case of Shadiqua
Shadiqua, a high school counselor, is conducting a group for sophomore girls. The purpose of the
group is to foster self-esteem and to help in making wise choices. During the fifth session, the topic is
boyfriends and whether to just say no to sex. Megan, a 15-year-old, shares that she and her 15-year-
old boyfriend are sexually active and that she thinks it’s okay because they are really in love. Megan
adds that her parents would kill her boyfriend if they found out and would throw her out of the house.
• Do you think Megan’s parents must be notified? Or can Shadiqua keep Megan’s disclosure
in confidence?
• If Shadiqua breaches Megan’s confidentiality, what are the risks to her relationship with
Megan and with the group?
Discussion: Because Megan is a minor, Shadiqua should talk privately with Megan to see if she
can persuade Megan to tell her parents. Shadiqua can remind Megan that the limits of confiden-
tiality had been discussed at the beginning of and throughout the group, and she can remind
Megan of those discussions. It is possible that despite Shadiqua’s previous explanations of con-
fidentiality limits, Megan and the other group members will feel betrayed, and the effectiveness
of the group will be compromised if Shadiqua decides to tell Megan’s parents. If Shadiqua does
not inform Megan’s parents and Megan is harmed in some way due to being sexually active
and the parents find out that Shadiqua knew and didn’t inform them, of course the parents
would be upset and might accuse Shadiqua of unethical practice. On the other hand, Shadiqua
might choose to take the risk of not telling the parents because she does not believe Megan is
endangering herself through her sexual activity with her boyfriend. We would recommend that
Shadiqua consult with other counselors who work with adolescents to gain their perspectives.

-- 353 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	331
Situations in which parents may need to be informed highlight the importance, when work-
ing with minors, of discussing confidentiality and its limits before the group begins and throughout
the duration of the group. If counselors reiterate confidentiality limits whenever sensitive topics
are broached during group sessions, they will have a better chance of preventing such difficult
dilemmas.
Privileged Communication
Privileged communication may exist for relationships between counselors and clients in your jurisdic-
tion, but this privilege generally is considered to be waived when you are counseling more than one
person. Only a few privileged communications statutes grant privilege to individual group counseling
members and their counselor (Huber & Baruth, 1987; Kearney, 1984; Arthur & Swanson, 1993). Read
and make sure you understand the provisions of the privileged communication statute in your state to
determine whether group counseling situations are covered.
Relationship Boundaries
Although dual relationships between counselors and their clients, including members of counsel-
ing groups, are generally to be avoided, relationships between group members and leaders will
vary somewhat depending on context. When task groups are held within a work environment, for
instance, casual contact between leaders and group members may be inevitable. In counseling
groups, however, outside-of-group contact between leaders and individual members can be inappro-
priate and counterproductive for the group as a whole (Gladding, 2020). The ASGW Best Practice
Guidelines (2007) acknowledges this need for flexibility, advising group workers to “define and
maintain” social relationship boundaries “as appropriate to their roles in the organization and type
of group” involved (B.3.c).
If the group counselor has a personal or social relationship with one of the members, this can
lead to charges of favoritism. The counselor might avoid confronting this member or might be reluc-
tant to explore in the group some interpersonal issues that are problematic in the social relationship
with the member. Group counselors should not use group clients to meet their personal needs for
social relationships or friendships. The role of group counselors is to help members meet their
goals, not to help counselors meet their own needs.
Just as group counselors should not develop friendships with group members, they
should not admit friends or close acquaintances to counseling groups they are conducting. In
the same way that preexisting personal relationships are problematic in a group context, prior
professional relationships can cause difficulties. Some counselors make it a routine practice to
form their groups largely from their former clients in individual counseling (Herlihy & Corey,
2015a). This is not unethical, although there are potential problems: Members of a group
who have been counseled individually and who are accustomed to having the counselor’s full
attention for the entire session may find it difficult to share their counselor with other group
members. In addition, members who are not former individual clients of the counselor may
feel disadvantaged because they have not had the same opportunity to form a bond with their
group counselor.
There are limits to counselor self-disclosure in group counseling as well as in individual coun-
seling. As a group leader, you must monitor your self-disclosures so that you are aware of what you
are saying and your rationale for sharing any personal information. Although it is not your role to
use group time to work on your own issues, you can self-disclose appropriately in several ways: You
can let members know that you are personally affected by what they are sharing; you can express

-- 354 of 593 --

332 	Section 2 • Issues
your persistent reactions to members and offer feedback; and you can model appropriate and timely
self-disclosure by expressing how you are affected in the moment by what is going on in the group
(Herlihy & Corey, 2015a).
Socializing Among Members
Groupwork specialists have taken varying positions on the question of whether socializing among
group members facilitates or hinders the group process. As is true of leader–member contact out-
side of group sessions, much depends on the context in which the group occurs. In 12-step groups,
socializing among members outside the meetings is common, and one member might serve as
another member’s sponsor. In hospitals, schools, and other institutional settings, it is inevitable that
members will encounter one another between sessions. In situations such as these, group leaders
generally avoid making strict rules about socializing and personal relationships among members
because these rules are impossible to enforce.
12-6 The Case of Marisu
Marisu has been conducting a grief group for parents who have lost a child. During the first session,
she discussed the ground rules for the group. She noted that, although members might want to
offer each other comfort and support between sessions, this should be avoided so that subgroups
do not form and negatively affect group cohesion. The group has been meeting for 8 weeks and
has become productive, with members offering each other support during each session. During the
last two sessions, Marisu has noticed some meaningful looks being exchanged between two of the
members, Alfred and Elena. Both Alfred and Elena have expressed their frustration and anger at
their spouses; they have stated that their spouses have walled off their grief and that they feel dis-
tance growing in their marital relationships. Today, another group member approaches Marisu after
the group ends and reveals that Alfred and Elena have confided in him that they have developed a
romantic relationship and are talking about divorcing their spouses so they can be with each other.
• How do you think Marisu should deal with this information that two of her group members
have developed a romantic relationship outside the group?
• Do you believe this is an issue that needs to be addressed within the group, or should
Marisu have a private conversation with Alfred and Elena?
Discussion: This situation presents both clinical and ethical considerations. From a therapeutic
standpoint, Marisu will be concerned about the direction that Alfred and Elena are taking in their
lives at a time when they are grieving and are emotionally vulnerable. This clinical concern can
be addressed with Alfred and Elena separately from the group if it cannot be addressed during a
group session. Marisu also needs to be concerned about the group, particularly because Alfred and
Elena have kept their relationship secret from most but not all of the members. She might begin
the next group session with a review of the ground rules and a discussion of the negative effects
that out-of-group relationships between members can have on group cohesion. This would provide
Alfred and Elena with an opportunity to reveal their relationship and process it with other group
members, who may be able to offer them insights into the risks of pursuing their relationship at this
time. If Alfred and Elena do not reveal their relationship to the group, then Marisu should meet with
them individually, inform them that she knows of their relationship, and get a commitment from
them to reveal their relationship to the group or to discontinue their participation in the group.

-- 355 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	333
Although the group counselor cannot control members’ lives outside the group, there
are some good reasons for discouraging the members from forming friendships or social rela-
tionships with each other during the group’s duration. If cliques or subgroups form, this is
detrimental to the group process. If some group members meet outside the group context and
discuss matters that are best dealt with during group sessions, hidden agendas will develop
and impede group progress. Members who meet outside the group in this way have a respon-
sibility to bring information about their meetings into the group, but they may avoid doing
so. Yalom and Leszcz (2020) have made the point that counseling groups teach people how to
form intimate relationships but do not provide these relationships. Thus, group leaders have
a responsibility to discuss with members the reasons it is inadvisable for them to socialize
between group sessions. If members recognize the pitfalls and understand the rationale for
avoiding outside-of-group socializing, they are more likely to honor the counselor’s request to
refrain from this activity.
Freedom to Exit the Group
Although group workers consider it an ethical imperative to give members the freedom to exit a
group at any time during the duration of the group, they have debated the delicate matter of how
such an event should be handled. When a member drops out of a group, it can cause disruptions
in the process for the remaining members. If members are concerned that they have said or done
something to cause the departure, the trust and cohesion of the group will be affected. For this
reason, many group leaders believe that members who are considering leaving the group should
be encouraged to raise the matter in a group session rather than simply notify the leader of their
decision to withdraw. Corey et al. (2024) have stated that group members have a responsibility to
the leaders and to other members to explain why they want to leave. Their practice is to ask these
group members to talk about their decision in the group, out of respect for the needs of the remain-
ing members and for their own well-being. These members should not be pressured or coerced to
remain, however.
Although clients in voluntary groups have the freedom to withdraw from participation, this
freedom is abridged when counseling is court ordered. Mandated clients must be informed that pre-
maturely exiting a group could place them in a compromised legal position, possibly including hav-
ing their parole revoked or being remanded to jail. In some inpatient settings, clients are expected to
attend groups as part of their treatment plan. When attendance is required, it is particularly impor-
tant for group leaders to ensure that participants know their rights and responsibilities, understand
the goals of the group, and can see potential benefits from participating.
Counselor Competence
Because many, if not most, counselors will conduct groupwork as part of their professional prac-
tices, training standards are written to ensure that counselors have adequate knowledge and experi-
ence in leading groups. CACREP (2024) requires that graduate programs in counseling include
training in groupwork that incorporates the study of group dynamics, group leadership, theories of
group counseling, methods of group counseling, types of groupwork, and ethical considerations.
The CACREP standards also require the development of groupwork skills under supervision as part
of the requirements for practicum and internship training.
ASGW has published Professional Standards for the Training of Group Workers (2000),
which describes two levels of competencies for group counseling. The first level specifies core
knowledge and skill knowledge that provide a foundation for specialized training.

-- 356 of 593 --

334 	Section 2 • Issues
According to ASGW (2000), after counselors-in-training have mastered the core knowledge
and skills, they can develop a groupwork specialization in one or more of the following areas:
(a) task/work group facilitation, (b) group psychoeducation, (c) group counseling, and (d) group
psychotherapy. Developing competence in both the basic and the specialized levels of practice
requires participation in planning and supervising small groups and clinical experience in leading
groups under careful supervision.
Different groups require various leader competencies. For example, a counselor may be quali-
fied to facilitate adolescent groups but be less prepared to conduct reminiscence groups for elderly
residents of a nursing home. You will need to continually evaluate the match between the types of
groups you are considering conducting and your levels of training and experience. As you prepare
to include groupwork in your professional practice, you will find that you need specific training and
supervised experience for each type of group you intend to lead (Corey et al., 2018).
It is equally important that you continue to update and expand your skills and knowledge. As
is true with all counseling specialties, counselors who work with groups need to continually update
their knowledge and skills, particularly in new and emerging areas. Both continuing education and
peer supervision can be useful in this regard. Gladding (2020) has suggested that peer supervision
groups can be particularly helpful for increasing one’s knowledge as well as one’s awareness of
even minor misjudgments in group leadership.
Diversity and Values Considerations in Group Counseling
It is not at all unusual for value-laden issues—such as divorce, sexuality, religion, family of origin
issues, and honesty versus deceit in relationships—to be brought into a group. A group can be an
ideal place for members to assess the degree to which their interpersonal behavior is consistent
with their values by receiving feedback from others. The group counselor’s role in this process
is to make the group a safe place where members can feel free to explore values issues that are
troubling to them.
Counselors who engage in groupwork are urged to familiarize themselves with ASGW’s
Multicultural and Social Justice Competence Principles for Group Workers (2012), which reminds
group counselors of the importance of sensitivity to cultural differences. It is crucial that you,
as a group leader, are aware of how your own cultural background, attitudes, values, and beliefs
influence the way you work with a group. You also need to be aware of the ways that oppression
and privilege impact the group process (Singh & Salazar, 2014). Ratts et al. (2012) have offered a
model for transforming traditional groupwork into a socially just framework, and ASGW has pub-
lished Ten Strategies to Intentionally Use Group Work to Transform Hate, Facilitate Courageous
Conversations, and Enhance Community Building (2018).
You should not impose your values on group members or operate as though all members share
your worldview or cultural assumptions. If the group is based on values that are alien to some group
members, you are likely to encounter resistance from those members. You will want to understand
and respect the roles of family and community, religion and spirituality, and ethnicity and culture in
the lives of group members. It is also important for group counselors to develop skills for working
with clients from other countries. Yakunina et al. (2011) have noted that groups can be very effective
in helping foreign students deal with issues of acculturative stress, language difficulties, cultural
misunderstandings, racial and ethnic discrimination, and loss of proximity to support systems such
as family and friends.

-- 357 of 593 --

Chapter 12 • Counseling Families and Groups 	335
Certain values are inherent in the group process, such as self-disclosure, risk-taking behav-
iors, communicating openly and directly, and increasing awareness and autonomy. Group coun-
selors must be cognizant that some of these values may run counter to the values of some group
members. For example, striving for personal autonomy may be an alien concept for group members
who come from certain cultures (Herlihy & Corey, 2015a).
Summary and Key Points
When counselors work with multiple clients, as
they do in family and group counseling, ethical and
legal issues can be more complicated to resolve
than when they work with individual clients.
Family counselors often work from a systems per-
spective that is quite different from the theoretical
underpinnings of individual counseling. They view
the entire family system, rather than its individual
members, as their client.
Key points with respect to family counseling
include the following:
• The transition to virtual family counseling dur-
ing the COVID-19 pandemic was challenging,
but benefits have been identified.
• The issue of informed consent in family coun-
seling presents some unique challenges, such as
determining who in the family gives consent and
how to deal with situations in which one family
member is reluctant to participate or refuses to
participate in the process.
• Although reluctant family members cannot be
forced or coerced into participating in family coun-
seling, some family counselors encourage these
resistant members to attend one or two sessions.
• Children cannot give legal informed consent;
nonetheless, they should be included in the
process.
• Counselors must be aware of the legal questions
created by the changing nature of families, par-
ticularly with respect to the rights of biological
parents versus other family members who may
wish to be involved in family counseling.
• Family counseling involves some powerful tech-
niques. One such technique about which ethical
concerns have been expressed is paradoxical
directives. Such techniques must be used with
caution so that no harm is caused.
• Whether family counseling should be avoided
when there is ongoing abuse in the family should
be carefully considered.
• Counselors must make it clear to family clients
that there are special limits to confidentiality;
counselors can guarantee confidentiality only on
their own parts.
• Privileged communication generally is waived if
a third party is present in the counseling situation.
• Some privileged communication statutes extend
privilege to family clients and group member cli-
ents. Counselors should know the statutes of the
state in which they practice and consult with an
attorney regarding how to interpret these statutes.
• Family counselors take differing positions on
how to handle the issue of family secrets.
• Divorce and child custody issues can be particu-
larly problematic for counselors, and counselors
should take care to avoid involving themselves
inappropriately in custody disputes.
• Counselor values have a strong impact on
how 	counselors 	conduct 	family 	counseling.
Counselors must be vigilant so that they do
not inadvertently impose their own values and
assumptions, particularly regarding culture and
gender roles.
• Developing competence in family counseling
requires 	specialized 	coursework, 	supervised
experience, and experience in the counselor’s
own family of origin work.
Group counseling is another modality that
involves multiple clients. Ethical and legal issues
have different implications in the group context

-- 358 of 593 --

336 	Section 2 • Issues
than they do in individual counseling. Key points
regarding group counseling include the following:
• Informed consent to participate in group coun-
seling involves a number of issues in addition to
the standard elements of informed consent for
individual counseling.
• Group leaders must balance the rights of the indi-
vidual group member against the needs of the
group as a whole.
• It is good practice to screen potential members of
a group to exclude those who are unlikely to ben-
efit from the experience and to select those who
are most likely to contribute to the group and be
compatible with the other group members.
• Group counselors have a responsibility to pro-
tect group members from harm and to be alert
to the dangers inherent in scapegoating, undue
pressure, inappropriate confrontation, and injury
resulting from activities that involve physical
contact.
• As is true with family counseling, confidentiality is
difficult to enforce in group settings, and counselors
should make a special effort to ensure that group
members understand the importance of confidenti-
ality and how to prevent inadvertent breaches.
• Privileged communication may not exist in group
counseling situations unless the state statute spe-
cifically extends privileged communication to
group counselors and their clients individually.
• The type of group may determine whether group
members should be discouraged from socializing
outside group sessions.
• Group counselors should make every effort to
avoid engaging in dual relationships with mem-
bers of their counseling groups.
• Group counseling requires specialized skills and
knowledge. The Association for Specialists in
Group Work (ASGW) has produced several doc-
uments to assist counselors in developing needed
competencies.

-- 359 of 593 --

337
13Professional Relationships, Private
Practice, and Health Care Plans
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
13.1 Demonstrate an understanding of how employed
counselors should proceed if their employers tell
them to do something they consider to be unethical.
13.2 Explain the legal requirements for establishing a
private practice in counseling.
13.3 Explain the differences among health maintenance
organizations (HMOs), preferred provider
organizations (PPOs), and traditional indemnity
health insurance policies.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What types of interactions and
relationships do counselors
have with other mental health
professionals who practice in their
community?
2. If you are employed as a counselor,
what should you do if your
employer tells you to do something
you consider to be unethical or
illegal?
3. What kinds of help does a
counselor need from other
professionals in order to set up a
private practice?
4. How would you respond if you
were a provider of counseling
services for a managed health care
organization and you believed your
client needed additional counseling
sessions, although the case manager
told you that no more counseling
sessions would be provided?
Counselors who practice in all settings interact regularly
with other professionals. Mental health professionals com-
municate and collaborate in several ways: Counselors, men-
tal health professionals and other professionals who work
with people confer, consult, coordinate client care, engage
in teamwork, and refer clients to each other. Understanding
how they communicate is essential to recognizing how they
are able to collaborate.
Conferring, the least structured of the types of com-
munication that counselors have with other professionals,
may be defined as “an informal comparing of observa-
tions.” For example, a school counselor might confer with
a teacher to determine whether a child’s classroom behavior
has improved as a result of counseling for impulse control.
Consulting (discussed in detail in Chapter 15) occurs
when one professional solicits the opinion or advice of
another professional. Consultants need to possess specific
consultation skills (Guiney & Zibulsky, 2017). Consultation
could focus on many possible issues, from determining the
most efficacious treatment for a client’s problem to resolv-
ing an ethical dilemma that the consultee may be facing.
Coordination of services usually refers to procedures
put in place to ensure that all service providers are work-
ing from the same treatment plan and goals and are aware
of each other’s roles and functions in serving a client. For

-- 360 of 593 --

338 	Section 2 • Issues
instance, a school counselor might work with the school psychologist, principal, school nurse, and
teachers to implement and monitor a child’s individualized educational plan (IEP).
Teamwork, the most structured form of collaboration, often takes place in inpatient settings
where various professionals provide a range of services to a client, such as individual counseling,
group counseling, art therapy, medication monitoring, case management, and family therapy. Members
of treatment teams tend to have formalized roles and responsibilities and work together over time—for
example, for the duration of a client’s stay in a psychiatric hospital (Linville et al., 2007).
Finally, referrals occur when professionals determine that a type of expertise they do not pos-
sess is needed to assist a client. For example, a counselor might refer a client to a psychiatrist to assess
whether psychotropic medication is indicated. When a client’s basic needs such as shelter or food are
not being met, a counselor could refer the client to a social worker in a social services agency.
Counselors must be able to establish and maintain appropriate relationships with mental
health and other professionals (such as physicians, law enforcement officials, clergy [Vermaas et al.,
2017], attorneys, and teachers) in order to render quality mental health care services to their clients
(American Counseling Association [ACA], 2014, Code of Ethics, §D; Carney & Jefferson, 2014).
They must also be alert to ethical and legal considerations that relate to their interactions with other
professionals.
When counselors have the opportunity to be members of interdisciplinary teams, clients ben-
efit from the higher level of mental health services. Johnson et al. (2021) interviewed professional
counselors who were working on interprofessional teams in hospitals. They concluded that these
counselors viewed themselves as valuable team members, but noted that they should have strong
professional identities because of the potential lack of supervision when employed in that environ-
ment. The counselors in the study advised other counselors who work in hospital settings to be
transparent with patients, seek ethics advice from professional associations and insurance carriers,
and advocate for themselves and for what they need to be successful. After studying the effective-
ness of mental health counselors in an integrated primary and behavioral health care environment,
Ulupinar et al. (2021) concluded that counselors perform well in integrated systems of care.
Just as it is essential to establish appropriate personal boundaries with clients, students, and
supervisees, it is equally important to establish appropriate boundaries with other professionals.
Counselors must continually determine their precise role when they are interacting with other pro-
fessionals. This role depends on the circumstances. Therefore, counselors must understand that they
have many roles and responsibilities and often must clarify their position to others with whom they
interact. Two examples may help to illustrate this point.
EXAMPLE ONE 	A psychiatrist in private practice has diagnosed a patient as having a mental
disorder and has prescribed medication. The psychiatrist refers the person to a counselor in private
practice for counseling services. In this situation, the psychiatrist and counselor function as co-equal
partners in treating the individual. They consult and relate to each other in that fashion.
EXAMPLE TWO 	A psychiatrist is employed as director of a public mental health center. The psychia-
trist assigns a client to a staff counselor for treatment and specifies that the counselor have five sessions
with the client related to proper parenting skills development. The psychiatrist is the counselor’s adminis-
trative supervisor, and the counselor is in the role of an employee carrying out the directives of a superior.
Of course, the counselor has an obligation to exercise judgment in the case, but the dynamics between the
two professionals will be much different than those in the first example.

-- 361 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	339
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Professional
Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans
The practice of counseling changed dramatically during the COVID-19 pandemic with the expanded
use of virtual counseling. Professional relationships that used to be face-to-face are now being expe-
rienced more often through video conversations. Employer–employee relationships look very dif-
ferent when counselors are working virtually from their homes or alone in their offices instead of in
offices with other counselors or with clients present. Private practitioners shifted the majority of their
services to virtual counseling formats. Unexpectedly, health care plans began to willingly reimburse
health professionals for virtual services that, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, were not allowed.
When the United States locked down during the COVID-19 pandemic, almost overnight
the majority of counseling services ceased to be offered face-to-face and switched immediately to
being delivered digitally. Right away, employers had to provide counselors with the technology they
needed at home to deliver counseling services. In addition, employers were required to meet state
or federal mandates that required counselors to be trained to deliver counseling services digitally.
Most supervisors of counselors were no longer located in the same office space with their counselor
employees, but instead had to supervise using technology for meetings and monitoring the work of
their supervisees through recordings and reports.
Prior to COVID-19, no one envisioned the rapid transition from in-person counseling in
private practices to virtual counseling that would occur. During the worst of the pandemic, coun-
selors in private practices offered only digital counseling services, but as the dangers of COVID-19
diminished, private practitioners had to decide whether to resume offering face-to-face counsel-
ing sessions. Many counselors in private practice are still delivering counseling services digitally,
and some counselors offer a mix of in-person counseling and virtual counseling. Some counselors
have given up their physical counseling offices altogether and offer only digital counseling ses-
sions, while other counselors have kept their offices and are specializing in face-to-face counseling
sessions.
When all private practitioners were alone in their homes or offices while counseling clients
digitally, the isolation that private practitioners had experienced prior to the pandemic was exacer-
bated. In the future, counselors who have private practices will have to be creative in finding ways
to prevent being isolated from their peers. Solutions such as forming peer consultation groups,
arranging regularly scheduled phone or Zoom conversations with peers, or developing chat groups
of counselors on social media might evolve over time to help prevent isolation.
PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
The ethical and legal issues that are important to counselors as they interact with other professionals
include: (a) employer–employee relationships, (b) confidential information, (c) referrals, and (d)
respect for other professionals.
Employer–Employee Relationships
Most counselors practice their profession as employees of agencies and entities such as schools,
hospitals, mental health centers, and rehabilitation agencies. At some time in their careers, most
counselors also supervise others in organizational settings, which requires them to function in the
role of employer. As a result, it is important that counselors understand the basic legal principles of
employment law. Counselors also need to be prepared to address some of the tensions experienced
by professionals who have obligations both to clients and to employers.

-- 362 of 593 --

340 	Section 2 • Issues
Surprisingly, the legal and ethical principles surrounding employer and employee relation-
ships have not changed very much despite the changes brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic
or because of the increased delivery of virtual counseling services. Employers and employees have
adapted to the new reality that includes providing counseling services digitally and having counsel-
ors work remotely, exclusively or partially.
COUNSELORS AS EMPLOYEES 	When a counselor applies for, is offered, and accepts a job, the
counselor then becomes an employee and must function within the legal framework that guarantees
certain rights to employees and also imposes on them a number of obligations.
Employed counselors have a legal right guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution or federal statutes
(e.g., Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967;
and Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990) to be free in the workplace of discrimina-
tion based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, or disabilities. In some states or locali-
ties, discrimination based on other characteristics, such as sexual orientation, may be prohibited by
statute as well.
Also, employees do not have to submit to any supervisor’s directive that constitutes a crime. If a
directive is unethical, it might also be illegal, but most ethical issues’ legality is debatable. Therefore,
in order for a court to support a professional who refused to follow a supervisor’s directive because the
professional believed the directive was unethical, a directive probably would have to be clearly unethi-
cal and put clients at substantial risk.
Although a few employees have detailed contracts with their employers, most employees work
without formal written contracts. Employment contracts do not have to contain the word contract in
the document or be in writing to be enforceable. Often, letters offering employment, written agency
policies, or employee handbooks are recognized by courts as enforceable contracts. In many large
businesses and governmental settings, policies and procedures exist that govern employer–employee
relationships without contracts being signed. When such policies and procedures exist, they must be
followed. Oral conversations between employers and employees can also be enforceable. Originally,
under the common law that the United States inherited from England, employees worked for employ-
ers under what is known as the at-will doctrine. This means that they were employed at the pleasure
of their employer and that the employer could terminate the arrangement at any point without giving
a reason. According to Perritt (2013), this concept held that employers could fire employees at any
time for no reason at all. The pure at-will doctrine has eroded over time in the United States; how-
ever, there is still a general concept in law that employees do not have a right to employment as well
as a presumption that employers have a right to dismiss employees without giving any reasons.
When employees who do not have employment contracts are fired, the legal burden is on
them to prove that their dismissal was wrongful and should be overturned by a court (Perritt, 2013).
Three legal theories might lead courts to conclude that a dismissal was wrongful: (a) The employer
had promised that the employee would have employment security; (b) the dismissal offends some
important public policy; or (c) the termination was unfair or done in bad faith.
Labor unions generally negotiate employment contracts for their members. Unions provide lever-
age for employees that they would not normally have when disputes arise between an employee and his
or her employer. If an employment contract has been negotiated either individually by an employee or
by a union, then the exact terms of the contract will dictate the employer–employee relationship.
When disputes arise between employees and employers, the law generally favors the employer
(Perritt, 2013). Individuals are not forced to work, and certainly they do not have to work for a
particular employer. Because employees are free to resign from their jobs if they are dissatisfied,
employers cannot be forced to comply with the preferences of an employee.

-- 363 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	341
By accepting a job, an employee agrees to perform the tasks assigned. These tasks can be any
that the employer wishes unless there is an employment contract or internal policies and procedures
to the contrary. If an employee refuses to carry out the directives of a supervisor, this constitutes
insubordination, for which an employee can be legally dismissed. The only defenses to refusing to
carry out the directives of a supervisor would probably be that a directive (a) was in violation of an
employment contract, (b) was in violation of internal policies or procedures, (c) illegally discrimi-
nated against a protected category of individuals, or (d) constituted a crime. Stone and Zirkel (2010)
reported a lawsuit in which a school counselor who considered herself to be advocating for special
education students resigned after receiving two reprimands for her actions and later sued the school
board for violating her First Amendment rights of free speech. The court found that the counselor
was required to follow the directives of school authorities and noted that employees must possess
interpersonal skills when negotiating political issues with school administrators.
Many counselors who are also employees are concerned about being in a situation in which
they believe they have an ethical obligation to act or refrain from acting but their employer issues
a directive to the contrary. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) does not require counselors to fall
on their swords and resign if they believe an organization demands actions that pose a conflict
with the Code. Instead, they should address their concerns directly with their employer and work
toward change in the organization (§D.1.h. and §I.2.d.). Standard D.1.h. provides a number of
alternative actions for counselors who believe they are working for an employer who has inap-
propriate policies or practices, including “referral to appropriate certification, accreditation, or
state licensure organizations, or voluntary termination of employment.” Counselors should bear
in mind, though, that licensure and certification boards accept ethics complaints against indi-
viduals only and will not accept complaints against organizations. Such boards generally require
accusers to identify themselves, and they may not accept anonymous complaints. Although coun-
selors may be uncomfortable working in a conflictual situation, it usually would be acceptable
from both an ethical and a practical standpoint for them to secure employment elsewhere before
resigning their current position.
Most employers understand that licensure laws and codes of ethics guide the behavior of the profes-
sionals they employ, even though the employers may not be members of the same profession. Nonetheless,
there are many disagreements between experts and professionals regarding what constitutes ethical and
unethical behavior (Sperry, 2007). Most often, when disputes in ethical areas arise between professionals
and their employers, it is because the parties disagree as to what is ethical and what is unethical.
Following are some examples of situations in which professionals and their employers might
disagree about an ethical issue:
• A physician believes that an operation would be in a patient’s best interest, but the health mainte-
nance organization determines that only a different, less expensive form of treatment is acceptable.
• An attorney who is an associate in a law firm believes that a potential client has no chance of
winning a lawsuit against a former employer because of the facts and the law. The attorney
recommends that the firm decline to represent the potential client, but a senior partner directs
the associate to take the case and to pursue it vigorously.
• A psychologist who is employed by a prison believes that many of the inmates who are evalu-
ated are in need of medical care due to their mental conditions. The supervisor, who is a
psychiatrist, disagrees and says that the psychologist should just conclude that the inmates do
not need medical care.
These situations illustrate that any professional who is employed could face problems of ethical
decision making.

-- 364 of 593 --

342 	Section 2 • Issues
13-1 The Case of Jason
Jason has been a counselor in a community mental health center for 2 years. A new director, Sofia,
has been hired recently. Sofia holds a master’s degree in business, and she has never worked in a
mental health facility before. Other counselors tell Sofia that Jason is an ineffective counselor, that
he becomes inappropriately involved in the personal lives of clients, and that he does not follow
center policies. Sofia wants to ensure that Jason is performing his job responsibilities adequately.
Therefore, she directs Jason to show her his case notes at the end of each day and to summarize
his work with each of his clients. Jason refuses, based on his belief that he has an ethical require-
ment to keep his conversations with his clients confidential. Sofia fires Jason.
• If you had been advising Sofia regarding this situation with Jason, what would you have
advised her to do differently?
• If you had been advising Jason regarding this situation, how would you have advised him
to respond to Sofia’s directive to show her his case notes at the end of each day and to
summarize his work with each of his clients?
Discussion: A better approach for Sofia would have been to assign another, perhaps senior,
mental health professional to review Jason’s work for a period of time. On the other hand, Jason
could have responded differently and perhaps saved his job. He could have engaged in a con-
versation with Sofia to determine why she was concerned about his job performance and could
have presented his side of the story. He also could have offered to be supervised by a senior
counselor for a period of time to assure Sofia, his administrative supervisor, of his competency.
In addition, Jason could have tried to accommodate his supervisor’s concerns in some way
and at the same time preserve the privacy of his clients. For example, he could have removed
identifying information from his records. Trying to work with a supervisor is much better than
defying a supervisor’s directive if continued employment is desired.
This situation describes a difficult problem for counselors and for those who supervise mental
health professionals but are not mental health professionals themselves. Sofia, the counseling center
director in this case example, certainly has an obligation to ensure that her employees are performing
their jobs adequately. A director is legally responsible for the work of employees. On the other hand,
professionals have a confidentiality obligation to their clients.
At some time in your professional career, you may be faced with a situation in which you
and your employer disagree about what is ethical. We recommend that you take these steps if you
believe your employer is forcing you to act in what you consider to be an unethical manner:
1. Avoid discussing the situation with coworkers in casual conversations or in staff meetings. Con-
sult with outside experts and colleagues in a confidential manner regarding the issue, and ask
them to keep your conversations confidential. If there is a consensus that the action is unethical,
go to step 2. If time allows, a request could be made to the ACA Ethics Committee for an inter-
pretation of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014). There is a formal process for requesting interpreta-
tions (see Chapter 8), but this step may be impractical because it might take a number of months
to receive an interpretation. If experts and colleagues do not agree that the action is unethical,
you could argue internally for changes but in the meantime should follow the directives of your
supervisor. If you have professional liability insurance, you might have the benefit of consulting
with a legal advisor regarding a situation such as the one you are facing.

-- 365 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	343
2. Schedule an appointment with your supervisor to discuss the matter. Tell your supervisor which
provisions in the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) you believe are being violated, and ask that you not be
directed to act in what you consider to be an unethical manner. If your supervisor requests additional
information or support for your position, offer to provide it to the extent possible.
3. If step 2 does not lead to a satisfactory resolution of the issue, you must decide whether to stay
in the organization and work toward change or whether to look for a different job that does not
force you to compromise your beliefs about your ethical obligations. If you decide to stay in the
organization, go to step 4. If you decide to leave, update your résumé and begin your search. For
practical purposes, if possible, keep your present job while you are searching. Many employers are
suspicious that unemployed professionals are poor employees, and many employers do not favor
applicants who left previous jobs because of disputes with their employers.
4. Ask your supervisor to schedule a three-way appointment with you, the supervisor, and his or her
supervisor to discuss the situation. If your supervisor refuses, inform your supervisor that you
are going to talk with his or her supervisor. Then ask your supervisor’s supervisor directly for an
appointment to discuss the matter.
5. If step 4 does not resolve the issue (and you still have your job), determine whether organizational
policies could be created or changed that would resolve the dilemma in a manner that would be
ethically acceptable to you. If so, suggest that a policy or procedure be created or changed follow-
ing the procedure used to make suggestions within your organization (ACA, 2014, §D.1.h.). To try
to preserve your working relationship, inform your supervisor of your activities, if possible. Try to
prevent giving the appearance that this issue is a struggle between you and your boss and that one
of you will win and the other will lose. Instead, present the issue as important to the organization
and to your profession, and advocate for change in a professional manner.
COUNSELORS AS EMPLOYERS 	Counselors who are in private practice
or who own their own businesses naturally will hire employees from time
to time to assist them with their work. In addition, counselors who become
supervisors in the agencies in which they are employed become members
of the management team and agents of their employer. Such supervisors
who also are counselors function as employers and as counselors.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that counselors “hire for
professional counseling positions only individuals who are qualified
and competent for those positions” (§C.2.c.). This standard suggests
that counselors should not agree to hire individuals in counseling posi-
tions who are not qualified through education and experience. Standard
D.1.f.—which states, “Counselors select competent staff and assign
responsibilities compatible with their skills and experience”—reinforces
the concept that counselors who hire must ensure that their employees
are capable of providing quality counseling services.
Employed counselors should realize that they must assume the role
of employer any time they have one or more persons who report to them
administratively. Sometimes administrative lines within organizations are
blurred. It is thus vital for counselors to clarify, if they are unsure, whether
they are the administrative supervisors for individuals with whom they
work. Generally, an administrative supervisor assigns work responsibili-
ties to another employee and evaluates that person’s performance. In addition, administrative supervi-
sors generally make final decisions or final recommendations about whom to hire for positions that

-- 366 of 593 --

344 	Section 2 • Issues
report to them. Administrative supervisors also have significant influence and responsibility for disci-
plining and dismissing employees who report to them.
Employed counselors may have clerical or professional staff members who report to them.
Employees want their supervisors to be clear in communicating expectations and directives. All
counselors—whether they are in a supervisory, subordinate, or collegial relationship with employ-
ers and employees—have an ethical obligation to make expectations clear and to establish working
agreements that are known to all parties.
Employees also want their supervisors to be fair and just in dealing with them. Counselors should
not commit or condone practices that are inhumane, illegal, or unjustifiable when hiring or promot-
ing. They also should not discriminate on the basis of “age, culture, disability, ethnicity, race, religion/
spirituality, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, marital/partnership status, language preference,
socioeconomic status, immigration status, or any basis proscribed by law” (ACA, 2014, §C.5.).
It is very important that counselors who supervise others avoid favoritism or the appearance
of favoritism toward certain employees. Consider what could happen if a friendship or personal
relationship developed between a supervisor and a supervisee. When the supervisor later disciplined
or dismissed another employee or gave some type of benefit or promotion to the friend, the supervi-
sor would be vulnerable to a complaint of favoritism or perhaps even illegal discrimination.
As a result, it is recommended that counselors who supervise others maintain a personal distance
between themselves and those they supervise. Organizational environments, however, often promote
employee friendships via a friendly climate or social gatherings that sometimes even extend to including
employees’ family members. If a friendship or personal relationship does develop between a supervisor
and an employee, the counselor should be careful to avoid personal interactions with the employee at
work and must self-monitor carefully to ensure that the employee is not being favored over others. See
additional discussions of multiple relationships in Chapter 9.
13-2 The Case of Valentina
When Valentina was promoted to director of the local mental health center, one of the first
personnel decisions she made was to hire one of her best friends, Beth, as a staff counselor.
Valentina knew that Beth was an excellent counselor with many years of experience who would
perform well as an employee for the center. Now, after a year, Beth has indeed performed her
job in an exemplary manner: She is very focused on work and is highly productive in the work
environment; however, she has alienated some of the other employees at the center. They see
her as unfriendly, abrupt in interpersonal communications, and self-centered. Valentina and
Beth have maintained their friendship and frequently socialize together on the weekends. A unit
supervisor has recently resigned, and Valentina must appoint someone to take his place. The two
top candidates for the job are Beth and another staff counselor who is very popular among his
peers. However, in Valentina’s opinion, he is not as capable as an administrator. Valentina wants
to promote Beth to the supervisory position, but she is worried that some of the other staff mem-
bers will be very upset with her if she does.
• What could Valentina have done to make this situation less difficult than it is?
• Whom do you think Valentina should promote?
Discussion: Perhaps Valentina should not have hired her best friend in the first place. However,
once she did hire Beth, she should have ensured that her friendship with Beth was not evident

-- 367 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	345
in the workplace. If Valentina promotes Beth, surely some of her staff members will believe
Valentina is biased and promoted Beth because of their personal friendship. If Valentina pro-
motes the other staff member instead of Beth, Valentina will worry that she is being unfair to
Beth and to the organization. There is no easy solution to a problem like this. No matter what
she decides, Valentina should work with Beth to help Beth improve her interpersonal relation-
ships with the other staff members. However, Valentina’s attempt to do that may have a negative
effect on her personal relationship with Beth. To prevent situations such as this, it is best to avoid
personal relationships with supervisees, if possible.
Employed counselors who serve as administrative supervisors must thoroughly familiarize
themselves with the policies and procedures of the organization and with the contract terms of any-
one employed through either a personal or a union contract. It is essential that administrative super-
visors follow, in detail, all written procedures. A common problem for administrative supervisors
is having their decisions overturned either within the organization or by courts because they have
failed to follow written procedures. Administrative supervisors who disapprove of organizational
policies, organizational procedures, or contract clauses should work within proper channels to get
them changed. In the meantime, administrative supervisors must follow such policies and proce-
dures or contract clauses precisely while they are still in effect.
Confidential Information
In the context of relationships with other professionals, counselors must often share information
about clients that is confidential or even privileged. In Chapter 5, sharing information with other
professionals was identified as an exception to confidentiality and privileged communication
requirements. Consistent with informed consent requirements, counselors should inform clients
in advance if they plan to share confidential information with other professionals.
It is best to obtain written permission from clients to transfer private information to others.
Although written permission generally is not a legal requirement, the federal Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires that permission be in writing. State licensure
laws or regulations for counselors could require that permission be in
writing as well. Also, the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) requires that writ-
ten permission be obtained to transfer records (§B.6.g.). A client waiver
form that you might want to consider using if your employer does not
have one is included in Appendix C.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to try to
ensure that receivers of their records are sensitive to the confidential
nature of the records (§B.6.g.). Counselors are not expected to conduct an
investigation of the policies and procedures for maintaining confidential-
ity of every individual, agency, or institution that receives their records.
What good practice dictates is that counselors ensure that the client’s
fully informed consent has been given to transfer the records and that
counselors clearly mark as confidential any records that they send. Only
information that is pertinent to the purpose of sharing records should be
disclosed. The federal HIPAA law that applies to most counseling agen-
cies has strict requirements in these areas (see Chapter 6).

-- 368 of 593 --

346 	Section 2 • Issues
Referrals
The practice of making referrals to other professionals is associated with a number of ethical respon-
sibilities. Because counselors have an obligation to practice only within the boundaries of their
competence, they should refer clients whom they are unable to assist to other professionals (ACA,
2014, §A.11.a.). The concept that counselors should refer clients if they do not believe they are
qualified or competent to serve them effectively has caused concern within the counseling profes-
sion. As was discussed in Chapter 3, we believe this standard should not be interpreted in a way that
would allow a counselor to refuse to counsel clients based on gender identity, sexual orientation, or
any other basis that would constitute discrimination. The update of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014)
added new language to address such concerns. Standard A.11.b. states, “Counselors [should] refrain
from referring prospective and current clients based solely on the counselor’s personally held val-
ues, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. Counselors [should] respect the diversity of clients and seek
training in areas in which they are at risk of imposing their values onto clients, especially when the
counselor’s values are inconsistent with the client’s goals or are discriminatory in nature.”
The responsibility to protect client welfare also may lead to a referral. Counselors are cau-
tioned to avoid abandoning clients and “assist in making appropriate arrangements for the continu-
ation of treatment, when necessary, during interruptions such as vacations, illness, and following
termination” (ACA, 2014, §A.12.). Standard A.11.a. states that counselors should be “knowledge-
able about culturally and clinically appropriate referral resources and suggest these alternatives.”
However, counselors should discontinue counseling relationships if their referrals are rejected by
clients (§A.11.a.). Counselors recommend other service providers when they terminate a counseling
relationship “when it becomes reasonably apparent that the client no longer needs assistance, is not
likely to benefit, or is being harmed by continued counseling” (§A.11.c.). Finally, “when counselors
refer clients to other practitioners, they ensure that appropriate clinical and administrative processes
are completed and open communication is maintained with both clients and practitioners” (§A.11.d.).
Counselors are prohibited from using their places of employment or institutional affiliation
to recruit or gain clients, supervisors, or consultees for their private practice (ACA, 2014, §C.3.d.).
The law regarding referrals is based on professionals’ fiduciary responsibilities to their clients. The
law requires that professionals not do anything that would benefit themselves at the expense of a
client or that would harm a client in any way. Obviously, counselors would benefit if they referred
clients to their own practice, which is why §C.3.d. exists.
Many counselors are concerned about the propriety of referring a client to a particular counselor.
This practice is neither unethical nor illegal. There is a misperception among counselors that referrals
to only one specified individual are wrong because many agencies, particularly agencies that are pub-
licly funded, have policies either prohibiting referrals to specific practitioners altogether or requiring
that counselors refer their clients to a specified minimum number of individuals. Some agencies have
developed these policies in an attempt to prevent furthering the business interests of some mental health
professionals to the detriment of other mental health professionals who practice in the community. To
prevent complaints from professionals that others are being favored by the agency, many agencies adopt
policies that require multiple referrals. However, it is permissible for counselors to refer clients to spe-
cific counselors if there is not a policy prohibiting that practice in the place where they are employed.
Ethical guidelines require counselors to be knowledgeable about culturally and clinically
appropriate referral resources so that they can suggest alternatives to clients (ACA, 2014, §A.11.a.).
Perhaps it is the use of the plural alternatives that has led some counselors to believe mistakenly that
they must always provide clients with more than one referral source. The actual intent of this stan-
dard is to stress that counselors need to be familiar with the resources in their community that provide
mental health and related services. If a counselor believes that a client would be well served by a

-- 369 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	347
referral to any of a number of other professionals, then it is good practice to give all these choices
to the client. If a counselor believes that a client would be best served by a particular mental health
professional whose specialty area matches the client’s needs, then the counselor should feel free to
recommend that particular professional (unless agency or organizational rules require multiple refer-
rals or no referrals to specific individuals).
Generally, a counselor would not be held accountable for the malpractice of a professional
to whom an individual had been referred. However, if the counselor making the referral had some
reason to know or should have known that a particular professional had a notoriously negative reputa-
tion in the professional community, then the counselor might be held accountable for harm suffered
by the person who was referred.
Sometimes clients who seek counseling services are already being seen by another mental
health professional. For example, a person who is receiving psychotropic medication from a psy-
chiatrist might also seek counseling. In these instances, counselors should obtain client consent to
contact and work with the other professional to establish positive and collaborative professional
relationships (ACA, 2014, §A.3.). Lemberger et al. (2010), in a qualitative study, found that school
counselor participants valued the mental health providers to whom they referred students for mental
health services outside the school but that communication and follow-up between the school coun-
selors and the providers may have been lacking post-referral.
Respecting Other Professionals
The introduction to Section D of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) emphasizes the importance of
developing and maintaining positive, collaborative working relationships with other mental health
and non–mental health professionals. The quality of services to clients is enhanced when counselors
develop positive relationships and communication systems with these other professionals. Non–
mental health professionals might include ministers (Kane, 2013; Vermaas et al., 2017), attorneys,
physicians, and others who may be serving the same clients.
Counselors have a responsibility to become knowledgeable about related mental health profes-
sionals and to be “respectful of approaches that are grounded in theory and/or have an empirical or
scientific foundation but may differ from their own” and “Counselors acknowledge the expertise of
other professional groups and are respectful of their practices” (ACA, 2014, §D.1.a.). They “work
to develop and strengthen relationships with colleagues from other disciplines to best serve clients”
(§D.1.b.). A collaborative approach is particularly vital when counselors serve as members of inter-
disciplinary treatment teams that deliver multifaceted services to clients.
Counselors must be aware that their opinions regarding other professionals, particularly
other mental health professionals, are serious and important and can influence the general public.
Counselors must be respectful of other professionals even if they personally have negative feelings
about their approaches to practice. Our relationships with fellow mental health professionals should
be based on respect, honesty, and fairness (Welfel, 2016). We noted in Chapter 2, in our discus-
sion of professional identity, that counselors sometimes have philosophical and practical differ-
ences regarding therapeutic approaches, as well as differences of opinions with other mental health
professionals. A counselor and a psychologist might find themselves, on Monday, testifying at the
state legislature on opposite sides of a mental health provider issue. Then, on Tuesday, they might
meet as members of a treatment team to work for the best interests of their shared clients. The key
to managing such situations is to keep professional disagreements in the political and philosophical
realms and to stringently avoid bringing them into our work with clients.
When we focus on differences and disagreements, our attitude toward fellow mental health
professionals tends to be one of tolerance rather than appreciation for how these differences can

-- 370 of 593 --

348 	Section 2 • Issues
help us to better serve our clients. Rather than believing that our point of view is the only valid one,
we need to keep in mind that interprofessional collaboration is an important resource for meet-
ing the complex psychological, emotional, social, economic, physical, and spiritual needs of our
clients. Counselors who have a strong professional identity and can clearly articulate their perspec-
tives will be better able to establish and maintain collegial relationships with other mental health
professionals.
From a legal perspective, counselors must be careful to avoid saying or writing comments that
might damage the reputation of another professional. If counselors repeat rumors that are inaccurate
or purposely make false oral or written statements, such actions could damage the reputations of
other professionals, and those individuals could sue for libel or slander. Libel refers to false, defama-
tory, or malicious written statements; slander refers to such statements that are spoken. Generally, the
law of libel and slander requires that persons who believe they were harmed by the words of another
prove special harm (Robertson et al., 2011). Injured persons usually have to prove actual pecuniary
loss, as opposed to humiliation or general harm to their reputations. However, accusing persons of
being unfit for their profession falls under the category of libel or slander per se, which means that
special harm does not have to be proven. Because professional reputation is so important to a career,
it is assumed in law that persons are harmed if their reputations are damaged by lies or deceit.
Schwartz et al. (2010) have listed the following defenses to accusations of libel or slander:
truth, retraction, absolute privilege, and qualified privilege. If you were accused of defaming another
person, you could argue that what you said or wrote was true. You also could publicly retract what
you said or wrote. Judges have absolute privilege and cannot be sued for what they say in their offi-
cial capacity. If you are defending yourself, you have a qualified privilege to repeat what you have
heard if you must do so to protect yourself.
PRIVATE PRACTICE
Many counselors-in-training idealize private practice and have a goal of owning their own independent
counseling practice someday. Practicing in an ethical manner in a private practice (Brennan, 2013) is
different from being ethical as a counselor within an organization. For example, deciding whether to
text with clients in a private practice (Sude, 2013) and maintaining private practices in rural settings
(Cohn & Hastings, 2013) are challenges counselors in private practice must face on their own, while
counselors working in schools or agencies usually are given written guidelines or policies.
To be successful in private practices, counselors need to understand how prospective clients
perceive their credentials. Neuer Colburn (2013) has suggested that counselors may need to diver-
sify the services they offer to meet market demand. Sheperis et al. (2019) found that clients prefer
counseling professionals who are board-certified and who have more than one specialization.
Counselors may not have considered that by owning a private practice, they will be running a
business and that opening a practice involves all the promises and pitfalls of starting any small business.
Most counselors do not have training or experience in business administration, so it is important that
they consider many important issues before deciding whether to go into private practice. Harrington
(2013), in introducing a special issue of the Journal of Mental Health Counseling that focused on pri-
vate practices of professional counselors, identified many of the challenges counselors face when they
engage in private practices, such as accepting total responsibility for financial matters including col-
lecting payments from insurance companies, figuring out how to survive when revenue streams are
inconsistent, and deciding how to proceed when clients cannot afford services.
The Small Business Administration (SBA, 2023) has suggested that prospective small business
owners evaluate their qualities to determine whether entrepreneurship is for them. To be successful,

-- 371 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	349
entrepreneurs must be comfortable taking risks, independent, persuasive, able to negotiate, creative,
and supported by others. Counselors who are considering opening a private practice should ask them-
selves whether they are prepared to spend the time and money needed to get their business started
and how long they can survive financially before beginning to make a profit. To help counselors who
are thinking about starting private practices, the SBA has offered guidelines and has suggested steps
for starting a small business that include, among other things, conducting market research to deter-
mine whether there is a market in your community for your proposed counseling private practice,
creating a business plan, and ensuring you have enough money to get started.
13-3 The Case of Vihaan
Three years after completing his master’s degree, Vihaan has recently been issued a license by
the state counseling board that permits him to practice counseling independently in the state
where he lives. He plans to see some clients virtually, but he wants to offer counseling services to
clients in-person as well. Vihaan has an office in his home that has an entrance from the outside,
and he plans to see private clients in that office. Vihaan asks the licensed counselor who has been
supervising him for the past 3 years what he needs to do to open his practice, and his supervisor
responds, “You are licensed now. That’s all you need to have in order to open a private practice.”
• What other steps must Vihaan take before seeing clients in his home office?
• What issues should Vihaan consider prior to seeing clients in his home office?
Discussion: Many counselors have the mistaken idea that once they are licensed as a counselor
by their state licensing boards, they can open a private practice without taking any additional
steps. However, an essential step that Vihaan must take before seeing clients in his home office
is to apply for and pay the fee for a business license in the jurisdiction in which he lives. The juris-
diction could be a city or county or some other political entity. In the process of applying for a
business license, Vihaan will have to indicate whether he will be seeing clients and, if yes, where
he will see clients. If Vihaan’s home is not zoned for commercial or mixed use, then he will not be
permitted to see clients in his home office. There may be exceptions for seeing a limited number
of clients in a residential zone, but such an exception would be unusual. In addition to purchasing
a business license and ensuring that he will be permitted to see clients in his home office, Vihaan
also should purchase professional liability insurance if he does not have a policy already, and it
would be best if he opened a separate bank account for his business. In addition, Vihaan should
consider the possible personal boundary issues that may arise if he sees clients in his home.
13-4 The Case of Nakeisha
After practicing in isolation in her private practice for a year after the COVID-19 pandemic
had begun, Nakeisha decided to organize a Zoom group for an hour and a half every 2 weeks
that included six local counselors she had met through her local counselors association. She
called the group a peer consultation group and told the other group members that it would
be an open forum where group members could talk about whatever they wanted to discuss.
After about 3 months, Nakeisha began to find the meetings tedious and concerning because

-- 372 of 593 --

350 	Section 2 • Issues
the other counselors seemed to spend most of their time together complaining about difficult
clients. The meetings seemed unprofessional to Nakeisha, and she sometimes felt embarrassed
that her fellow professional counselors seemed to be interested only in gossiping about their
clients.
• What are the ethical concerns about what is occurring in this peer consultation group?
• What should Nakeisha do about this situation?
Discussion: Obviously, client privacy is at risk during these group meetings. This situation could
have been prevented if Nakeisha had developed some professional guidelines for the peer con-
sultation group and asked members of the group to agree to the guidelines prior to beginning
their bi-weekly meetings. As an example, guidelines might have indicated that group members
would (1) avoid disclosing anything about their clients that might allow other group members
to identify the clients and (2) rotate bringing up a counseling case, private practice issue, or
a professional journal article to the group each meeting that group members would discuss.
Structuring the group meetings might also have helped prevent discussions from focusing only
on difficult client behaviors. Because Nakeisha did not structure the group meetings from the
very beginning, she could share her concerns with the group members now and suggest that
they structure their group meetings this way in the future.
Taxes and Business Licenses
If counselors generate any income at all besides their salary, they are in business and have a private
practice. Depending on the state statute and the nature of the services rendered, counselors may
need to be licensed by their state counselor licensing board. In some states, a license is required to
provide counseling services in a private practice, whereas in other states a license is optional. Also,
in some states counselors may conduct educational workshops, produce written professional prod-
ucts, and engage in other counseling-related activities that produce an income, all without being
licensed. Whether a license in counseling is required depends entirely on the wording of the state
counselor licensure statute. Counselors who generate income in addition to their wages or salaries
must file a separate federal income tax form for income produced from a business. In states that
have income taxes, similar forms sometimes must be filed at the state level as well.
Numerous federal, state, and local requirements must be addressed when counselors open
their private practices. Steps that a counselor might need to take include the following:
• Obtain a federal tax identification number if there are any employees.
• In some states, obtain a professional license.
• Apply for and obtain a business license.
• Purchase workers’ compensation insurance or unemployment compensation insurance if there
are employees in the private practice.
• If required, obtain employee bonds.
• Purchase liability, property damage, or other types of insurance.
• Comply with a fictitious or assumed name statute if one exists.
Counselors with businesses must purchase a business license from their local jurisdiction’s
office, which is usually located in a city hall or county courthouse (Alberty, 2014). Purchasing a
business license involves listing a business address. In most jurisdictions, zoning laws prohibit or

-- 373 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	351
limit in some way clients (or customers) coming to a residence. So, if a residence is listed as the
place of business, the counselor must indicate that no clients or customers come there for services.
For example, a counselor might provide counseling services only online or might provide services
at another counselor’s place of business or in the homes of clients. Each year that a business license
is renewed, counselors must report the amount of their gross income and pay a tax to the city
or county. This tax is minimal unless substantial income is generated. Although few jurisdictions
actively pursue those who violate business license laws, such violations could become important if
a counselor were accused of wrongdoing.
Counselors who generate income and fail to report it on federal and state income tax forms,
or who fail to purchase and renew business licenses each year, are committing crimes. A number of
counselors who are unaware of tax and business license requirements are in violation of these laws.
Ignorance of legal requirements does not excuse those who violate them.
Business Form
Businesses are structured in a number of ways. Most professional private practices are known in
law as sole proprietorships. The individual professional owns the private practice, and no other pro-
fessional has a financial interest in it. This is the simplest form of business ownership and the one
chosen by most private practitioners in counseling. In our opinion, it is usually the best option for
counselors who engage in private practice.
The second-most-popular business form for counselors is a partnership. Generally, partner-
ships should be chosen only if a partnership is required to obtain financing for a new business or if
there is a significant advantage in the commercial market for a partnership over a sole proprietor-
ship. Some counselors seem to choose partnerships because they are anxious about beginning a
business venture on their own or because they want the social benefits of affiliating with friends or
colleagues. However, these are not good reasons for forming a partnership. There are, in fact, many
arguments against forming partnerships that should be carefully considered: (a) Total agreement
on all business decisions is required; (b) each partner is fully liable for the acts or omissions of the
other partner; (c) there is a presumption of equality of partners regarding liabilities and profits; (d)
personal assets are not protected from business debts; and (e) dissolutions of partnerships can be
contentious and very expensive if problems cannot be resolved amicably and one or more partners
hire lawyers to represent their interests.
A corporation is a third possible business form. Generally, individuals are motivated to form
corporations if the business involved is very risky and if the owner has substantial personal assets
(Alberty, 2014). Most states have what are known as professional corporations, in which individual
professionals essentially incorporate their individual private practices. Although professional corpo-
rations were very popular in the past, the tax advantages of this form of business have been reduced
through legislation (Hamilton et al., 2012). Also, corporations are complicated and difficult to keep
current, and as a result, professional corporations have fallen out of favor. Despite the negatives,
some individuals still form professional corporations, which offer the following advantages: (a)
accumulation of capital, (b) transferability of ownership, (c) flexible fiscal year, (d) employee ben-
efits, (e) some reduction in liability, and (f) management structure.
A professional’s primary motivation for choosing any type of corporate form for a private
practice would be to protect personal assets in the event that the business fails or a judgment is
rendered against it. A reason for not forming a corporation, however, is that adequate professional
liability insurance must be purchased to prevent losing the business and personal assets because of
a lawsuit or judgment. Other problems with corporations include the following: (a) They are very

-- 374 of 593 --

352 	Section 2 • Issues
expensive to form; (b) meetings must be held periodically and annual reports must be filed, or the
corporation will cease to exist legally; (c) income is taxed to the corporation and is taxed again
when it is distributed to owners; and (d) accountants and lawyers must be retained on a continuous
basis to ensure that the corporation is functioning properly.
Some counselors choose to form nonprofit corporations as the basis of their practice.
Essentially, counselors form a nonprofit corporation and then pay themselves a salary from the pro-
ceeds of the entity. Such corporations have favorable tax laws (Hamilton et al., 2012) and might be
eligible for certain grants. The significant problem with nonprofit corporations is that the counselor
does not own or control them. To qualify as a nonprofit corporation, the entity must include a board
of directors in its charter. Although counselors might originally form boards that will support them
as directors, it is possible that board members may begin to assert themselves or that replacement
board members may not support the counselor. In addition, a nonprofit corporation board has the
authority to remove the counselor as the director and to take over the business entity itself.
Fees for Services
Counselors in private practice must set fees for their services, and they often struggle with establishing
their fee structures (Newlin et al., 2004). They are in business, so they must generate enough income to
cover their business expenses. In addition, if their private practice is their only source of income, they
want to generate enough income above expenses to allow them to have a comfortable lifestyle. Steele
(2012) and Truffo (2007) have suggested that counselors can achieve significant wealth if they man-
age their private practice effectively. However, counselors know that if their fees are too high, clients
will go elsewhere for services. On the other hand, if their fees are too low, clients may not value the
services they are receiving, or they may choose a practitioner who charges higher fees in the belief that
the fee reflects the quality of services offered. Although most professionals seek to establish the high-
est fee that the market will tolerate, counselors, like lawyers, are in a fiduciary relationship with their
clients. Therefore, they must set fees within a framework of basic fairness.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §A.10.c.) states that in establishing fees, counselors should
consider the financial status of clients and locality. The standard probably was intended to encour-
age counselors to set fees that reflect the economy in the locality. However, it could be misinter-
preted to mean that counselors should charge clients according to clients’ ability to pay, which could
result in problems for counselors in private practice. Legally, counselors and other professionals
may set any fees that they wish for their services. They can even charge different clients different
amounts for the same service as long as they do not discriminate based on constitutionally protected
categories of persons. Standard A.10.c. also states, “If a counselor’s usual fees create undue hard-
ship for the client, the counselor may adjust fees, when legally permissible, or assist the client in
locating comparable, affordable services.” If a potential client cannot afford to pay the fee you have
established for your services in your private counseling practice, then you may adjust your fees, or
you may help that client by providing him or her with referrals where counseling services may be
free or available at rates below those you charge.
Some counselors establish the same sliding scale fee structure in their private practice that is
used by counseling centers supported by public funds or private charitable funds. A sliding scale fee
structure sets the fee for services based on objective criteria such as the amount of the client’s income
and the size of their family. With sliding scales, individuals with more income and less financial bur-
den pay more for the same services than those with less income and more financial burden. Although
from a business perspective, a sliding scale seems more appropriate for a nonprofit agency than it
does for a private practice, counselors in private practice could adopt this method, too.

-- 375 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	353
An important part of charging fees is the process of collecting them (Barnett & Walfish, 2012).
Many counselors are uncomfortable taking money from their clients, but collecting fees is a neces-
sary part of maintaining a successful private practice. Counselors who want to avoid the collection
of fees probably should consider working in an agency where they do not have to collect client fees
rather than operating a private practice.
The trend today is for all professionals to collect fees as services are rendered. In other words,
counseling clients probably should be expected to pay for each session at the time the session is
held. An exception, of course, is clients whose payments will be made by another entity, such as
an indemnity health insurance company, preferred provider organization, employee assistance pro-
gram, or governmental agency. Counselors in private practice should develop clear policies regard-
ing fee payment, and these policies should be spelled out specifically in the counselor’s disclosure
statement (see Appendix B). It is unwise to make any exceptions. If unanticipated problems arise
regarding payment, it is best to address these problems immediately with the client (Knapp &
VandeCreek, 2008).
Standard A.10.d. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states, “If counselors intend to use col-
lection agencies or take legal measures to collect fees from clients who do not pay for services as
agreed upon, they [should] include such information in their informed consent documents and also
inform clients in a timely fashion of intended actions and offer clients the opportunity to make
payment.” Although this standard suggests that counselors do sue their clients for unpaid fees, we
recommend against this practice. In the event that a counselor does allow a client to accumulate a
large bill for services, the counselor should never threaten a client in any way if payment is not made
and certainly should never sue the client. If a counselor demanded payment from a former client
for past services rendered, the former client could take the position that the services were inferior
and could countersue or file a complaint with the counselor’s licensure board, certifying agency, or
professional association. In our opinion, it is better just to forget client bills that are never paid and,
in the future, to prevent allowing any large unpaid bills to accumulate.
Attorney and Accountant Services
Counselors who are employed can expect their employer to provide them with legal consultation
when requested. Counselors in private practice, though, must pay for the services of attorneys when
they are needed. Employed counselors are not required to keep business financial records, but coun-
selors in private practice must retain the services of an accountant on an ongoing basis.
As a counselor in private practice, you will need the services of attorneys for a variety of
issues (Pope & Vasquez, 2005). Some of the more common situations in which you will need an
attorney are as follows:
• You are considering forming a partnership and must know the legal implications.
• You have been presented with a lease to sign for your office space, and you do not know much
about leases.
• You receive a subpoena for a client’s records, and the client tells you not to release them.
• Staff members from a health insurance company notify you that they are denying claims made
by one of your clients because they do not believe you rendered the services that you said you
provided.
• An investigator for a suspected child abuse case you reported is very aggressive in dealing
with you.
• You and your partner have decided to dissolve the partnership, and your partner is being very
unreasonable.

-- 376 of 593 --

354 	Section 2 • Issues
Legal issues arise regularly in a private practice, as this list illustrates. Advice regarding iden-
tifying and establishing a relationship with an attorney is provided in Chapter 1.
Most counselors in private practice do not have the expertise or time to handle all the finan-
cial obligations of their business. As a counselor in private practice, you would be wise to retain an
accountant or an accounting firm to perform the following tasks for you:
• Set up a system for recording income and expenses
• Develop a retirement program for you and your employees
• Handle your payroll, including deducting income taxes and Social Security payments
• File annual tax returns for you
The expenses for the services of attorneys and accountants are substantial and are part of the
overhead for a counselor’s private practice. Failing to obtain legal or financial advice because of the
expense involved can lead to substantial problems later.
Professional Liability Insurance
Professional liability insurance is essential for counselors in private practice. There are numerous
ethical challenges particular to private practices (Barnett et al., 2014; Hammer & Kessler, 2012;
Woody, 2011). In addition, if a counselor’s private practice accumulates debts that exceed the assets
of the practice, which could happen if a counselor were sued, a counselor’s personal assets might be
vulnerable. A counselor’s personal assets are always at risk when a private practice is opened. Even
if the practice is incorporated, personal assets can sometimes be accessed to pay off a judgment after
a lawsuit.
Therefore, it is essential that counselors purchase professional liability insurance for their
practice. Counselors in private practice should purchase the best professional liability insurance
available to them and should request the maximum coverage available. If possible, purchase a pol-
icy that pays for attorneys’ fees and judgments; legal representation if an ethics complaint is filed
against you; claims made for actions that occurred during the time the policy was in effect; and
claims against supervisees, partners, or employees.
Counselors in private practice also need insurance that covers injuries that might occur on
their office premises, acts or omissions by employees that they may be supervising, and any other
claim that may arise as a result of their business. This type of insurance is relatively inexpensive.
Making the Transition
Typically, counselors who go into private practice begin their professional careers by working in
an agency or organization for several years to gain experience and to complete the hours of super-
vised practice required for licensure. Later, when they are considering going into private practice,
they should assess their ability to handle financial uncertainties. These include an initial period of
struggle that may last 3 to 5 years while the practice is getting established, financial losses incurred
by cancellations and no-shows, and income that fluctuates from month to month. Personal stressors,
such as isolation and dealing with clients who have expressed thoughts of harming themselves or
others, should also be given some thought. For counselors who can manage the stressors and who
would enjoy the independence that self-employment allows, private practice can be very rewarding.
However, be aware that counselors who move from one state to another must obtain a license in the
new state in order to open a private practice (Henriksen et al., 2019), and this issue has become very
important for counselors who wish to counsel clients virtually in a state different from their own and
who realize that they have to be licensed in that state to serve such clients. The portability compact

-- 377 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	355
that has been enacted in a substantial number of states has improved the ability of counselors to
practice in more than one state (ACA, 2023).
A counselor who establishes a part-time private practice while employed as a counselor in an
agency must be careful not to accept clients for a fee in the private practice who could receive the
same services from the counselor in the employment setting (ACA, 2014, §A.10.a.). If an agency
does allow its counselors to accept agency clients in their private practices, then the standard says
that clients must be informed of their other options, such as being counseled by a staff member in
their private practice.
An issue that distresses many counselors in the realm of private practice is the restrictive
covenant, usually called a noncompetition agreement. A noncompetition agreement prohibits an
employee from practicing the profession for a specified time or within a geographic region after
the employee leaves the organization (McAdams, 2019). Although these types of agreements have
been common in professions such as law, medicine, architecture, and dentistry, they present unique
problems for counselors. Counselors who are planning to leave an employing agency need to inform
clients regarding their choices of who will counsel them in the future. Will the client be transferred
to another counselor within the agency, or can the client choose to follow the counselor to the coun-
selor’s private practice? If the client has the choice, the counselor must be careful not to exercise
undue influence on the client’s decision.
Starting your own private practice is a complex process. According to Gilabert (2014), 80%
of all new businesses fail in the first 18 months. The Small Business Administration (2023) has
indicated the following top reasons for business failures that could be associated with counseling
private practices: insufficient start-up capital (money), lack of experience, personal use of business
funds, competition, and low sales.
Most counselor preparation programs do not offer courses in establishing and maintaining
private counseling practices (Green et al., 2007). As a result, counselors who plan to open a private
practice should attend workshops on the topic and read materials that have been developed to help
them succeed (Aronoff, 2017; Diana, 2010; Hunt, 2004; Paterson, 2011; Stout & Grand, 2006;
Truffo, 2007; Walfish & Barnett, 2009; Wendler, 2016).
Both in private practice and in agency or other community settings, counselors must deal
effectively with third-party payers, or health care insurance companies, if they are to serve the
majority of clients who seek counseling services. In our observation, counselors in private practice
often struggle with issues related to receiving reimbursement from third-party payers. In the follow-
ing section, we discuss some realities of managed care that counselors need to understand.
HEALTH CARE PLANS
Health care plan assistance is a necessity for many individuals who receive mental health care ser-
vices; they could not afford the services without this help. It is thus important for counselors to have
a basic understanding of how health care plans function, particularly in the area of providing mental
health care services.
In many countries, citizens pay taxes to the government, and the government then provides
health care services at no cost. In the United States, individuals pay for health care plans because
the federal government does not provide health care services to all citizens or residents and because
the cost of some of their health care needs could easily exceed the individual’s financial resources.
When people enter into contracts with health care companies, the health care plan agrees to provide
them with health care in return for a premium they pay on a regular basis.

-- 378 of 593 --

356 	Section 2 • Issues
As a fringe benefit, employers in the United States often provide health care plans for their
employees free of charge, or, more commonly, they subsidize the cost of the plans for their employ-
ees. The federal government requires large employers to provide some type of health care assis-
tance to full-time employees. Individuals who are unemployed, who own their own businesses, or
who work for employers who do not provide health care plans must purchase their own. Indigent
persons or disabled individuals who cannot purchase their own insurance may receive health care
assistance in the form of Medicaid (42 U.S.C. §1396, 1982) from the government. Older persons
receive Medicare from the federal government if they qualify due to their having paid into Medicare
when they were working. As discussed in Chapter 2, licensed counselors recently were approved as
providers of mental health care for Medicare recipients.
Unfortunately, many people in the United States have no health care plan at all. These indi-
viduals must pay for medical services as they are rendered to them, or they simply do not receive
medical care. Most of the people who do not have health care plans belong to a group known as the
working poor (Zuberi, 2006). These are people who earn income that exceeds the eligibility limits
for Medicaid, have jobs that do not provide health care plans as a fringe benefit, and cannot afford
to purchase health care plans on their own. Millions of individuals in the United States do not have
health care plans to assist them in paying for mental health care services. In addition, many people’s
health care plans either do not pay for mental health care services or pay for only extremely limited
services (Fullen et al., 2021).
On March 23, 2010, the Affordable Care Act (also known as Obamacare) took effect in the
United States. The goal of the Act was for every U.S. citizen to have health care. Under this Act,
every citizen was required to have a health insurance plan by 2014 if they could afford one and if
their religious beliefs allowed health care, and those who did not have a health care plan could be
fined. Health care providers were concerned that mental health care services would not be cov-
ered under the federal plans to the same extent that physical health care services were covered
(Flaskerud, 2009). The requirement that all citizens have a health care plan was eliminated starting
in 2019 under the 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs Act, which was enacted in December 2017 (Gluck &
Scott-Railton, 2020).
State Insurance Laws
Each state (or jurisdiction) in the United States has laws governing health care plan contracts that
may be sold in that state. These laws require that health care plan companies offer certain health
benefits in order to be allowed to sell plans in that state. In addition to benefits that are mandated
by state law, health care companies can offer additional benefits as an incentive for individuals to
purchase plans from them rather than from other companies.
A state may also mandate by statute which categories of professionals are eligible to render
the health care services that are reimbursable. Physicians are always listed as acceptable provid-
ers of health care services. State legislation can require that other health care providers, such as
chiropractors, nurses, or physical therapists, be eligible to provide health care services under all
insurance plans sold in the state. This type of statute is called freedom of choice legislation. It allows
consumers of health care services to choose the providers they prefer, rather than allowing health
care companies to limit categories of approved providers, thereby excluding the other providers.
In some states, freedom of choice statutes require allowing licensed counselors to provide mental
health care services if those services are reimbursed by health care companies. In states where
such legislation does not exist, health care companies can determine for themselves whether they
will reimburse for services rendered by licensed counselors. In most circumstances, health care

-- 379 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	357
companies will voluntarily reimburse their plan members for the reimbursable mental health care
services of licensed counselors. If health care companies refuse to allow licensed counselors to
provide mental health care services to their plan holders and if there is no statute in that state to
the contrary, plan members or licensed counselors cannot force these companies to accept licensed
counselors as legitimate providers. See Chapter 2 for a review of how counselors can become active
in legislative issues affecting their profession.
Managed Care
Managed health care is a concept that has had a significant impact on mental health care services
(Namburi & Tadi, 2023; Rupert & Baird, 2004). Basically, managed care means that people are not
given all the health care services that they want or that their provider wants them to have. Instead,
health care plan members are given the services that the health care plan company has determined
are appropriate and necessary. The idea is to lower the cost to the company for health care by man-
aging the care provided.
These companies have policies regarding the type of care they will provide for preventive
procedures or for various illnesses. They also use a procedure known as utilization review, in which
a physician or panel of physicians or other health care providers reviews requests for services from
the treating service providers to determine whether the services will be allowed. If plan members
or their providers want services that exceed those allowed under a managed care system, they must
request exceptions from the company.
A controversy regarding managed care revolves around whether health care companies are
indeed containing health care costs appropriately by eliminating unnecessary procedures and lim-
iting allowable services or are simply increasing their profits at the expense of health care recip-
ients. Many health care providers are dissatisfied with managed care systems because managed
care administrators make decisions about health care services that professionals believe they should
make themselves. Most health care companies today limit the number of outpatient visits for mental
health concerns that members are allowed each year. The idea of limiting counseling services to a
set number of visits is objectionable to many mental health care providers. They would rather have
health care companies allow clients as many visits as professionals believe are necessary to resolve
a mental health concern. Of course, clients who are plan members could have more visits than their
health care plan allows, but they would have to pay the fees themselves.
Types of Health Care Plans
Health care companies offer many different types of plans to the public. The most common kinds
available today include health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organiza-
tions (PPOs), and traditional indemnity health insurance policies. Of course, many other types of
health care plans exist, such as exclusive provider organizations (EPOs), managed care organiza-
tions (MCOs), and individual practice associations (IPAs). Combinations of two or more types are
occasionally formed, and sometimes what appears to be an HMO is actually a PPO.
When individuals purchase health care plans from an HMO, they agree to go to the HMO for
all their health care needs, and they agree to accept the provider of the health care services who is
assigned to them by the HMO. Although most HMOs offer some flexibility in choosing providers
within the organization, members cannot go outside the organization for their health care. Most
HMOs hire providers of health care. Members do not pay for services and then get reimbursed.
Instead, they receive health care services from the HMO for no fee or for the co-payments that they
have agreed to in their contracts.

-- 380 of 593 --

358 	Section 2 • Issues
Individuals who purchase health care plans from a PPO agree to go to providers who have
been preapproved by the organization for all of their health care needs. PPO policy members can
choose their providers but only from the list of approved providers given to them by the PPO plan.
PPOs do not hire providers of health care. The approved providers on their list usually are in private
practice or work for a separate health care agency. PPO providers collect co-pays and deductibles
and bill insurers, but members are responsible for what the insurer does not cover.
Indemnity insurance works something like a PPO, but individuals who purchase indemnity
health insurance do not have to go to providers who have been preapproved by the organization.
Policyholders can choose their health care provider as long as the provider is in a category that
the insurance company recognizes. Health care providers collect co-pays and deductibles and bill
insurers, and persons insured by indemnity health insurance companies are responsible for what the
insurer does not cover.
Counselors as Service Providers
Some counselors or counseling agencies refuse to accept clients who intend to use their health
care plan to assist with fees (Chamlou, 2023). The position of these counselors and agencies is that
dealing with health care plans or insurance companies is too time consuming or is objectionable
philosophically. The clients of such counselors and agencies are, therefore, directly responsible for
any fees charged for the services rendered to them. Of course, such clients must have the financial
resources to be able to afford the services, which means that the counselors in these practices coun-
sel only individuals who have the financial means to afford their services.
In contrast, many agencies that employ counselors require that they become providers for
health care plans (Kassirer et al., 2013). In addition, most counselors in private practice find that
they must become providers in order to have enough paying clients to maintain their business.
Becoming a provider for a PPO is not an easy process. Counselors must first determine
which PPOs exist in their community and then apply to each one separately to become a provider.
Sometimes the application process is difficult and time consuming. Because PPOs purposefully
limit their lists of preferred providers, not all eligible mental health professionals in the commu-
nity will be accepted by a PPO, which can accept or reject any application it receives as long as it
does not illegally discriminate against a professional. To become a provider for a particular PPO, a
counselor may have to apply many times over a long period. Despite these difficulties, counselors
do seem to be succeeding at becoming accepted providers. Once a counselor has been accepted by
a PPO as a provider, or when a counselor has accepted a client who has indemnity health insurance
that will reimburse the client for the counselor’s services, it is important that the counselor complete
health plan forms in an appropriate and professional manner.
Most health care plans demand accountability from their providers. Plans may require coun-
selors to submit detailed justifications for their diagnoses. In addition, most health care plans expect
providers of mental health care services to develop objective and measurable goals as a part of each
client’s treatment plan. Some plans send auditors to providers’ offices to determine whether the
provider is offering a professional setting for rendering services, is keeping confidential information
secure, is accessible to clients for services, and is keeping records appropriately. If providers do not
comply with a health care plan’s requirements, the plan has the option of removing them as provid-
ers. In fact, to avoid liability, health care plans must remove from their lists any providers who are
ineffective professionally.
It is vital for counselors to request detailed information from each health care plan for which
they provide services regarding the plan’s expectations from providers. Each plan is unique and

-- 381 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	359
requests various types of information in a multitude of formats. In order to maintain provider status,
counselors must comply with the requirements of each health care plan: Counselors must be “accu-
rate, honest, and objective in reporting their professional activities and judgments to appropriate
third parties, including courts, health insurance companies, those who are the recipients of evalua-
tion reports, and others” (ACA, 2014, §C.6.b.).
Counselors who serve as providers must be prepared to deal with a number of ethical and
legal issues that are unique to managed care and other types of health plans. Issues that counselors
must contend with in managed care environments include ensuring client privacy, providing proper
diagnoses, securing informed consent, receiving payment for services, continuing treatment despite
denial of services, and not engaging in fraud. Welfel (2016) has pointed out that counselors who
work with managed care companies must also deal with a conflict of interest in that they must avoid
alienating the company from which they need referrals and must be advocates for quality care for
their clients at the same time.
Federal Health Care Plans
Counselors have been politically active in each state to become recognized as mental health care provid-
ers by health care companies under state laws. Counselors have also been recognized as providers under
federal health care plans. Fullen et al. (2020a, 2020b) investigated the advocacy beliefs and behaviors of
counselors related to Medicare reimbursement for counselors and found, among other things, that coun-
selors had been negatively affected by not being eligible to provide services to Medicare clients and
that counselors expect CACREP and ACA to provide leadership in advocacy areas such as Medicare
reimbursement for counselors. CACREP specifically accredits counseling graduate programs and does
not have the mission of advocating for the counseling profession. While ACA provides lobbying at the
national level for issues such as health care reimbursement for counselors, ACA administrators count
on practicing counselors to be involved in advocacy efforts. Perhaps the expectation of practicing coun-
selors that CACREP and ACA should be the primary advocates for important professional issues leads
to practicing counselors not being individually as active in advocacy efforts as they should be (Westcott
et al., 2022). After many years of lobbying the federal government and its agencies by individual coun-
selors and their professional associations, licensed counselors have been recognized as mental health
providers for military TRICARE recipients and Medicare beneficiaries. Mental health counselors and
marriage and family therapists were recognized as outpatient mental health providers under Medicare
Part B on January 1, 2024, after Congress passed the Mental Health Access Improvement Act (S.
828/H.R. 432). See https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/432/text. Prior to the pas-
sage of this legislation, counselors were excluded from the list of approved mental health providers,
which already included psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, and psychiatric nurses
(NBCC, 2023c). See Chapter 2 for discussions of these developments.
On February 1, 2023, the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) formally launched an occu-
pational series for mental health counselors. In the past, counselors employed by the VA held job
titles other than counselor (National Board for Certified Counselors [NBCC], 2023d). There contin-
ues to be no occupational series for professional counselors within the general federal government,
where job positions are categorized in one of the Occupational Series classifications established by
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM; NBCC, 2023a). NBCC is pursuing government
affairs initiatives focused on helping counselors become providers of mental health services and is
advocating for additional counselor employment by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Indian
Health Service, and the Military Health Systems and for the creation of a federal occupations series
for counselors beyond the one recently developed by the VA.

-- 382 of 593 --

360 	Section 2 • Issues
Client Privacy
When clients contract with health care plans, they sign forms that give health care providers per-
mission to transmit information regarding their health care to their health care plan administrators.
Clients, in the past, believed that they had to agree that service providers could release any informa-
tion regarding their treatment that the plan administrators requested. However, HIPAA has changed
that situation significantly: Under HIPAA, insurance companies are limited in the types of infor-
mation they may request, and they are not allowed to disallow claims if clients refuse to provide
them with certain types of information, such as psychotherapy notes. See Chapter 6 for a thorough
discussion of the provisions of HIPAA.
Many mental health professionals feel uneasy about providing detailed information regarding
their clients’ diagnoses and treatment to administrators who usually are not mental health profes-
sionals. Their discomfort is compounded by the fact that they have no control over what happens
to the information after it has been released to the provider. Yet if counselors wish to be providers,
they must transmit this information. When counselors become providers for PPOs, they should
request a copy of the privacy waivers that PPO members routinely sign. If a counselor is ever unsure
about whether a client wants the counselor to provide information requested from a health care plan
administrator, it would be best to ask the client to sign a waiver giving permission for the informa-
tion to be sent.
In our opinion, it is fruitless for an individual counselor to challenge the idea that health care
providers inappropriately invade the privacy of their clients. If a counselor believes that a health care
plan policy should be changed, the counselor should communicate directly with a company repre-
sentative regarding the policy. Counselors who believe that laws or regulations should be changed
should work through the state or national counseling association to seek legislative changes.
Counselors might take additional steps, such as increasing their role in the decision-making pro-
cesses of managed care companies and working with companies to establish clearly structured
appeals processes. Knapp and VandeCreek (2008) have reminded counselors that they have an ethi-
cal obligation to advocate for their clients by informing policymakers about problems with the pres-
ent health care system. Most professional associations for counselors have government relations
offices that advocate for counselors and they often request that counselors help influence legislation
favorable to counselors by contacting legislators.
Diagnosis
In Chapter 7, we noted that using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM, 2022) creates con-
flicts for counselors who espouse a wellness or developmental orientation. Most managed care
organizations require that mental health professionals assign a DSM diagnosis to their clients in
order to qualify for reimbursement of services. Most managed care organizations also limit in some
way the diagnoses for which they will pay benefits. Some organizations will not reimburse for
V-code conditions, typical developmental transitions, personality disorder diagnoses, adjustment
disorders, or family or couples counseling.
Counselors are sometimes caught in a conflict because they want to promote client welfare by
helping clients receive reimbursement and, at the same time, to provide accurate diagnoses. Given
the choice between an honest diagnosis without insurance reimbursement and a deceptive diagnosis
with third-party payment, some counselors may consider rendering inappropriate diagnoses that are
tied to the chance of being reimbursed by health care companies. Rather than yield to these tempta-
tions, counselors can improve the chances that their treatment plans will be approved by assessing
clients thoroughly, setting realistic treatment goals, and complying with health care companies’

-- 383 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	361
recommended treatment protocols. Regardless, counselors are ethically obligated to “take special
care to provide proper diagnosis of mental disorders” (ACA, 2014, Code of Ethics, §E.5.a.).
Informed Consent
Managed care can complicate informed consent procedures in several ways. Because managed care
plans typically limit treatment options and the number of sessions they will reimburse, counselors must
address these limitations with clients at the outset of the counseling relationship. Informed consent
also includes ensuring that clients know what information their managed care organization requires the
counselor to disclose as well as the implications of any diagnosis that might be assigned (ACA, 2014,
Code of Ethics, §A.2.b.). More detailed information about informed consent is provided in Chapter 4.
Receiving Payment for Services
Most PPOs pay providers directly for services rendered to the PPO members. These fees are sent
to providers after they have completed necessary forms that document the services rendered. This
arrangement means that counselors often receive payment long after services have been rendered.
When counselors provide services to indemnity health insurance policyholders, counselors can
handle payment in one of two ways. Counselors may require that the client pay for services as they are
rendered and then file for reimbursement. Counselors may also allow clients to assign their reimburse-
ment to the counselors so that the payment goes to the counselor from the insurance company. With
either method, counselors must verify to the insurance company that they provided services for the
client and must provide all the information regarding the services requested by the insurance company.
Usually, both PPOs and indemnity health insurance companies require clients to pay a portion
of the counselor’s fees directly. This amount is called a co-payment. It is vital that counselors collect
co-payments from clients when such payments are a requirement of the PPO or indemnity health
insurance company.
After counselors have succeeded in becoming approved providers under managed care plans,
they confront some ethical issues. Most managed care companies approve only brief mental health
treatment as a cost containment measure. Thus, counselors must be prepared to provide brief coun-
seling for many of their clients who want their health care plans to pay for services. In the past,
counselors typically were not trained in brief counseling. Since then, counselor training programs
have recognized the need to teach not only the traditional approaches but also the brief counseling
models. Programs are now preparing students to meet the clinical and ethical challenges created by
managed care. Therefore, practitioners whose training did not adequately prepare them to deal with
managed care must seek continuing education in the brief counseling approaches and seek supervi-
sion and consultation while developing their competencies (ACA, 2014, §C.2.b.).
Counselors who participate in managed care plans must be able to assess which clients will be
well served in a time-limited context. They must also be knowledgeable about referral resources for
clients whose needs cannot be met under the limitations of their health care plans. Because counsel-
ors have an ethical obligation to be advocates for their clients (ACA, 2014, §A.6.a.), they must also
be skilled at appealing health care companies’ decisions to deny reimbursement when clients need
more sessions than their plan allows.
Continuing Treatment and Denial of Services
Although counselors may do their best to serve clients whose health care plans reimburse only for
time-limited counseling, inevitably there will be clients who will need more sessions than their
health care plan allows or approves. In these situations, counselors may be caught between the

-- 384 of 593 --

362 	Section 2 • Issues
need to uphold their ethical standards and the need to remain financially viable in private prac-
tice. They have ethical obligations to avoid abandoning clients (ACA, 2014, §A.12.), to ensure
appropriate termination (§A.11.c.), and to help clients find alternative resources for continued
treatment (§A.11.d.).
Counselors face issues of abandonment when they have to terminate client relationships
before they believe they should. It is not ethical to discontinue counseling services for lack of pay-
ment when the client is in a state of crisis or emergency. In such situations, counselors must con-
tinue providing treatment until the emergency is resolved or appropriate alternative care can be
arranged (Welfel, 2016). At the same time, counselors cannot be expected, except in emergency
situations, to continue indefinitely to counsel clients without receiving payment for their services
(ACA, 2014, §A.11.c.).
Lawsuits have been filed when patients suffered injuries after their health plans refused to
cover services that were requested (Wickline v. State of California, 1986; Wilson v. Blue Cross,
1990). In these cases, the health plans argued that their denial of payment or reimbursement
for services was not a denial of care. They argued that the treating health care provider had the
final responsibility for appropriate care. The courts in these cases held that health plans could be
held liable if they were negligent in denying health care services that were necessary to prevent
a patient being injured. In Wickline, the court also found that the physician involved in the case
should have protested the health plan’s denial of care that he had requested. It was the court’s
position that a health care provider is not liable if a health plan refuses to provide necessary care
but that the provider does have a responsibility to protest if the recommendation for care is not
accepted.
Mental health care services under managed care probably present more challenges to provid-
ers than do physical health care services. First, mental health care often is limited to levels that seem
inappropriate to mental health care providers. For example, a health care plan may allow only five
reimbursed counseling sessions a year, or the plan may require that a member have a diagnosis of
a serious mental or emotional disorder, while severely limiting the services that may be provided
under the plan.
The court cases discussed previously provide a foundation for making some recommenda-
tions to counselors providing services to clients covered by managed health care companies. These
recommendations will help you protect yourself from legal liability:
• If you believe that a client requires counseling services beyond what has been approved by a
managed health care company, request the additional services on behalf of the client. If the
request is denied, file a written protest or complaint with the company.
• Instruct the client regarding their right to appeal a decision that denies additional services.
• If the client’s condition indicates a danger to self or others or if the client is in a crisis and
cannot afford to pay for your services directly, continue providing services for the client
until care can be transferred to another professional or to a facility that provides mental
health care.
Anderson (2000), who is a counselor and has been a managed care case manager, has offered
suggestions to counselors about how to deal constructively with managed care companies. He has
suggested that counselors avoid treating managed care case managers as the enemy but, instead,
establish a positive relationship with them for the benefit of clients. Anderson (2000) has also rec-
ommended to counselors that they emphasize good treatment plans in their practices, use proper
code numbers in submitting claim forms, and use empirical research results to support exceptions to
decisions that have been made.

-- 385 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	363
Avoiding Fraud
Counselors who complete the forms required by PPOs or health insurance companies must be careful
not to engage in fraudulent practices. Fraud occurs when counselors misrepresent to health care com-
panies any facts regarding their services so that their clients will receive payment or reimbursement
for the counselors’ services (Robinson, 2020). If fraudulent practices are discovered, health care com-
panies can file civil lawsuits to recover payments or reimbursements made inappropriately. Because
fraud is a crime, the companies can even cause prosecutors to file criminal charges against counselors.
Because many counselors do not know what constitutes health care fraud, it is possible for them
to commit fraud without realizing they are doing so. New counselors should be careful not to pattern
their behavior after that of seasoned practitioners because some actions that mental health professionals
have been taking for years are actually fraudulent. We have observed that some counselors occasionally
engage in health care fraud activities because they are motivated to help their clients receive mental
health care services that are paid for or reimbursed by health plans. For example, counselors report inac-
curate information to health care plans so that their clients will be able to begin or continue counseling.
Unfortunately, counselors also benefit from fraudulent practices in that health plans pay for their ser-
vices based on the inaccurate information they have provided. Therefore, it appears to outside observers
that counselors are being self-serving when they give false information to health care plans.
13-5 The Case of Dan
Dan has just been licensed as a professional counselor and has decided to open a private prac-
tice. He knows from talking to other licensed counselors in his state that a few of the major PPOs
and health insurance companies in the state do not pay or reimburse clients for the services of
licensed counselors. Dan’s good friend Monique is a licensed clinical psychologist. Monique’s
clients do receive payment or reimbursement for her services. Monique agrees to sublease office
space to Dan for his private practice. In addition, Monique agrees to sign off on PPO and health
insurance forms indicating that she is the client’s psychologist even though Dan is the one see-
ing the clients. Monique and Dan meet weekly and review each of Dan’s cases to ensure that
Monique is comfortable with his treatment of clients. All clients are told that Monique is supervis-
ing Dan. In exchange for Monique’s assistance, Dan agrees to give Monique 25% of all fees he
collects from PPO and health insurance clients.
• What is the major problem with this arrangement?
• What do you think would happen if Monique indicated on the insurance forms that Dan
provided the mental health care services and that Monique supervised him in providing
those services?
Discussion: This arrangement between Dan and Monique appears on the surface to be one that
serves everyone’s purposes well. Monique is helping out her friend and realizing extra income
through subleasing her office space, supervising Dan, and receiving 25% of the PPO and health
insurance client fees that Dan collects. Because his clients’ health care plans will pay or reimburse as
long as Monique continues to supervise Dan and sign off on his treatment plans, Dan is able to see
clients who normally would not be able to see him. Clients are pleased that their health care plans
are paying for their counseling services. This may seem like a perfectly reasonable arrangement,
and some mental health practitioners have long been involved in these kinds of arrangements.

-- 386 of 593 --

364 	Section 2 • Issues
The problem is that Monique and Dan are fraudulently misrepresenting their services to
the PPOs and health insurance companies. Although it may seem unfair that health care plans do
not reimburse licensed counselors for their services, health care plans in some states do have the
right to refuse to reimburse for the services of licensed counselors. If a health care company dis-
covered this arrangement, the company could sue Monique, Dan, and Dan’s clients for fraud and
perhaps collect all of the fees they had paid out to them, plus other damages. In addition, the
company could request that the local prosecutor file criminal fraud charges against all the parties
and might also file ethics complaints against Monique and Dan with their licensure boards.
There is actually nothing wrong with licensed counselors affiliating with other mental health
professionals, such as licensed psychologists or licensed physicians. If the counselor is going to
provide the direct service to clients, then PPO and insurance forms must be completed to reflect
that situation. In the case example you just read, no fraud would have been involved if Monique
had indicated on forms that Dan, a licensed counselor, was providing the direct service and that she,
a licensed psychologist, was supervising Dan’s work. A PPO or health insurance company might
have refused to pay or reimburse for services provided under such an arrangement (which it would
have a legal right to do), but possibly payment or reimbursement would have been approved. If they
had fully disclosed their arrangement to the payor, then the entire arrangement between Dan and
Monique would have been acceptable. There is nothing illegal or unethical about fee splitting under
arrangements such as theirs as long as there are no misrepresentations to PPOs or health insurance
companies.
In the following list, you will find a number of fraudulent practices that could lead to seri-
ous trouble for mental health professionals. Counselors commit fraud when they report to PPOs or
health insurance companies that:
• An approved professional is providing direct services to a client, but a counselor who is not
approved for payment or reimbursement actually is providing the services.
• A client is assigned a DSM diagnosis that is approved for payment or reimbursement, but the
counselor actually does not believe the diagnosis is accurate.
• The counselor is claiming to provide individual counseling that is reimbursable but is actually
providing couples, family, or group counseling that is not reimbursable.
• The counselor is collecting a required co-payment from a client even though the counselor is
actually waiving the co-payment.
• Counseling services were said to be rendered on a specific date, even though the client actually
missed the session, but the counselor billed for the missed session anyway.
• The counselor appears to be a physician by signing forms in the space marked physician’s
signature and doesn’t note that he is a licensed counselor rather than a physician.
• The counselor claims that they are beginning a counseling relationship with a client for the first
time, when actually they have been involved in an ongoing counseling relationship, because
health care providers often will not pay or reimburse for preexisting conditions.
• The client says they are requesting payment or reimbursement from only one health care plan,
but the counselor knows that the client is actually requesting payment for the same services
from two or more plans.
As discussed in Chapter 7, counselors who are willing and properly trained to diagnose emo-
tional and mental disorders have an ethical and legal obligation to diagnose according to accepted

-- 387 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	365
standards in the mental health field (ACA, 2014, §E.5.a.). If a counselor determines that a client
does not have a DSM disorder for which a health care plan will pay or reimburse, then the counselor
must not assign such a disorder just to allow a client to obtain health care plan financial assistance.
The Changing Nature of Health Care Plans
We have summarized the current types of health care plans available and the issues they raise for
mental health care providers. Health care plans have changed substantially over the past two decades
and are expected to continue to change as legislators and the public discuss and amend health care
delivery systems in the United States. It is important for counselors who provide services for clients
with health care plans to constantly monitor changes in the health care industry. What may be an
acceptable practice today may be prohibited tomorrow.
Diversity Considerations
As noted, some people in the United States do not have health care insurance. Unfortunately, many
of these individuals are the very people who can ill afford to pay out of pocket for mental health care
services. Wilcoxon et al. (2008) have urged counselors to confront the business paradigm of the health
care industry and have suggested that counselors advocate for changing corporate approaches to cli-
ent care that further disadvantage those who already are disadvantaged. Counselors in private practice
grapple with conflicts between their desire to assist these individuals and their need to generate suf-
ficient income to maintain their practices. Private practitioners are thus encouraged to provide some
pro bono service—that is, service for which there is little or no financial return (ACA, 2014, Section A
Introduction). Knapp and VandeCreek (2008) have pointed out, though, that decisions about pro bono
and reduced-cost services should be made only after careful consideration of possible ramifications.
For example, will the client devalue the worth of the services if the services are free?
13-6 The Case of Isabelle
Isabelle has been in private practice for 10 years. She has an office in an affluent part of town,
and all of her clients either have insurance that pays for her services or are wealthy enough to
pay her from their personal funds. Isabelle feels some guilt, however, because she entered the
counseling profession to be of help to individuals and to society. She also is aware that the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014) encourages counselors to provide some services pro bono. Isabelle is won-
dering how she should provide free services to some clients.
• If Isabelle decides to see some clients for free or at a reduced rate in her private practice,
what problems might that cause?
• How else might Isabelle meet her pro bono obligations?
Discussion: If Isabelle were to accept some clients into her private practice who pay nothing,
she would need to have clear criteria regarding how clients could qualify for the services. If her
other clients were to somehow learn that she was serving some clients pro bono and they did not
understand how she came to that decision, they might feel resentful even if they can afford her
full fee. Perhaps a better option for Isabelle to fulfill her pro bono obligation would be to volun-
teer her counseling services in a community agency for a period of time each week or to provide
free workshops in the community.

-- 388 of 593 --

366 	Section 2 • Issues
Summary and Key Points
This chapter focuses on three related topics—
professional relationships, private practice, and
health care plans. Counselors who practice in any
setting interact regularly with other professionals
and must conduct themselves in an ethically and
legally appropriate manner. Although private prac-
tice is idealized by many counselors in training,
private practice is a business that carries associated
risks and requires knowledge of business practices.
It is important for counselors to understand the var-
ious types of insurance plans.
Key points regarding professional relation-
ships include:
• Counselors have different roles depending on
the circumstances of their interactions with other
professionals.
• Because 	most 	counselors 	function 	at 	vari-
ous times as employees and as employers, it is
important that they understand the basic princi-
ples of employment law.
• Counselors as employees have the right to be
free of discrimination in the workplace and to
refuse to follow a supervisor’s directive if it con-
stitutes a crime.
• Counselors as employees do not have a right to
employment, and in all but limited circumstances
they can be dismissed from their jobs.
• Counselors 	and 	their 	employers 	sometimes
disagree about what is ethical, and several
steps can be taken to attempt to resolve these
disagreements.
• Counselors as employers need to be clear about
their roles and their expectations of those whose
work they supervise.
• Counselors as employers should avoid having
close personal relationships or friendships with
their employees.
• Before transferring private information about cli-
ents, counselors should obtain client permission;
counselors must also work to preserve client
confidentiality when transferring clients’ private
information.
• Although counselors cannot make referrals in
ways that might benefit the counselors them-
selves, they may make referrals to other profes-
sionals as dictated by client welfare or the poli-
cies of their employers.
• Relationships between counselors and other
mental health professionals are characterized by
respect, honesty, and fairness.
• Counselors must avoid making statements about
other professionals that could be libelous or
slanderous.
Private practice is a business. Counselors
who wish to start their own practice need to under-
stand certain aspects of business practice. Key
points regarding private practice include:
• Counselors who wish to start their own practice
must be knowledgeable about taxes; business
licenses; and the various forms of businesses,
including sole proprietorships, partnerships, and
corporations.
• Private practitioners must set fees that are rea-
sonable by community standards.
• Counselors must understand the appropriate and
inappropriate uses of a sliding scale fee.
• It is a good practice for counselors to collect pay-
ment at the time they render their services.
• Counselors in private practice need the services
of attorneys and accountants to assist them in
managing their businesses.
• It is vitally important that counselors carry
adequate professional liability insurance.
• Private practice is not for every counselor. The
risks and benefits must be carefully weighed
before a decision to enter private practice is made.
Most individuals today have some type of
health insurance that is paid for or subsidized by
their employer or by the government. Several types

-- 389 of 593 --

Chapter 13 • Professional Relationships, Private Practice, and Health Care Plans 	367
of insurance plans raise complex issues for coun-
selors who wish to become approved providers of
mental health care services. Key points regarding
health insurance include:
• Each state in the United States has laws that gov-
ern which health care plan contracts may be sold
in that state.
• There are several types of health care plans,
including HMOs, PPOs, and traditional indem-
nity plans.
• Managed care has had a significant impact on
mental health care services.
• With some perseverance, counselors usually can
become approved providers for managed care
companies.
• Ethical and legal issues raised by managed care
and other types of health plans include maintain-
ing client privacy, rendering appropriate diagnoses,
ensuring informed consent of clients, receiving
payment for services, continuing treatment after
benefits end, dealing with problems caused by
denial of services, avoiding committing insurance
fraud, and meeting the needs of individuals who do
not have mental health insurance.

-- 390 of 593 --

368
14Issues in Counselor Education
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
14.1 	Identify the major ethical and legal issues that
counselor education programs must address to
serve students and protect their future clients.
14.2 	Describe the varied issues involved in relationships
between counseling students and faculty members.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What kinds of information do
prospective students need to
receive about a counselor training
program so that they can make
an informed decision regarding
whether to apply?
2. What do you think you should do
if you know that a classmate is
struggling and does not seem to be
learning the skills, behaviors, and
dispositions needed to become a
competent counselor?
3. What kinds of relationships outside
the classroom between counselor
education professors and students
are appropriate?
In this chapter, you will learn about the ethical and legal
issues that must be addressed during the process of educat-
ing graduate students to become counselors. The faculty in
counselor education programs have responsibilities to ensure
that prospective students have adequate information to make
an informed decision whether to enter the programs, and
admissions standards must be clear and fair. Gatekeeping is
perhaps the responsibility that causes the most consternation
among educators and faculty alike, yet it is a necessary pro-
cess to protect future clients of students’ counseling services.
In this chapter, a variety of issues that affect relationships
between students and faculty are also explored.
The Impact of the COVID-19
Pandemic on Counselor Education
Although computer-enhanced counselor education has existed
since 1984, the vast majority of CACREP-accredited programs
were traditional in structure at the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic (Becnel et al., 2023; Haddock et al., 2020; Snow &
Coker, 2020; Snow et al., 2018). The pandemic caused an
unprecedented disruption in higher education (Ghazi-Saidi
et al., 2020), particularly in applied education programs, such
as counseling, that had depended on external structures to pro-
vide field experiences and needed to ensure all courses could
be taught and standards met online in a secure and confiden-
tial manner (Christian et al., 2021).
Initially, this unexpected and sudden transition caused
confusion, chaos, and frustration among students and faculty

-- 391 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	369
alike (Li, 2022). Counseling students, suddenly unable to attend classes in person, had to adapt to
online delivery platforms and management systems such as Blackboard and Canvas while learning
to cope with their own life changes necessitated by the lockdown. Students who were enrolled in
their practicum and internship courses were concerned about how they would complete their clinical
field experiences and obtain their required practicum and internship hours (Becnel et al., 2022). As it
became apparent that face-to-face instruction would not resume quickly, counselor educators had to
set aside their concerns as to whether applied courses such as counseling skills and group counseling
could be taught effectively using virtual means because no other options were available.
Despite these challenges, counselor education programs adapted quickly to the new realities.
Counselor educators, realizing that simply transferring their course materials into virtual manage-
ment systems would not promote student engagement, developed new teaching strategies and forged
online student learning communities (Haddock et al., 2020). Students, as well, became acclimated
to a virtual learning environment. In one study, most counseling students reported that although they
initially experienced a wide variety of disruptions, they found their educational and informal support
systems to be adequate for them to be able to continue their studies (Crockett & Ivers, 2022).
Today, virtual learning is well-established in counselor education (Coker et al., 2021;
McKenna & Manis, 2021), and the trend is continuing in the post COVID-19 era. The conveniences
of online learning have been retained in a mixture of in-person, virtual, and hybrid courses in many
counselor education programs. Counselor educators have established procedures for encouraging
student autonomy in virtual learning environments (e.g., flipped classrooms), providing adequate
instructor support (e.g., virtual office hours), and facilitating student interaction and collaboration
(e.g., discussion boards; Lee, 2022). Practices such as these may be particularly well suited to our
high-paced technological society (Gay & Swank, 2021). In the post-pandemic era, the focus of
research has shifted to developing best practices in virtual counselor education, such as strategies
for infusing a social justice lens (Rollins et al., 2022), for addressing inherent racism (Hannon
et al., 2023), for incorporating telehealth training into the curriculum (Gallo et al., 2022), and for
integrating virtual technology that presents content-specific immersive and experiential learning
that emulates real-world interactions (Sacco-Bene et al., 2022). In the future, it will be necessary
to assess the effectiveness of such transformations and to continue to develop teaching practices
specifically tailored to virtual counselor education (Elliott & Henninger, 2020; Li & Su, 2021). The
pace of change is likely to continue to accelerate, presenting new opportunities and challenges for
the transformed process of counselor education.
COUNSELOR EDUCATION PROGRAMS
Informed Consent
Just as clients have the right to know what they are undertaking when they come for counseling,
students have the right to know what will be expected of them before they choose to enter a graduate
program in counseling. In keeping with the spirit of informed consent, prospective students need
enough information to enable them to make wise choices about their graduate studies.
In the American Counseling Association’s Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), §F.8.a. lists quite
explicitly the information that must be provided to prospective students before they enter a program.
This information includes the following:
• The values and ethical principles of the profession
• The type and level of skill and knowledge acquisition required for successful completion of
the training program

-- 392 of 593 --

370 	Section 2 • Issues
• Technology requirements
• Program training goals, objectives, and mission and the subject matter that will be covered
• Bases for evaluation
• Training components that encourage self-growth or self-disclosure as part of the training
process
• The type of supervision settings and the requirements of the sites that are needed to obtain the
required clinical field experiences
• Student and supervisee evaluation and dismissal policies and procedures
• Up-to-date employment prospects for graduates
Application materials, including those found on websites, must include all of these elements and
must be thorough and current. Counselor education programs also have an obligation to ensure that
prospective students can contact a knowledgeable individual at the university if they have questions.
You learned in Chapter 4 that informed consent is a legal as well as an ethical matter. The law
of informed consent requires that individuals be properly informed before their consent to engage in
counseling sessions is valid. Before graduate students can appropriately agree to enter a program into
which they have been accepted and subsequently meet the program’s requirements for graduation,
they must be informed of all the requirements. In addition, the program’s requirements for graduation
must be presented in sufficient detail to allow entering students to fully understand their obligations.
Jorgensen and Brown-Rice (2016) found that 27.7% of CACREP-accredited programs require
applicants to undergo a criminal background check (CBC). Although this may seem intrusive, such a
check can prevent future problems for some applicants. All 50 states require a CBC for school coun-
selors. In 2016 a total of 17 state licensure boards required applicants to pass a CBC (Jorgensen &
Brown-Rice, 2016), and it is likely that all 50 states now require a criminal background check as
part of the counselor licensure application process. Applications for licensure typically ask whether
the applicant has been convicted of a felony. As an informed consent issue, we believe it would be
wise for all programs, whether or not they require a CBC, to inform prospective students of the pos-
sible consequences of any legal violations in their past.
Perhaps the most important goal of informed consent in admissions is to ensure that prospec-
tive students understand that becoming a counselor involves more than just acquiring knowledge.
Counseling students are instead expected to engage in a variety of learning experiences that differ
from those required in most other disciplines (Pease-Carter & Barrio Minton, 2012). Applicants
should be made aware that their training will challenge them on the personal level as well as on the
academic level (Herlihy & Corey, 2015a).
Admissions
Counselor educators strive to admit into training programs individuals who are likely to suc-
ceed at developing the knowledge, skills, and characteristics needed to become effective coun-
selors. Academic ability is one important criterion, and relevant work experience might also be
considered. Some graduate programs list minimum criteria for admission, which might include
a minimum Graduate Record Examination (GRE) score or a Miller Analogy Test (MAT) score, a
minimum undergraduate or graduate grade point average (GPA), or a minimum number of years
of work experience. Swank and Smith-Adcock (2014) found that 70% of counselor education
programs use standardized test scores and that 95% use GPA as a criterion for admission into mas-
ter’s-degree programs. There is some evidence to suggest that undergraduate GPA and GRE scores
are useful for predicting both graduate GPAs and student scores on the Counselor Preparation
Comprehensive Exam (CPCE; Hatchett et al., 2017). Many counselor education programs require

-- 393 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	371
that students pass the CPCE to graduate. Many programs also attempt to gather information by
requiring applicants to submit letters of reference or a personal statement or essay. With the advent
of artificial intelligence, however, counselor educators have become concerned that personal state-
ments may have been written by an avatar. Concerns surrounding artificial intelligence will need to
be addressed on an ongoing basis in admissions processes as new technologies emerge.
Demonstrated academic ability is a relatively straightforward criterion to apply. Admissions deci-
sions become more difficult when we consider that learning to be a counselor involves more than mas-
tery of academic content. Admissions screening also involves an evaluation of the personal qualities and
interpersonal skills of applicants (Garner, 2020). Personal characteristics associated with the ability to
succeed as a counselor include maturity, flexibility, emotional stability (Nagpal & Richie, 2002), accep-
tance, open-mindedness, empathy, warmth, genuineness, and sensitivity (McCaughan & Hill, 2014).
As we noted in Chapter 7 on competence, it is possible for a student to have strong intellectual abilities
and still not possess the personal and interpersonal characteristics to be an effective counselor. Some
individuals who are attracted to careers in counseling seem to have personality or adjustment problems
that would negatively affect their ability to develop the competencies needed to become effective coun-
selors. Therefore, counselor educators attempt to screen applicants carefully and to select only those
students who possess the characteristics associated with counseling effectiveness. As you can imagine,
it is difficult for counselor educators to assess whether program applicants have these personal and
interpersonal attributes. The importance of assessing counselor dispositions has become institutional-
ized in the CACREP accreditation standards (CACREP, 2024); accredited programs are required to
assess the dispositions of their students both at the time of admission and throughout their matriculation
in their respective programs. However, the absence of dispositional measures that reliably predict coun-
selor performance makes this standard difficult to uphold (Hatchett, 2023).
Admissions decisions for applicants are usually based on a review of several factors. These fac-
tors are considered in relation to the number of individuals that the program can accommodate and
the credentials of other applicants. Counseling graduate programs should make it clear that they make
admissions decisions in this manner. University administrators and judges generally would not substi-
tute their judgment for that of faculty members unless it was clear that an applicant had been unfairly
discriminated against or that the faculty had failed to follow the procedures that they had established.
Counselor education programs cannot legally discriminate against prospective students who
are in any category that is protected by the U.S. Constitution or federal statutes and their imple-
menting regulations. These categories include race, sex, disability, age, residence, and alien status
(Kaplin & Lee, 1995; Welfare et al., 2017). Counselor education programs must also be careful to
avoid discriminating against students with disabilities.
In the past, programs have given special consideration to applicants whose characteristics are
underrepresented in the program or in the profession of counseling. Admissions practices are being
scrutinized in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Standards for Fair Admissions, Inc. v.
President and Fellows of Harvard College (2023), which prohibited affirmative action practices in
which race was considered in admission decisions. Regardless of developments in the legal arena,
however, nondiscrimination remains an ethical mandate. Counselor educators have an ethical respon-
sibility to ensure that counselor education programs reflect the cultural diversity of our society.
According to the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014):
Counselor educators [should] actively attempt to recruit and retain a diverse student body. Counselor
educators [should] demonstrate commitment to multicultural/diversity competence by recognizing
and valuing diverse cultures and types of abilities students bring to the training experience. Counselor
educators [should] provide appropriate accommodations that enhance and support diverse student
well-being and academic performance. (§F.11.b.)

-- 394 of 593 --

372 	Section 2 • Issues
For some counselor education programs that are located in geographical areas where the
population is not very diverse, recruiting a diverse student body can be a challenge. Even when a
diverse range of students can be attracted to a program, a recursive situation may occur in which
a program continues to admit and then ultimately lose students who are members of marginalized
societal groups because the students are always entering programs in which most of the students are
members of the dominant culture (Behl et al., 2017; Avent Harris et al., 2017). Hipolito-Delgado
et al. (2021), after interviewing 19 counseling graduate students of color, discovered that the par-
ticipants’ motivations for attending graduate school included their interest in serving marginalized
communities, their ability to find programs committed to diversity, and the support they received
during the application process to graduate school. Some programs now use flexible admissions
criteria to increase student diversity rather than continue to rely on GPA and GRE scores, which are
less reliable predictors of success for racially and ethnically diverse applicants. Hannon et al. (2023)
have recommended that counselor education programs increase the racial or ethnic diversity of their
applicant pools by removing standardized test requirements (e.g., the Graduate Record Exam) for
admission. Hammonds and Perguson (2022) have advocated for a holistic admissions process that
includes evaluation of applicants’ life experiences, academic metrics, and attributes or dispositions.
Curriculum Issues
In Chapter 2, we discussed in some detail the curricular components that a counselor education
program must contain to be accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related
Educational Programs (CACREP). CACREP standards (CACREP, 2024) are generally accepted by
the profession as a model curriculum for master’s-level preparation of counselors. Here, we high-
light some of the ethical responsibilities of counselor educators in delivering the curriculum and
explore one of the most ethically sensitive components of training—self-growth experiences.
TEACHING ETHICS, MULTICULTURAL COUNSELING, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 	Counselor edu-
cators must make students aware of the ethical standards of the counseling profession and their
responsibilities to the profession (ACA, 2014, §F.7.e.). Historically, in some counselor education
programs, ethics was taught as a separate course, whereas it was infused into existing courses in
other programs. Today, best practice is for ethical and legal issues to be both taught as a discrete
course and infused throughout the training process when students are at various developmental
levels. Students who are just beginning their studies in this area may look at ethical issues one way.
Later, as they acquire direct experience with clients during their practicum and internship, their
views are likely to evolve.
Ethical decision-making skills are essential; experts polled by Herlihy and Dufrene (2011)
identified helping students develop these skills as the most important ethical issue in counselor
preparation. Ametrano (2014) has described how an ethics course can teach ethical decision mak-
ing, increase tolerance for ambiguity, and enhance student awareness of how values influence
decision making in the wake of the Ward v. Wilbanks (2010) legal case (described in detail in
Chapter 3).
Counselor educators have strengthened their focus on multicultural pedagogy in recent decades
(Hall et al., 2014) in response to a growing recognition that multicultural competence is essential to
ethical practice. As was noted in Chapter 3, it is almost certain that counselors will encounter clients
whose cultural backgrounds are different from their own, which presents a challenge for counselor
educators who must determine how best to prepare multiculturally competent counselors. Counselor
educators are thus obligated to “infuse material related to multicultural/diversity into all courses and
workshops for the development of professional counselors” (ACA, 2014, §F.7.c.).

-- 395 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	373
An often-overlooked resource is the large numbers of international students in counselor educa-
tion programs, who can offer diverse perspectives on curricula that may be Eurocentric (Kuo et al.,
2018). In addition, counselor educators must infuse multicultural/diversity competency in their training
and supervision practices and “train students to gain awareness, knowledge, and skills in the compe-
tencies of multicultural practice” (ACA, 2014, §F.11.c.). Despite these mandates, some students find
it difficult to remain open to multicultural course content and react with reluctance, attitudinal rigidity,
and entrenchment of prejudiced beliefs (Malott et al., 2023); and counselor educators have invested
considerable effort in determining the most effective approaches to increase these students’ receptivity.
As a result, multicultural counseling courses often are taught using a combination of didactic, experien-
tial, and community service learning approaches. Killian and Florin (2020) found that approaches that
enforced both direct exposure and self-reflection (rather than passive knowledge attainment) were best
for facilitating the development of students’ multicultural competence.
Social justice, a growing force within the counseling profession, has created a shift in how
prospective counselors are prepared for the profession, and counselor education programs are
infusing issues related to multiculturalism and social justice into all counselor education courses.
Students often believe that they are inadequately prepared in social justice and advocacy, and
counselor educators are responding to this belief by implementing pedagogical strategies such
as exploring the dynamics of privilege and oppression, engaging students in the development of
critical consciousness, using experiential activities, infusing social justice advocacy into supervi-
sion (Bevly et al., 2017), and engaging students in service learning projects to shift learning to
beyond the classroom (Manis, 2012; Steele et al., 2014). Counselor educators are teaching students
the skills involved in broaching (Day-Vines et al., 2021) the topics of race, ethnicity, and culture
so that social justice issues are addressed in the counseling relationship. Singh et al. (2020) have
noted that although numerous improvements were made in the attention given to multicultural,
social justice, and advocacy issues in the 2014 ACA Code of Ethics, ethical practice entails more
than adherence to the Code, and the spirit of social justice must be infused throughout all compo-
nents of counselor training.
TEACHING THEORIES AND TECHNIQUES 	Counselor educators have an ethical responsibility to
teach current theories and techniques that are appropriate to the populations that students will be coun-
seling. This obligation is articulated in the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), which states that counselor
educators should “provide instruction based on current information and knowledge available in the
profession” (§F.7.b.). This means that counselor education programs must expose students to a wide
range of counseling theories and encourage students to develop their own theoretical stances. Before
the 1960s, models of counseling that were taught were almost exclusively those developed by Euro-
American males. It was generally assumed by counselor educators that these models had universal
application. However, today’s counselor educators are aware that traditionally taught theories may
be inadequate to address the needs of diverse clientele. They also emphasize multicultural, feminist,
relational–cultural, ecological, and other systemic approaches that may be more applicable to diverse
client populations.
Counselor educators should “promote the use of techniques/procedures that are grounded in
theory and/or have an empirical or scientific foundation” (ACA, 2014, §F.7.h.). When counselor
educators introduce students to techniques or modalities that are developing or innovative, they
must explain to students the potential risks and ethical considerations of using those techniques or
modalities. The intent of this standard is not to discourage innovation; rather, it serves as a reminder
of the importance of intentionality in selecting techniques and as a caution against implementing
techniques that may be risky to use with clients if those techniques are not well proven.

-- 396 of 593 --

374 	Section 2 • Issues
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING 	Counselor education programs, whether they are offered in a tradi-
tional or an online format, must integrate academic study and supervised practice (ACA, 2014,
§F.7.d.). Typically, training programs present students with a graduated series of opportunities to
practice the skills they are learning, beginning with an introductory skills or techniques course and
progressing through a supervised practicum and internship.
A particular type of experiential learning that occurs in counselor education programs involves
self-growth experiences in which students increase their understanding of interpersonal dynamics
and their awareness of self and others. An ethical concern regarding self-growth experiences is how
counselor educators can balance students’ rights to privacy and the need to provide effective train-
ing. Until the mid-1980s, professors who had any administrative, supervisory, or evaluative author-
ity over students were prohibited from offering students self-growth experiences, and counselor
education programs were required to offer students alternatives to self-growth experiences without
penalty or prejudice. These guidelines, which certainly protected students’ privacy rights, allowed
for the possibility that a student could go through an entire training program without participating in
a self-growth experience. In recent decades, there has been a shift in thinking regarding self-growth
experiences. The current Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) clarifies that self-growth is an expected com-
ponent of counselor training. Standard F.8.c. states that counselor educators should be “mindful
of ethical principles when they require students to engage in self-growth experiences.” Counselor
educators should therefore inform students that they have a right to decide what information about
themselves they will share or withhold in class. Evaluation has to be independent of the student’s
self-disclosure—that is, students cannot be graded on their level of self-disclosure. In addition,
counselor educators may require students to seek professional help to address any personal con-
cerns that have the potential to affect their professional competence (§F.8.d.). It can be uncomfort-
able for students to confront their own biases and prejudices that may emerge in group discussions,
so it is important for students to understand that a rationale exists for requiring such experiences.
As was discussed in Chapter 3, students who are unaware of their own countertransference issues or
biases are at risk of providing inadequate or even harmful services to clients.
DEVELOPING AND EVALUATING COUNSELING SKILLS 	Effective counseling requires coun-
selors to apply techniques and behaviors that are accepted as effective in the professional litera-
ture (Schmidt, 2016). In addition, they must know when to engage in which behaviors and how
to acknowledge the unique personalities of the counselor and the client in the counseling process.
Counseling includes scientific principles that are artfully applied. Students may be uneasy about
being evaluated on their skill development because these criteria are less objective than those in
tests of academic performance that use scores or numbers.
Counselor educators who teach counseling skills must define effective counseling in specific
and concrete terms so that students can become proficient in their skill development. Students who
are not performing well in counseling skills classes have the rights to be made aware of their defi-
ciencies and to receive recommended steps to improve their performance.
If an evaluation or grade is challenged, counselor educators have to explain to peers, and later
perhaps to a judge or jury, the criteria they used to evaluate a student’s counseling skills. Counselor
educators are obligated to:
• Indicate the skills to be learned in the course in terms that are as specific and behavioral as
possible.
• Give periodic, specific feedback regarding the development of those skills.
• Have a method of transferring evaluations into numbers or grades that can be justified.

-- 397 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	375
14-1 The Case of Naomi
Naomi is a first-semester master’s-degree student in a counselor education program. Over the course
of the semester, she does excellent work in her classes in counseling theories and human growth
and development, earning an A in both classes. Naomi is also enrolled in the beginning counsel-
ing techniques class. During the first half of the semester, she is evaluated twice by the instructor
on her skill development as demonstrated in role-play counseling sessions with classmates. After
she receives a grade of unacceptable on her first evaluation, she makes an appointment with the
professor, who gives her specific feedback regarding the areas of performance in which she needs
to improve. At midterm, she shows very little improvement, and the instructor asks her to make
another appointment to receive individualized feedback. Naomi does not follow up on this request.
After observing Naomi’s counseling performance for a third time, the instructor takes her aside after
class and explains that Naomi is at risk of failing the course if she continues to be unable to demon-
strate the basic active-listening skills required of counselors. Together, they develop a growth plan
with specific behavioral objectives. For the remainder of the semester, Naomi is so anxious about
performance evaluations that she freezes up and makes no progress. She also ignores the instruc-
tor’s suggestion that she seek counseling to deal with her performance anxiety. At the end of the
semester, she does not receive a passing grade, which means, by program policy, that she cannot
continue in the program. Naomi files an appeal, asserting that she is an excellent student, as evi-
denced by her A grades in her other two courses.
• Why do you think a graduate student in counseling, such as Naomi, might get A’s in two
courses but a failing grade in her counseling techniques course?
• What might Naomi have done differently to improve her chances of receiving a passing
grade?
Discussion: Naomi has very little chance of succeeding with her appeal. She received feedback
throughout the semester and was given specific instructions regarding what she needed to do to
improve her performance. In addition, she failed to respond to the instructor’s requests to make a
second appointment or to take steps to deal with her performance anxiety. There is no evidence
that the instructor violated procedures or was unfair in evaluating Naomi. This case illustrates the
effort required to evaluate students on their skill development. This course instructor devoted
much more time and effort in working with Naomi than would have been required had the course
been a traditional, didactic course in which grades were based on performance on objective tests.
We would hope that Naomi seeks personal counseling to learn to cope with her anxiety if she
wishes to continue in her graduate program. She will be expected to demonstrate her skills if she
repeats the class and to continue to do so in other courses throughout the program.
Evaluation issues can be very complex for educators who teach skills courses, particularly for
those who teach group counseling courses. Among counselor educators, the consensus is that stu-
dents learn best when didactic instruction is accompanied by experiential learning about group pro-
cess and dynamics. Generally, the course instructor avoids serving as the facilitator of the experiential
component of the class because this dual role creates ethical dilemmas when evaluating students for
continuation in the program. Although students are informed about the limits of confidentiality at
the outset of the group experience, a level of trust can develop in the group that fosters personal risk
taking. Student self-disclosures may allow course instructors to have knowledge about a student that

-- 398 of 593 --

376 	Section 2 • Issues
might cause educators to have concerns about the student’s fitness for the profession. The counselor
educators would then face the dilemma of not wanting to violate the student’s confidentiality but also
feeling the need to fulfill their gatekeeper role. Because of these dual-role conflicts, counselor educa-
tion programs have developed several alternative methods for delivering the experiential component
of a group counseling class. Some of these alternative methods include having advanced students or
counselors from the community lead the groups, having the component led by adjunct instructors
who have no ongoing evaluative role with students as they progress through the program, having
actors play the roles of group members (Fall & Levitov, 2002), sending students off campus to par-
ticipate in group experiences, using videos to engage students in observational learning, or using a
fishbowl technique to combine observational and experiential learning (Spargo et al., 2010). During
the COVID-19 pandemic, most of these alternatives were unavailable. Urkmez et al. (2021) studied a
group of students who began the group experience in a face-to-face format and abruptly had to tran-
sition to an online format because of COVID-19. Although the students reported a reasonably good
experience with online groups, including comfort and cohesiveness with the other group members,
most voiced a preference for face-to-face sessions. Nonetheless, we anticipate that virtual group
counseling courses will remain an option for students. Wathen et al.
(2021) have offered a model that considers the ethical challenges as well
as the adaptations that are needed to ensure success with these courses.
EVALUATIONS OF FIELD EXPERIENCE PERFORMANCE 	Just as evaluat-
ing the development of counseling skills can be difficult, evaluating students’
performance in their practicum and internship experiences is challenging
(Cook et al., 2018; Storlie et al., 2017). It is important for counselor educa-
tion programs to have specific and understandable procedures for students to
enter into and complete field experiences. Developing practicum and intern-
ship sites, communicating with on-site supervisors, and orienting everyone
involved are complex tasks for counselor educators, yet these responsibili-
ties are clearly delineated in the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014). According
to §F.7.i., counselor educators must develop clear policies regarding field
placement and other clinical experiences, and they must provide clearly
stated roles and responsibilities for students, site supervisors, and program
supervisors. Counselor educators must also confirm that site supervisors are
qualified to provide supervision and are informed of their ethical and profes-
sional responsibilities as supervisors.
During field experiences, graduate students are evaluated by a
number of professors and on-site supervisors. If a student’s performance
is evaluated negatively, counselor educators must ensure that the evalu-
ations are fair. To prevent having negative evaluations successfully chal-
lenged, counselor educators must follow all the procedures that have
been established by the program for field placements.
PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 	Because there is a well-established relation-
ship between clinical competence and personal and professional development, counselor educators
have an ethical obligation to evaluate student development in areas other than academic perfor-
mance and skills acquisition. CACREP accreditation standards (2024) require counselor educators
to assess students’ professional and personal growth and development. Characteristics that have
been deemed to be crucial to personal and professional development are discussed in Chapter 7.

-- 399 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	377
When student development proceeds according to faculty expectations, problems are
unlikely to arise. However, sometimes students struggle in their personal and professional
development (Lundquist et al., 2020; Um & Bardhoshi, 2022). Historically, counselor educa-
tors have shown a preference for using informal means to address these struggles (Foster &
McAdams, 2009). Counselor educators are aware that a great deal of subjectivity is involved
in such evaluations and may be reluctant to negatively evaluate students along these dimen-
sions because of concern about being unfair, a hope that the struggles will self-correct with
further training, or fear that the students will bring lawsuits against them (Gaubatz & Vera,
2002). Despite this possible reluctance, however, counselor educators recognize the needs to be
clear and specific when evaluating personal and professional development and to communicate
their expectations to students. Most programs have developed written assessment forms that
include criteria for personal and professional growth. Foster and McAdams (2009) have noted
that these types of evaluation can be anxiety provoking for stu-
dents and that students who are not familiar with the programs’
assessment policies and procedures may consider the policies
to be punitive.
Classmates often are aware of peers who are having prob-
lems with professional competency. Results of one study sug-
gested that 95% of peers had been personally affected by this
situation (Rosenberg et al., 2005), which indicates that the learn-
ing of all students is disrupted by these problems. Brown-Rice
and Furr (2019) found that approximately two-thirds of doctoral
students were aware of peers with problems with professional
competency. These students reported that they were affected
negatively by being in a program with these peers and were frus-
trated with educators for allowing problematic peers to continue
their doctoral training. Generally, students understand the impor-
tance of intervention for the sake of the classmate’s future clients
as well as for the profession (Foster et al., 2014), but they may be
uncertain as to whether or how they should take action. Brown-
Rice and Furr (2013) and Parker et al. (2014) have recommended
that counselor educators develop, implement, and inform stu-
dents about formal procedures that provide an opportunity for
students to approach a faculty member when a peer is struggling.
14-2 The Case of Nasima
Nasima is a second-year master’s-degree student who has just begun her practicum experience,
counseling clients in a community agency. As Nasima has progressed through her degree pro-
gram, she has become friends with a group of four other students who entered the program at
the same time Nasima did. They have all remained friends and socialize together. One of these
friends, Tonya, is enrolled in practicum at the same agency. Tonya has confided in Nasima that she
is finding her work with clients to be very stressful, and Nasima has noticed that Tonya is becoming
intoxicated when the two of them go out socializing with their friends. Tonya has also confided that
she is struggling as a counselor and is not selecting the videotapes of her bad counseling sessions

-- 400 of 593 --

378 	Section 2 • Issues
to share with her supervisor. Nasima is concerned about Tonya and is worried that Tonya’s clients
are not being well served. At the same time, Nasima doesn’t want to take any action that could
“get Tonya in trouble with her supervisor.” Nasima doesn’t know what to do.
• Does Nasima have an ethical obligation to take some action to protect Tonya’s clients?
• What do you think Nasima should do in this situation?
Discussion: According to the ACA Code of Ethics (2014), Nasima as a student has the same
ethical obligations as does a counselor who is already in practice. She cannot ignore the pos-
sibilities that Tonya may be in danger of becoming impaired and may not be providing adequate
counseling services to clients. Nasima’s desire to protect her friend is understandable, and her
first step should be to talk with Tonya about her concerns. She should then encourage Tonya to
seek personal counseling to deal with her stress and excessive drinking and to inform her super-
visor of Tonya’s struggles. If Tonya is not open to hearing Nasima’s concerns, then Nasima should
let Tonya know that she will need to speak with the supervisor herself. She can emphasize that
she will be doing this out of concern for the well-being of both Tonya and Tonya’s clients and in
fulfillment of her ethical obligations.
Gatekeeping
As we noted in Chapter 7, competence in counseling is hard to define. Nonetheless, counselor
educators are gatekeepers to the profession and must evaluate students to determine whether they
should be allowed to progress through and graduate from their counselor preparation programs
(Surette & Brenton, 2022). It would be unfair to future clients if incompetent or unprepared stu-
dents were allowed to graduate from these programs. At the same time, it would be unfair to stu-
dents if this evaluation process were not ongoing, systematic, and conscientiously communicated.
Therefore, counselor educators must clearly state to students the level of competency expected,
their appraisal methods, and the timing of evaluations (ACA, 2014, §F.9.a.; Lambie & Haugen,
2022). They should provide students with ongoing feedback regarding their performance through-
out the training program.
Counselor educators share a strong commitment to giving students every possible opportunity
to succeed in their studies and to keeping students informed of their progress. They hope that stu-
dents will use this feedback to build on their strengths and to remediate problem areas or deficiencies.
Sometimes, however, students are not able to achieve the needed counseling competencies
(Prikhidko & Swank, 2018). When this happens, counselor educators have an ethical obligation
to exercise their gatekeeping responsibilities. Gatekeeping is a process of evaluation and reme-
diation to ensure compliance with accreditation competencies and ethical standards (DeDiego &
Burgin, 2016). The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) advises counselor educators to (a) assist students
in securing remediation, (b) seek consultation from other professionals and document their decision
to dismiss or refer students for assistance, and (c) ensure that students know in a timely manner that
problems exist and provide them with due process (§F.9.b.).
Gatekeeping has been discussed extensively in the professional literature in the years since a
counseling student was dismissed from a public university in 2005 on the grounds of deficient pro-
fessional performance. The student brought a lawsuit against the counseling program faculty and the
university (Plaintiff v. Rector and Board of Visitors of The College of William and Mary, 2005). The
lawsuits brought by dismissed students in Ward v. Wilbanks (2010) and Keeton v. Anderson-Wiley,

-- 401 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	379
et al. (2011) brought the issue of values conflicts into bold relief (Burkholder et al., 2014) and have
generated recommendations for working with students whose personal values conflict with those of
the counseling profession (e.g., Bayne et al., 2022; Taylor Rouse & Doughty Horn, 2022).
Gate-slipping occurs when counselor educators or supervisors recognize that a student is hav-
ing problems with professional performance but do not intervene. This may occur because of a lack
of clear evidence of student deficiencies, a bias toward leniency, a fear of recrimination (including
a lawsuit), a fear of appearing to be culturally insensitive, a choice to step behind the empathy veil
(a term coined by Brown-Rice and Furr [2014]) to describe the counselor educator’s need to empa-
thize with students), or a lack of support from colleagues or administrators (Brown-Rice & Furr,
2016; DeDiego & Bergin, 2016; Jorgensen & Brown-Rice, 2016).
Doctoral students often are involved in the process of gatekeeping with master’s-level stu-
dents. Charnley (2021), Corley et al. (2020), and Smarinsky et al. (2023) all found that doctoral
students felt unprepared for gatekeeping roles and responsibilities. Counselor education programs
would thus be wise to incorporate specific training in gatekeeping into their doctoral curriculums
(DeCino et al., 2022; Freeman et al., 2020; Rapp et al., 2018). The doctoral student participants in
Charnley’s (2021) study unanimously expressed that although gatekeeping was addressed at some
point in their curriculum, it was not addressed sufficiently or explicitly enough in their classes.
Gilbert et al. (2019) raised the concern that gatekeeping in online programs has not been
researched. Sheperis et al. (2020a, 2020b) noted that gatekeeping has become much more complex
with the advent of virtual counselor education, raising new questions that need to be addressed. For
example, to what extent can a counselor educator or supervisor in one location monitor the behavior
of a student in an entirely different location?
REMEDIATION 	The focus of the gatekeeping literature was on dismissing students rather than on
remediation (Henderson & Dufrene, 2011) until recent years, when the remediation process began
to receive more attention. Dufrene and Henderson (2009) defined remediation as “a documented,
procedural process that addresses perceived inabilities in trainees’ performance with the intent to pro-
vide trainees with specific means to remedy their inabilities” (p. 151). McAdams and Foster (2007)
described remediation procedures that were developed by the counselor education faculty at the
College of William and Mary as an outgrowth of the lawsuit that was filed against them. In addition,
Dufrene and Henderson (2009) and Kress and Protivnak (2009) have described the steps involved in
developing and implementing an individualized remediation plan or a professional development plan
that is a behaviorally focused contract between the faculty and the student. Teixeira (2017) found
that the remediation interventions used most frequently are discussing the problem with the student
and starting due process procedures. Researchers have also identified a myriad of other strategies for
remediation intervention, such as referring a student for personal counseling, increasing or changing
supervision of the student, having the student repeat coursework, tutoring, assigning a peer mentor,
increasing observation of clinical work, assigning or recommending readings and workshops, writing
a letter of concern, and restricting some form of student participation in the program (e.g., a leave
of absence) (Henderson & Dufrene, 2011; Teixeira, 2017). Remediation continues to be a problem-
atic issue, however (Rouse & Horn, 2022). Although personal counseling may be recommended
or required, no studies have demonstrated the effects of required counseling on the professional
performance of remediated students (Byne & Shufelt, 2014; Prosek et al., 2013). Further, Brown
(2013) found that counselor education programs are inconsistent in the terms they use to describe
problematic student behavior and that programs continue to rely on subjective means to assess such
problems. Rust et al. (2013) also found a lack of standardization across programs and noted that
little is known about how cultural differences may factor into how problematic behavior is defined.

-- 402 of 593 --

380 	Section 2 • Issues
These researchers recommended that counselor education programs develop formal assessment
tools, including qualitative and quantitative methods, and publish specific criteria for assessing prob-
lematic behaviors. Although there remains a lack of consensus among counselor educators regarding
the most effective approach to remediation (Salpietro et al., 2021), some evidence exists to sug-
gest that remediation processes are improving (Guiffrida et al., 2019). Salpietro et al. (2022) found
that counselor educators are using developmentally appropriate, individualized, and strengths-based
approaches and perceive them to be effective.
An issue that has been addressed only rarely in the literature is the need for counselor educators
to recognize their gatekeeping responsibilities with respect to colleagues. Brown-Rice and Furr (2015)
found that 75% of the counselor educators they surveyed had observed colleagues who displayed
problems with professional competence and were concerned about how students were being affected.
DISMISSAL DECISIONS 	The remediation process does not always work as desired. Sometimes,
even after counselor educators have identified problems and have assisted a student in securing
remedial assistance, the student is still unable to demonstrate mastery of the required skills, knowl-
edge, or dispositions. When efforts at remediation fail, counselor educators are obligated to dismiss
from the preparation program students who are unable to provide competent counseling services.
In other disciplines in which students must master skills, such as medicine and nursing, courts
defer to the judgment of professors, unless established procedures are violated or professors are
clearly unfair in rendering their evaluations (Connelly v. University of Vermont, 1965; Dutile, 2001).
In Connelly, the judges explained that courts defer to professors on academic matters because, in mat-
ters of scholarship, the school authorities are uniquely qualified by training and experience to judge
the qualifications of a student, and efficiency of instruction depends in no small degree on the school
faculty’s freedom from interference from other noneducational tribunals. It is only when the school
authorities abuse this discretion that a court may interfere with the decision to dismiss a student.
The U.S. Supreme Court case Horowitz v. Board of Curators of the University of Missouri
(1978) has established that professional programs have the right to dismiss students who have excel-
lent academic records but poor performance in applied areas. In Horowitz, a medical student who
had excellent grades on written examinations was dismissed for deficiencies in the areas of clinical
performance, peer and patient relations, and personal hygiene.
In the realm of counselor education, a student at the College of William and Mary brought
suit against the university and the counselor education faculty who dismissed her. McAdams and
Foster (2007) and McAdams et al. (2007) have described in detail the lengthy legal process that
ensued, which resulted in a decision in favor of the counseling program faculty and university.
These authors concluded that dismissal decisions in counselor education programs are likely to be
legally justified but only after faculty have provided a student with fair and just opportunities to
remediate any identified deficiencies.
As was discussed in Chapter 3, lawsuits were brought by students who were dismissed from
their counseling graduate programs at Eastern Michigan University and Augusta State University in
Georgia. The faculty at those institutions determined that the two students were deficient in multicul-
tural competence after the students refused to counsel LGBTGEQIAP+ clients regarding same-sex
relationships. Both students were dismissed only after they had failed to meet the requirements of the
remediation plans offered to them. These cases are likely to have had an impact on the criteria and
processes by which dismissal decisions are made. Hutchens et al. (2013) concluded that the decisions
in Ward and Keeton reinforce the importance of counselor education programs ensuring that all fac-
ulty members agree on policies and on how they should be implemented and that policies and proce-
dures should be applied uniformly to all students, well documented, and readily available to students.

-- 403 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	381
Dugger and Francis (2014) reflected on the lessons they learned from their involvement as defendants
in Ward v. Wilbanks. They reiterated the importance of having and adhering to policies and procedures
for dismissal decisions and noted that it is also vital to have a concrete process for responding to a
lawsuit, to assume all communications will be subpoenaed, and to seek support throughout the process.
Counselor educators never take lightly the decision to dismiss a student from a preparation
program. Gatekeeping is an emotionally intense experience for counselor educators, who often
experience dissonance, discomfort, guilt, anger, and role confusion as well as empathy, compassion,
and sensitivity for students (DeCino et al., 2020). Counselor educators have identified only a few
behaviors that are likely to be irremediable; these include predatory behavior, breaches of confi-
dentiality, substance abuse, intentional ethical violations, sexual harassment, serious and chronic
mental health issues, and deliberate cheating (Schuermann et al., 2018). Harrichand et al. (2022)
noted the difficulties inherent in balancing the need to create psychological safety for learners while
simultaneously monitoring for gatekeeping purposes.
Counseling graduate students who are politically conservative or deeply religious sometimes
feel uncomfortable in the environment of counselor education programs, which tend to be socially lib-
eral. For counseling graduate students to learn and thrive in a counselor education graduate program,
they must feel psychologically safe. Counselor educators have power over the students they teach, and
students need to be sure that the power professors have over them will not be abused. Giordano et al.
(2018) surveyed 264 graduate students from four different university counseling graduate programs.
Students were asked to complete an instrument that measured their perceptions of psychological
safety and their perceptions of their professors’ appreciation of differences. Older students and more
politically conservative students in this study perceived less psychological safety and less appreciation
of differences in their training programs. Results from studies such as this one challenge counselor
educators to examine their biases and behaviors toward older and more politically conservative stu-
dents. University professors tend to be liberal in their beliefs (Yancey, 2011), so they must be careful to
prevent imposing their personal beliefs on students whose beliefs differ from their own.
The care that is taken in dismissal decisions is reflected in the ethical standards, which state
that counselor educators must use ongoing evaluation to become aware of and address the inability
of some students to achieve counseling competencies (ACA, 2014, §F.9.b.). When limitations are
identified, counselor educators should seek professional consultation and document their decisions
to refer students for assistance or dismiss them from the program. Students must also have recourse
to address such decisions and be provided with due process (§F.9.b.). The CACREP standards also
address the issue of dismissal of students for nonacademic reasons. These standards require that
when evaluations indicate that a student is inappropriate for a counseling program, faculty should
assist in facilitating the student’s transition out of the program and into a more appropriate area of
study, if that is possible (CACREP, 2024). The case of Naomi in this chapter is a good example of
how a student can be academically competent but deficient in counseling skill development. The
program faculty can assist Naomi, if she is willing, to find a different area of graduate study that
may be more compatible with her competencies.
No hearing is required if a student is dismissed for academic reasons. However, if a stu-
dent is dismissed for misconduct, a hearing is required. It is vital that the student’s rights to due
process are observed. This process involves meeting with the student to clearly communicate
the concerns, providing the student with sufficient information to make needed changes, and
creating a remediation plan (Kimball et al., 2019). It is important for faculty members to avoid
mixing misconduct charges with academic or performance reasons when they discipline or dis-
miss students (Horowitz v. Board of Curators of the University of Missouri, 1978; Regents of the
University of Michigan v. Ewing, 1985).

-- 404 of 593 --

382 	Section 2 • Issues
ENDORSEMENT 	Professional preparation programs such as medicine, nursing, and counseling
have a responsibility to society to ensure not only that graduates have the knowledge necessary to
practice successfully but also that they have the ability to apply that knowledge in a manner that
leads to effective professional practice.
Although unfavorable decisions or recommendations can be difficult to make, counselor edu-
cators should not endorse a student for employment or for any credential (such as a graduate degree,
certification, or licensure) if they believe that the student is not qualified (ACA, 2014, §F.6.d.).
Counselor educators, as gatekeepers to the profession, have responsibilities not only to their stu-
dents but also to the future clients of their students and to the profession as a whole. Typically, coun-
selor educators decline to provide a recommendation or endorsement when their candid assessment
would not be helpful to the student.
FACULTY AND STUDENT ISSUES
Faculty Competence
Competence is an issue that applies to counselor educators as well as to students. Counselor educa-
tors must also be able to provide services competently. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §F.7.a.)
requires counselor educators to be skilled as teachers and practitioners. They must be knowledgeable
regarding the ethical, legal, and regulatory aspects of the profession, and they have an obligation to
make students aware of their responsibilities. They must also conduct counselor education programs
in an ethical manner and serve as role models for the profession.
As role models, counselor educators must practice what they preach and make ongoing efforts
to ensure their own continuing competence. Reading and attending workshops and conferences to
stay up to date on developments in the field, working a few hours a week at a counseling agency in
the community to keep their skills as practitioners sharp, paying serious attention to student evalua-
tions of their teaching and courses and implementing recommended improvements, and conducting
and publishing their own research are just a few of the strategies counselor educators might use to
keep themselves on their growing edge.
Standard F.7.b., a new requirement in the most recent Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), addresses
counselor educator competence directly. This standard requires counselor educators to provide
instruction that is based on the current information and knowledge available to the profession and
is within their areas of knowledge and competence. Some counselor education programs may have
a practice of allowing the most experienced professors to choose the courses they want to teach,
which leaves new and inexperienced faculty members teaching the courses that no one else wants to
teach (Kaplan & Martz, 2014b). Continuing this practice could put new professors in the position of
being in violation of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014).
Counselor educators have been required to develop new competencies in the technology
arena in response to the switch to virtual learning necessitated by the COVID-19 lockdown. As
Okoye et al. (2021) have noted, technology-mediated education has become a fundamental part of
modern-day teaching and learning in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic; for this reason,
counselor educators must continue to learn to manage ever-evolving technologies to improve
student learning outcomes.
Diversity Considerations
Counselor education programs have an ethical responsibility to recruit and retain not only cultur-
ally diverse students but also culturally diverse faculty (ACA, 2014, §F.11.a., §F.11.b.). Although
Schweiger et al. (2012) observed a trend toward attempting to hire faculty who are diverse both

-- 405 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	383
theoretically and culturally to give students a more varied set of perspectives, the counselor educa-
tion professorate remains predominantly White. Avent Harris et al. (2019) reported that women fac-
ulty members continue to experience microaggressions (subtle negative messages). Although women
are well represented in the ranks of counselor educators, Hill et al. (2005) found that female coun-
selor educators’ life satisfaction was negatively influenced by toxic faculty environments, office poli-
tics, and being overcontrolled by others, as well as by a lack of mentors. Mothers who are counselor
educators have been found to have more job satisfaction if they have support from colleagues, do
not have children under age 6, and do not work at research universities (Neale-McFall et al., 2018).
Asian American counselor educators continue to experience distinct challenges, compared to the chal-
lenges that their White counterparts experience (Litam & Chan, 2021), and these challenges may have
increased at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Foreign-born faculty members interviewed by
Interiano-Shiverdecker et al. (2022) believed that their cultural differences were a strength but that
rejection of their cultural differences presented barriers to connection and sometimes a reason for
discrimination. For these faculty, the COVID-19 pandemic was an added stressor as it greatly limited
their ability to travel and visit family and friends living abroad. Counselor education programs must
therefore address racism and sexism, develop and implement strategies to increase the number of
ethnic/racial minority faculty, and facilitate the progress of minority and women faculty through the
ranks (Newhart et al., 2020). Thacker et al. (2021) have called upon faculty members with privileged
identities to examine how their roles and behaviors influence the experiences of colleagues who do not
share their privilege. Until such efforts are successful, there will continue to be a dearth of mentors and
role models for racial or ethnic minority students who aspire to become counselor educators.
Student–Faculty Research Collaboration
Counselor educators are often subject to the same pressures felt by their colleagues in other
disciplines when they work in a publish or perish environment. These pressures may tempt
counselor educators to become overly concerned about the number of their publications and to
neglect considerations of quality or their actual contributions to a study (Borders et al., 2019;
Hatchett et al., 2020; Welfel, 2016).
14-3 The Case of Lakiesha
Lakiesha was elated to be accepted into a doctoral program in counselor education. During her
first semester she worked very hard at her studies. Dr. Wilks, one of their professors, was particu-
larly impressed with one of the papers Lakiesha had written and suggested that Lakiesha consider
publishing it. Lakiesha made several attempts to seek out Dr. Wilks for guidance on how to publish,
but he was always too busy working on his own research and writing, so Lakiesha let the matter
drop. Over the next 2 years, Lakiesha continued to be a diligent student and found other profes-
sors to mentor her. She completed her formal coursework and was preparing to sit for the general
examination that, once passed, would admit her into “all but dissertation (ABD)” status. Dr. Wilks
was one of the professors on her general examination committee. Lakiesha was shocked and angry
when she came across a published article by Dr. Wilks that was based largely on the paper Lakiesha
had written for him 2 years ago. Lakiesha wanted to confront him but was afraid that such an action
might negatively affect Dr. Wilks’s evaluation of her examination. She thought about talking to one
of the professors who had been a helpful mentor but was reluctant to put that professor in an awk-
ward position. In the end, Lakiesha didn’t say anything to anyone.

-- 406 of 593 --

384 	Section 2 • Issues
To prevent misunderstandings, it is wise for a student and a professor who wish to undertake a col-
laborative research project to carefully work out, in advance, the arrangements regarding their respective
contributions, deadlines, and publication credit for the completed work (§G.5.e.). Ethically conscientious
counselor educators are careful to avoid exploiting their students who may be eager to contribute to a
professor’s research study or who may feel honored to be asked to assist (Sackett et al., 2015).
Relationships Boundaries Between Counselor
Educators and Students
Counselor educators are obligated to clearly define and maintain ethical, professional, and social
relationship boundaries with their students. They should not seek to meet their personal needs
for affiliation, friendship, or sex through relationships with students. In Chapter 9 we examined
issues surrounding dual relationships between counselors and clients. The relationships between
counselor educators and students are both similar to and different from the relationships between
counselors and clients.
A similarity is that both dyads involve a power differential in an inherently unequal relationship
in which one person is seeking a service: counseling or education. Throughout a graduate-degree
program, and even after a degree is earned, faculty members must evaluate students. Evaluative
responsibilities create a power differential. The power of educators goes far beyond grades:
Counselor educators can provide students with introductions that create networking opportunities;
sponsorship to professional associations; opportunities for research experience and publications
(Ghoston et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022); and letters of recommendation for scholarships, assistant-
ships, internships, and jobs.
However, faculty–student relationships are different from counselor–client relationships in
some significant ways. Faculty–student relationships are usually characterized by multiple and
overlapping roles (Dickens et al., 2016). The roles in the relationship between counselor and client
are fixed in that the client never becomes the counselor, nor does the counselor ever become the cli-
ent. By contrast, the roles in the educator–student relationship are always in transition as students
progress through the program, first as beginning students, next as advanced students and interns,
• What might have been a good course of action for Lakiesha to take to address this situation?
• Can you think of any justifications that Dr. Wilks might have had for his actions?
Discussion: It appears that Dr. Wilks may have violated his ethical obligation to give credit to
this student, who contributed to his article, in a manner that was in accordance with that stu-
dent’s contributions. Standard G.5.f. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that manuscripts
that are substantially based on a student’s course paper, project, dissertation, or thesis must be
used only with the student’s permission and must list the student as lead author. If the contri-
butions of Lakiesha’s paper to Dr. Wilks’s article were less substantial, they would still merit an
acknowledgment (§G.5.d.). Lakiesha is in an uncomfortable position due to the power dynamics
at work here. Rather than letting the matter drop, we would recommend that Lakiesha talk with a
trusted mentor who is not on her examination committee and explain the incident without iden-
tifying Dr. Wilks. If Lakiesha decides, after consultation, to take some kind of action, she should
talk first with Dr. Wilks despite the discomfort she might experience. It is possible that Dr. Wilks
wrote the paper he published based only on his own independent research, which happened to
be similar to the content of the paper Lakiesha wrote.

-- 407 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	385
then as graduates, and finally as colleagues and professional peers of their trainers (Hays et al.,
2021). These transitions shift the balance of power but do not eliminate it. Professors have a degree
of power over former students for a long time, as they are asked throughout the careers of former
students for recommendations for jobs, certifications, and licenses.
It has been argued that students are in an even more vulnerable position than are clients with
respect to dual relationships. Whereas clients can terminate their relationships with their counselors,
students do not have the same option.
Relationship boundaries in counselor education are somewhat fluid because good teach-
ing at the graduate level often involves mentoring and opportunities for faculty and students to
interact in professional and social settings such as colloquiums, receptions, and special events.
Mentoring is typically viewed in the literature as a positive kind of dual relationship that is
encouraged in academia because of its potential benefits to students. Nonetheless, even mentor-
ing involves potential risks, such as personal disillusionment with the relationship, professional
repercussions when the mentoring relationship falters, and the possible sexualization of the rela-
tionship. Male counselor educators experience unique relationship challenges within the context
of power relationships and potential claims of sexual harassment. The majority of counseling stu-
dents are female, and male counselor educators are particularly sensitive to even the appearance
of impropriety. Ray et al. (2016) identified more than 40 strategies that male counselor educa-
tors use to structure their relationships with students, including not meeting alone with students,
meeting only on campus, making no physical contact, and mentioning their significant others and
family in classes or conversations.
Despite complicating factors, counselor educators can take some steps to maintain healthy
boundaries with students. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) contains several standards that describe
these steps under §F.10.: Roles and Relationships Between Counselor Educators and Students.
These standards are summarized as follows:
• Counselor educators are prohibited from having sexual or romantic interactions or relationships
with students currently enrolled in a counseling program and over whom they have power and
authority. This prohibition applies to electronic as well as in-person interactions (§F.10.a.).
• Counselor educators do not condone or subject students to sexual harassment (§F.10.b.). Sexual
harassment is illegal as well as unethical; Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972
prohibits sexual harassment, which occurs when students are pressured by unwanted sexual
overtures or acts.
• Nonprofessional relationships with former students are not prohibited, but counselor educators
must be aware of the power differential that continues to exist. Whenever counselor educators
consider engaging in social, sexual, or other intimate relationships with a former student, they
must discuss the potential risks with the former student (§F.10.c.).
• Counselor educators should avoid having nonacademic relationships with students in which
there is a risk of potential harm to the student or that may compromise the training experience
or grades assigned (§F.10.d.).
• If a counselor educator believes a nonprofessional relationship may be beneficial to a student,
the educator should take precautions similar to those taken by counselors when working with
clients. In addition, counselor educators should “discuss with students the rationale for such
interactions, the potential benefits and drawbacks, and the anticipated consequences for the
student,” “clarify the specific nature and limitations of the additional role(s) they will have
with the student prior to engaging in a nonprofessional relationship,” and have only nonpro-
fessional relationships that are “time-limited and/or context specific and initiated with student
consent” (§F.10.f.).

-- 408 of 593 --

386 	Section 2 • Issues
SEXUAL OR ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS 	Although the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) prohibits
sexual relationships between counselor educators and current students, consensual sexual relation-
ships between adult students and professors generally are not prohibited by law. Arguments have
been presented by those who believe that these relationships should be prohibited, asserting that
the differential in power between students and professors makes it impossible for relationships to
be truly consensual. Those who argue that such relationships should be allowed have contended
that prohibiting such relationships would infringe on constitutional rights of free association, would
inappropriately invade the privacy of faculty and students, or would infantilize or disempower adult
students by denying them the right to make their own choices. Historically, concern about the harm
caused by sexual relationships has been a concern primarily of faculty in counseling and psychology
programs, but there is some indication that this concern is spreading: Research conducted by Abboud
et al. (2018) revealed that 29 states had enacted specific educator sexual misconduct statutes by
2017, but many of these statutes apply only when the students are minors. In 2023, 39 states and the
District of Columbia had adopted statutes that prohibit sexual abuse of schoolchildren, and 75% of
U.S. states and jurisdictions have passed statutes that specifically outlaw educator sexual misconduct
even when the student is over the age of consent (Enough Abuse Campaign, 2023). During the 1990s,
several universities implemented policies that forbid all professors and administrators from dating
the students they teach, mentor, or supervise (James, 1996; Leatherman, 1993), and that number has
likely increased in the twenty-first century. Richards and Nystrom (2022), in their examination of
policies of institutions of higher education, found that universities are becoming more restrictive in
their policies, moving toward limited bans and prohibitions and including graduate students. Most
policies place the burden of proof on faculty to prove consent when allegations are made.
Lawsuits brought by students against college and university professors because of consensual
personal relationships probably would not be successful because these relationships are not prohib-
ited by law. However, because teaching counseling skills requires personal reflection on the part of
students and requires counselor educators to assess students in personal as well as academic areas,
an argument could be made that professor–student personal relationships in counseling programs
have more potential for harm than such relationships in other academic disciplines (Kress & Dixon,
2007). In addition, the specific sections in the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) that prohibit sexual
relationships with students (§F.10.a.) or sexual harassment of students (§F.10.b.) would seem to
give students a foundation for prevailing in a lawsuit when they believe they have been harmed by a
professor who had a personal relationship with them.
The question of whether a sexual relationship between a counselor educator and a student
can truly be consensual and noncoercive takes on some new dimensions when viewed from an ethi-
cal perspective. From this perspective, sexual relationships between faculty and students are never
appropriate due to the power differential inherent in the relationship.
NONSEXUAL RELATIONSHIPS 	Although counselor educators should not enter formal, therapeutic
relationships with students, the very nature of counselor training presents many opportunities for pro-
fessors to get to know students at a personal level. Students may self-disclose personal issues during
a live demonstration of counseling, a dyadic practice session in which one student is serving as the
counselor and the other as a client, or an experiential component of a group counseling course. This
could also happen when a counselor educator is exploring a practicum student’s difficulties in work-
ing with a particular client or in courses in which students are encouraged to explore any personal
biases, prejudices, or values that might interfere with their ability to counsel effectively. Students
who engage in self-exploration do so in the belief that their professors will not violate their trust.
Thus, counselor educators have a special responsibility to be trustworthy recipients of the knowledge

-- 409 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	387
they gain about students’ personal and interpersonal struggles. This trustworthiness is as important in
the student–educator relationship as it is in the client–counselor relationship.
Certain kinds of dual relationships are inevitable in counselor training programs. However,
there is no universal agreement regarding how these situations can best be handled. Counselor edu-
cators mentor graduate students, socialize with them at professional conferences, and interact with
them in myriad ways outside the formal classroom setting. Welfel (2019) and Herlihy and Corey
(2015b) have suggested that some flexibility is needed, arguing that when faculty take a rigid stance
against all forms of dual relationships with students, they are probably overreacting to the risks.
Because new issues related to dual relationships are continually emerging, it is important for coun-
selor educators to have a thoughtfully considered model for decision making about such issues.
In considering the boundaries of relationships with students, counselor educators need to acknowl-
edge their position of power and authority over students, and a climate for ethical behavior should be
fostered. Counselor educators function as role models for the profession. Students learn about dual
relationships not only from explicit ethics education but also from their own experiences. Counselor
educators thus have a crucial responsibility to model ethical management of relationships with students
if they hope to foster ethical attitudes and behaviors in students (Herlihy & Corey, 2015b).
Negotiation of boundaries should be a shared endeavor, and it will be helpful for you as a
student to consider your own stance toward dual relationships with faculty members. You might ask
yourself the following questions when you consider entering into a dual relationship with a coun-
selor educator:
• Has my professor fully discussed with me the potential risks and benefits of our dual relation-
ship? Do we have a clear working agreement?
• What am I learning in this relationship? Am I becoming more competent or more dependent
on a special relationship?
• What are my fellow students learning? Are they learning about equitable treatment or about
special privilege?
• Do I have a choice? Do I feel that I have the freedom to refuse requests the professor might
make or to withdraw from the relationship without penalty?
• Do I believe the professor has maintained the capacity to evaluate me objectively?
Diversity Considerations in Faculty–Student Relationships
Mentoring is the one form of role blending that is almost universally viewed as positive and important
to the professional development of counselor trainees. Mentors serve as coaches, guides, role models,
sources of support (Purgason et al., 2018), advisors, and sponsors into the profession upon graduation.
Doctoral students who have opportunities to conduct collaborative research, teaching, and profes-
sional services are enriched by the experience and are better prepared to enter the professorate.
Mentoring relationships are a highly valued component of counselor training, especially at
the doctoral level (Perera-Diltz & Sauerheber, 2017), and are a key ingredient in developing mul-
ticultural leadership (Storlie et al., 2015). Because there are so few counselor educators who are
non-White, however, it may be difficult for graduate students who are persons of color to find a
mentor with whom they identify and feel comfortable in the close and complex mentoring relation-
ship. Brooks et al. (2023) urged counselor educators to create a safe and supportive environment
for Black students and to provide structured and culturally sensitive mentoring, and Cartwright
et al. (2021) provided recommendations for creating mentorship programs for Black women in
counselor education programs. It is essential that counselor educators are effective cross-cultural
mentors. Oller and Teeting (2021) have offered concrete recommendations for counselor education

-- 410 of 593 --

388 	Section 2 • Issues
programs, including cross-cultural awareness training for both faculty members and new graduate
students, education about the benefits of mentorship, acknowledgment of the obstacles faced by
marginalized students and faculty in counselor education programs, and developing and supporting
explicit cross-cultural mentoring guidelines for faculty–student dyads. Counselor education faculty
members can also encourage experienced doctoral students to mentor doctoral students new to the
program as well as master’s-level students.
Relationships Among Students
In counseling techniques courses, students are sometimes asked to be clients for their fellow stu-
dents as they practice their counseling skills. To prevent unrealistic role playing, students some-
times believe they should discuss issues to which they can relate from personal experience. To
prevent inappropriate self-disclosures, counselor educators who ask students to be clients for
other students in counseling skills courses should caution all course members to maintain confi-
dentiality regarding issues discussed in class and should intervene if student clients appear uneasy
or distressed.
When counselor education programs offer the doctorate degree as well as the master’s degree,
doctoral students frequently are involved in supervising the skills development of beginning students.
The doctoral students, in turn, receive supervision of their supervision by faculty. This practice, known
as layered supervision, offers many advantages: When motivated and enthusiastic doctoral students
assist with supervision, master’s students receive more supervision and high-quality supervision.
Doctoral students may have more focused energy and effort to devote to supervision, compared with
faculty members, who have many other responsibilities. Students learn to give and receive corrective
feedback and to manage multiple roles. At the same time, this practice places some complex demands
on doctoral students, who must move in and out of the multiple roles of student, supervisee, supervi-
sor, mentor, protégé, and peer/classmate (Dickens et al., 2016). They are in a position of authority
over their master’s student supervisees but may not feel empowered in that role because they are still
students under the supervision of faculty. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) addresses these concerns
by saying that counselor educators should make efforts to ensure that the rights of students are not
compromised when their peers lead experiential counseling activities (§F.7.g.). Counselor educators
need to impress upon students who lead groups composed of other students, or who supervise other
students, that they have the same ethical obligations that counselor educators, trainers, and supervisors
have. Faculty must carefully supervise student group leaders and student supervisors to help them
understand that multiple relationships in counselor education programs are inevitable and manageable
and to help them navigate these relationships and resolve problems that occur.
14-4 The Case of Luis
Luis, age 26, received his master’s degree a year ago and immediately applied for admission and
was accepted into the doctoral program in counselor education at the same university. He has
been assigned to supervise Ella, a 45-year-old master’s-degree student, as Ella begins her coun-
seling internship. Luis and Ella were in two classes together when Luis was still in the master’s
program, although they did not know each other very well. Despite Luis’s best efforts to establish
a supervisory alliance, Ella becomes increasingly resistant to supervision. Luis shares their dif-
ficulties with his faculty supervisor and wonders whether Ella should be assigned to a different
doctoral student supervisor.

-- 411 of 593 --

Chapter 14 • Issues in Counselor Education 	389
• What are some reasons Ella may be resistant to being supervised by Luis?
• What do you think the faculty supervisor should do in this circumstance?
Discussion: Ella may be finding it difficult to accept the fact that Luis, who is someone she has
known as a peer and who is much younger, is now in a supervisory capacity over her. Luis’s fac-
ulty supervisor might suggest that Luis address this dynamic directly with Ella. If her resistance
to supervision continues, the faculty member should intervene and try to do so in a way that will
make this into a positive learning experience for both Ella and Luis.
Responsibilities of Students
Reading this chapter has made you aware that students have many rights. For example, you are
entitled, under the law, to due process and freedom from discrimination. Section F of the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014) contains numerous standards concerning the duties of counselor educa-
tors to ensure that your welfare is safeguarded. However, along with your rights come certain
responsibilities. According to the Code of Ethics, students preparing to become counselors must
adhere to the Code and have the same obligations to clients as counselors who have already com-
pleted their training do (§F.5.a.). You must be familiar with codes of ethics; lack of knowledge
or misunderstanding of an ethical responsibility is not a defense against a charge of unethical
conduct (§I.l.a.).
Just as practicing counselors have an ethical responsibility to refrain from providing coun-
seling services when they are impaired, counselors-in-training must also refrain from offering
or providing counseling services when their physical, mental, or emotional problems are likely
to harm a client or others (ACA, 2014, §F.5.b.). You are ethically obligated to remain alert to
signs of impairment, seek assistance (including personal counseling) for problems, and notify
your program supervisors when you are aware that you are unable to provide effective services
(§F.5.b.). Therefore, it is essential that you are open to receiving feedback from your professors
and supervisors when they express concern that your personal issues or problems are interfering
with your ability to provide effective counseling services and that you take steps to address any
problems that may exist.
It is crucial that you practice ethical behaviors and decision making while you are still a stu-
dent. Your time as a graduate student can be well spent by developing good professional habits, such
as carefully handling client records and consulting with others when you are uncertain about how to
deal with a situation. Following are some strategies to enhance the development of your professional
identity and to help you learn more about your legal, ethical, and professional responsibilities:
• Join and actively participate in organizations such as Chi Sigma Iota, if your university has a
chapter of this honorary society for counselors, or other campus organizations for counseling
students.
• Join professional organizations such as ACA and its divisions that represent your specialty
interests, as well as your state and local counseling organizations. Student membership rates
are generally much lower than regular rates.
• Attend professional workshops and conferences that deal with ethical, legal, and professional
issues in counseling.
• Approach a professor and ask for mentoring. Engaging in a mentoring relationship can be a
significant aspect of your professional development and will have many benefits.

-- 412 of 593 --

390 	Section 2 • Issues
Summary and Key Points
This chapter explores several complex ethical and
legal issues that arise in the counselor training
process. Counselor educators’ ethical and legal
responsibilities to students begin before students
enter a graduate program and continue even after
students graduate. Students have many rights—to
be provided with sufficient information in order
to be able to give informed consent to enter a pro-
gram, to expect admissions decisions to be equi-
table, to receive high-quality training, to be able
to count on fair evaluations and opportunities to
remediate deficiencies, to receive credit for their
contributions to research, and to have appropriate
boundaries maintained in their relationships with
faculty and peers. With these rights come a number
of concomitant responsibilities.
Counselor education programs are different
from most other graduate programs because they
give attention both to students’ personal/inter-
personal development and to their professional
development. This broad scope of training pres-
ents some unique challenges. Key points regarding
counselor education programs and practices are:
• Students have the right to know what will be
expected of them before they select a graduate
program in counseling. Counselor education pro-
grams have a responsibility to provide students
with enough information to make wise program
decisions.
• Admissions criteria for counselor education pro-
grams typically include demonstrated academic
ability as well as more subjective measures,
although a trend toward holistic admissions pro-
cedures is emerging.
• Counselor educators are responsible for mak-
ing students aware of the ethical standards of
the counseling profession. Students have the
same obligations to uphold standards for ethical
behavior as do practicing counselors.
• Counselor educators must be competent and
must provide students with current information
about theories, techniques, and approaches that
are effective for the client populations the stu-
dents will be counseling.
• Counselor education programs integrate aca-
demic study and supervised practice. Self-growth
experiences that involve student self-disclosure
are an integral part of the training process.
Counselor educators strive to balance students’
rights to privacy with the need to provide effec-
tive training.
• It is difficult to assess the development of a stu-
dent’s counseling skills and to evaluate field
experiences. Although evaluation may be sub-
jective, courts defer to professors on academic
matters.
• Students who are unable to demonstrate required
competencies must be given opportunities to
remediate their deficiencies as well as to appeal
the decision. A remediation plan can present an
opportunity for growth, and many students have
fulfilled their plan’s requirements and have gone
on to be successful counselors.
• Counselor educators, as gatekeepers to the pro-
fession, must ensure that students who are unable
to provide competent counseling services are not
graduated from the program or endorsed for any
professional 	credential. 	Counselor 	educators
never take lightly a decision to dismiss a student
from a training program.
Relationships between counselor educators
and students are characterized by multiple and
overlapping roles. Relationship boundaries must be
managed carefully and thoughtfully.
• Counselor educators are responsible for main-
taining healthy boundaries.
• Counselor 	educators 	avoiding 	engaging 	in
sexual harassment and sexual intimacies with
students.
• Counselor educators provide informed consent
to students with whom they engage in multi-
ple roles by remaining cognizant of the power
differential and by maintaining a thoughtful
awareness of their potency as role models for
students.
• Because there are so few counselor educators
who are persons of color, counselor educators
must be skilled as cross-cultural mentors.

-- 413 of 593 --

391
15Supervision and Consultation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
15.1 Identify and describe the primary ethical and legal
issues in counselor supervision.
15.2 Describe situations in which counselors might seek
or provide consultation services.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. How are counseling, supervision,
and consultation similar? How are
they different from each other?
2. What would you do if you believed
your clinical supervisor was not
competent to provide you with
quality supervision services?
3. As a beginning counselor, in
what circumstances do you think
you might seek consultation? In
what circumstances do you think
others might come to you for
consultation?
During your career as a counselor, you will almost certainly
be involved in legal, ethical, and professional issues that
occur in supervision and consultation, in both the learner or
help-seeker role (as supervisee or consultee) and the expert
or help-provider role (as supervisor or consultant).
Supervision has been practiced for as long as counsel-
ing and psychotherapy have been in existence. Only in recent
decades, however, has supervision been given much atten-
tion as a process that is distinct from education, counseling,
and consultation. Bernard and Goodyear (2019) have defined
clinical supervision as an intervention provided by a senior
or experienced member of a profession to a junior or aspiring
member or members of that same profession. Supervision also
has been described as an attachment process that involves the
development of a bond or working alliance that is gradually
loosened as the end of supervision nears (Nelson et al., 2010).
Clinical supervision involves multiple roles, including teacher,
mentor, coach, evaluator, advisor, and consultant. Supervision
also involves multiple responsibilities. Supervisors usually are
responsible not only for the welfare of their supervisees but
also, in an indirect way, for the welfare of their supervisees’
clients. In addition, a supervisor may have an obligation to the
agency or other setting where the supervised practice occurs
to ensure that quality services are provided. Also, supervisors,
like counselor educators, serve as gatekeepers to the profession.
Consultation, like supervision, involves a tripartite rela-
tionship among at least three parties: the consultant, the con-
sultee, and the consultee’s client or client system. Consultation
is a common practice among mental health professionals in
community agencies, schools, and other settings. Dougherty’s

-- 414 of 593 --

392 	Section 2 • Issues
(2014) definition of consultation is widely accepted. He describes consultation as an indirect process
in which a counselor (or other mental health professional) assists a consultee with a problem that is
typically related to their work environment. The dual goal is to help the consultee and improve the
system in which the consultee is embedded. Counselors frequently are the recipients of services from
consultants, and they often function in the role of consultant. When consulting, they apply their profes-
sional expertise to the questions, needs, or concerns of those who have sought their services.
Many of the issues we raised regarding counselor education in Chapter 14 are equally perti-
nent to supervision and consultation. In this chapter, we discuss them as they apply to the specific
triad involved (supervisor–supervisee–client or consultant–consultee–client or client system).
The Impact of COVID-19 on Supervision and Consultation
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic dramatically increased the need for virtual supervision (Nadan
et al., 2020). The delivery method of supervision was immediately impacted by the closure of facilities
that provided in-person counseling services. Counseling students in the midst of accruing their practicum
and internship hours found themselves in a particularly anxiety-provoking situation; no longer able to see
clients at their sites, they were concerned as to whether they could complete their coursework and graduate
as planned. As counseling services switched to online delivery, these students needed to learn how to pro-
vide online counseling as well as receive online supervision. Despite these rapid and unexpected changes,
the practicum students studied by Oliveira and Silveus (2023) obtained positive outcomes, including
increased self-reliance and flexibility. These researchers recommended that in the future, supervisors
should be intentional in emphasizing flexibility in clinical settings as well as in clinical skills instruction.
Throughout COVID-19, distance supervision enabled continuity of care for clients while
also ensuring personal safety for supervisees and supervisors. Sandusky et al. (2022) recom-
mended that supervisors engage in significant planning prior to taking on a distance supervisee
and consider (a) what form of HIPAA-compliant software will be used, (b) how issues related to
internet disruptions will be handled, (c) in what type of environment the supervisee needs to be
when sessions are conducted, (d) what the supervisee should do in case of an emergency, and (e)
how to assess whether distance supervision is appropriate for this supervisee.
The isolation created by the COVID-19 pandemic may have contrib-
uted to a continued underutilization of consultation as a means to ensure
professional vitality and ethical practice. Limited access to consultants and
practice settings that do not allot time for consultation have always served
to discourage consultation, with the result that counselors may not have
developed a mindset that identifies consultation as a resource during times
of stress and uncertainty. Although informal peer consultation groups would
seem to provide a source of support for addressing personal and profes-
sional issues that contribute to burnout and questionable ethical practices
(Miu et al., 2022), a literature search did not reveal any descriptions of peer
consultation groups for counselors being held during the pandemic.
SUPERVISION
Administrative and Clinical Supervision
The professional literature in mental health supervision recognizes
two basic types of supervision for counselors: administrative and clini-
cal (ACES, 2011). Administrative supervision occurs when direct-line

-- 415 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	393
administrators give direction, or supervision, to counselors who are their employees. Clinical super-
vision, on the other hand, is the process whereby the work of counselors is reviewed by other mental
health professionals, usually with the goal of increasing the counselors’ effectiveness. Within coun-
selor education programs, supervision has the dual purpose of monitoring the services provided
by the counselors-in-training and monitoring the welfare of the clients who are receiving services
from these trainees (ACA, 2014, §F.1.a.). Although supervision is provided primarily to counselor
trainees and pre-licensed counselors, it is sound ethical practice for experienced counselors to seek
supervision periodically as a means of self-monitoring. School counselors, in particular, are unlikely
to receive clinical supervision unless they seek it for themselves (Bledsoe et al., 2018). Brott et al.
(2021) have noted that peer clinical supervision would be a beneficial professional resource to help
school counselors maintain the necessary skills and support to ethically meet the challenges inher-
ent in their work.
The purpose of administrative supervision is to ensure that counselors who are employed
are performing their jobs appropriately. Administrative supervisors usually have direct con-
trol and authority over those who are being supervised. Generally, the purpose of clinical
supervision is to help counselors increase their skills and ensure that they are serving their
clients appropriately. Clinical supervisors usually have no direct control or authority over the
counselors they supervise, unless they happen to be the counselors’ administrative supervisors
as well. Counselors who are receiving clinical supervision often are completing practicum or
internship experiences for their graduate program, or post-master’s supervised experience for
state licensure or national certification (Magnuson et al., 2000). In some instances, an admin-
istrative supervisor also serves as a counselor’s clinical supervisor, and this arrangement has
positive aspects and usually is not problematic (Tromski-Klingshirn & Davis, 2007). Most of
our discussion in this chapter focuses on clinical supervision rather than on administrative
supervision. Keep in mind, though, that the law treats the relationships differently because the
purposes of the two types of supervision generally are quite different. When there is a legal
question regarding supervision, the issue of whether the supervisor has direct control and
authority is important.
Fair Evaluation
Fair evaluation in supervision has to do with supervisee rights. Legal due process rights derive from
the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Supervisees who work in public institutions
and those who work in private organizations that have policies stipulating due process rights can
expect to be protected from unfair or arbitrary decisions that affect them negatively. According to
Bernard and Goodyear (2019), the most blatant violations of supervisees’ fair evaluation rights
occur when a supervisee is given a negative final evaluation or is dismissed from an internship or
job without having been given warning that performance was inadequate, along with a reasonable
opportunity to improve.
What this means for supervisors is that they need to provide supervisees with ongoing
feedback, periodic evaluation, and opportunities to correct their deficiencies. When evalua-
tion is negative, the changes that the supervisee must make should be communicated in spe-
cific, behavioral terms. Bernard and Goodyear (2019) have suggested that supervisees be given
a specific description of what constitutes inadequate performance, what behaviors consti-
tute improvement, and what degree of improvement is expected. The Code of Ethics (ACA,
2014) contains some provisions to ensure that supervisee rights are protected when supervi-
sors believe that supervisee limitations are impeding performance. Supervisors should assist

-- 416 of 593 --

394 	Section 2 • Issues
supervisees in securing remedial assistance when needed, seek consultation and document their
decisions to dismiss or refer supervisees for assistance, and ensure that supervisees are aware
of options available to them to address such decisions (§F.6.b.). Counselors who supervise
sometimes create problems because they are uncomfortable with giving evaluations and avoid
giving clear feedback to a supervisee about the deficiencies they observe. Supervisees will then
be justifiably upset and angry when they receive a negative final evaluation or when the super-
visor declines to endorse them for licensure or another professional credential. Supervisors
should also provide formative as well as summative feedback to supervisees. Formative feed-
back is designed to help supervisees improve their skills, whereas summative feedback serves
the purpose of evaluating the performance of supervisees. Evaluation must be ongoing, and
formal evaluation sessions must be scheduled throughout the supervisory relationship (ACA,
2014, §F.6.a.). Feedback should be given both orally and in writing.
Informed Consent
Informed consent for supervision should be obtained both from the client and from the super-
visee. Clients of supervisees need to know that their counselor is working under supervision
and need to understand what this supervision will mean for them. For instance, will their
sessions be observed or audio- or videotaped? Who will be involved in supervision? Will the
client’s case be discussed with a supervision group? What does this mean in terms of the cli-
ent’s confidentiality? These questions must be clearly addressed with clients, and clients need
to provide written consent before they agree to enter the counseling relationship. Best prac-
tice requires that counselors provide clients with specific information regarding supervisory
relationships.
Clients have the right to be aware that their counselors are working under supervision, and
they have the right to know the supervisee’s identity and qualifications to provide counseling
services (ACA, 2014, §F.5.c.). Sometimes counselors who are being supervised will minimize
the need for supervision and gloss over the details of the arrangement in an attempt to make
themselves and their clients more comfortable. As a counselor working under supervision, you
may be concerned that your clients will not believe that you are competent to provide services and
may not develop trust and confidence in you. These concerns should not inhibit you from fully
informing your clients about supervision, however. If a client expresses reservations about a third
party being privy to sensitive information that might be shared, a solution might be to arrange for
the client to meet the supervisor face-to-face and raise any concerns directly with the supervisor.
If some clients refuse to allow you to tape sessions or discuss their cases during supervision ses-
sions and if your supervisor requires the opportunity to supervise your counseling sessions with
these clients, you may have to terminate your relationship with these clients and transfer them to
another counselor.
Just as the supervisee has a responsibility to secure the client’s informed consent, the
supervisor is obligated to ensure that the supervisee understands and consents to the conditions
of supervision. The supervisor and the supervisee should discuss several points before they enter
into a formal working relationship. These points are included in Figure 15-1. The Code of Ethics
(ACA, 2014) addresses informed consent for supervision, requiring supervisors to incorporate into
their supervision the principles of informed consent and participation and to inform supervisees
of their policies and procedures and the mechanisms for due process appeal of their supervisory
actions (§F.4.a.).

-- 417 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	395
Supervision Agreements
Written agreements are recommended for counselor–client relationships, and these agreements are
also important for supervisory relationships. Generally, written agreements are not necessary in
administrative supervision because such relationships are dictated by the job descriptions of both
the supervisor and the supervisee. The types of supervisory arrangements in clinical supervision
vary substantially among dyads. Whereas one clinical supervisor may require payment for services
and weekly video- or audiotapes of sessions, another clinical supervisor may not charge a fee and
may prefer to observe sessions behind a one-way mirror. A written agreement can articulate a super-
visory relationship in detail to prevent later misunderstandings. It can also serve to formalize the
relationship, educate the supervisee regarding the nature and expectations of supervision, provide a
model for how to approach informed consent with clients, and provide security for both parties by
structuring the relationship.
• Purposes of supervision. The goals of a supervision arrangement typically are to foster the super-
visee’s professional development and to protect the welfare of clients while a supervisee is developing
the competence to work independently, although the purposes of supervision are varied. An important
benefit could be that the supervisee accrues the supervised hours to fulfill requirements for an intern-
ship or licensure, but simply acquiring a certain number of hours is not the purpose of supervision.
When the intent is merely to have the supervisor sign off on the required hours, there is little chance
that supervision will be a growth-producing experience for the supervisee.
• The logistics of supervision. 	An understanding should be reached regarding how frequently the
supervisor and the supervisee will meet, where they will meet, and for how long. If the supervisee is
under the direct control and authority of the supervisor in a work setting, the supervisee should know
how to contact the supervisor, whom to contact in case of an emergency, and what to do if the super-
visor or the designee is unavailable. Supervisors and supervisees should discuss the various forms of
documentation required by licensing boards—or, in the case of student interns, by the university and the
internship site—and who will be responsible for completing the paperwork. Supervisors should create a
way of documenting intern compliance with applicable regulations and all information required by the
supervisee’s state licensure board, the site, and the university (Blalock et al., 2021).
• Information about the supervisor. Supervisees need to know that their supervisors are qualified by
training, experience, or credentials to provide them with competent supervision. Supervisors should
provide prospective supervisees with information regarding their credentials. To help supervisors and
supervisees determine whether there are any differences in perspective that might need to be negoti-
ated, supervisors should explain their theoretical orientations and describe their supervisory styles to
potential supervisees.
• Expectations, roles, and responsibilities. These should be made clear for each party in the relation-
ship. For instance, is the supervisee expected to bring audio- or videotapes to the supervisory sessions,
present cases for discussion, or prepare in some other specific way? If the supervisor is charging a fee,
what are the arrangements for payment? What is the nature of the supervisory relationship, and how
does it differ from a counseling relationship or a consulting relationship? What are the boundaries of
the relationship?
• Evaluation. 	It is best practice to explain in detail to supervisees the processes and procedures for
evaluating their performance.
• Ethical and legal practice. 	Supervisors should not simply assume that supervisees have been
instructed and that they know all they need to know about legal and ethical issues. Supervisors pro-
tect themselves and safeguard the welfare of their supervisees and the supervisees’ clients when they
identify at the outset of the supervisory relationship areas of ethical and legal practice in which the
supervisee may need further instruction or clarification.
FIGURE 15-1 Topics to be discussed before supervision begins

-- 418 of 593 --

396 	Section 2 • Issues
An example of a supervision agreement is included in Appendix F. A supervision agree-
ment is designed for a licensed counselor to provide supervision for a counselor who is accruing
post-master’s supervised experience required for licensure. Sections of this agreement could be
modified easily to fit a number of other clinical supervision situations. This agreement covers
very important understandings between the supervisor and the supervisee. Note that the clini-
cal supervisor gives deference to the administrative or on-site supervisor and that the agreement
includes several statements meant to limit the clinical supervisor’s responsibilities for the coun-
selor’s day-to-day activities.
Supervisor Competence
One of the most important competencies needed for being an effective supervisor is to main-
tain compliance with ethical and legal requirements (Colburn et al., 2016). The Association for
Counselor Education and Supervision (ACES) Standards for Counseling Supervisors (1990) pro-
vides a detailed description of the characteristics and competencies of effective supervisors. One of
these competencies is that supervisors are familiar with and can skillfully apply the ethical, legal,
and regulatory dimensions of supervision.
Being a competent counselor does not necessarily mean that one is also a competent super-
visor (Muratori, 2001). In fact, being a skilled counseling practitioner is only one prerequisite for
competence as a supervisor. Such competence also requires specific training in the knowledge and
skills involved in supervision. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that “prior to offering clini-
cal supervision services, counselors [should be] trained in supervision methods and techniques”
(§F.2.a.). Licensure boards in some states (e.g., California, Ohio, Louisiana, Texas) now require
those who supervise candidates to be not only trained and licensed as counselors but also approved
by the boards as supervisors. The Center for Credentialing and Education, a National Board for
Certified Counselors (NBCC) corporate affiliate, offers a national supervisory credential that may
be used to verify one’s expertise in supervision of counselors. More information about this creden-
tial may be found at https://www.cce-global.org/.
Supervisors must be cognizant of the need for continuing education. According to the Code
of Ethics (ACA, 2014), clinical supervisors “regularly pursue continuing education activities,
including both counseling and supervision topics and skills” (§F.2.a.). This task can be enormous
for supervisors, as they need to keep current in their own specialty areas as well as be aware of
advances that are being made in the general area of clinical supervision (Bernard & Goodyear,
2019). Experienced supervisors can benefit from competency training; the clinical supervisors
who participated in a study by Tebes et al. (2011) reported significant increases in their perceived
ability to manage supervisory relationships, manage supervisee job performance, and promote
supervisee professional development.
Supervisees sometimes want to gain experience working in specialty areas or with client pop-
ulations with which the supervisor has limited training or experience. In these cases, supervisors
must decide whether they have the necessary skills to adequately supervise. Supervisors should be
clear about the kinds of cases they would not supervise (such as equine therapy or genetic counsel-
ing), the kinds of settings that are outside their scope of expertise (e.g., an agency counselor who
works with adults not feeling competent to supervise an elementary school counselor), and the
kinds of cases they would supervise only when they are working under supervision themselves or
in conjunction with a consultant. In fact, because supervision is such a complex and demanding
responsibility, supervisors would be wise to have a consultant or consultation group with whom
they meet regularly to monitor their performance.

-- 419 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	397
If you are working under supervision and your caseload includes a significant number of cli-
ents who have experienced a crisis, disaster, or other form of traumatization, you will want to seek
out a supervisor who is able to provide you with wellness-based supervision (Blount et al., 2016;
Hayden et al., 2015). Your supervisor should be alert to any vicarious trauma you may be experienc-
ing and encourage you in practicing self-care (Jordan, 2018).
Confidentiality Concerns
When you are working as a counselor under supervision, you can expect your supervisor to inform
you about client rights, including the protection of client privacy and confidentiality in the counseling
relationship (ACA, 2014, §F.1.c.). You will need to provide your clients with disclosure information
that informs them of how the supervision process influences the limits of confidentiality and to let
them know who will have access to their records. You will have access to sensitive information about
clients that must be kept confidential. In some circumstances, this information may be privileged
by statute. At the same time, you will be required to share information about your clients with your
supervisor. As a rule, sharing confidential and privileged information with professionals who have a
need to know for professional purposes, such as supervision, is acceptable and does not destroy legal
privilege. You must know how to apply the general principles of confidentiality to your specific situa-
tion. If you are working in a community agency, the agency is likely to have policies and regulations
regarding the release of client information, and you must know and abide by these regulations.
What would happen if your site supervisor were to inappropriately disclose confidential or
privileged information? Because you may have had no control over who would be your supervi-
sor, you probably would not be held accountable. Nonetheless, you do have a professional and
legal responsibility to address concerns you may have regarding an untrustworthy supervisor.
This can be extremely difficult because you are in a vulnerable position. If you are a practicum
student or intern in a counselor training program, you should bring your concern to the attention
of your university supervisor, who will help you determine how to proceed. If possible, it is best
for you to resolve the concern directly with the site supervisor involved. Counselors who have
graduated from a training program and are working under supervision toward their licensure
should also attempt first to resolve the concern directly with the supervisor. If this approach is not
feasible or is unsuccessful, they should consult with their supervisor’s administrative supervisor.
Another dynamic in supervision related to confidentiality is a practice known as triadic super-
vision. Some years ago, CACREP issued an approval for counselors-in-training (during their practi-
cum and internships) to receive either individual or triadic supervision. In triadic supervision, a
supervisor provides clinical supervision to two supervisees at the same time. Of course, having
a second supervisee involved changes the dynamics of the supervision process and relationships.
Lonn and Juhnke (2017) interviewed supervisees who had participated in triadic supervision. They
found themes suggesting that some supervisees in triadic supervision had concerns about sharing
with the other supervisee the time they had with their supervisor, about another counseling student
hearing information about their clients, and about having another counseling student hear the feed-
back they received from their supervisors.
The use of technology in supervision has burgeoned, and supervisors are challenged to keep
current with all the innovations. Over a decade ago, the use of videoconferencing as a means of
providing supervision increased because of its time and cost efficiency (Jencius et al., 2010), and
distance supervision became standard practice during the COVID-19 pandemic. Cautions remain,
however, that even encryption-protected telecommunications systems are vulnerable to intrusion.
Supervisors who have the option of providing in-person supervision need to carefully weigh the

-- 420 of 593 --

398 	Section 2 • Issues
benefits of providing distance supervision against the potential threats to
confidentiality (Glosoff et al., 2016; Jencius, 2015).
The increasing use of technology in higher education and the
recent COVID-19 pandemic have dramatically increased the practice
of virtual supervision, “a clinical supervision of psychological ser-
vices using digital tools through a synchronous audio-video format in
which the supervisor is not located in the same physical location as the
trainee” (Nadan et al., 2020, p. 998). During the COVID-19 pandemic,
online counseling and supervision extended mental health support and
continued supervision (Nadan et al., 2020) to those who otherwise
might not have received continuing services.
Supervisory Relationships
Supervision occurs at multiple levels and involves several parties,
including a client, a counselor/supervisee, and one or more supervi-
sors. Within a counselor training program, both a university supervi-
sor and a site supervisor typically oversee the work of the student
who is completing a field-based practicum or internship. In counselor
education programs that have doctoral as well as master’s programs,
doctoral students sometimes supervise master’s-level interns in a
structure called layered supervision. What makes this type of super-
vision layered is that the doctoral student supervisor will be supervised as well. Master’s-level
interns can benefit from this arrangement. Fernando (2013) found that supervisees of doctoral
students reported significantly higher self-efficacy and satisfaction than did students who were
supervised by faculty. When relationships involve clients, a supervisee, a university supervisor, a
site supervisor, a supervisor who is a doctoral student, and the supervisor of the doctoral student
supervisor, sorting out the roles and responsibilities can be a daunting task. Sometimes, faculty
members who serve as university supervisors are less than diligent about providing an orienta-
tion to or communicating with the site supervisors or field supervisors. This lack of connection
can cause problems when field supervisors need to exercise their gatekeeping function. In a
study by Freeman et al. (2016), only 35% of field supervisors indicated that they would discuss
these situations with counselor education faculty.
Both the supervisor and the supervisee need to be aware of and monitor the power dynamics
in their relationship. Recent graduates of master’s-level counseling programs in a study conducted
by DeStefano et al. (2019) reported that power resides in the supervisor’s expertise; supervisors
lose power when they make errors; supervisees become focused on self-preservation when power
is misused; and supervision is enhanced when supervisors trust the supervisee and are transparent.
Supervision also occurs at the post-master’s level. The counselor licensure movement has pro-
duced another group of supervisors—those who work with licensure applicants (Henriksen et al.,
2019). Obviously, there are multiple roles and relationships to consider in supervision.
All the guidelines in the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) regarding nonprofessional relationships
between counselor educators and students apply equally to the supervisory relationship. Boundaries
in supervisory relationships must be carefully managed because supervisors have considerable power
in the relationship. In their gatekeeping function, they hold the key to the supervisee’s entrance into
the profession. Their supervisees also look to them as models of professional behavior. In addition,
because the supervisory relationship can involve a strong emotional connection, transference and

-- 421 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	399
countertransference reactions are common. Skilled supervisors are aware of (and address in super-
vision) the phenomenon of parallel process, which occurs when counselors unconsciously identify
with their clients and then present to their supervisors in a similar fashion (Giordano et al., 2013;
Pakdaman et al., 2015). Jorgensen et al. (2018) suggested that supervisors need additional support
and training when working with supervisees who demonstrate problems with professional compe-
tence (PPC). These researchers found that supervisees with PPC cause supervisors increased stress
and workload, negatively impact their work environment, and negatively impact client care.
Supervision is a complex process that can be further complicated when supervisors have mul-
tiple roles with their supervisees, such as teacher, clinical supervisor, and administrative supervisor.
If possible, these roles should be divided among several supervisors. Doctoral supervisors often
have multiple relationships with their master’s-student supervisees. The doctoral supervisor might
be serving as a teaching assistant in a course in which the master’s student is enrolled, attend the
same social functions, and be a fellow officer in a campus-based counseling organization (DeDiego
& Burgin, 2016; Dickens et al., 2016).
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §F.3.a.) cautions supervisors to clearly define and maintain
ethical professional, personal, and social relationships with supervisees and to consider the risks
and benefits when they consider extending current supervisory relationships beyond conventional
parameters. Although supervisors will probably encounter their supervisees in social settings and
community activities such as workshops or meetings of professional associations, socializing
or friendships with supervisees could make it difficult, if not impossible, for the supervisor to
conduct an objective evaluation. As we noted in Chapter 14, counselor educators and supervisors
can be tempted to relax the boundaries as students near completion of their training programs. As
supervisees make the transition to becoming their supervisors’ professional peers, their interac-
tions take on an increasingly collegial tone. Nonetheless, supervisors must remember that their
position requires them to evaluate their supervisees and perhaps recommend them for licensure
or future employment.
15-1 The Case of Bohdan
Bohdan is a licensed professional counselor who works in an outpatient mental health treatment
facility. He is serving as site supervisor for Amanda, who is a master’s-degree student enrolled in
an internship at a local university. Initially, Amanda’s performance anxiety (which was especially
evident when she knew Bohdan was observing her sessions with clients) interfered with her abil-
ity to effectively establish therapeutic relationships with her clients. In supervision sessions with
Bohdan, Amanda was receptive to his suggestions regarding how to manage her anxiety, and
she repeatedly expressed her desire to improve her skills. Although her progress was minimal,
Bohdan gave her a satisfactory grade on her mid-term evaluation, as he believed that she was
working hard and would be able to turn the corner to get past her anxiety. As the semester pro-
gressed, he often found himself functioning more and more as a counselor with her as they dis-
cussed her fears and anxieties and explored what might be sustaining them. Now that the time
for final evaluation is nearing, Bohdan is feeling conflicted. Even though he has tried to keep the
focus of his supervision on Amanda’s professional development, the sessions often have had a
personal focus. In his counselor role he has been supportive and nonjudgmental with Amanda,
but now he feels uncomfortable with being evaluative. He doesn’t believe that she is ready to
proceed into her second semester of internship but fears that she will feel betrayed if he decides

-- 422 of 593 --

400 	Section 2 • Issues
Supervisors play multiple roles. Three roles often discussed in the literature are teacher, coun-
selor, and consultant. Sometimes supervisors function more like teachers, especially when they
are working with beginning supervisees. Sometimes they function more like peers or consultants,
usually with advanced supervisees. Although supervision is also similar to counseling, there are
important differences: In counseling, the relationship sometimes is the intervention, whereas if
supervision consisted only of the supervisory relationship, the supervisee would not learn new and
needed skills. A second important difference is that counseling is nonjudgmental, whereas supervi-
sion always has an evaluative component.
Just as counselor educators should not become counselors to their students, a supervisor
should not establish a therapeutic relationship with a supervisee as a substitute for supervision.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states clearly that “supervisors [should] not provide counseling
services to supervisees” (§F.6.c.). Supervisors address interpersonal competencies in terms of the
impact of these issues on clients, the supervisory relationship, and professional functioning (§F.6.c.).
The distinctions between the therapeutic aspects of the supervisor’s role and the role of the coun-
selor are not always clear. Herlihy and Corey (2015a) have argued that when supervisors are overly
cautious in trying to avoid taking the counselor role, they may do their supervisees a disservice.
Effective supervision includes a focus on the impact of the counselor on the counseling process,
and when supervision focuses exclusively on client cases or problem-solving strategies for working
with clients, opportunities for supervisee growth may be lost. At the same time, a personal-issues
focus should not slide beyond appropriate boundaries and become a therapeutic relationship. When
supervisors become counselors to their supervisees, these dual relationships model inappropriate
behaviors that the supervisees may later perpetuate when they become supervisors themselves.
There is a delicate balance to be maintained in the supervisory relationship. In your work as a
practicum student or intern, your own unresolved personal issues occasionally may be triggered by
a client, and this may interfere with your counseling effectiveness. You can expect your supervisor
to give her an evaluation of unsatisfactory. He wonders whether he should give her a minimally
passing grade in the hope that her performance will improve.
• What problems have been created by Bohdan’s failure to maintain the boundaries between
supervision and counseling in his relationship with his supervisee?
• What ethical considerations must Bohdan keep in mind as he determines Amanda’s
evaluation?
Discussion: Bohdan has blurred the boundaries between supervision and counseling, which
has a number of ethical implications. As a supervisor, he is indirectly responsible for his super-
visee’s clients. If these clients have not been adequately served, Bohdan has violated the basic
ethical principle that “client welfare comes first and foremost.” Despite his good intentions, he
has not provided his supervisee with the most competent supervision. By acting as a counselor,
he has failed to adequately perform his role as a supervisor. Now, at the end of the semester,
he has an ethical obligation to provide an honest and accurate evaluation of Amanda’s perfor-
mance, and he must not give her a satisfactory grade if she has not earned it. He will need to
discuss this with Amanda, although it may be a difficult conversation for both of them, and he
would be wise to schedule an appointment to discuss his evaluation with her university supervi-
sor with Amanda present.

-- 423 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	401
to help you identify what is occurring and to understand the issues involved. Your supervisor might
even suggest that you seek counseling to help resolve the issues, but the focus of your supervisory
sessions should remain on your work and should not become personal therapy sessions for you.
15-2 The Case of Dr. Jones
Dr. Jones has been supervising Marla’s work as a practicum student. Marla has demonstrated
very good skills thus far in her first semester of counseling actual clients. Dr. Jones has just
watched the videotaped recording of one of Marla’s sessions and was surprised to see Marla
falter midway through the session and continue to give a poor performance. At their next super-
vision session, Dr. Jones shares her surprise that Marla’s counseling skills in the session had fallen
so far short of her usual abilities. Marla responds by bursting into tears and stating that her per-
sonal life is falling apart and she is under incredible stress.
• How should Dr. Jones react to this situation?
• Why is it inappropriate for a clinical supervisor to provide professional counseling services
to a supervisee?
Discussion: Dr. Jones certainly will want to be supportive and empathic toward Marla but
should do so without slipping into a counselor role. Dr. Jones might use active listening skills
to allow Marla to vent her feelings, discuss how Marla’s personal problems are affecting her
professional performance, and perhaps suggest that Marla seek counseling. If Dr. Jones were
to provide counseling services to Marla, this would constitute an inappropriate dual relationship
and would make it very difficult for both of them when the time comes for Dr. Jones to evaluate
Marla’s practicum performance.
SEXUAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SUPERVISORS AND SUPERVISEES 	There is clear consensus
in the counseling profession regarding the impropriety of sexual dual relationships between super-
visors and their supervisees. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014, §F.3.b.) states that sexual intimacies
between supervisors and supervisees are unethical.
Although sexual intimacies seem to occur in only a small percentage of relationships between
supervisors and supervisees, it is probably much more common for feelings of sexual attraction to
develop between them. When this happens, several actions could be taken to resolve the problem.
It is important to remember that when sexual attraction takes place in a supervisory relationship,
the supervisor has the obligation, as the person with the power in the relationship, to manage the
attraction in an appropriate and ethical manner. The supervisee could be transferred to a different
supervisor if this could be done without having a negative impact on the supervisee’s clients or the
supervisee’s professional growth. If circumstances prevent a transfer, the supervisory relationship
should be carefully documented by both the supervisor and the supervisee. The supervisor should,
at a minimum, request regular consultation and obtain a second opinion when evaluating the super-
visee’s abilities. It would be prudent to involve another supervisor, who would monitor the supervi-
sory relationship.
The manner in which issues of sexual attraction are handled by a supervisor can have a potent
modeling effect for the supervisee. Feelings of sexual attraction to a client are likely to occur for the

-- 424 of 593 --

402 	Section 2 • Issues
first time when counselors are still novices working under supervision. Therefore, supervisors must
do more than admonish their supervisees to avoid sexual intimacies with clients: They must create
a safe climate for supervisee self-exploration. It is crucial that the supervisor develop a relationship
of trust that encourages supervisees to honestly discuss their feelings of sexual attraction to a client
without fear of being judged negatively.
Accountability and Responsibility
Supervisors have several parties to whom they are directly and indirectly accountable. Although
their primary responsibilities are to facilitate the growth of supervisees and to protect clients, they
also have a larger scope of responsibility that includes parties who are indirectly involved.
The supervisor is indirectly responsible to the field setting in which the supervisee is working
to ensure that clients served by the supervisee receive quality care. Community agencies, schools,
hospitals, and other settings that accept and provide site supervision to practicum students and
interns take on an additional responsibility that requires considerable time and effort. In return,
university supervisors feel an obligation to ensure that these students make a positive contribution to
the setting and do so in a professional manner.
Supervisors, like counselor educators, serve as gatekeepers to the profession. If a supervisee’s
incompetence is not addressed, the counseling program’s reputation in the community will suffer,
and the counseling profession itself will be diminished. Supervisors must therefore not endorse
supervisees for graduation from a training program or for a professional credential if the supervisees
are not able to provide effective counseling services (ACA, 2014, §F.6.d.). In a broad sense, the
supervisor functions to protect future clients of counseling services. Figure 15-2 depicts the mul-
tiple layers of responsibility and accountability of supervisors.
Increased supervision is often prescribed as an intervention when supervisees are not making
sufficient progress in their competency development (Henderson & Dufrene, 2011). After review-
ing the literature, Nelson et al. (2010) concluded that a therapeutic supervisory stance is the most
crucial variable when working with problematic supervisees. They emphasized the importance of
creating a trusting relationship and a safe environment before evaluating supervisee performance.
Additional research evidence supports this conclusion. Ladany et al. (2013) found that the most
effective supervisors facilitated open communication, and Mehr et al. (2014) found that supervisees
Agency or other setting
Future clients of
supervisee
Counseling profession
Program reputation
Consumers of
counseling services
Supervisor
Client 	Supervisee
FIGURE 15-2 Multiple layers of supervisor responsibility

-- 425 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	403
were more willing to disclose their concerns when the supervisory working alliance was strong.
Herlihy and Corey (2015a) have noted that supervisees sometimes are reluctant to openly discuss
with their supervisors mistakes they may have made in their clinical work. It is critical, however,
that supervisees feel safe to discuss their doubts and fears if they are to rectify their mistakes and
learn from them. Supervisors not only are accountable for the work of their supervisees in an ethical
and professional sense but also can be held legally liable for supervisee incompetence. This legal
responsibility, which occurs under the principle of vicarious liability, is discussed next.
Vicarious Liability
The legal principle known as respondeat superior, or vicarious liability, holds that individuals
who have control and authority over others will be held accountable for those others’ negligence.
Generally, an employer will be held accountable for the negligence of an employee who is act-
ing within the scope of employment (John R. v. Oakland Unified School District, 1989; Lisa M. v.
Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hosp., 1995). Respondeat superior, a Latin term meaning “Let the
master answer,” is the basis for an English legal concept known as master/servant. The legal reason-
ing has been that one who has the authority to direct the activities of another (the master) should be
held accountable for the negligence of the person who has submitted to such authority (the servant).
In the mental health arena, counselors who work for others or who volunteer their services, such as
they usually do in an internship, would be the servants.
The administrative supervisor would be the counselor’s master. From a practical standpoint, a
person who has been injured by a servant (or employee) has a better chance of being compensated
by a master (or employer) because masters tend to have more resources than servants.
The principle of vicarious liability was applied to the mental health professions in the famous
Tarasoff v. Regents of University of California (1976) case. (See Chapter 7 for a review of the events
that occurred in this lawsuit.) In this case, a precedent was set for a mental health professional’s
duty to warn potential victims of a violent client, and liability for the harm that was done was
extended to the professional’s supervisor.
When a counselor who is under the control and authority of another person harms a third per-
son, giving rise to a lawsuit, the amount of control that the counselor’s administrative and clinical
supervisors have over the counselor probably will determine the degree to which each supervisor
will be held responsible for the counselor’s negligence. For example, a counselor intern’s on-site
supervisor, who is physically present each day, assigns work to the intern, and monitors the intern’s
activities, would most likely be held accountable by a court for the intern’s negligence. A court
would be less likely to hold responsible a university supervisor who meets weekly with the intern
and discusses issues brought to the supervisor’s attention by the intern. Of course, the liability of the
supervisors would depend on the exact facts in the situation and the extent to which the supervisors
knew or should have known about the intern’s negligent acts. Lack of awareness of a supervisee’s
behaviors that caused harm to a client is not, in itself, an adequate legal defense for a supervisor.
A supervisor who is aware of the problem but makes an incorrect judgment probably would not be
found liable.
Obviously, supervision can be a risky undertaking. Snider (1985) has offered some guide-
lines for supervisors to help them reduce their likelihood of being named as a co-defendant in a
malpractice lawsuit. These guidelines offer protection to supervisees as well. First, it is important
to maintain a trusting relationship in which supervisees feel comfortable in sharing their doubts and
concerns. Second, supervisors must keep up to date with legal issues that affect supervision and
mental health practice in general. Third, supervisors must recognize the need for competent legal

-- 426 of 593 --

404 	Section 2 • Issues
advice and ensure that an attorney is available to provide legal support.
In addition, both supervisors and supervisees should carry professional
liability insurance.
Supervisors are advised to document their supervisory sessions,
not only because of the liability issues involved but also to improve eval-
uation and to monitor client care. This documentation should include (a)
meeting date and time, (b) a listing of cases discussed, (c) notes regard-
ing client progress, (d) recommendations made to the supervisee, (e)
issues to be followed up in future meetings, and (f) a plan for remedi-
ating any significant supervisee deficiencies that are identified (Welfel,
2016). Although documentation of supervisory sessions may constitute
best practice, our observation is that not all supervisors take notes related
to their supervision sessions.
Supervisor and Supervisee Rights
and Responsibilities
It should be evident from your reading thus far that supervision is a seri-
ous responsibility that is not undertaken lightly by your supervisor. For
the process to facilitate your maximum professional growth, both you and your supervisor must
understand your roles and responsibilities and work conscientiously to fulfill them.
You have the right to expect certain behaviors from your supervisor. Your supervisor will work
to ensure that you are aware of the professional and ethical standards and your legal responsibilities
(ACA, 2014, §F.4.c.). You can also expect your supervisor to provide you with regular face-to-face or
virtual supervision. If you are a student in a CACREP-accredited training program, you will receive
a minimum of 1 hour per week of individual supervision and 1.5 hours per week of group supervi-
sion during your practicum and internship. Your supervisor may require you to bring audio- or vid-
eotapes to your supervisory sessions or may even wish to have direct interaction with your clients.
Conscientious supervision thus involves more than simply reviewing case notes and discussing cases.
You can expect supervisors to give you their full attention during your agreed-on supervision
time. Your supervisory sessions should be reasonably free from interruptions, and your supervi-
sor should not have taken on an excessive number of supervisees. Although some agencies have
policies limiting the number of supervisees for whom their employees may be responsible, not all
state licensure boards stipulate a maximum number of supervisees (Welfel, 2019). Your supervisor
has a responsibility to ensure that you are able to contact them in emergencies or, if the supervisor
is unavailable, to provide you with alternative, on-call supervisors to assist you in handling crises
(ACA, 2014, §F.4.b.).
You can expect your supervisor to thoroughly explain the supervision process to you and
secure your informed consent, to possess the competencies described earlier in this chapter, to be
skilled at managing the boundaries of the supervisory relationship, to provide you with ongoing
feedback about your performance, and to safeguard the confidentiality of information exchanged.
For your part, it is important that you are open to receiving feedback and are willing to work
to implement your supervisor’s suggestions, which will help you improve your effectiveness as a
counselor. Although you may be hesitant at times to admit your uncertainties, confusion, or lack of
knowledge about various aspects of your professional functioning, it is much better that you bring
your concerns to your supervisory sessions and ask for assistance than to withhold your uncertain-
ties regarding the requirements of appropriate counseling (Cook & Sackett, 2018; Cook et al., 2018).

-- 427 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	405
Cook et al. (2020), in a survey study of 107 counselors, found that 95% of pre-licensed counselors
reported intentionally withholding some degree of information from their supervisors and that 53%
completely withheld a concern from their supervisors. Those surveyed reported withholding issues
such as their concerns about their supervisors’ competence more often than they withheld informa-
tion about their work with clients.
You should welcome the experience if your supervisor requires you to provide videotapes
of your sessions to review, even though Ellis et al. (2014, 2015) and Fall and Sutton (2004) have
reported that the supervisors of pre-licensed counselors seldom observe the counseling sessions of
their supervisees. Remember that supervision is a developmental process: Each time you master a
new skill or add new knowledge and understanding to your repertoire, you become more capable of
one day practicing independently.
Technology Issues in Supervision
Technologies have been infused extensively into the clinical supervision of counselors and have facili-
tated communication and improved the quality of supervision in myriad ways. Supervisees benefit
from immediate, in-session learning when supervisors communicate feedback through bug-in-the-ear,
phone-in, monitor-text, computer-based live supervision, or other synchronous methods. Email,
instant messaging (IM) and texting, and teleconferencing all have increased the ease and speed with
which supervisee and supervisor can communicate with each other. Asynchronous videoconferencing
and digital video recording have made it possible for supervisors to review supervisees’ counseling
sessions without traveling to the site where the supervisee is working (Jencius et al., 2015).
Distance supervision that uses various technologies has revolutionized counselor supervision
and has proven to be an effective means of providing supervision services, particularly during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Distance supervision offers many benefits, including lower costs to supervis-
ees, flexibility in scheduling, supervision opportunities for those who live in isolated or rural commu-
nities, immediate access to a supervisor in crisis situations, and real-time supervision from experts on
specific clinical issues (McAdams & Wyatt, 2010). Vaccaro and Lambie (2007) have noted that ethi-
cal issues must always be addressed in supervision, regardless of how it is delivered. These authors
reviewed issues of confidentiality, liability, and technological competencies that arise in distance
supervision and reminded supervisors and supervisees that (a) they must be specifically trained in
using the needed technologies, (b) measures must be taken to ensure the security of computer-based
communications, (c) informed consent documents should explicitly discuss the limits of computer-
based supervision, and (d) counselor education programs that use distance supervision should have
adequate liability coverage and provide technical support. Problematic aspects of distance supervi-
sion include the potential for miscommunications between supervisor and supervisee due to restricted
nonverbal cues and misunderstanding the regulations that pertain to distance supervision. Because
technology is advancing so rapidly, supervisors need to continually monitor the technologies they
use for compliance and educate themselves on emerging technologies (Glosoff et al., 2016). State
regulations for technology-assisted distance supervision are inconsistent, which can make it difficult
to determine whether distance supervision is acceptable when the supervisee and the supervisor are
communicating from different states. See Chapter 10 for a full discussion of distance supervision.
Diversity Considerations in Supervision
Addressing cultural diversity issues in supervision is essential to helping supervisees become
multiculturally competent counselors (Ancis & Marshall, 2010; Colistra & Brown-Rice, 2011).
If supervisors are not attuned to diversity issues in supervision, they are likely to inadvertently

-- 428 of 593 --

406 	Section 2 • Issues
reinforce the biased attitudes and behaviors that their supervisees might have. Existing mod-
els of clinical supervision have been criticized for being grounded in a traditional perspective
that ignores racism and other biases (Washington et al., 2021). Washington et al. (2023) have
suggested that Critical Race Theory be integrated into supervision to help establish anti-racist
dispositions for both supervisors and supervisees. Effective cross-cultural supervisors are aware
of and address the role of multiculturalism/diversity in the client–supervisee and supervisor–
supervisee relationships (ACA, 2014, §F.2.b.). Supervisors must themselves be multicultur-
ally competent if they are to foster the development of such competence in their supervisees.
Supervisors thus need to have supervision-specific competencies that address privilege and
oppression, power dynamics, and broaching if they are to facilitate supervisee development of
social justice and advocacy competencies (Fickling et al., 2019). Supervisors as well as super-
visees have become more culturally diverse, and little is known about the experiences of supervi-
sors of color, who face the additional challenge of paying attention to racial and ethnic identities
in the supervisory relationship and the parallels to their supervisees’ relationships with clients
(Levitt et al., 2022). Recently, scholars have noted that multicultural and social justice principles
have not been incorporated into supervision models. Mitchell and Butler (2021) have offered a
multiculturally integrated supervision model; Dollarhide and Hale (2021) have also offered a
new model for social justice supervision.
Because there are a significant number of international students enrolled in counselor
training programs, supervisors need to be cross-culturally competent. They must be aware of
the distinct challenges that their supervisees may be facing as well as the limitations of an
emphasis on Western values as they pertain to mental health (Lee, 2018). Wong et al. (2013)
found that the supervisor’s multicultural competence is a significant factor in cross-cultural
supervision dyads.
Other research has shown that discussing diversity issues during supervision can increase
supervisee satisfaction with supervision (Duan & Roehlke, 2001; Estrada et al., 2004), can
increase supervisees’ perceptions of their own multicultural competence (Toporek et al., 2004),
and can lead to more positive outcomes for clients (Ancis & Marshall, 2010). There is consensus
that it is the responsibility of supervisors to initiate discussions of cultural differences with their
supervisees (Bernard & Goodyear, 2019; Corey et al., 2010, 2024). If the supervisor is silent
on this issue, the supervisee will get the message that cultural diversity is a taboo subject in
supervision.
It is likely that you will become a supervisor to at least one counselor or counselor trainee
during your career. It is also likely that your supervisee will be culturally different from you in some
ways. Although you may feel uncomfortable about broaching the issue of cultural differences with
your supervisee, it is necessary for you to transcend the taboo of talking about racial, gender, or
cultural differences (Corey et al., 2024). When you become a supervisor, it will be your responsibil-
ity to be aware of the complex ways in which culture and gender interact among client, counselor,
and supervisor and present multiple challenges to communication and understanding (Nelson et al.,
2006). Your initial supervisory sessions with your supervisees will present opportunities to establish
an open dialogue regarding multicultural issues.
Once the supervisory alliance is established, you can promote multicultural competence in
your supervisees by incorporating multicultural case conceptualization into supervision. You can
do this by helping your supervisees analyze the impact of their client’s race or ethnicity, gender
role socialization, social class, sexual orientation, and other salient cultural variables on the client’s
problems. It is also important that you promote culturally appropriate interventions, which may
include teaching supervisees how to advocate for their clients.

-- 429 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	407
CONSULTATION
Counselors must assume a variety of roles as they perform their work responsibilities, and each
role demands different perspectives, attitudes, and behaviors. The professional role that counselors
engage in at any given moment determines their behavior and, in many instances, their responsibili-
ties to the individual with whom they are interacting. Consultant and consultee are two roles that
counselors take on regularly.
Counselors regularly consult with others for the benefit of their clients and to further their
own knowledge of a particular area of counseling. Counselors use the following consultants: other
mental health professionals when making clinical or ethical judgments; other professionals, such
as physicians, social workers, nurses, and psychologists, who are also treating their client; family
members, friends, and significant others in the clients’ lives for the benefit of clients; administra-
tors in their employment setting regarding their job responsibilities as counselors or when seeking
direction in difficult situations; and attorneys, when they have legal questions. The very best step a
counselor can take when faced with a difficult ethical decision or with a legal question is to consult
others (Woody, 2013), particularly when treatment is not effective or the problems presented are
beyond the counselor’s competence (Wheeler & Bertram, 2019). Consulting with peers and other
mental health professionals is best when facing ethical dilemmas. Consulting with supervisors and
attorneys is necessary when dealing with legal problems.
Consultation may be a particularly valuable resource for counselors who are isolated
because of working in a remote setting. Although there is no legal requirement for supervision or
consultation after a counselor becomes licensed, Holliman and Muro (2015) recommended that
counselors be strongly encouraged to formalize professional relationships such as consultation
once they have entered independent practice. For rural practitioners, who often practice with-
out the benefit of nearby consultation resources, Paulson et al. (2015) found that an online peer
consultation group provided support and networking as well as an opportunity for professional
development.
Counselors find themselves in the role of consultant in a number of situations. A fel-
low counselor may be having difficulty making a clinical or ethical decision. Another pro-
fessional who is treating one of the counselor’s clients may request a consultation. In each
of these examples, the consultation takes place between two individuals (a consultant and a
consultee) for the benefit of a third person (the client). These consultation relationships are
not formalized and generally are limited to a single discussion or a brief series of discussions.
We refer to this type of consultation as peer consultation. By contrast, counselors sometimes
function as consultants to organizations such as businesses, agencies, or schools. These con-
sultation relationships are usually longer term and formalized in some manner, often through
a contract. This type of consultation is known as organizational consultation. Both peer and
organizational consultations are primarily aimed at work-related concerns, as opposed to the
consultee’s personal problems.
Accountability
In most situations, consultants do not have control of or authority over the person who is receiv-
ing the benefit of their consultation. Instead, consultants essentially give advice. Once individuals
receive advice from a consultant, they are free to accept or ignore the advice they have been given.
When consultants have no control over the actions taken by the individuals who have received their
advice, they cannot be held accountable legally for an individual’s negligence even if they give inac-
curate or wrong information or bad advice.

-- 430 of 593 --

408 	Section 2 • Issues
Exceptions exist when a consultant is a counselor’s administrative or clinical supervisor. As
explained in this chapter, a supervisor who has control over a counselor’s actions probably has some
degree of legal liability for the negligence of the counselor. Also, it is possible that an individual
who retains a consultant may have a legal cause of action based on contract principles against a
consultant who gives wrong or poor advice that the consultee relies on.
Counselors who are asked to consult with colleagues sometimes are concerned about whether
they might be held responsible for the advice they give as consultants.
15-3 The Case of Allison
Kamau, a counselor in a mental health center, approaches Allison, another counselor at the cen-
ter, who has no administrative authority over him, and asks her to consult with him regarding a
client with whom he is having some difficulty. As Kamau describes his work with the client, Allison
has a hunch that the client may have a history of complex, intergenerational trauma that Kamau
has not recognized. She is hesitant to enter into a consultation relationship with him, however,
because she knows that Kamau does not have specific training in working with clients who have
this type of background. Allison wonders to herself, “What if Kamau doesn’t do an adequate job
in working with this client? If I give him advice, can I be held accountable?”
• What do you think Allison should do?
• If Allison does agree to consult with Kamau, how can she be helpful to him in working with
his client?
Discussion: Allison should realize that Kamau will make the final decisions regarding how to
counsel his client and that he alone will be responsible for his actions. A consultant who has no
administrative authority over another counselor cannot be held accountable for what the coun-
selor/consultee ultimately does. Allison should thus listen carefully to Kamau’s concerns, and she
might choose to give him her best advice, depending on how she understands the situation. She
might suggest that he seek further training in complex trauma, although she would not provide
this training. She will need to set boundaries to maintain her consultant role. She should also
refrain from meeting with the client herself to evaluate the client, and to avoid taking on a super-
visory role, she should not meet regularly with Kamau regarding his counseling of the client.
After you have begun your counseling practice and you need to consult, you should choose
exemplary consultants, with the understanding that you, as the individual who is seeking advice,
will be held accountable. You should therefore choose consultants who are knowledgeable, trust-
worthy, and reputable.
Power
Although consultants generally have no legal accountability for the actions of their consultees, it is
important to remember that the power, or the ability to influence, is not evenly distributed in con-
sulting relationships. Because the consultant is viewed as the expert, there is potential for misuse
or abuse of power. Even if the power differential is more perceived than real, consultants may have
considerable influence on the outcome and process of a consultation. Therefore, consultants have
an ethical responsibility to avoid misusing their power (Simpson & Glowiak, 2012).

-- 431 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	409
Consultation Contracts
In organizational consulting and in some other consulting situations, consultants enter into long-term
agreements with others to provide advice in a particular manner. A clinical supervisor who provides
supervision over a 2-year period for a counselor who is gathering experience for licensure or certi-
fication is also a consultant. Just as a supervision agreement is recommended for supervisory rela-
tionships, a written contract is recommended for counselors who consult.
The following recommendations have been offered for contracts that are prepared by
consultants:
• Clearly specify the work to be completed by the consultant.
• Describe in detail any work products expected from the consultant.
• Establish a time frame for the completion of the work.
• Establish lines of authority and the person to whom the consultant is responsible.
• Describe the compensation plan for the consultant and the method of payment.
• Specify any special agreements or contingency plans agreed on by the parties (Remley, 1993).
Counselors who take on consulting roles need to understand the legal principles involved in
accountability and contracts and to fulfill those roles in an ethical manner. Unlike counselors who
function as supervisors (who have the ACA Code of Ethics to assist them), consultants who func-
tion as consultants are at somewhat of a disadvantage: There is no code of ethics specifically for
consultants, and the ACA Code of Ethics (2014) contains only a few standards (§B.7.a., §D.2.a.,
and §D.2.b.) that address consultation directly. This paucity of ethical standards, along with the fact
that not all counselors are adequately trained in consultation, raises some cause for concern that
counselors may not be well prepared to resolve the ethical dilemmas they encounter when they are
functioning as consultants. Dougherty (2014) has identified several ethical issues that consultants
frequently face. These issues include (a) consultant competence, (b) safeguarding consultee and cli-
ent rights, (c) the consultation relationship, and (d) the role of values and diversity in consultation.
Consultant Competence
Competence to provide services is an important ethical issue in consultation, just as it is in coun-
seling and supervision. Before counselors agree to enter a consultation relationship, they must
assess whether their personal and professional competence are adequate for the task (Dougherty,
2014). When you become an experienced counselor and are asked to consult with peers, you
should ask for a description of the potential consultee’s problem and then determine whether you
possess the expertise needed to be of assistance. For example, if you have worked for several
years in a clinic that specializes in treating individuals with eating disorders, you will probably
feel confident that you can serve as a consultant to a high school counselor who is wonder-
ing whether one of her student clients suffers from anorexia. By contrast, assume that you are
approached by another counselor in the clinic where you work. She tells you that she needs a
consultation because she is concerned that one of her teenage client’s parents might sue her for
malpractice. This colleague has a legal problem, and you should refer her to the clinic supervisor.
Being asked to consult is always a compliment, but you should not always agree to such a request.
It would be wise to ask yourself whether you have the qualifications and experience to consult
on a particular situation, whether you can maintain your objectivity, and whether any potential
conflicts of interest may exist.
When counselors are asked to perform organizational consultation, they should present their pro-
fessional qualifications clearly to avoid misrepresenting themselves. Before entering into an agreement

-- 432 of 593 --

410 	Section 2 • Issues
to provide services, they should ensure that they have the resources and competencies to provide the
needed assistance (ACA, 2014, §D.2.a.). It is essential that consultants know their own limitations,
and they should make an appropriate referral when they are unable to provide the requested services.
The ability to carefully monitor one’s own boundaries of competence is particularly critical because
so few counselors have received formal training in consultation. Organizational consultation can be
particularly complex because multiple parties are involved, both directly and indirectly. Because this
can complicate the ethical and legal considerations, it is important that the consultant clarify who the
client is before agreeing to enter into the consultative relationship (Fuqua et al., 2012).
Welfel (2019) has stated that counselors tend to make the same mistake regarding their com-
petence to consult as they make regarding their competence to supervise: They assume that coun-
seling skills are sufficient when consulting others. She cautions counselors that when they present
themselves as skilled consultants, they must be prepared to demonstrate the sources of their knowl-
edge and to be ethically responsible for any harm their interventions might cause. Without a con-
tract, consultants may not be legally responsible for the outcomes of the interventions they suggest,
but they do have a professional and an ethical obligation to carefully consider the implications of
actions that may be taken based on their advice.
Safeguarding Consultee and Client Rights
Due to the triadic nature of consultation, the client does not employ the consultant and sometimes
does not even know that a consultant is involved. Welfel (2019) reminds counselors who consult to
be attuned to the ramifications of their work for these unknown participants. Consultants must be
careful to prevent situations in which their work could be used to the detriment of clients or client
systems. Unfortunate outcomes can be prevented if counselors adhere to ethical obligations “to
inform all parties involved about the purpose of provided services including relevant costs, potential
risks and benefits, and the limits of confidentiality (ACA, 2014, §D.2..b.).
15-4 The Case of Jerry
Jerry was hired by an administrator in a large organization to conduct a series of conflict resolu-
tion workshops with an employee group. Part of the agreement was that Jerry would conduct a
pre- and a post-assessment of the participants’ conflict resolution skills to assess what they had
learned. Jerry included the results of these assessments in his final report to the administrator.
Later, the administrator used this information as one basis for determining which of the employ-
ees would be let go when the organization downsized.
• How did Jerry err as a consultant? How did the organization administrator err?
• What do you think Jerry can do to ensure that such problems do not occur again in his work
as a consultant?
Discussion: Jerry violated the privacy of the employees when he provided the administrator
with their specific scores. It appears that he failed to clarify with the administrator exactly what
his role as consultant would entail and what should be contained in the report. The administrator
erred by using the information Jerry inappropriately gave him to make management decisions.
He violated the trust of his employees by using that information. In the future, Jerry should
develop a clear and detailed contract with any organization before he agrees to serve as a con-
sultant to that organization.

-- 433 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	411
Informed consent is an important consultee right that also extends to the clients and client
systems involved. In peer consultation, informed consent is a relatively straightforward matter. As
we have suggested in other chapters, informed consent is sound ethical practice for counselors.
They should inform a client that they plan to consult about the client’s case, explain their rationale,
and document the client’s consent to proceed. Standard D.2.d. of the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014)
advises counselors functioning as consultants to review, both verbally and in writing, “the rights and
responsibilities of both counselors and consultees.”
Note that informed consent is much more complicated in organizational consulting.
Often, administrators or executives hire consultants and make decisions about the work they
want the consultant to do. Employees–clients may have little or no input into this decision,
and the consultation process will be negatively affected if they feel coerced to participate.
Therefore, consultants must be sensitive to the hierarchical nature of organizations and must
work skillfully with all the parties involved to make consent as informed and voluntary as pos-
sible (Welfel, 2019). Consultants must therefore discuss with those who will be affected by
the consultation the goals and purposes of the consultation, the potential benefits and risks,
and the desired outcomes. Dougherty (2014) suggests that consultants mentally put them-
selves in the consultees’ position and ask themselves what they would like to know at the
outset. Consultants must also remember that informed consent is an ongoing process, so these
issues may need to be revisited periodically.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) offers these guidelines for protecting confidentiality in con-
sultation: (a) Information should be discussed for professional purposes only; (b) reports should
present only the data germane to the purposes of the consultation; and (c) every effort should be
made to protect client identity and prevent undue invasion of privacy (§B.7.a.). In addition, counsel-
ors who consult with colleagues should not disclose confidential information that reasonably could
lead to the identification of a client or other person or organization unless they have obtained prior
consent or the disclosure cannot be prevented (§B.7.b.). In peer consultations, confidentiality issues
are not particularly difficult to manage because it is usually possible for a counselor to consult with-
out revealing the identity of the client who is the subject of the consultation. Even if the consultant
were to ascertain the client’s identity, the consultant understands the professional obligation to keep
information confidential.
In organizational consulting, it is important that those who participate in the process
have a clear understanding of the limits of confidentiality. Consultants have an ethical respon-
sibility to ensure that the participants understand what information will be gathered, how it
will be used, with whom it will be shared, and for what purpose (Simpson & Glowiak, 2012).
Managing confidentiality is particularly complicated when consultation is aimed at organiza-
tional change. If disgruntled employees share information about their boss with the consultant,
will the consultant keep their disclosures confidential? Dougherty (2014) has suggested that
employing the concept of anonymity—sharing the information but protecting its source—
might be a useful strategy in such situations. He also suggests that complex questions about
confidentiality be posed at the outset of consultation, consensus on the answers reached, and
the consensus publicized.
The Consultation Relationship
Because the consultant–consultee–client relationship is very complex, consultants must be particu-
larly careful to maintain appropriate boundaries; and because counseling, supervision, and con-
sultation are alike in several ways and there is some role overlap, it can be easy for counselors to
confuse these activities with each other. Similarities and differences are outlined in the following
paragraphs.

-- 434 of 593 --

412 	Section 2 • Issues
Consultation and counseling are similar in that both usually are voluntary in nature and that
each is a temporary process aimed at assisting the help seeker to function independently, without the
helper, in the future. Both consultation and counseling are collaborative relationships, but they are
not relationships between equals: In each relationship, one participant is assumed to have greater
expertise that can be brought to bear on the problem. Consultation and counseling are different in
that counseling is a dyadic relationship in which a direct service is provided to a client, whereas
consultation involves a triadic relationship in which an indirect service is provided to someone
who works directly with a client. In addition, counseling generally focuses on personal problems,
whereas consultation focuses on work-related problems.
Consultation and supervision are similar in that both relationships are tripartite: The person who
provides assistance to the client does so indirectly through a third party (the consultee or the supervisee).
In both relationships, the goal is to increase the help seeker’s skills and ability to function independently.
Consultation and supervision are different in that supervision is not always voluntary, and in a super-
visory relationship the person in the help-seeker role may not be free to decline the helper’s advice or
recommendations without penalty. Supervision is a hierarchical relationship, whereas consultation is a
collaborative relationship: Consultants have no direct authority over the help seeker. Also, supervision
is generally ongoing or long term, whereas peer consultation is usually temporary and of brief duration.
The focus of the consultation relationship should be on work-related problems, not on the
personal problems of the consultee. As is the case in supervisory relationships, there is a fine line to
be drawn, and it can be difficult to distinguish between professional concerns and personal issues.
For example, assume you are a school counselor who has been approached by a teacher who wants
help in dealing with a difficult student. During the consultation, the teacher says, “You’re helping
me see that the student’s behavior isn’t all that much out of line. If I weren’t in the midst of a painful
divorce, he wouldn’t be getting under my skin this way.” You must be careful to avoid converting the
consultation into a counseling relationship that centers on the teacher’s personal problems.
The two most common dual relationships in consultation create conflicts of interest as well as
role conflicts. The two most common dual roles in consultation are that of consultant and counselor
and consultant and supervisor (Dougherty, 2014). The blurring of boundaries that leads consultants
into the counselor role often occurs when a consultant determines that the basis for a work-related
concern resides more in the consultee than in the client. In these instances, the consultant should refer
the consultee for assistance.
When a consultant has supervisory or administrative experience, it can be easy to incorporate
supervision into a consulting relationship. This is inappropriate, however, because consultation is
essentially a peer relationship, whereas supervision involves evaluation and a power differential.
Dougherty (2014) has noted that the use of supervision in consultation allows the consultant to build
an illegitimate power base, creates potential conflicts of interest, and violates the consultation con-
tract. Dual relationships in consultation should thus be prevented.
Freedom of choice is the final important relationship issue to consider in consultation. Consultees
should feel comfortable that they have the freedom to do whatever they choose to do with the con-
sultant’s recommendations. Freedom of choice is diminished when a dependency on the consultant is
created. Consultants must therefore avoid coercing, pressuring, or manipulating consultees into taking
actions that the consultant might advocate. Having a clear understanding at the outset about the param-
eters of the relationship can help prevent later problems caused by blurred boundaries.
The Role of Values and Diversity in Consultation
Consultants, like counselors, must be aware of the ways in which their values and worldviews influ-
ence the process and outcomes of their work. The consultant, consultee, and client or other members of
the client system all have values formed by their life experiences, and these values will have a mutual

-- 435 of 593 --

Chapter 15 • Supervision and Consultation 	413
influence on the consulting process. Therefore, consultants must possess a reflective understanding of
their values and how those values influence the process of consultation and make a commitment not to
impose their values on consultees (Dougherty, 2014). In addition, consultants must understand diverse
worldviews and be aware of differences in reasoning and communication patterns. They must also be
aware of how their own culture and gender affect their work as consultants.
Value conflicts may be inevitable in organizational consulting because the process involves
multiple parties who have diverse and often-competing interests and priorities. Conflicts can occur
in peer consultations as well, particularly when the consultant and the consultee have differing
worldviews. For example, Pete, a Native American counselor, has asked Judy, a traditionally trained
Anglo counselor, to consult with him regarding a client with whom he is working. Pete believes
that the client would be well served by bringing members of the client’s family into the counsel-
ing process. Judy disagrees, believing that this would diminish the client’s autonomy and violate
the client’s confidentiality. In this case, the consultant and the consultee have very different ideas,
formed by their worldviews, regarding how the client can best be helped. Judy is operating from
Euro-American notions of individualism and autonomy. For Pete, including the client’s family
would be consistent with the tradition of honoring the wisdom of tribal elders, which is part of his
cultural background. Consultants must therefore be honest with themselves in determining whether
they can be objective enough to work with a consultee whose values or worldviews differ signifi-
cantly from their own.
Increasingly, consultants are providing their services during crisis and disaster situations.
Consultants need knowledge and skills that are unique to these situations, including how to conduct a
risk assessment for danger to self or others, familiarity with organizational crisis policies and procedures,
crisis intervention skills, and knowledge about how to develop a disaster plan (Corey et al., 2024).
Summary and Key Points
Supervision and consultation are two types of tri-
partite relationships that involve complex ethical
considerations. Legal issues in supervision and
consultation have to do primarily with fair evalu-
ation, accountability, and contracts. Supervision
is an intervention that an experienced member of
a profession provides to a novice member of that
profession. Consultation is a process in which a
counselor assists a consultee with a work-related
problem related to a client or client system.
Supervision is essential to protect client wel-
fare as students and novice counselors working
toward licensure begin to practice their skills. Key
points regarding supervision include the following:
• There 	are 	two 	types 	of 	supervision—
administrative and clinical—and they differ in
the amount of control or authority that the super-
visor has over the supervisee.
• Supervisors must be sensitive to the due pro-
cess rights of their supervisees, especially with
respect to the obligation to provide ongoing feed-
back and evaluation of supervisee performance.
• Informed 	consent 	for 	supervision 	must 	be
obtained from both the client and the supervisee.
• Points that should be discussed between a super-
visor and a supervisee before they enter into a
working relationship include the purposes of
supervision; the logistics of supervision; infor-
mation about the supervisor’s qualifications and
supervisory style; the expectations, roles, and
responsibilities of both parties; evaluation; and
ethical and legal practice.
• Written supervision agreements are recommended
to prevent misunderstandings and to articulate the
nature of the supervisory relationship.
• The requirements to keep client information
confidential in counseling relationships apply
equally to supervision relationships.
• Boundaries in the supervisory relationship must
be managed carefully. Supervisors should thus not

-- 436 of 593 --

414 	Section 2 • Issues
engage in close personal or social relationships
with their supervisees, nor should they establish a
counseling relationship as a substitute for supervi-
sion. Of course, sexual intimacies between super-
visors and supervisees are unethical.
• Supervisors have a large scope of responsibility and
a number of parties to whom they are accountable.
Under the legal principle of vicarious liability, to
the extent that supervisors have direct control and
authority over their supervisees, they may be held
liable for their supervisees’ negligence.
• Both the supervisor and the supervisee have cer-
tain rights and responsibilities in the relationship.
It is crucial that both parties understand these
rights and responsibilities.
Counselors frequently take on the roles of
consultant and consultee. Two types of consulta-
tion discussed in this chapter are peer consultation
and organizational consultation. Key points regard-
ing consultation include the following:
• Because consultants generally do not have direct
control and authority over those who receive
their services, they cannot be held accountable
legally for the negligence of the consultee.
• When counselors enter into long-term arrange-
ments to provide consultation services, they should
negotiate a written contract for their services.
• Consultants must be aware of the ways in which
their values and their cultural backgrounds influ-
ence the consulting process and outcomes.
• Counselors must ensure that they have the needed
competencies before they agree to take on a con-
sulting role with a peer or with an organization.
• Consultants must take care to safeguard the
informed consent and confidentiality rights of
consultees and clients.
• In 	organizational 	consultation, 	the 	consul-
tant focuses on work-related problems, not
on the personal problems of the consultee.
Maintaining this work-related focus, avoiding
the dual-relationship problems that are created
by blending consultation with counseling or
supervision, and ensuring consultee freedom of
choice are all important consultant obligations.

-- 437 of 593 --

415
16Professional Writing, Conducting
Research, and Publishing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
16.1 Identify strategies for preventing plagiarism when
producing professionally written documents.
16.2 Explain why permission of institutional review
boards is required prior to conducting research
projects.
16.3 Demonstrate an understanding of how first
authorship should be determined for manuscripts
that are submitted to be considered for publication
in refereed journals.
FOCUS QUESTIONS
1. What is plagiarism, and why do
you think so many college students
get into trouble because they
plagiarize?
2. Why do you think it is important
for master’s-level counselors to
understand research?
3. Why do you think the U.S.
government has required
universities and other organizations
that conduct research to establish
institutional review boards that
examine research proposals to
ensure that human subjects are
protected from harm?
This chapter explores the ethical and legal issues involved
when graduate students, counselors, or counselor educators
engage in the scholarly activities of professional writing,
research, and publication.
Issues of academic integrity arise in many situations.
Students in counselor preparation programs are expected
to perform in an honest manner as they write term papers,
complete course assignments, take tests, and prepare tapes
of counseling sessions during practicum and internship.
Counseling supervisees are required to accurately report to
their supervisors the counseling-related tasks they perform.
Professors who teach and supervise counseling students and
supervisees expect information to be reported to them fully
and honestly.
Wester (2007, 2011) has noted that little has been
written about research integrity in counseling and has called
upon professional counselors who conduct research to better
inform themselves regarding their ethical obligations. If you
are a full-time counseling practitioner or a master’s-level
graduate student, you may be thinking that a discussion of
research or scholarship has only minimal relevance to what
you do or intend to do.
It is true that counseling practitioners, traditionally,
have not engaged in research or even read much research
(Astramovich, 2016). Even today, counselors tend to view

-- 438 of 593 --

416 	Section 2 • Issues
research and publication as activities that are performed by their professors, by doctoral-level grad-
uate students, or by counselors whose employment depends on governmental or private funding
sources that demand research to show that grant or contract dollars are well spent. However, cur-
rent economic and societal trends are challenging the assumptions that counseling practitioners
do not need to involve themselves in research activities (Watts, 2015; Welfel, 2016). For example,
because of the interests of counseling practitioners, researchers are beginning to focus more on
trauma-informed counseling to assist practitioners in practicing effectively in this relatively new
area (Webber et al., 2017). Astramovich (2016) found that school counselors saw the need for con-
ducting program evaluations but did not believe they had the necessary skills to determine whether
the programs they were delivering were effective. Mason et al. (2016) have proposed a model in
which school counseling practitioners could be mentored to publish action research.
Counselors in schools and agencies are experiencing increased demands for accountability
(Eschenauer & Chen-Hayes, 2005; Gysbers, 2004). More and more, counselors are being required
to demonstrate that they are making a difference in the lives of children and adults (Erford et al.,
2011). They are being asked to show that their services are having an effect on societal concerns
such as school shootings, teen suicide, bullying, school failure and dropping out, unemployment,
and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases (Lancaster et al., 2011). Blake et al. (2014) have
indicated that school counselors must begin using evidence-based practices in assessing bully-
ing. Managed care companies are demanding accountability from counselors as well, requiring
counselors whose services they are reimbursing to demonstrate that their treatments are effective
for the clients served. Although Sexton (2001) has suggested that best practice in counseling be
evidence based, Ray et al. (2011) found in a review of articles from 1998 to 2007 in American
Counseling Association division-affiliated journals that only 6% of counseling research articles
explored effectiveness of counseling interventions. In recent years, articles focused on evidence
and best practice are appearing more frequently (Alvarez et al., 2022; Choate & Gintner, 2011;
Juhnke et al., 2013; Lanier & Carney, 2019; Lawson, 2017; Lemberger et al., 2018; Miller et al.,
2010; Whiston et al., 2011). External pressures suggest that more counselors will be involved in
conducting research and disseminating the results in the future (Crane & Law, 2002). Perhaps this
involvement will help to close the gap between what researchers discover and how counselors
practice (Murray, 2009).
Many practicing counselors collect data and write reports. In addition, doctoral-level counsel-
ing graduate students and university counselor educators are heavily involved in research. Davis
et al. (2008) have found that questionable research practices do exist within the counseling profes-
sion. This chapter highlights some of the important ethical, legal, and professional issues in writing,
conducting research, and publishing.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Writing,
Research, and Publishing
Like other ethical, legal, and professional issues in counseling, the impacts of COVID-19 on profes-
sional writing, conducting research, and publishing have been significant.
In the area of professional writing, university professors have had to figure out how to address
academic integrity concerns in a learning environment in which the tests their students complete
are not monitored in person (Chiang et al., 2022; Herdian et al., 2021; Krienert et al., 2021), and
students work more independently on writing projects than in the past. Conducting survey research
in the digital age in counseling has become much easier as researchers have shifted from mail-
ing out survey instruments in paper form to potential participants, to providing links to potential

-- 439 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	417
participants that allow them to click on a link and complete a survey immediately. This eliminates
the need to write anything on paper or mail completed surveys back to researchers.
Today, more opportunities exist for researchers who do not work at the same university to
collaborate using communication formats such as Zoom video calls, email, text messages, and elec-
tronically shared documents to which multiple authors can contribute simultaneously. Collected
data can be transferred easily from one researcher to another using secure websites. As a result of
increased opportunities to collaborate in research projects, researchers need to be keenly aware
of ethical issues related to roles of researchers, including mentorship. Understandings need to be
developed prior to beginning research projects. Giving proper credit to research contributors con-
tinues to be important.
Because more research currently is being conducted with subjects or participants who are
not physically connected with researchers, it has become increasingly important for researchers
to ensure that people are not harmed as a result of participating in research projects. Obtaining
informed consent from participants and following the requirements of research review boards con-
tinue to be important because more research is now being conducted digitally.
Even prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, online and open-access peer-reviewed professional
journals were beginning to proliferate. New peer-reviewed journals in counseling have emerged in
the last few years, and it is expected that even more will be established in the future. While this trend
is providing more outlets for researchers to disseminate their research results, researchers must
continue to follow procedures in the counseling profession that allow manuscripts to be submitted
to only one journal at a time for publication consideration.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING
Writing often is a significant part of the professional activities of counselors. Counselors in all set-
tings are required to create a multitude of documents, including notes from client sessions, evalu-
ations of clients, reports regarding counseling programs, correspondence among counseling staff
members, and letters to individuals outside the setting where counselors work.
Graduate students in counselor preparation programs write many term papers and reports that
are submitted to professors. The general principles regarding academic integrity apply to the writing
activities of counseling graduate students, practicing counselors, supervisors, and counselor educa-
tors alike. The following discussion is intended to assist graduate students and practicing counselors
who might struggle to avoid plagiarizing and to master American Psychological Association (APA)
style.
Academic Integrity
Although the vast majority of counseling students are diligent in their efforts to practice academic
integrity, instances of academic dishonesty do occur. Some scholars have studied the motivation of
students to engage in academic dishonesty. Williams et al. (2010) conducted a series of three studies
in an effort to predict academic dishonesty and to better understand why students cheat and found that
the following predict cheating in students: Machiavellianism, narcissism, psychopathy, low agreeable-
ness, low conscientiousness, poor verbal ability, restrained achievement, and lack of moral inhibi-
tion. In older studies (Cizek, 1999; Stern & Havlicek, 1986), two-thirds of students surveyed reported
cheating, and in a more recent study (Robinson et al., 2004), up to 80% reported having been academi-
cally dishonest. A number of research studies have suggested that cheating might be predicted based
on gender, the subject matter being studied, ethnicity (Blanchnio et al., 2022), or personality traits,

-- 440 of 593 --

418 	Section 2 • Issues
but those findings are inconclusive. A popular belief is that technology and the internet have changed
the way students define academic dishonesty, especially plagiarism (Adkins & Joyner, 2022; Baird &
Dooey, 2014; Chiang et al., 2022; Herdian et al., 2021; Krienert et al., 2021; Lee, 2011). After finding
a downward trend in plagiarism in college students from 2004 to 2014, more plagiarism was found in
2019, suggesting that technology may be inducing more students to plagiarize (Curtis & Tremayne,
2021). Gabriel (2010) reported that scholars and professors around the United States are saying that
many students do not believe that lifting the writing of others and claiming it as their own are wrong,
for a number of reasons. Many students note that Web pages often do not include author information;
some see much information on the Web as common knowledge; many have downloaded music (per-
haps illegally) without even a thought that doing so might be wrong or illegal; and some argue that the
ideas of originality and author ownership are outmoded in today’s technological world. In addition,
digital technology makes copying and pasting written information from the internet very easy (Isaacs,
2011). Some have suggested that since the COVID-19 pandemic and the pivot to online education,
cheating has increased (Chiang et al., 2022; Herdian et al., 2021; Krienert et al., 2021). The concern
among professors that students may not be writing their papers themselves has increased since the
advent of artificial intelligence (AI) websites such as ChatBot. Adkins and Joyner (2022) have recom-
mended that professors can reduce the use of plagiarism by students by warning students not to pla-
giarize on low stakes assignments early in a course and by promptly notifying students who plagiarize
and helping them acknowledge their behavior is unacceptable. While institutional policies forbidding
plagiarism generally exist, finding ways to assist students recognize when they do it and understand
that it is wrong is an effective way to reduce student plagiarism.
Although it is easy to understand why today’s students may believe that plagiarism is accept-
able, the American Counseling Association Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) specifically prohibits pla-
giarism; most universities have strict honor codes or academic rules that prohibit plagiarism; and
copyright laws in the United States provide legal protections of original works by authors. One
major problem in dealing with the issue of plagiarism is that many students (and many professors as
well) are not sure of exactly what constitutes plagiarism. According to §G.5.b. of the ACA Code of
Ethics (2014), counselors must not plagiarize, which is defined as presenting another person’s work
as one’s own. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (APA, 2020)
includes similar prohibitions against plagiarism.
Watts (2015) has pointed out that some guidelines regarding plagiarism can be confusing and
difficult to interpret. First, the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) requires counselors to give credit to previ-
ous work on a topic by others or self (§G.5.c.). This means that authors should not present even their
own work as if it were not previously published. Students may wonder whether this means that they
must cite their own work if they turn in a paper containing material that builds on a previously submit-
ted paper. Presenting your previously published work as original is referred to as self-plagiarism and is
unacceptable (Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association, APA, 2020). Second,
the manual states that the practice of presenting the work of others as if it were one’s own work can
extend to ideas as well as written words. It is difficult to know where many ideas originated. Because
plagiarism is so difficult to understand, teaching students about plagiarism and giving them strategies
to avoid doing it are vitally important tasks (Elander et al., 2010; Wester, 2011).
Universities and legal authorities impose severe sanctions for plagiarism. In universities, students
found guilty of plagiarism could be given a failing grade on an assignment, issued an academic warn-
ing, suspended, or even dismissed (Diperna v. The Chicago School of Psychology, 2017). In courts of
law, those who plagiarize might have to pay monetary damages to the original author for having stolen
their ideas or words. Although it is rare, universities have sometimes revoked degrees they had con-
ferred to students after discovering graduates had plagiarized their theses or dissertations (Hesse, 2017).

-- 441 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	419
Today, a number of websites exist where professors or editors of journals or texts may enter
what has been written by someone else and check to see if the phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or
passages are plagiarized (Lee, 2011). Examples of such websites include www.turnitin.com, www.
plagiarismchecker.com, and www.articlechecker.com. The existence of these websites is testimony
to the fact that many academics are aggressive about exposing individuals who plagiarize, with some
demanding that violators be punished. Our position is that, generally, punishment generally should
not be the first alternative considered when plagiarism is detected. Rather, the offender should be
educated regarding the inappropriateness of plagiarizing. However, individuals who repeatedly pla-
giarize and purposefully steal the ideas and writing of others should not be allowed to continue to do
so. The results of a study conducted by Bruton and Childers (2016) support our position. After inter-
viewing 23 faculty members at medium-sized public universities in the United States, they found
that the majority believed the plagiarism they encountered was unintentional. The faculty members
interviewed by Bruton and Childers (2016) said that they penalized only what they considered to be
extreme instances of intentional plagiarism.
A helpful tutorial on plagiarism that students can access is provided by Indiana University, and
many other universities and organizations have provided guidelines to writers for avoiding plagiarism
(Empire State College, 2011; Fowler, 2003; Office of Research Integrity, 2011; Roig, 2009; The Writing
Place, 2005). The tips for avoiding plagiarism in Figure 16-1 were created from their suggestions.
FIGURE 16-1 Tips for avoiding plagiarism
• It is acceptable and common in academic writing to use ideas, direct quotations, or paraphrased infor-
mation from others. The key is to always give credit to other authors when you do that.
• Always give a citation to another author’s work when you quote or paraphrase what the other author has said.
• Generally, in academic writing, paraphrasing is valued more highly than using direct quotations. Usu-
ally, direct quotations should be used when it is impossible to communicate what another writer has
said without using his or her exact words. It is always essential to give credit to other authors when
paraphrasing what they have said.
• When introducing the ideas of another author, use phrases such as “According to Smith . . .” or “Jones
stated . . .” or “In his 1987 study, Robinson found. . . .”
• Always put quotation marks around direct words, phrases, sentences, or excerpts when another author’s
direct words are quoted.
• If you paraphrase information from another author, look back over what you have written and what
the other author wrote to ensure that you have not used any exact phrases used by the other author.
If it is important to use exact phrases from another author, put those phrases inside quotation marks.
• Read examples of good paraphrasing and poor paraphrasing so that you can understand how to
paraphrase appropriately.
• You do not have to give a source for information that is considered common knowledge. For example,
it is generally agreed that Christopher Columbus discovered America in 1492, that the boiling point
of water is 100 degrees Celsius, and that Mark Twain wrote Huckleberry Finn. As a result of common
knowledge, you do not have to attribute such generally accepted information to a source. However,
if some other person has given a unique interpretation to common knowledge facts, then you would
have to give that person credit for his or her unique perspective. If you are in doubt as to whether a
particular piece of information is common knowledge, it is always a good idea to provide a citation to
an authority who has stated the knowledge.
• If one author quotes another, it is always best to find the original author’s statement rather than rely on
the second author’s interpretation of what the first author said. If you do quote one author’s quotation
of another, make it clear in your writing that is what you are doing.
• All instances of plagiarism are unacceptable, even if they are unintentional, short, or seemingly
unimportant.

-- 442 of 593 --

420 	Section 2 • Issues
Proper citation of sources is essential to prevent plagiarism. Generally, professors require
graduate students to use APA style when writing their research papers and when citing the
sources they’ve used. The latest edition of the Publication Manual of the American Psychological
Association (APA, 2020) is an indispensable resource, and further assistance can be accessed at
www.apastyle.org. Purdue University also has established several websites to assist students with
professional writing; these can be found by typing Purdue Owl into a search engine.
CONDUCTING RESEARCH
Conducting research ethically is essential (Wester, 2011). Perhaps the first questions that should be
addressed in a discussion of research procedures are these: Who conducts a research study, and who
is responsible for ensuring that it is carried out in an ethical and legally appropriate manner?
16-1 The Case of Sylvia
Sylvia is a first-year master’s-degree student in a counselor education program. She was required
to write a term paper in her counseling theories course. While she was collecting information to
put in her paper, she kept a careful record of the APA citations of texts, text chapters, and profes-
sional journal articles she read. Each time she read a professional source, she jotted down notes
about what she had read so she could include the information in her term paper. Occasionally,
she wrote down direct quotations from an author and put quotation marks around the materials
and indicated the page number where the quotation appeared.
Unfortunately, at one point Sylvia forgot to put quotation marks around a few sentences that
were a direct quotation, and she later thought she had written the information herself. So she copied
the sentences into her term paper, thinking they expressed thoughts she had created herself.
Sylvia’s theories course professor, Dr. Adams, routinely submitted all student papers to an
internet service that checked for plagiarism. The sentences Sylvia had written in her paper were
identified as direct quotations from an article Sylvia had cited in her paper, but Sylvia had not
attributed the quotations to the author of the article.
Dr. Adams recently had dealt with several other instances of serious plagiarism in her
classes, so she submitted Sylvia’s paper and evidence of Sylvia’s plagiarism to the Office of
Judicial Affairs at her university and filed a formal complaint alleging that Sylvia had plagiarized.
• What other actions could Dr. Adams have taken?
• Do you think Sylvia should be punished for having plagiarized?
Discussion: The actions described in this case study are clearly an example of a situation in which
a student who plagiarized should be educated rather than punished. Dr. Adams could have met
with Sylvia, showed Sylvia the evidence of her plagiarism, and asked Sylvia to explain what had
happened. Dr. Adams would have then learned of Sylvia’s mistake and could have helped Sylvia
prevent similar mistakes in the future. Of course, Sylvia is responsible for the errors she made, and
if Dr. Adams believed a consequence was warranted, she might have deducted points from Sylvia’s
paper or given her a lower grade. Putting Sylvia through an extended ordeal with the university’s
Office of Judicial Affairs could have been prevented if Dr. Adams had reacted differently.

-- 443 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	421
Research Roles
The American Psychological Association (2016) has described several
roles in research. The first is the principal investigator, who conceptual-
izes, designs, and plans the study. If the principal investigator carries out
the research alone, of course the ethical and legal responsibilities fall to
this one individual. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) specifies that the
ultimate responsibility for ethical research practice lies with the princi-
pal researcher (§G.1.f.).
More often, though, the principal investigator has one or more per-
sons who assist in the data collection, statistical analysis, or other com-
ponents of the research study. In these instances, a second role is that of
research assistant. In academia, students often play this role when they
assist their professors with research. When this is the case, both the prin-
cipal investigator and the research assistant(s) are responsible for proper
behavior, but the principal investigator, as the supervisor, has the ultimate
responsibility for any breaches of ethics or law that might occur.
A third role is that of research supervisor. This person advises and
oversees the research of someone else. In an academic setting, this typically
would be a professor who supervises the doctoral dissertation or master’s
thesis research of a student. These relationships are based on mutual respect
and are actually co-equal because graduate students are knowledgeable
researchers who have been trained in research procedures and in ethics.
A discussion of roles raises the issue of potential dual relation-
ships. Professors who supervise thesis or dissertation research often have other relationships with
the students involved. They may be simultaneously supervising students’ clinical work in an intern-
ship, teaching them in formal courses, mentoring them toward their transition into the world of
work, co-presenting with them at professional conferences, interacting with them as peers at meet-
ings of professional organizations, or writing letters of recommendation for their future employ-
ment. Most of these roles have an evaluative component, thus giving the professor considerable
power over the student who is conducting the research.
Because of this power differential and the resultant potential for exploitation, counselor edu-
cators must attend carefully to ethical issues when they involve their students as research subjects
or research assistants. Students’ participation as research subjects should be voluntary. Certainly,
professors should not require students to participate in their research as part of the student’s grade or
evaluation. Beyond that minimal requirement, they also must realize that students can feel pressured
or even coerced to serve as subjects for professors’ research.
When students volunteer or are asked to serve as research assistants, a full discussion must
take place before the students agree to participate. In this discussion, the counselor educator should
provide (a) assurance that there will be no penalty to students who decline to participate, (b) a clari-
fication of expectations regarding who will do which parts of the work, (c) a timeline for comple-
tion of the various tasks, (d) an agreement about the type of acknowledgment that the students will
receive when the research is published (including whether they will be listed as co-authors), and (e)
an agreement about the process that will be followed if any problems or misunderstandings should
occur. The Association for Counselor Education and Supervision (ACES) has published guidelines
for research mentorship that provide thorough guidance on professor–student research collaboration
(Borders et al., 2012).

-- 444 of 593 --

422 	Section 2 • Issues
Research Design
The overarching goal of all counseling research is, in a global sense, to identify interventions that
will facilitate positive changes in clients and in their lives (Szymanski & Parker, 2001). Research
studies must be rigorously and carefully designed. Prosek (2020) has suggested that the rigor of
research in teaching in counselor education needs to be improved. Also, in a special issue of the
Journal of Counseling Development, numerous authors called for counselors to conduct and pub-
lish more rigorous research to advance the counseling profession and provided counselors with
guidelines for best practices in conducting and reporting high-quality research (Balkin et al., 2021;
Giordano et al., 2021; Hays & McKibben, 2021; Limberg et al., 2021; O’Hara et al., 2021; Prosek
et al., 2021; Watson et al., 2021; Wester et al., 2021; Wood et al., 2021).
Even when research is of high quality, experimental design raises some ethical considerations.
Some researchers use a control group that does not receive the potential benefits of the treatment being
investigated. If a delay in receiving treatment increases subject discomfort, or if the emotional condi-
tions of control group members deteriorate while they are participating in the study, client welfare is at
issue. The conundrum is that whether the experimental treatment is indeed beneficial cannot be known
without conducting the study. One way to reduce risk to control group participants is to compare the
experimental treatment with other treatments known to be effective, if such an option is available and
viable. If the experimental treatment is found to be effective, the researcher has an ethical obligation to
offer it to control group participants as soon as possible after the experiment is completed.
The ethical issues discussed thus far apply to quantitative research, which was once the pre-
dominant method of conducting research in the social sciences. A relatively recent development in
counseling research is the burgeoning of qualitative research (Hays & Wood, 2011). Unlike quan-
titative research—which uses statistics to control, explain, and predict—qualitative research uses
words to create rich descriptions to understand the experiences of people who have lived a particular
phenomenon. Qualitative research is particularly well suited to the counseling field (Hunt, 2011),
as it acknowledges the diversity of experience and honors subjective data and personal perspectives
(Paisley, 1997). In qualitative research, efforts are made to ensure that those who read research
reports trust those who have reported the qualitative research projects they have conducted. In quali-
tative research, trustworthiness is established by researchers taking a number of steps to prove they
have integrity. Some steps that have been identified by Hays et al. (2016), based on the work of
Lincoln and Guba (1985) and Creswell (2016), include prolonged engagement and persistent obser-
vation, triangulation, peer debriefing, negative case analysis, reflexivity, thick description, member
checking (Kronbluh, 2015), external audits, complexity of analysis (Hays & Singh, 2012), and ref-
erential adequacy (Lincoln & Guba, 1985).
DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS IN RESEARCH DESIGN 	Designing research studies in counseling
is an incredibly challenging process, especially with regard to ensuring that diversity is represented.
Being sensitive to diversity issues means taking into consideration the complexity of variables
involved in research with human beings. Szymanski and Parker (2001) have stated that contextual
variables include client characteristics (such as gender, race or ethnicity, age, socioeconomic status,
attitudes and values, and worldviews); counselor variables (including all of the same individual
characteristics that apply to clients, plus training, experience, and theoretical orientation); and coun-
seling process variables (interactional and reciprocal aspects of counseling). It is impossible to con-
trol for all these factors, yet any variance must be explained.
To give just a few examples of the importance of contextual variables, researchers should not
generalize their results to populations not represented in their sample. If a study’s participants were

-- 445 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	423
only cis-gender men, the researcher cannot make generalizations to people
of other genders or sexual orientations. If the participants were primarily
White and middle class, the researcher must acknowledge the generaliz-
ability limitations of the study with respect to race, ethnicity, and socioeco-
nomic status.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) states that counselors should “min-
imize bias and respect diversity in designing and implementing research”
(Section G, Introduction). Several difficulties present themselves in con-
ducting research with ethnic minority groups and women (Kurasaki et al.,
2000; O’Hara et al., 2021). First, counseling practices based on Western
theories or treatment modalities may be culturally inappropriate for some
members of minority groups. Thus, studies that measure the effectiveness
of traditional approaches may not produce valid results with minority
research participants. Second, researchers often have difficulty finding an
appropriate sample to study, due to the small size of some minority popu-
lations and the unwillingness of some groups to become research partici-
pants. Third, because race or ethnicity and gender are closely linked to
other variables such as socioeconomic status, researchers must account
for these other variables before attributing any differences to race or gen-
der. Fourth, as we noted in Chapter 7, many standardized tests have ques-
tionable validity when used with minority group research participants. Despite all these obstacles,
however, a growing body of culture-sensitive research (e.g., Arenas & Paz Sandin, 2009; Nagayama-
Hall, 2001; Ojeda et al., 2011; Smith, 2010) is making contributions to our understanding.
Protecting Research Participants from Harm
In every research project that involves human subjects, some risk to the participants exists. Although
counseling research rarely poses physical risks, there may be psychological risks because partici-
pation can cause discomfort, stress, anxiety, or distress. The ACA ethical standards (ACA, 2014)
remind counselors who conduct research that they are responsible for the participants’ welfare and
should “take reasonable precautions to avoid causing injurious psychological, emotional, physical,
or social effects” to the participants (§G.1.e.). Three ways to minimize risks to participants are to (a)
ensure that participation is voluntary, (b) secure participants’ informed consent, and (c) protect the
confidentiality of participants.
VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION 	Ethical standards encourage researchers to design their research
studies to make participation voluntary. When counselors conduct research involving clients, the
counselors must make it clear to the clients that they are free to choose whether to participate
(ACA, 2014, §G.2.c.).
16-2 The Case of Clay
Clay is a counselor educator interested in conducting a research study related to older students’
success in online college degree programs. He plans to study whether individual mentoring
of older college students helps them succeed academically when they are enrolled in online
degree programs. At his university, there is a program for at-risk students whose grade point

-- 446 of 593 --

424 	Section 2 • Issues
Researchers must be particularly careful to protect the rights of participants who may not be
participating voluntarily or who may be vulnerable to abuse, such as prisoners, hospital patients,
residents of institutions, or individuals who are not competent to give consent. Children should be
given the opportunity to assent to participation, although legally their parents or guardians must
give informed consent (Welfel, 2016).
INFORMED CONSENT 	The ACA (2014) ethical standards go into great detail regarding what
informed consent for research should entail (§G.2.a.). Participants have a right to receive a full
explanation of the following, in language that they understand:
• The purpose of the research and procedures to be followed (Researchers must explain to par-
ticipants what they will be expected to do and how long it will take.)
• Any procedures that are experimental or relatively untried
• Discomforts and risks involved, and the power differential that exists between researchers and
participants
• Benefits or changes in individuals or organizations that might be expected. There are many
possible benefits, but basically, they can be considered to be external, such as money, or
internal, such as learning something new or making a contribution to science (Wilkinson &
McNeil, 1996)
• Appropriate alternative procedures that might be advantageous for participants
• Their right to have their questions answered regarding the procedures
• Any limitations on confidentiality (For example, if a participant showed signs of suicidal ideation,
confidentiality concerns would be secondary to concerns for ensuring the person’s safety.)
averages were below 2.0 the previous semester. To continue at the university, these students
must participate in an at-risk student program that requires them to attend virtual study skills
classes and meet with a virtual academic support group each week. In addition, students in the
program must complete instruments that measure their attitudes toward college, their perceived
academic self-efficacy, and the number of hours they study each week, The director of the pro-
gram has agreed to allow Clay to use data from this program from the past 5 years to compare
the grade point averages and drop out rates of those in the program above the age of 40 in
relation to their scores on the three instruments. Clay does not have access to the identities of
the students. Clay is wondering whether it would be ethical for the director to require students to
participate in the at-risk program and then to use data from that program without past students
being informed of his study.
• Do you think providing the data from the students for Clay’s study would be ethical? Why
or why not?
• What might Clay do to ensure that students who participate in his study are not harmed
in any way?
Discussion: Such an arrangement is not unethical. Although it is best if participants in a study
know that their data will be used in a study, when their identity is not known to the researcher, a
study using data that has already been collected is not unethical. Researchers do not always have
to study only those who volunteer to participate. The director of the program and Clay should
ensure that the identities of the students are not disclosed to Clay.

-- 447 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	425
• The format and target audiences for dissemination of the research findings
• Their freedom to withdraw their consent and discontinue their participation at any time, without
penalty
A troublesome issue in informed consent is that of concealment or deception. There can be
some very good reasons for researchers to withhold certain information from participants. For
example, if participants know the goals of the study, their desire to perform in socially desirable and
helpful ways can skew the data. Some measure of concealment can often be justified. After data are
collected, however, researchers must provide participants with information that will “remove any
misconceptions participants have regarding the research” (ACA, 2014, §G.2.g.).
Deception is a more difficult matter. Researchers should be cautious about deliberately mis-
informing participants about the purpose of the study. The ethical guidelines for psychologists are
explicit about deception. They specify that researchers never deceive participants about significant
aspects that would affect their willingness to participate, such as physical risks, discomfort, or
unpleasant emotional experiences. In addition, any deception must be explained to participants as
early as feasible, preferably at the conclusion of their participation but not later than at the conclu-
sion of the research. During the explanation, the researcher is obligated to try to correct any misper-
ceptions that participants may have (APA, 2016).
CONFIDENTIALITY 	The third consideration in minimizing risks to research participants is con-
fidentiality. Information obtained about research participants during the course of a study must be
kept confidential (ACA, 2014, §G.2.d.). Researchers can ensure confidentiality in several ways:
During data collection or in scoring protocols, a coding system rather than participants’ names can
be used. Any material collected (such as written reports, test scores, or audiotaped interviews) that
includes identifying information about participants must be kept securely in a locked file or in com-
puter files protected by passwords to which only the investigators and their assistants have access.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) also addresses relationships between researchers and
research participants. When researchers consider extending the boundaries of the relationship
beyond conventional parameters, they must consider the risks and benefits and document any
unusual actions taken (§G.3.a.). Sexual or romantic relationships (both in-person and electronic)
with current research participants are prohibited (§G.3.b.), and research participants should never be
sexually harassed (§G.3.c.).
When results are reported, participants’ names are not used. The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014)
requires researchers to protect the confidentiality of participants (§G.2.d.). When reporting case
studies or other descriptive information about research participants, all identifying details must be
disguised. People who participate in research studies have a right to expect to have their anonymity
or confidentiality protected.
Institutional policies often require researchers to guarantee anonymity to participants when
their informed consent is obtained. Once a researcher has guaranteed that a participant’s identity
will not be revealed, the researcher must take care to prevent disclosure. If a lawsuit were filed
claiming damages for disclosure of a research participant’s identity, courts probably would try to
determine whether the researcher had made reasonable efforts to ensure anonymity after promising
to do so. Careless disclosure of research participants’ identities could cause legal problems for those
who engage in counseling research.
Welfel (2016) has raised an ethical concern about research that does not involve the actual
participation of clients but instead reviews client records. Securing the informed consent of the
clients may seem unnecessary because they are not put at risk or inconvenienced, but it would be

-- 448 of 593 --

426 	Section 2 • Issues
ethically questionable to proceed on such an assumption. Unless the clients were told when they
entered counseling that their records would be utilized in a research study, Welfel believes that the
researcher should attempt to contact the clients and request their permission to review the records.
If this is not feasible, the counselors who produced the records might eliminate any identifying data
from the records before giving the researcher access to them. Other researchers would argue that it
would not be necessary to obtain consent from former clients to collect data from records as long
as the researcher did not disclose the names of clients to others and did not identify the clients in
reporting the study’s results.
Institutional Review Boards
Many of the ethical mandates regarding the protection of research participants are legal
requirements as well. The National Research Act of 1974 requires institutions that receive any
federal funds to establish committees to review research proposals to ensure that human par-
ticipants are protected. National Research Act of 1974 regulations have been developed with
specific requirements for researchers (45 Code of Federal Regulations 46). The penalty for
violation of the requirements would be removal of federal funds from the institution, which
would be devastating for both public and private institutions because almost all receive sub-
stantial federal support.
Universities and other research institutions have institutional review boards (IRBs) or human
subject protection committees that approve and oversee research involving human subjects. All
investigators connected with an institution must have their research approved by an IRB. This
applies to graduate students who conduct research as well as to faculty. IRBs, which have consider-
able power, typically require researchers to submit detailed proposals describing informed consent
procedures, the voluntary nature of participation, and the protection of confidentiality of informa-
tion collected (Welfel, 2016).
If you plan to conduct research during your graduate studies, your university will have a
standard protocol for submitting your proposed research to its IRB. You will need to obtain this
protocol, complete it carefully, and have it reviewed by your major professor before you begin
your research study. If you are collecting data from more than one source (e.g., students at several
universities), you may be required to obtain approval from IRBs at all of the places where data
will be collected. When you apply for approval to conduct a research project, you must guarantee
to the IRB that you will take steps to protect human participants. If you fail to do the things you
have promised, you could be held legally accountable by the institution and by any participant
who was harmed.
16-3 The Case of Aretha
Aretha is in her first year as an assistant professor in a counselor education program in a tier-one
research university. She earned a bachelor’s degree in statistics before earning her master’s and
PhD degrees in counselor education and supervision. She serves on the university’s institutional
review board (IRB). At each meeting of the board, Aretha grows more frustrated. Aretha believes
the designs of the quantitative studies that are considered by the IRB are substandard. When
she objects to studies being approved that are not well designed, the chair of the IRB and other
members remind Aretha that their job is to protect human subjects, not evaluate the quality of
the research designs in studies being reviewed. The IRB chair refuses to allow Aretha to give

-- 449 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	427
Reporting Results
Once researchers have collected and analyzed the data from a study, they have four additional
ethical obligations. According to the Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014), they need to honor their
commitments to research participants (§G.2.f.), explain the nature of the study to remove any
misconceptions (§G.2.g.), report their results honestly and accurately (§G.4.a., §G.4.b., §G.4.c.),
and make available sufficient original research data to qualified professionals who may wish to
replicate their study (§G.4.e.).
Commitments to Participants
When researchers make commitments to participants in advance of a research project, those com-
mitments must be honored by the time the project is completed (ACA, 2014, §G.2.g.). Participants
need to be provided with a summary of the study, if they want one, for the following reasons:
• It is respectful, after asking individuals to participate, to give them the results at a later date.
• Participants have a right to know the outcome of a study in which they have participated.
• Individuals who receive follow-up information might be more willing to participate in studies
in the future.
Often, researchers offer to give participants feedback regarding the study after the research
project has ended. In research parlance, the process of providing feedback is sometimes called
debriefing. Some evidence seems to suggest that providing feedback may be a frequently neglected
commitment. McConnell and Kerbs (1993) found that more than 30% of researchers failed to pro-
vide participants with the feedback they had promised. When this happens, the participants not only
are left hanging with respect to the particular study but also are likely to be less enthusiastic about
participating in future research studies.
IRB applicants suggestions meant to improve their research designs. Aretha recently told her
department chair that she cannot understand why the university is allowing such inferior research
projects to be approved.
• If you were Aretha’s department chair, how would you respond to Aretha’s complaint?
• How could the department chair advise Aretha?
Discussion: Aretha’s department chair should explain to Aretha that the IRB chair and other
members of the IRB are correct when they say that their job is to protect human subjects, not to
evaluate the quality of the research designs in studies being reviewed. The only purpose of an
IRB is to protect human subjects. Other reviews in universities ensure that quality research takes
place. Examples include annual reviews of the research work of professors, committees that
review and approve the quality of dissertation studies of students, and peer reviews of research
manuscripts that determine whether the manuscripts get published. Aretha’s department chair
might consider praising Aretha for the high standards she has for quantitative research and help
Aretha understand that she should focus her attention on her own research quality and let others
ensure the quality of other professors’ research work. The department chair might also suggest
that Aretha offer to assist other faculty members with the quantitative research projects they are
designing but refrain from evaluating the research of other faculty members if they have not
asked her to do so.

-- 450 of 593 --

428 	Section 2 • Issues
If you plan to conduct research, you must consider (a) when you will offer to give feedback
to your participants, (b) how you will give it, and (c) what you will tell them. In terms of timing, if
you offer to give feedback, it should be given as soon as is feasible after the data are collected and
analyzed. You must also decide how much information you want to share about aspects such as the
research purpose, hypotheses or research questions, the sample, and the contribution you hope the
study will make.
16-4 The Case of Carmen
Carmen, a doctoral student in a counselor education program, is designing her dissertation study,
which involves surveying licensed professional counselors (LPCs) regarding their attitudes toward
counseling men who have been involved with the legal system for committing intimate partner
violence (IPV). She intends to send her prospective participants a survey, along with a cover letter,
explaining her study and including informed consent information. Carmen plans to utilize an online
survey service to collect her data. She wants to protect participant confidentiality, so she plans to
ask recipients to return the survey anonymously. She wants to offer to provide participants with a
summary of her study’s results but is unsure how to obtain their names and addresses without com-
promising their confidentiality. She asks her dissertation director for advice.
• What suggestions might her dissertation advisor offer?
• Why do you think participants should be provided with a summary of the study once it is
completed, if they want one?
Discussion: Most online survey services allow for respondents to ask for feedback in such a
way that their identity is not tied to their survey responses. Carmen’s dissertation advisor might
instead suggest that Carmen ask participants who want to receive the results summary to send
her their names and addresses via email. Of course, Carmen will need to follow up and send
the summary to those who request it and do so in a timely manner. Another option would be
to publish the results in the newsletter of the LPC board, which all participants receive. A third
option might be for Carmen to inform participants that the results will be posted on a website
accessible to them.
Honest and Accurate Reporting of Results
Counselors are responsible for reporting research accurately and in a manner that minimizes the
possibility that results will be misleading. Counselors are further prohibited from engaging in
fraudulent research, distorting or misrepresenting data, or deliberately biasing their results (ACA,
2014, §G.4.a.).
Unfortunately, these dishonest practices may not be uncommon (Swenson, 1997). In the aca-
demic setting, pressures to publish or perish can be strong for assistant professors who are near-
ing their tenure decisions. Sometimes doctoral students, having become emotionally invested in
producing a study with significant results, are tempted to ignore contrary findings or manipulate
data to fit their expectations. The push for productivity can also be strong in research environments
where continued funding depends on demonstrating that grant money is being well spent. The ACA
Code of Ethics (2014) provides some specific guidance regarding the full and accurate reporting of
research results. First, ethical counselors do not ignore findings that run contrary to their hopes or

-- 451 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	429
expectations. They do not distort or misrepresent data or deliberately bias their results to make them
seem more applicable to diverse populations than is warranted by the data. (§G.4.a.). They must
communicate the results of any research judged to be of professional value, even if doing so reflects
unfavorably on institutions, programs, services, prevailing opinions, or vested interests (§G.4.b.). If
they discover significant errors in their published research, they must take reasonable steps to cor-
rect those errors (§G.4.c.).
Cooperating with Other Researchers
The ultimate aim of research in counseling is to improve the practice of the profession. As a body
of evidence accumulates about the effectiveness of a counseling process or treatment strategy, this
process or strategy will be more widely applied, and more clients will be better served. Replication
studies are one vital process through which this goal is accomplished. Thus, counselors have an
ethical duty to “make available sufficient original research data to qualified professionals who may
wish to replicate or extend the study” (ACA, 2014, §G.4.e.).
What this means for you, as a researcher, is that you have an obligation to keep your raw data
for a number of years so that other researchers can have access to it. As Welfel (2016) has pointed
out, this is not such an onerous duty, now that voluminous data can be stored on computers. If
you receive a request for your data, you would be wise to follow the dictates of the APA’s Ethical
Principles (2016), which require you to release the data if other researchers are conducting studies
to verify your results (§8.14.).
PUBLICATION
Ethical issues related to publication include giving credit to others for their work and following
appropriate procedures for submitting work for publication consideration. Giving credit to others is
a legal as well as an ethical issue. Other legal issues that are important to counselors who engage in
all types of scholarly activities include observing copyright laws, signing contracts, and reporting
income derived from research, presentations, or publications.
Giving Credit to Contributors
Earlier we mentioned the pressure to publish or perish that can exist among university faculty. This
pressure can affect the behavior of professors and can also have a negative impact on their students.
The practice of evaluating professors for tenure, promotion, and merit pay increases based
largely on their records of scholarly publications has fostered an atmosphere that is more competi-
tive than would be ideal. Sometimes counselor educators who are outstanding teachers are denied
tenure for lack of sufficient publications and are forced to leave their university positions, to the
dismay of their students and the professors themselves. Others are challenged to uphold their schol-
arly integrity under reward systems that give more credit for sole authorship than for cooperative
research endeavors, for being listed as first author on a publication, and for producing publications
in large quantity with little consideration for quality. These factors, although they do not excuse
inappropriate behavior, probably do contribute to such practices among professors as publishing
student work under the professors’ own names or usurping first authorship for work that was more
the student’s than their own.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) addresses these practices in several ways. First, in publish-
ing, counselors who are familiar with previous work on a research topic should give recognition to

-- 452 of 593 --

430 	Section 2 • Issues
that work and give full credit to those who deserve it (§G.5.c.). Second, they must give credit through
“joint authorship, acknowledgment, footnote statements, or other appropriate means to those who
have contributed significantly” to their work, in accordance with such contributions (§G.5.d.). Third,
guidelines exist for determining the order and types of acknowledgment to be given when more than
one person has contributed to research (Moore & Griffin, 2007). The principal contributor is listed
first, whereas minor technical or professional contributions are acknowledged in notes or introduc-
tory statements (§G.5.d.). A student is listed as the principal author of an article that is substantially
based on the student’s course paper, project, dissertation, or thesis (§G.5.f.). This standard arose
because students sometimes have felt taken advantage of by their professors.
New counselor educators need mentoring and support if they are to meet the expectations of
their universities to publish refereed journal articles (Borders et al., 2019; Limberg et al., 2020), and
students also need mentoring as they learn about the publication process. It is important for you to
be familiar with the guidelines for giving credit to contributors if you are involved or are planning
to be involved in research activities during your graduate studies. The professor with whom you are
collaborating or whom you are assisting should have a conversation with you before you begin the
research endeavor regarding the work you will do and the type of acknowledgment you will receive.
If you will be contributing substantially to the project, your professor should discuss with you and
any other co-authors the order in which names will appear because the first author listed is generally
assumed to have contributed the most to a collaborative project, and the last author listed is assumed
to have contributed the least. The order of names should be open to negotiation throughout the
project, and all authors must be in agreement by the time the product is published. If your professor
does not offer to have a discussion with you about these matters, you should feel free to request it.
In a study that included more than 1,000 participants, Welfare and Sackett (2011) surveyed doctoral
students and faculty members in education-related disciplines regarding how they made decisions
related to journal article authorship. They found that respondents believed authorship decisions
should be made before beginning work together and then evaluated throughout the project. In addi-
tion, respondents indicated that doctoral students should initiate authorship discussions to the same
degree as faculty members do. However, the results also indicated that faculty members usually
decided independently who would receive credit for authoring manuscripts.
16-5 The Case of Singh
Singh, a master’s-degree student in a counselor education program, wrote a term paper for Dr.
Martinez’s class related to the effects of COVID-19 on clients that greatly impressed the profes-
sor. Dr. Martinez suggested to Singh that his paper could be published, with some modifications.
Singh, although flattered and excited, admitted to Dr. Martinez that he didn’t know anything
about how to get published. The professor thus offered to help him. They met and established
an agenda that described the needed additional research and revisions to the manuscript,
divided the workload equally between them, and established timelines and a meeting schedule.
After planning for how to proceed, they completed their tasks and submitted the manuscript for
publication, with Singh listed as the senior (first-named) author.
• Do you think it was appropriate that the professor was listed as a co-author of the article?
• How would you feel if one of your professors offered to help you publish a paper that you
had written?

-- 453 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	431
We turn now to the legal arena as it applies to the issue of giving credit to others. One source
of litigation involves conflicts among multiple authors of scholarly work. Because individuals
legally own their ideas that are reflected in written materials, multiple authors may argue over who
owns which ideas.
Counselors who contribute to a scholarly work have legal rights regarding that work. When
more than one person is involved, each author has some independent legal rights and some legal
rights that require full agreement of all the involved authors (Leaffer, 1989). Each joint author has
the full right to use the work or to allow others to reproduce it. However, agreement among all the
joint authors is required to grant exclusive rights to the work or to transfer ownership rights of the
work to a non-author. Authors also must agree on an equitable manner of sharing income derived
from the product.
Financial compensation for written works usually occurs in conjunction with a contract signed
by the author(s) and a publisher. The terms of such contracts vary substantially and should always
specify the amount of compensation that will be paid to each author individually.
Problems occur in multiple authorship of scholarly works when counselors do not discuss
issues such as percentage of ownership, order of listing of author names, and other joint-authorship
matters. If one of the authors believes that they have not received adequate recognition or financial
compensation, that individual may pursue legal ownership rights.
Submitting Work for Publication Consideration
The primary ethical standard regarding the process of submitting work for publication con-
sideration has to do with duplicate submissions. Counselors should submit their manuscripts
for publication consideration to only one journal at a time (ACA, 2014, §G.5.g.). Other fields
(such as law and business) allow multiple submissions of a manuscript to several refereed
journals at one time, so the social sciences rule requiring submission to only one journal at a
time can be frustrating for authors. Because the time that elapses between the original submis-
sion and the publication of a manuscript can be lengthy, there are always concerns that the
material will be outdated by the time it is published or that someone else may publish some-
thing similar in the interim. However, there is no alternative to this system, although turn-
around time from submission to publication is improving in refereed journals due to advances
in the use of technology.
If you conduct research with your professors, you will experience the frustrations of the wait-
ing game. It is likely that you will need to rewrite and resubmit your manuscript, maybe more
than once, or it may be rejected by the first journal to which you have submitted it. You and your
Discussion: If the professor’s contributions were substantial enough that they might eventually
lead to the paper’s publication, the professor being listed as an author is warranted. The paper
will look much different when it is submitted for publication than it did when the student wrote it.
The differences will be a result of the professor’s advice.
Usually, students are excited when a professor offers to help them publish a paper they
have written and are pleased to list their professor as a co-author. The process followed by Singh
and Dr. Martinez seems to have met ethical guidelines. As you will see when you read the fol-
lowing section, Singh may have several more time-consuming tasks to perform before his manu-
script is published.

-- 454 of 593 --

432 	Section 2 • Issues
professor will then need to rewrite it and submit it to another journal. This process takes many
months, at best, and can take years. Patience is a necessary virtue if you intend to be active in con-
ducting and publishing research.
In a study of the editorial feedback and publication experiences of doctoral students, Lee
et al. (2022) found that students were influenced by the level of engagement in research of their
faculty members. Faculty members who were more engaged in their own research were also more
effective mentors for the doctoral students. Participants in the study reported that mentorship by
faculty members, peers, and even individuals unaffiliated with their programs in regard to con-
ducting studies and developing manuscripts was helpful, but that participants also had to strike
a balance between being mentored and working autonomously. Participants especially valued the
editorial feedback they received that provided them with concrete suggestions on how to improve
their manuscripts. The doctoral students in this study reported that submitting their manuscripts and
receiving editorial feedback gave them external validation that enhanced their motivation and desire
to continue to engage in research and scholarly activities.
CACREP (2024) standards and university promotion and tenure policies state expectations
that counselor educators be involved in scholarly activity. However, studies have shown that
scholarship is not prevalent among counselor educators (Barrio Minton et al., 2008; Hatchett
et al., 2020; Lambie et al., 2014). After gathering data about counselor educators teaching in
master’s-level programs at comprehensive, as opposed to research universities, Hatchett et al.
(2020) found that between the years 2008 and 2017, almost half of the counselor educators had
no refereed journal publications and that the median number of publications was 1. Hatchett
et al. (2020) questioned whether counselor education PhD programs should be emphasizing
research preparation when so few doctoral graduates become counselor educators and when
those who do, publish very little during their careers. Newhart et al. (2020) found that the rate
of peer-reviewed publications for counselor educators was higher for those who worked in
research-focused institutions, had more experience as counselor educators, held higher faculty
ranks, and were male.
The Code of Ethics (ACA, 2014) includes a lengthy standard to guide the activities of coun-
selors who serve as editorial board members of refereed journals or who review manuscripts written
by others. This standard states:
Counselors who review materials submitted for publication, research, or other scholarly purposes
[should] respect the confidentiality and proprietary rights of those who submitted it. They [should]
make publication decisions based on valid and defensible standards. Counselors [should] review article
submissions in a timely manner and based on their scope and competency in research methodologies,
and [should] make every effort to only review materials that are within their scope of competency and
use care to avoid personal biases. (§G.5.h.)
This standard was added to address questionable activities by some reviewers. Unfortunately,
situations have occurred in which reviewers have stolen ideas from authors and used them as their
own before the authors’ ideas were published, have been biased in their reviews of materials, have
been dilatory in completing reviews, and have agreed to review materials that they were not quali-
fied to comment on. Fortunately, these negative practices are unusual.
Copyright Laws
Counselors involved in research, presentations, or publishing need to be aware of the basic legal
principles involving copyright. Essentially, a copyright acknowledges legally that individuals own
ideas once they have created them.

-- 455 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	433
Authors of original written materials have a copyright immediately when the documents are
produced (General Revision of the Copyright Law, 1999). Materials do not have to be registered
with the U.S. Copyright Office to be protected from infringement. However, individuals who do
register their materials might qualify for an award of attorney’s fees and substantial statutory dam-
ages if someone steals their ideas (Patry, 1986).
Authors who wish to announce that they are protective of their work usually insert at the end
of the document either the symbol © or the abbreviation Copr. followed by the year of first publica-
tion, with the author’s name listed underneath. The © symbol indicates that authors are aware that
their work is protected legally but does not necessarily indicate that the work has been registered
(Henn, 1991).
Most written materials are legally protected from the time they are created until 50 years after
the author’s death. In the case of multiple authors, the copyright lasts until 50 years after the death
of the last author. Copyright protection of tests, corporate products, or anonymous works lasts for
75 years from the date of first publication or 100 years from its date of creation, whichever date
expires first.
When authors publish their work in a text or journal, they often assign or transfer their
copyright to the publisher. As a result, a publisher, rather than the authors themselves, may own a
copyright to a particular written work. The fact that a publication may no longer be available for
purchase, or may be out of print, does not affect the author’s or publisher’s legal copyright protec-
tion. Permission to reproduce the work must still be obtained from the copyright owner.
Some publishers have become rather aggressive in protecting their copyrighted materials.
Publishers sell for a profit the materials they produce, so they are naturally concerned when individ-
uals duplicate their published materials and they lose income as a result. Cases against businesses
that duplicate materials (Henn, 1991) have demonstrated that some publishers will bring lawsuits to
protect their copyrighted materials.
Counselors who are involved in scholarly activities generally do not register their written
materials with the U.S. Copyright Office because of the time and expense involved. However, when
you produce materials that are unique, have a potential for a high commercial value, or might be
susceptible to being illegally duplicated, you may wish to consider paying the required fees and
registering them.
Counselors also must ensure that they do not infringe on the legal rights of others by duplicating
protected materials without permission. Before duplicating any material, you should obtain permis-
sion from the copyright owner, either the author or the publisher (Johnson & Roark, 1996), and give
credit to the author of the material. Most duplicating businesses, university printing operations, and
publishers are familiar with the process of obtaining permission to duplicate copyrighted materials.
Contracts
Counselors who engage in scholarly activities sometimes enter into contracts with publishers, enti-
ties that fund research projects, or organizations that pay for presentations. Generally, when there
are no financial dealings involved, such as pay, honoraria, or reimbursement of expenses, no con-
tract is signed by the parties. When counselors benefit in some way financially from the scholarly
activity in which they are engaged, a contract often is signed by all of the parties involved. Letters
of agreement that are signed by two parties usually are legal contracts as well.
The legal assumption made when a contract is signed by two or more parties is that the written
contract represents an agreement reached among the individuals involved after they have carefully
considered all the options and after open negotiations have occurred. Another important assumption

-- 456 of 593 --

434 	Section 2 • Issues
regarding contracts is that the written document covers all the issues that were important to the par-
ties. These two assumptions generally are not true when counselors sign contracts related to their
scholarly work, which can cause problems for counselors at a later time.
The reality is that counselors generally sign, without questioning, contracts that are presented
to them by the entities with whom they will be working. Most entities that contract with counselors
for services use preprinted contract forms that usually have been prepared by the attorneys repre-
senting the entities. They are the result of years of experience in contracting with authors, present-
ers, and researchers. Specific terms are filled in on blank lines. Attorneys who prepare contract
forms naturally include terms that are favorable to their clients. As a result, such contract forms
protect the rights of the entities who are buying the counselors’ services, but they do not favor the
counselors who will be signing them.
A further reality is that most counselors who produce scholarly works and who contract with
entities for their services do not believe they have the financial resources to have contracts reviewed
by their own attorneys. In addition, counselors may not have a favorable position in the negotiation
process. The entities contracting with them can often go to other counselors for the same services if
the original counselors cause problems in the negotiation process. These entities may be unwilling
to alter their contract form for one individual.
The result is that most counselors engaged in writing, presenting, or conducting research
usually sign the contract presented to them and hope for the best. Sometimes the only area that can
be successfully negotiated with preprinted contracts is the amount of compensation or reimburse-
ment. Most counselors sign very few contracts and have neither the position nor the resources to
do anything more than read contracts presented to them, ask for clarification of terms they do not
understand, negotiate basic financial matters, and finally sign them.
Of course, counselors who have unique credentials or talents have more negotiating
power and can be more aggressive in the contract negotiation process. If substantial compen-
sation is involved or if the publications could have a significant impact on their career, they
probably should hire an attorney to either negotiate contracts for them or at least advise them
as they negotiate contracts for themselves. Beren and Bunnin (1983) and Bunnin (1998) have
developed a guide for authors that includes advice on locating attorneys who specialize in pub-
lications law.
When a counselor is employed and the contract for a research project is between the insti-
tution and the funding entity, the contract usually is negotiated directly between the institution’s
representatives and the funding entity. A counselor may apply for external funding, but the contract
goes to the counselor’s employer.
When counselors receive funding that is external to their institution, it is important that they
comply with the terms of their funding contract. The person who applies for a grant and receives the
funding usually is responsible for ensuring that the money is spent properly.
The funded project’s manager must sign all expenditure authorizations. Occasionally project
managers engage in fraudulent practices that can lead to civil and criminal charges against them.
Diverting project funds to other purposes, falsifying reimbursement requests, and failing to fol-
low required bidding for service procedures are some of the fraudulent practices that may cause
problems.
Reporting Income
When counselors receive any payment for their services, they must report it for income tax pur-
poses. It does not matter whether the payment is called a fee, a charge, a payment, or even an hono-
rarium. It is considered income by the Internal Revenue Service and must be reported.

-- 457 of 593 --

Chapter 16 • Professional Writing, Conducting Research, and Publishing 	435
In fact, counselors who receive income for their scholarly activities are in private practice and
should conform to all of the legal requirements for private practices that are discussed in Chapter 13.
A city or county business license should be purchased, and professional liability insurance should
be secured.
Generally, the type of practice can be listed as consultant, and counselors are not required to
be licensed as mental health professionals by their state to engage in many types of scholarly activi-
ties, such as writing, presenting workshops, or conducting research. However, state laws should be
consulted to determine whether a license is required.
Summary and Key Points
This chapter deals with ethical and legal consider-
ations that are important for counselors who write,
who conduct research, and who report their find-
ings in scholarly publications.
All counselors write when they are graduate
students and later when they practice profession-
ally. In addition, counselors who are professors and
supervisors often must evaluate the writing of other
counselors. There are ethical and legal implications
regarding the writing activities of counselors, espe-
cially regarding plagiarism.
Some key points regarding writing include
the following:
• Counselors in training must write many papers
during their academic programs. Counselors in
practice write reports, case notes, and other doc-
uments related to their jobs.
• Researchers have found that the majority of stu-
dents admit to cheating or academic dishonesty.
• Some scholars have suggested that students
today, because of the technological world we
live in, are more comfortable incorporating the
ideas or work of others as their own because it
is so easy to cut and paste information from the
Internet and because there is less respect among
young people for original creative works.
• Plagiarism is prohibited by codes of ethics and
laws in the United States.
• The 	Publication 	Manual 	of 	the 	American
Psychological Association (APA, 2020) specifies
that plagiarism is unacceptable and explains that
plagiarism occurs when individuals present the
work of others as their own.
• Counselors who plagiarize are punished by uni-
versities and in courts of law.
• Guidelines have been developed to assist coun-
selors to prevent engaging in plagiarism.
Due to current demands for accountability
of counselors in all settings, more counselors than
ever before will probably be involved in conduct-
ing research and publishing their findings. The pro-
cess of conducting research involves understanding
the various roles that are involved, knowing how
to design good studies, and protecting participants
from harm. The process of reporting the results
entails giving feedback to participants, reporting
honestly and accurately, and cooperating with other
researchers.
Some key points regarding research include
the following:
• The principal investigator conceptualizes, designs,
and plans the research study and has the primary
responsibility for seeing that ethical and legal
requirements are followed.
• Students sometimes serve as research assis-
tants when they help with a professor’s research
project.
• The professor who supervises the master’s the-
sis or doctoral dissertation of a graduate student
is the research supervisor, who shares ethi-
cal and legal responsibilities with the student
investigator.
• Counselor educators must carefully manage dual
roles with their students who are involved with
them in research projects.
• Poorly designed research is actually unethical
because it wastes the time of participants and erodes
the esteem in which research is generally held.
• Good research pays attention to issues of cultural
diversity.

-- 458 of 593 --

436 	Section 2 • Issues
• Participating in a research study involves some
level of risk to human participants; therefore,
they must be protected from harm.
• Ways to protect participants are to ensure that
their participation is voluntary, secure their fully
informed consent to participate, and protect their
confidentiality.
• Proposed research studies must be approved by
institutional review boards, which are quite rig-
orous in evaluating research that involves human
subjects.
• After a study is completed, researchers must
debrief, or give feedback to, everyone who par-
ticipated in the study.
• Despite the existence of many pressures to pub-
lish, counselors must report the results of their
studies with complete honesty and accuracy.
• Researchers are required to keep their raw data
and make them available to other researchers
who might want to replicate the study.
Both ethical and legal issues exist in writing
and publishing. One ethical issue is knowing the
procedures for submitting one’s work for publica-
tion. Legal issues include observing copyright laws,
signing contracts, and reporting income. The issue
of giving credit to others who have contributed to
a research study has both ethical and legal dimen-
sions. Some key points regarding publications
include the following:
• The pressures to publish or perish that exist in
academia can make it challenging for counselor
educators to uphold their scholarly integrity.
• When publishing research, counselors must give
credit to all others who contributed to the study
and must do so in accordance with each contrib-
utor’s level of contribution.
• Counselors who produce scholarly works have
legal rights regarding those works; when legal
problems occur, they are usually due to multiple
authorship.
• Counselors must not submit manuscripts for
publication consideration to more than one social
sciences journal at a time.
• Counselors must know the basic principles of
copyright law.
• Counselors generally are not very adept at under-
standing contracts even though they may enter
into contracts with publishers, entities that fund
research, and organizations that pay them for
giving presentations.
• All income received for scholarly activities must
be reported to the Internal Revenue Service.

-- 459 of 593 --

437
APPENDIX A
ACA Code of Ethics
MISSION
The mission of the American Counseling Association is to enhance the quality of life in society by
promoting the development of professional counselors, advancing the counseling profession, and
using the profession and practice of counseling to promote respect for human dignity and diversity.
ACA CODE OF ETHICS PREAMBLE
The American Counseling Association (ACA) is an educational, scientific, and professional organi-
zation whose members work in a variety of settings and serve in multiple capacities. Counseling is
a professional relationship that empowers diverse individuals, families, and groups to accomplish
mental health, wellness, education, and career goals.
Professional values are an important way of living out an ethical commitment. The following
are core professional values of the counseling profession:
1. enhancing human development throughout the life span;
2. honoring diversity and embracing a multicultural approach in support of the worth, dignity,
potential, and uniqueness of people within their social and cultural contexts;
3. promoting social justice;
4. safeguarding the integrity of the counselor–client relationship; and
5. practicing in a competent and ethical manner.
These professional values provide a conceptual basis for the ethical principles enumerated
below. These principles are the foundation for ethical behavior and decision making. The funda-
mental principles of professional ethical behavior are
• autonomy, or fostering the right to control the direction of one’s life;
• nonmaleficence, or avoiding actions that cause harm;
• beneficence, or working for the good of the individual and society by promoting mental health
and well-being;
• justice, or treating individuals equitably and fostering fairness and equality;
• fidelity, or honoring commitments and keeping promises, including fulfilling one’s responsi-
bilities of trust in professional relationships; and
• veracity, or dealing truthfully with individuals with whom counselors come into professional
contact.

-- 460 of 593 --

438 	Appendix A
ACA CODE OF ETHICS PURPOSE
The ACA Code of Ethics serves six main purposes:
1. The Code sets forth the ethical obligations of ACA members and provides guidance intended
to inform the ethical practice of professional counselors.
2. The Code identifies ethical considerations relevant to professional counselors and counselors-
in-training.
3. The Code enables the association to clarify for current and prospective members, and for
those served by members, the nature of the ethical responsibilities held in common by its
members.
4. The Code serves as an ethical guide designed to assist members in constructing a course of
action that best serves those utilizing counseling services and establishes expectations of con-
duct with a primary emphasis on the role of the professional counselor.
5. The Code helps to support the mission of ACA.
6. The standards contained in this Code serve as the basis for processing inquiries and ethics
complaints concerning ACA members.
The ACA Code of Ethics contains nine main sections that address the following areas:
Section A: The Counseling Relationship
Section B: Confidentiality and Privacy
Section C: Professional Responsibility
Section D: Relationships With Other Professionals
Section E: Evaluation, Assessment, and Interpretation
Section F: Supervision, Training, and Teaching
Section G: Research and Publication
Section H: Distance Counseling, Technology, and Social Media
Section I: Resolving Ethical Issues
Each section of the ACA Code of Ethics begins with an introduction. The introduction to each
section describes the ethical behavior and responsibility to which counselors aspire. The intro-
ductions help set the tone for each particular section and provide a starting point that invites
reflection on the ethical standards contained in each part of the ACA Code of Ethics. The stan-
dards outline professional responsibilities and provide direction for fulfilling those ethical
responsibilities.
When counselors are faced with ethical dilemmas that are difficult to resolve, they are
expected to engage in a carefully considered ethical decision-making process, consulting available
resources as needed. Counselors acknowledge that resolving ethical issues is a process; ethical
reasoning includes consideration of professional values, professional ethical principles, and ethical
standards.
Counselors’ actions should be consistent with the spirit as well as the letter of these ethical
standards. No specific ethical decision-making model is always most effective, so counselors are
expected to use a credible model of decision making that can bear public scrutiny of its applica-
tion. Through a chosen ethical decision-making process and evaluation of the context of the situ-
ation, counselors work collaboratively with clients to make decisions that promote clients’ growth

-- 461 of 593 --

Appendix A 	439
and development. A breach of the standards and principles provided herein does not necessarily
constitute legal liability or violation of the law; such action is established in legal and judicial
proceedings.
The glossary at the end of the Code provides a concise description of some of the terms used
in the ACA Code of Ethics.
SECTION A: THE COUNSELING RELATIONSHIP
Introduction
Counselors facilitate client growth and development in ways that foster the interest and welfare of
clients and promote formation of healthy relationships. Trust is the cornerstone of the counseling
relationship, and counselors have the responsibility to respect and safeguard the client’s right to
privacy and confidentiality. Counselors actively attempt to understand the diverse cultural back-
grounds of the clients they serve. Counselors also explore their own cultural identities and how
these affect their values and beliefs about the counseling process. Additionally, counselors are
encouraged to contribute to society by devoting a portion of their professional activities for little or
no financial return (pro bono publico).
A.1. Client Welfare
A.1.a. PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY 	The primary responsibility of counselors is to respect the dig-
nity and promote the welfare of clients.
A.1.b. RECORDS AND DOCUMENTATION 	Counselors create, safeguard, and maintain documen-
tation necessary for rendering professional services. Regardless of the medium, counselors include
sufficient and timely documentation to facilitate the delivery and continuity of services. Counselors
take reasonable steps to ensure that documentation accurately reflects client progress and services
provided. If amendments are made to records and documentation, counselors take steps to properly
note the amendments according to agency or institutional policies.
A.1.c. COUNSELING PLANS 	Counselors and their clients work jointly in devising counseling plans
that offer reasonable promise of success and are consistent with the abilities, temperament, develop-
mental level, and circumstances of clients. Counselors and clients regularly review and revise counsel-
ing plans to assess their continued viability and effectiveness, respecting clients’ freedom of choice.
A.1.d. SUPPORT NETWORK INVOLVEMENT 	Counselors recognize that support networks hold
various meanings in the lives of clients and consider enlisting the support, understanding, and
involvement of others (e.g., religious/spiritual/community leaders, family members, friends) as pos-
itive resources, when appropriate, with client consent.
A.2. Informed Consent in the Counseling Relationship
A.2.a. INFORMED CONSENT 	Clients have the freedom to choose whether to enter into or remain
in a counseling relationship and need adequate information about the counseling process and the
counselor. Counselors have an obligation to review in writing and verbally with clients the rights
and responsibilities of both counselors and clients. Informed consent is an ongoing part of the coun-
seling process, and counselors appropriately document discussions of informed consent throughout
the counseling relationship.

-- 462 of 593 --

440 	Appendix A
A.2.b. TYPES OF INFORMATION NEEDED 	Counselors explicitly explain to clients the nature of
all services provided. They inform clients about issues such as, but not limited to, the following: the
purposes, goals, techniques, procedures, limitations, potential risks, and benefits of services; the
counselor’s qualifications, credentials, relevant experience, and approach to counseling; continua-
tion of services upon the incapacitation or death of the counselor; the role of technology; and other
pertinent information. Counselors take steps to ensure that clients understand the implications of
diagnosis and the intended use of tests and reports. Additionally, counselors inform clients about
fees and billing arrangements, including procedures for nonpayment of fees. Clients have the right
to confidentiality and to be provided with an explanation of its limits (including how supervisors
and/or treatment or interdisciplinary team professionals are involved), to obtain clear information
about their records, to participate in the ongoing counseling plans, and to refuse any services or
modality changes and to be advised of the consequences of such refusal.
A.2.c. DEVELOPMENTAL AND CULTURAL SENSITIVITY 	Counselors communicate information in
ways that are both developmentally and culturally appropriate. Counselors use clear and under-
standable language when discussing issues related to informed consent. When clients have difficulty
understanding the language that counselors use, counselors provide necessary services (e.g., arrang-
ing for a qualified interpreter or translator) to ensure comprehension by clients. In collaboration
with clients, counselors consider cultural implications of informed consent procedures and, where
possible, counselors adjust their practices accordingly.
A.2.d. INABILITY TO GIVE CONSENT 	When counseling minors, incapacitated adults, or other per-
sons unable to give voluntary consent, counselors seek the assent of clients to services and include
them in decision making as appropriate. Counselors recognize the need to balance the ethical rights
of clients to make choices, their capacity to give consent or assent to receive services, and parental or
familial legal rights and responsibilities to protect these clients and make decisions on their behalf.
A.2.e. MANDATED CLIENTS 	Counselors discuss the required limitations to confidentiality when
working with clients who have been mandated for counseling services. Counselors also explain
what type of information and with whom that information is shared prior to the beginning of coun-
seling. The client may choose to refuse services. In this case, counselors will, to the best of their
ability, discuss with the client the potential consequences of refusing counseling services.
A.3. Clients Served by Others
When counselors learn that their clients are in a professional relationship with other mental health
professionals, they request release from clients to inform the other professionals and strive to estab-
lish positive and collaborative professional relationships.
A.4. Avoiding Harm and Imposing Values
A.4.a. AVOIDING HARM 	Counselors act to avoid harming their clients, trainees, and research par-
ticipants and to minimize or to remedy unavoidable or unanticipated harm.
A.4.b. PERSONAL VALUES 	Counselors are aware of—and avoid imposing—their own values, atti-
tudes, beliefs, and behaviors. Counselors respect the diversity of clients, trainees, and research partici-
pants and seek training in areas in which they are at risk of imposing their values onto clients, especially
when the counselor’s values are inconsistent with the client’s goals or are discriminatory in nature.

-- 463 of 593 --

Appendix A 	441
A.5. Prohibited Noncounseling Roles and Relationships
A.5.a. SEXUAL AND/OR ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS PROHIBITED 	Sexual and/or romantic
counselor–client interactions or relationships with current clients, their romantic partners, or their
family members are prohibited. This prohibition applies to both in-person and electronic interac-
tions or relationships.
A.5.b. PREVIOUS SEXUAL AND/OR ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS 	Counselors are prohibited from
engaging in counseling relationships with persons with whom they have had a previous sexual and/
or romantic relationship.
A.5.c. SEXUAL AND/OR ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS WITH FORMER CLIENTS 	Sexual and/or
romantic counselor–client interactions or relationships with former clients, their romantic partners,
or their family members are prohibited for a period of 5 years following the last professional contact.
This prohibition applies to both in-person and electronic interactions or relationships. Counselors,
before engaging in sexual and/or romantic interactions or relationships with former clients, their
romantic partners, or their family members, demonstrate forethought and document (in written
form) whether the interaction or relationship can be viewed as exploitive in any way and/or whether
there is still potential to harm the former client; in cases of potential exploitation and/or harm, the
counselor avoids entering into such an interaction or relationship.
A.5.d. FRIENDS OR FAMILY MEMBERS 	Counselors are prohibited from engaging in counseling
relationships with friends or family members with whom they have an inability to remain objective.
A.5.e. PERSONAL VIRTUAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH CURRENT CLIENTS 	Counselors are prohibited
from engaging in a personal virtual relationship with individuals with whom they have a current
counseling relationship (e.g., through social and other media).
A.6. Managing and Maintaining Boundaries and Professional Relationships
A.6.a. PREVIOUS RELATIONSHIPS 	Counselors consider the risks and benefits of accepting as clients
those with whom they have had a previous relationship. These potential clients may include individu-
als with whom the counselor has had a casual, distant, or past relationship. Examples include mutual or
past membership in a professional association, organization, or community. When counselors accept
these clients, they take appropriate professional precautions such as informed consent, consultation,
supervision, and documentation to ensure that judgment is not impaired and no exploitation occurs.
A.6.b. EXTENDING COUNSELING BOUNDARIES 	Counselors consider the risks and benefits of
extending current counseling relationships beyond conventional parameters. Examples include
attending a client’s formal ceremony (e.g., a wedding/commitment ceremony or graduation), pur-
chasing a service or product provided by a client (excepting unrestricted bartering), and visiting a
client’s ill family member in the hospital. In extending these boundaries, counselors take appropri-
ate professional precautions such as informed consent, consultation, supervision, and documenta-
tion to ensure that judgment is not impaired and no harm occurs.
A.6.c. DOCUMENTING BOUNDARY EXTENSIONS 	If counselors extend boundaries as described in
A.6.a. and A.6.b., they must officially document, prior to the interaction (when feasible), the rationale
for such an interaction, the potential benefit, and anticipated consequences for the client or former

-- 464 of 593 --

442 	Appendix A
client and other individuals significantly involved with the client or former client. When unintentional
harm occurs to the client or former client, or to an individual significantly involved with the client or
former client, the counselor must show evidence of an attempt to remedy such harm.
A.6.d. ROLE CHANGES IN THE PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIP 	When counselors change a role
from the original or most recent contracted relationship, they obtain informed consent from the cli-
ent and explain the client’s right to refuse services related to the change. Examples of role changes
include, but are not limited to
1. changing from individual to relationship or family counseling, or vice versa;
2. changing from an evaluative role to a therapeutic role, or vice versa; and
3. changing from a counselor to a mediator role, or vice versa.
Clients must be fully informed of any anticipated consequences (e.g., financial, legal, per-
sonal, therapeutic) of counselor role changes.
A.6.e. NONPROFESSIONAL INTERACTIONS OR RELATIONSHIPS (OTHER THAN SEXUAL OR
ROMANTIC INTERACTIONS OR RELATIONSHIPS) 	Counselors avoid entering into nonprofes-
sional relationships with former clients, their romantic partners, or their family members when the
interaction is potentially harmful to the client. This applies to both in-person and electronic interac-
tions or relationships.
A.7. Roles and Relationships at Individual, Group, Institutional, and Societal Levels
A.7.a. ADVOCACY 	When appropriate, counselors advocate at individual, group, institutional, and
societal levels to address potential barriers and obstacles that inhibit access and/or the growth and
development of clients.
A.7.b. CONFIDENTIALITY AND ADVOCACY 	Counselors obtain client consent prior to engaging
in advocacy efforts on behalf of an identifiable client to improve the provision of services and
to work toward removal of systemic barriers or obstacles that inhibit client access, growth, and
development.
A.8. Multiple Clients
When a counselor agrees to provide counseling services to two or more persons who have a rela-
tionship, the counselor clarifies at the outset which person or persons are clients and the nature of
the relationships the counselor will have with each involved person. If it becomes apparent that the
counselor may be called upon to perform potentially conflicting roles, the counselor will clarify,
adjust, or withdraw from roles appropriately.
A.9. Group Work
A.9.a. SCREENING 	Counselors screen prospective group counseling/therapy participants. To the
extent possible, counselors select members whose needs and goals are compatible with the goals of
the group, who will not impede the group process, and whose well-being will not be jeopardized by
the group experience.
A.9.b. PROTECTING CLIENTS 	In a group setting, counselors take reasonable precautions to
protect clients from physical, emotional, or psychological trauma.

-- 465 of 593 --

Appendix A 	443
A.10. Fees and Business Practices
A.10.a. SELF-REFERRAL 	Counselors working in an organization (e.g., school, agency, institution)
that provides counseling services do not refer clients to their private practice unless the policies of a
particular organization make explicit provisions for self-referrals. In such instances, the clients must
be informed of other options open to them should they seek private counseling services.
A.10.b. UNACCEPTABLE BUSINESS PRACTICES 	Counselors do not participate in fee splitting,
nor do they give or receive commissions, rebates, or any other form of remuneration when referring
clients for professional services.
A.10.c. ESTABLISHING FEES 	In establishing fees for professional counseling services, counselors
consider the financial status of clients and locality. If a counselor’s usual fees create undue hardship
for the client, the counselor may adjust fees, when legally permissible, or assist the client in locating
comparable, affordable services.
A.10.d. NONPAYMENT OF FEES 	If counselors intend to use collection agencies or take legal
measures to collect fees from clients who do not pay for services as agreed upon, they include such
information in their informed consent documents and also inform clients in a timely fashion of
intended actions and offer clients the opportunity to make payment.
A.10.e. BARTERING 	Counselors may barter only if the bartering does not result in exploitation
or harm, if the client requests it, and if such arrangements are an accepted practice among profes-
sionals in the community. Counselors consider the cultural implications of bartering and discuss
relevant concerns with clients and document such agreements in a clear written contract.
A.10.f. RECEIVING GIFTS 	Counselors understand the challenges of accepting gifts from clients
and recognize that in some cultures, small gifts are a token of respect and gratitude. When determin-
ing whether to accept a gift from clients, counselors take into account the therapeutic relationship,
the monetary value of the gift, the client’s motivation for giving the gift, and the counselor’s motiva-
tion for wanting to accept or decline the gift.
A.11. Termination and Referral
A.11.a. COMPETENCE WITHIN TERMINATION AND REFERRAL 	If counselors lack the com-
petence to be of professional assistance to clients, they avoid entering or continuing counseling
relationships. Counselors are knowledgeable about culturally and clinically appropriate referral
resources and suggest these alternatives. If clients decline the suggested referrals, counselors dis-
continue the relationship.
A.11.b. VALUES WITHIN TERMINATION AND REFERRAL 	Counselors refrain from referring pro-
spective and current clients based solely on the counselor’s personally held values, attitudes, beliefs,
and behaviors. Counselors respect the diversity of clients and seek training in areas in which they
are at risk of imposing their values onto clients, especially when the counselor’s values are inconsis-
tent with the client’s goals or are discriminatory in nature.
A.11.c. PROPRIATE TERMINATION 	Counselors terminate a counseling relationship when it
becomes reasonably apparent that the client no longer needs assistance, is not likely to benefit, or is

-- 466 of 593 --

444 	Appendix A
being harmed by continued counseling. Counselors may terminate counseling when in jeopardy of
harm by the client or by another person with whom the client has a relationship, or when clients do
not pay fees as agreed upon. Counselors provide pretermination counseling and recommend other
service providers when necessary.
A.11.d. APPROPRIATE TRANSFER OF SERVICES 	When counselors transfer or refer clients to
other practitioners, they ensure that appropriate clinical and administrative processes are completed
and open communication is maintained with both clients and practitioners.
A.12. Abandonment and Client Neglect
Counselors do not abandon or neglect clients in counseling. Counselors assist in making appropriate
arrangements for the continuation of treatment, when necessary, during interruptions such as vaca-
tions, illness, and following termination.
SECTION B: CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY
Introduction
Counselors recognize that trust is a cornerstone of the counseling relationship. Counselors aspire to
earn the trust of clients by creating an ongoing partnership, establishing and upholding appropriate
boundaries, and maintaining confidentiality. Counselors communicate the parameters of confidenti-
ality in a culturally competent manner.
B.1. Respecting Client Rights
B.1.a. MULTICULTURAL/DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS 	Counselors maintain awareness and sen-
sitivity regarding cultural meanings of confidentiality and privacy. Counselors respect differing
views toward disclosure of information. Counselors hold ongoing discussions with clients as to
how, when, and with whom information is to be shared.
B.1.b. RESPECT FOR PRIVACY 	Counselors respect the privacy of prospective and current clients.
Counselors request private information from clients only when it is beneficial to the counseling process.
B.1.c. RESPECT FOR CONFIDENTIALITY 	Counselors protect the confidential information of pro-
spective and current clients. Counselors disclose information only with appropriate consent or with
sound legal or ethical justification.
B.1.d. EXPLANATION OF LIMITATIONS 	At initiation and throughout the counseling process,
counselors inform clients of the limitations of confidentiality and seek to identify situations in
which confidentiality must be breached.
B.2. Exceptions
B.2.a. SERIOUS AND FORESEEABLE HARM AND LEGAL REQUIREMENTS 	The general require-
ment that counselors keep information confidential does not apply when disclosure is required to
protect clients or identified others from serious and foreseeable harm or when legal requirements
demand that confidential information must be revealed. Counselors consult with other professionals
when in doubt as to the validity of an exception. Additional considerations apply when addressing
end-of-life issues.

-- 467 of 593 --

Appendix A 	445
B.2.b. CONFIDENTIALITY REGARDING END-OF-LIFE DECISIONS 	Counselors who provide ser-
vices to terminally ill individuals who are considering hastening their own deaths have the option
to maintain confidentiality, depending on applicable laws and the specific circumstances of the situ-
ation and after seeking consultation or supervision from appropriate professional and legal parties.
B.2.c. CONTAGIOUS, LIFE-THREATENING DISEASES 	When clients disclose that they have a dis-
ease commonly known to be both communicable and life threatening, counselors may be justified
in disclosing information to identifiable third parties, if the parties are known to be at serious and
foreseeable risk of contracting the disease. Prior to making a disclosure, counselors assess the intent
of clients to inform the third parties about their disease or to engage in any behaviors that may be
harmful to an identifiable third party. Counselors adhere to relevant state laws concerning disclosure
about disease status.
B.2.d. COURT-ORDERED DISCLOSURE 	When ordered by a court to release confidential or privi-
leged information without a client’s permission, counselors seek to obtain written, informed consent
from the client or take steps to prohibit the disclosure or have it limited as narrowly as possible
because of potential harm to the client or counseling relationship.
B.2.e. MINIMAL DISCLOSURE 	To the extent possible, clients are informed before confidential
information is disclosed and are involved in the disclosure decision-making process. When circum-
stances require the disclosure of confidential information, only essential information is revealed.
B.3. Information Shared With Others
B.3.a. SUBORDINATES 	Counselors make every effort to ensure that privacy and confidentiality of
clients are maintained by subordinates, including employees, supervisees, students, clerical assis-
tants, and volunteers.
B.3.b. INTERDISCIPLINARY TEAMS 	When services provided to the client involve participation by
an interdisciplinary or treatment team, the client will be informed of the team’s existence and com-
position, information being shared, and the purposes of sharing such information.
B.3.c. CONFIDENTIAL SETTINGS 	Counselors discuss confidential information only in settings in
which they can reasonably ensure client privacy.
B.3.d. THIRD-PARTY PAYERS 	Counselors disclose information to third-party payers only when
clients have authorized such disclosure.
B.3.e. TRANSMITTING CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 	Counselors take precautions to ensure the
confidentiality of all information transmitted through the use of any medium.
B.3.f. DECEASED CLIENTS 	Counselors protect the confidentiality of deceased clients, consistent
with legal requirements and the documented preferences of the client.
B.4. Groups and Families
B.4.a. GROUP WORK 	In group work, counselors clearly explain the importance and parameters of
confidentiality for the specific group.

-- 468 of 593 --

446 	Appendix A
B.4.b. COUPLES AND FAMILY COUNSELING 	In couples and family counseling, counselors
clearly define who is considered “the client” and discuss expectations and limitations of confiden-
tiality. Counselors seek agreement and document in writing such agreement among all involved
parties regarding the confidentiality of information. In the absence of an agreement to the contrary,
the couple or family is considered to be the client.
B.5. Clients Lacking Capacity to Give Informed Consent
B.5.a. RESPONSIBILITY TO CLIENTS 	When counseling minor clients or adult clients who lack the
capacity to give voluntary, informed consent, counselors protect the confidentiality of information
received—in any medium—in the counseling relationship as specified by federal and state laws,
written policies, and applicable ethical standards.
B.5.b. RESPONSIBILITY TO PARENTS AND LEGAL GUARDIANS 	Counselors inform parents and
legal guardians about the role of counselors and the confidential nature of the counseling relation-
ship, consistent with current legal and custodial arrangements. Counselors are sensitive to the cul-
tural diversity of families and respect the inherent rights and responsibilities of parents/guardians
regarding the welfare of their children/charges according to law. Counselors work to establish, as
appropriate, collaborative relationships with parents/guardians to best serve clients.
B.5.c. RELEASE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 	When counseling minor clients or adult cli-
ents who lack the capacity to give voluntary consent to release confidential information, counselors
seek permission from an appropriate third party to disclose information. In such instances, coun-
selors inform clients consistent with their level of understanding and take appropriate measures to
safeguard client confidentiality.
B.6. Records and Documentation
B.6.a. CREATING AND MAINTAINING RECORDS AND DOCUMENTATION 	Counselors create and
maintain records and documentation necessary for rendering professional services.
B.6.b. CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS AND DOCUMENTATION 	Counselors ensure that records
and documentation kept in any medium are secure and that only authorized persons have access to
them.
B.6.c. PERMISSION TO RECORD 	Counselors obtain permission from clients prior to recording
sessions through electronic or other means.
B.6.d. PERMISSION TO OBSERVE 	Counselors obtain permission from clients prior to allowing
any person to observe counseling sessions, review session transcripts, or view recordings of ses-
sions with supervisors, faculty, peers, or others within the training environment.
B.6.e. CLIENT ACCESS 	Counselors provide reasonable access to records and copies of records
when requested by competent clients. Counselors limit the access of clients to their records, or por-
tions of their records, only when there is compelling evidence that such access would cause harm
to the client. Counselors document the request of clients and the rationale for withholding some or
all of the records in the files of clients. In situations involving multiple clients, counselors provide
individual clients with only those parts of records that relate directly to them and do not include
confidential information related to any other client.

-- 469 of 593 --

Appendix A 	447
B.6.f. ASSISTANCE WITH RECORDS 	When clients request access to their records, counselors pro-
vide assistance and consultation in interpreting counseling records.
B.6.g. DISCLOSURE OR TRANSFER 	Unless exceptions to confidentiality exist, counselors obtain
written permission from clients to disclose or transfer records to legitimate third parties. Steps are
taken to ensure that receivers of counseling records are sensitive to their confidential nature.
B.6.h. STORAGE AND DISPOSAL AFTER TERMINATION 	Counselors store records following ter-
mination of services to ensure reasonable future access, maintain records in accordance with federal
and state laws and statutes such as licensure laws and policies governing records, and dispose of cli-
ent records and other sensitive materials in a manner that protects client confidentiality. Counselors
apply careful discretion and deliberation before destroying records that may be needed by a court of
law, such as notes on child abuse, suicide, sexual harassment, or violence.
B.6.i. REASONABLE PRECAUTIONS 	Counselors take reasonable precautions to protect client con-
fidentiality in the event of the counselor’s termination of practice, incapacity, or death and appoint a
records custodian when identified as appropriate.
B.7. Case Consultation
B.7.a. RESPECT FOR PRIVACY 	Information shared in a consulting relationship is discussed for
professional purposes only. Written and oral reports present only data germane to the purposes of
the consultation, and every effort is made to protect client identity and to avoid undue invasion of
privacy.
B.7.b. DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 	When consulting with colleagues, coun-
selors do not disclose confidential information that reasonably could lead to the identification of a
client or other person or organization with whom they have a confidential relationship unless they
have obtained the prior consent of the person or organization or the disclosure cannot be avoided.
They disclose information only to the extent necessary to achieve the purposes of the consultation.
SECTION C: PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
Introduction
Counselors aspire to open, honest, and accurate communication in dealing with the public and other
professionals. Counselors facilitate access to counseling services, and they practice in a nondis-
criminatory manner within the boundaries of professional and personal competence; they also have
a responsibility to abide by the ACA Code of Ethics. Counselors actively participate in local, state,
and national associations that foster the development and improvement of counseling. Counselors
are expected to advocate to promote changes at the individual, group, institutional, and societal
levels that improve the quality of life for individuals and groups and remove potential barriers to the
provision or access of appropriate services being offered. Counselors have a responsibility to the
public to engage in counseling practices that are based on rigorous research methodologies. Coun-
selors are encouraged to contribute to society by devoting a portion of their professional activity to
services for which there is little or no financial return (pro bono publico). In addition, counselors
engage in self-care activities to maintain and promote their own emotional, physical, mental, and
spiritual well-being to best meet their professional responsibilities.

-- 470 of 593 --

448 	Appendix A
C.1. Knowledge of and Compliance With Standards
Counselors have a responsibility to read, understand, and follow the ACA Code of Ethics and adhere
to applicable laws and regulations.
C.2. Professional Competence
C.2.a. BOUNDARIES OF COMPETENCE 	Counselors practice only within the boundaries of their
competence, based on their education, training, supervised experience, state and national profes-
sional credentials, and appropriate professional experience. Whereas multicultural counseling
competency is required across all counseling specialties, counselors gain knowledge, personal
awareness, sensitivity, dispositions, and skills pertinent to being a culturally competent counselor in
working with a diverse client population.
C.2.b. NEW SPECIALTY AREAS OF PRACTICE 	Counselors practice in specialty areas new to them
only after appropriate education, training, and supervised experience. While developing skills in
new specialty areas, counselors take steps to ensure the competence of their work and protect others
from possible harm.
C.2.c. QUALIFIED FOR EMPLOYMENT 	Counselors accept employment only for positions for
which they are qualified given their education, training, supervised experience, state and national
professional credentials, and appropriate professional experience. Counselors hire for professional
counseling positions only individuals who are qualified and competent for those positions.
C.2.d. MONITOR EFFECTIVENESS 	Counselors continually monitor their effectiveness as profes-
sionals and take steps to improve when necessary. Counselors take reasonable steps to seek peer
supervision to evaluate their efficacy as counselors.
C.2.e. CONSULTATIONS ON ETHICAL OBLIGATIONS 	Counselors take reasonable steps to consult
with other counselors, the ACA Ethics and Professional Standards Department, or related profes-
sionals when they have questions regarding their ethical obligations or professional practice.
C.2.f. CONTINUING EDUCATION 	Counselors recognize the need for continuing education to
acquire and maintain a reasonable level of awareness of current scientific and professional informa-
tion in their fields of activity. Counselors maintain their competence in the skills they use, are open to
new procedures, and remain informed regarding best practices for working with diverse populations.
C.2.g. IMPAIRMENT 	Counselors monitor themselves for signs of impairment from their own
physical, mental, or emotional problems and refrain from offering or providing professional ser-
vices when impaired. They seek assistance for problems that reach the level of professional impair-
ment, and, if necessary, they limit, suspend, or terminate their professional responsibilities until it is
determined that they may safely resume their work. Counselors assist colleagues or supervisors in
recognizing their own professional impairment and provide consultation and assistance when war-
ranted with colleagues or supervisors showing signs of impairment and intervene as appropriate to
prevent imminent harm to clients.
C.2.h. 	COUNSELOR 	INCAPACITATION, 	DEATH, 	RETIREMENT, 	OR 	TERMINATION 	OF
PRACTICE 	Counselors prepare a plan for the transfer of clients and the dissemination of records
to an identified colleague or records custodian in the case of the counselor’s incapacitation, death,
retirement, or termination of practice.

-- 471 of 593 --

Appendix A 	449
C.3. Advertising and Soliciting Clients
C.3.a. ACCURATE ADVERTISING 	When advertising or otherwise representing their services to
the public, counselors identify their credentials in an accurate manner that is not false, misleading,
deceptive, or fraudulent.
C.3.b. TESTIMONIALS 	Counselors who use testimonials do not solicit them from current clients,
former clients, or any other persons who may be vulnerable to undue influence. Counselors discuss
with clients the implications of and obtain permission for the use of any testimonial.
C.3.c. STATEMENTS BY OTHERS 	When feasible, counselors make reasonable efforts to ensure
that statements made by others about them or about the counseling profession are accurate.
C.3.d. RECRUITING THROUGH EMPLOYMENT 	Counselors do not use their places of employment
or institutional affiliation to recruit clients, supervisors, or consultees for their private practices.
C.3.e. PRODUCTS AND TRAINING ADVERTISEMENTS 	Counselors who develop products related
to their profession or conduct workshops or training events ensure that the advertisements concern-
ing these products or events are accurate and disclose adequate information for consumers to make
informed choices.
C.3.f. PROMOTING TO THOSE SERVED 	Counselors do not use counseling, teaching, training, or
supervisory relationships to promote their products or training events in a manner that is deceptive
or would exert undue influence on individuals who may be vulnerable. However, counselor educa-
tors may adopt textbooks they have authored for instructional purposes.
C.4. Professional Qualifications
C.4.a. ACCURATE REPRESENTATION 	Counselors claim or imply only professional qualifica-
tions actually completed and correct any known misrepresentations of their qualifications by oth-
ers. Counselors truthfully represent the qualifications of their professional colleagues. Counselors
clearly distinguish between paid and volunteer work experience and accurately describe their con-
tinuing education and specialized training.
C.4.b. CREDENTIALS 	Counselors claim only licenses or certifications that are current and in good
standing.
C.4.c. EDUCATIONAL DEGREES 	Counselors clearly differentiate between earned and honorary
degrees.
C.4.d. IMPLYING DOCTORAL-LEVEL COMPETENCE 	Counselors clearly state their highest earned
degree in counseling or a closely related field. Counselors do not imply doctoral-level competence
when possessing a master’s degree in counseling or a related field by referring to themselves as
“Dr.” in a counseling context when their doctorate is not in counseling or a related field. Counselors
do not use “ABD” (all but dissertation) or other such terms to imply competency.
C.4.e. ACCREDITATION STATUS 	Counselors accurately represent the accreditation status of their
degree program and college/university.

-- 472 of 593 --

450 	Appendix A
C.4.f. PROFESSIONAL MEMBERSHIP 	Counselors clearly differentiate between current, active
memberships and former memberships in associations. Members of ACA must clearly differenti-
ate between professional membership, which implies the possession of at least a master’s degree in
counseling, and regular membership, which is open to individuals whose interests and activities are
consistent with those of ACA but are not qualified for professional membership.
C.5. Nondiscrimination
Counselors do not condone or engage in discrimination against prospective or current clients,
students, employees, supervisees, or research participants based on age, culture, disability, ethnicity,
race, religion/spirituality, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, marital/partnership status,
language preference, socioeconomic status, immigration status, or any basis proscribed by law.
C.6. Public Responsibility
C.6.a. SEXUAL HARASSMENT 	Counselors do not engage in or condone sexual harassment. Sexual
harassment can consist of a single intense or severe act, or multiple persistent or pervasive acts.
C.6.b. REPORTS TO THIRD PARTIES 	Counselors are accurate, honest, and objective in report-
ing their professional activities and judgments to appropriate third parties, including courts, health
insurance companies, those who are the recipients of evaluation reports, and others.
C.6.c. MEDIA PRESENTATIONS 	When counselors provide advice or comment by means of public
lectures, demonstrations, radio or television programs, recordings, technology-based applications,
printed articles, mailed material, or other media, they take reasonable precautions to ensure that
1. the statements are based on appropriate professional counseling literature and practice,
2. the statements are otherwise consistent with the ACA Code of Ethics, and
3. the recipients of the information are not encouraged to infer that a professional counseling
relationship has been established.
C.6.d. EXPLOITATION OF OTHERS 	Counselors do not exploit others in their professional
relationships.
C.6.e. CONTRIBUTING TO THE PUBLIC GOOD 	(Pro Bono Publico) Counselors make a reasonable
effort to provide services to the public for which there is little or no financial return (e.g., speaking
to groups, sharing professional information, offering reduced fees).
C.7. Treatment Modalities
C.7.a. SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR TREATMENT 	When providing services, counselors use techniques/
procedures/modalities that are grounded in theory and/or have an empirical or scientific foundation.
C.7.b. DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION 	When counselors use developing or innovative tech-
niques/procedures/modalities, they explain the potential risks, benefits, and ethical considerations
of using such techniques/procedures/modalities. Counselors work to minimize any potential risks or
harm when using these techniques/procedures/modalities.
C.7.c. HARMFUL PRACTICES 	Counselors do not use techniques/procedures/modalities when sub-
stantial evidence suggests harm, even if such services are requested.

-- 473 of 593 --

Appendix A 	451
C.8. Responsibility to Other Professionals
C.8.a. PERSONAL PUBLIC STATEMENTS 	When making personal statements in a public context,
counselors clarify that they are speaking from their personal perspectives and that they are not
speaking on behalf of all counselors or the profession.
SECTION D: RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHER PROFESSIONALS
Introduction
Professional counselors recognize that the quality of their interactions with colleagues can influ-
ence the quality of services provided to clients. They work to become knowledgeable about col-
leagues within and outside the field of counseling. Counselors develop positive working relationships
and systems of communication with colleagues to enhance services to clients.
D.1. Relationships With Colleagues, Employers, and Employees
D.1.a. DIFFERENT APPROACHES 	Counselors are respectful of approaches that are grounded in
theory and/or have an empirical or scientific foundation but may differ from their own. Counselors
acknowledge the expertise of other professional groups and are respectful of their practices.
D.1.b. FORMING RELATIONSHIPS 	Counselors work to develop and strengthen relationships with
colleagues from other disciplines to best serve clients.
D.1.c. INTERDISCIPLINARY TEAMWORK 	Counselors who are members of interdisciplinary teams
delivering multifaceted services to clients remain focused on how to best serve clients. They partici-
pate in and contribute to decisions that affect the well-being of clients by drawing on the perspectives,
values, and experiences of the counseling profession and those of colleagues from other disciplines.
D.1.d. ESTABLISHING PROFESSIONAL AND ETHICAL OBLIGATIONS 	Counselors who are mem-
bers of interdisciplinary teams work together with team members to clarify professional and ethi-
cal obligations of the team as a whole and of its individual members. When a team decision raises
ethical concerns, counselors first attempt to resolve the concern within the team. If they cannot
reach resolution among team members, counselors pursue other avenues to address their concerns
consistent with client well-being.
D.1.e. CONFIDENTIALITY 	When counselors are required by law, institutional policy, or extraor-
dinary circumstances to serve in more than one role in judicial or administrative proceedings, they
clarify role expectations and the parameters of confidentiality with their colleagues.
D.1.f. PERSONNEL SELECTION AND ASSIGNMENT 	When counselors are in a position requiring
personnel selection and/or assigning of responsibilities to others, they select competent staff and
assign responsibilities compatible with their skills and experiences.
D.1.g. EMPLOYER POLICIES 	The acceptance of employment in an agency or institution implies
that counselors are in agreement with its general policies and principles. Counselors strive to reach
agreement with employers regarding acceptable standards of client care and professional conduct
that allow for changes in institutional policy conducive to the growth and development of clients.

-- 474 of 593 --

452 	Appendix A
D.1.h. NEGATIVE CONDITIONS 	Counselors alert their employers of inappropriate policies and
practices. They attempt to effect changes in such policies or procedures through constructive action
within the organization. When such policies are potentially disruptive or damaging to clients or may
limit the effectiveness of services provided and change cannot be affected, counselors take appro-
priate further action. Such action may include referral to appropriate certification, accreditation, or
state licensure organizations, or voluntary termination of employment.
D.1.i. PROTECTION FROM PUNITIVE ACTION 	Counselors do not harass a colleague or employee
or dismiss an employee who has acted in a responsible and ethical manner to expose inappropriate
employer policies or practices.
D.2. Provision of Consultation Services
D.2.a. CONSULTANT COMPETENCY 	Counselors take reasonable steps to ensure that they have
the appropriate resources and competencies when providing consultation services. Counselors pro-
vide appropriate referral resources when requested or needed.
D.2.b. INFORMED CONSENT IN FORMAL CONSULTATION 	When providing formal consultation
services, counselors have an obligation to review, in writing and verbally, the rights and responsi-
bilities of both counselors and consultees. Counselors use clear and understandable language to
inform all parties involved about the purpose of the services to be provided, relevant costs, potential
risks and benefits, and the limits of confidentiality.
SECTION E: EVALUATION, ASSESSMENT, AND INTERPRETATION
Introduction
Counselors use assessment as one component of the counseling process, taking into account the
clients’ personal and cultural context. Counselors promote the well-being of individual clients or
groups of clients by developing and using appropriate educational, mental health, psychological,
and career assessments.
E.1. General
E.1.a. ASSESSMENT 	The primary purpose of educational, mental health, psychological, and career
assessment is to gather information regarding the client for a variety of purposes, including, but not
limited to, client decision making, treatment planning, and forensic proceedings. Assessment may
include both qualitative and quantitative methodologies.
E.1.b. CLIENT WELFARE 	Counselors do not misuse assessment results and interpretations, and
they take reasonable steps to prevent others from misusing the information provided. They respect
the client’s right to know the results, the interpretations made, and the bases for counselors’ conclu-
sions and recommendations.
E.2. Competence to Use and Interpret Assessment Instruments
E.2.a. LIMITS OF COMPETENCE 	Counselors use only those testing and assessment services for
which they have been trained and are competent. Counselors using technology-assisted test inter-
pretations are trained in the construct being measured and the specific instrument being used prior
to using its technology-based application. Counselors take reasonable measures to ensure the proper
use of assessment techniques by persons under their supervision.

-- 475 of 593 --

Appendix A 	453
E.2.b. APPROPRIATE USE 	Counselors are responsible for the appropriate application, scoring,
interpretation, and use of assessment instruments relevant to the needs of the client, whether they
score and interpret such assessments themselves or use technology or other services.
E.2.c. DECISIONS BASED ON RESULTS 	Counselors responsible for decisions involving individu-
als or policies that are based on assessment results have a thorough understanding of psychometrics.
E.3. Informed Consent in Assessment
E.3.a. EXPLANATION TO CLIENTS 	Prior to assessment, counselors explain the nature and pur-
poses of assessment and the specific use of results by potential recipients. The explanation will be
given in terms and language that the client (or other legally authorized person on behalf of the cli-
ent) can understand.
E.3.b. RECIPIENTS OF RESULTS 	Counselors consider the client’s and/or examinee’s welfare,
explicit understandings, and prior agreements in determining who receives the assessment results.
Counselors include accurate and appropriate interpretations with any release of individual or group
assessment results.
E.4. Release of Data to Qualified Personnel
Counselors release assessment data in which the client is identified only with the consent of the cli-
ent or the client’s legal representative. Such data are released only to persons recognized by coun-
selors as qualified to interpret the data.
E.5. Diagnosis of Mental Disorders
E.5.a. PROPER DIAGNOSIS 	Counselors take special care to provide proper diagnosis of mental
disorders. Assessment techniques (including personal interviews) used to determine client care
(e.g., locus of treatment, type of treatment, recommended follow-up) are carefully selected and
appropriately used.
E.5.b. CULTURAL SENSITIVITY 	Counselors recognize that culture affects the manner in which cli-
ents’ problems are defined and experienced. Clients’ socioeconomic and cultural experiences are
considered when diagnosing mental disorders.
E.5.c. HISTORICAL AND SOCIAL PREJUDICES IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF PATHOLOGY 	Counselors
recognize historical and social prejudices in the misdiagnosis and pathologizing of certain individu-
als and groups and strive to become aware of and address such biases in themselves or others.
E.5.d. REFRAINING FROM DIAGNOSIS 	Counselors may refrain from making and/or reporting a
diagnosis if they believe that it would cause harm to the client or others. Counselors carefully con-
sider both the positive and negative implications of a diagnosis.
E.6. Instrument Selection
E.6.a. APPROPRIATENESS OF INSTRUMENTS 	Counselors carefully consider the validity, reliabil-
ity, psychometric limitations, and appropriateness of instruments when selecting assessments and,
when possible, use multiple forms of assessment, data, and/or instruments in forming conclusions,
diagnoses, or recommendations.

-- 476 of 593 --

454 	Appendix A
E.6.b. REFERRAL INFORMATION 	If a client is referred to a third party for assessment, the coun-
selor provides specific referral questions and sufficient objective data about the client to ensure that
appropriate assessment instruments are utilized.
E.7. Conditions of Assessment Administration
E.7.a. ADMINISTRATION CONDITIONS 	Counselors administer assessments under the same
conditions that were established in their standardization. When assessments are not adminis-
tered under standard conditions, as may be necessary to accommodate clients with disabilities,
or when unusual behavior or irregularities occur during the administration, those conditions
are noted in interpretation, and the results may be designated as invalid or of questionable
validity.
E.7.b. PROVISION OF FAVORABLE CONDITIONS 	Counselors provide an appropriate environ-
ment for the administration of assessments (e.g., privacy, comfort, freedom from distraction).
E.7.c. TECHNOLOGICAL ADMINISTRATION 	Counselors ensure that technologically administered
assessments function properly and provide clients with accurate results.
E.7.d. UNSUPERVISED ASSESSMENTS 	Unless the assessment instrument is designed, intended,
and validated for self-administration and/or scoring, counselors do not permit unsupervised use.
E.8. Multicultural Issues/Diversity in Assessment
Counselors select and use with caution assessment techniques normed on populations other than
that of the client. Counselors recognize the effects of age, color, culture, disability, ethnic group,
gender, race, language preference, religion, spirituality, sexual orientation, and socioeconomic sta-
tus on test administration and interpretation, and they place test results in proper perspective with
other relevant factors.
E.9. Scoring and Interpretation of Assessments
E.9.a. REPORTING 	When counselors report assessment results, they consider the client’s personal
and cultural background, the level of the client’s understanding of the results, and the impact of
the results on the client. In reporting assessment results, counselors indicate reservations that exist
regarding validity or reliability due to circumstances of the assessment or inappropriateness of the
norms for the person tested.
E.9.b. INSTRUMENTS WITH INSUFFICIENT EMPIRICAL DATA 	Counselors exercise caution when
interpreting the results of instruments not having sufficient empirical data to support respondent
results. The specific purposes for the use of such instruments are stated explicitly to the examinee.
Counselors qualify any conclusions, diagnoses, or recommendations made that are based on assess-
ments or instruments with questionable validity or reliability.
E.9.c. ASSESSMENT SERVICES 	Counselors who provide assessment, scoring, and interpretation
services to support the assessment process confirm the validity of such interpretations. They accu-
rately describe the purpose, norms, validity, reliability, and applications of the procedures and any
special qualifications applicable to their use. At all times, counselors maintain their ethical respon-
sibility to those being assessed.

-- 477 of 593 --

Appendix A 	455
E.10. Assessment Security
Counselors maintain the integrity and security of tests and assessments consistent with legal and
contractual obligations. Counselors do not appropriate, reproduce, or modify published assessments
or parts thereof without acknowledgment and permission from the publisher.
E.11. Obsolete Assessment and Outdated Results
Counselors do not use data or results from assessments that are obsolete or outdated for the current
purpose (e.g., noncurrent versions of assessments/instruments). Counselors make every effort to
prevent the misuse of obsolete measures and assessment data by others.
E.12. Assessment Construction
Counselors use established scientific procedures, relevant standards, and current professional
knowledge for assessment design in the development, publication, and utilization of assessment
techniques.
E.13. Forensic Evaluation: Evaluation for Legal Proceedings
E.13.a. PRIMARY OBLIGATIONS 	When providing forensic evaluations, the primary obligation of
counselors is to produce objective findings that can be substantiated based on information and tech-
niques appropriate to the evaluation, which may include examination of the individual and/or review
of records. Counselors form professional opinions based on their professional knowledge and exper-
tise that can be supported by the data gathered in evaluations. Counselors define the limits of their
reports or testimony, especially when an examination of the individual has not been conducted.
E.13.b. CONSENT FOR EVALUATION 	Individuals being evaluated are informed in writing that
the relationship is for the purposes of an evaluation and is not therapeutic in nature, and entities or
individuals who will receive the evaluation report are identified. Counselors who perform forensic
evaluations obtain written consent from those being evaluated or from their legal representative
unless a court orders evaluations to be conducted without the written consent of the individuals
being evaluated. When children or adults who lack the capacity to give voluntary consent are being
evaluated, informed written consent is obtained from a parent or guardian.
E.13.c. CLIENT EVALUATION PROHIBITED 	Counselors do not evaluate current or former clients,
clients’ romantic partners, or clients’ family members for forensic purposes. Counselors do not
counsel individuals they are evaluating.
E.13.d. AVOID POTENTIALLY HARMFUL RELATIONSHIPS 	Counselors who provide forensic
evaluations avoid potentially harmful professional or personal relationships with family members,
romantic partners, and close friends of individuals they are evaluating or have evaluated in the past.
SECTION F: SUPERVISION, TRAINING, AND TEACHING
Introduction
Counselor supervisors, trainers, and educators aspire to foster meaningful and respectful profes-
sional relationships and to maintain appropriate boundaries with supervisees and students in both
face-to-face and electronic formats. They have theoretical and pedagogical foundations for their
work; have knowledge of supervision models; and aim to be fair, accurate, and honest in their
assessments of counselors, students, and supervisees.

-- 478 of 593 --

456 	Appendix A
F.1. Counselor Supervision and Client Welfare
F.1.a. CLIENT WELFARE 	A primary obligation of counseling supervisors is to monitor the ser-
vices provided by supervisees. Counseling supervisors monitor client welfare and supervisee
performance and professional development. To fulfill these obligations, supervisors meet regu-
larly with supervisees to review the supervisees’ work and help them become prepared to serve
a range of diverse clients. Supervisees have a responsibility to understand and follow the ACA
Code of Ethics.
F.1.b. COUNSELOR CREDENTIALS 	Counseling supervisors work to ensure that supervisees com-
municate their qualifications to render services to their clients.
F.1.c. INFORMED CONSENT AND CLIENT RIGHTS 	Supervisors make supervisees aware of client
rights, including the protection of client privacy and confidentiality in the counseling relationship.
Supervisees provide clients with professional disclosure information and inform them of how the
supervision process influences the limits of confidentiality. Supervisees make clients aware of who
will have access to records of the counseling relationship and how these records will be stored,
transmitted, or otherwise reviewed.
F.2. Counselor Supervision Competence
F.2.a. SUPERVISOR PREPARATION 	Prior to offering supervision services, counselors are trained
in supervision methods and techniques. Counselors who offer supervision services regularly pursue
continuing education activities, including both counseling and supervision topics and skills.
F.2.b. MULTICULTURAL ISSUES/DIVERSITY IN SUPERVISION 	Counseling supervisors are aware
of and address the role of multiculturalism/diversity in the supervisory relationship.
F.2.c. ONLINE SUPERVISION 	When using technology in supervision, counselor supervisors are
competent in the use of those technologies. Supervisors take the necessary precautions to protect the
confidentiality of all information transmitted through any electronic means.
F.3. Supervisory Relationship
F.3.a. EXTENDING CONVENTIONAL SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 	Counseling supervisors
clearly define and maintain ethical professional, personal, and social relationships with their super-
visees. Supervisors consider the risks and benefits of extending current supervisory relationships in
any form beyond conventional parameters. In extending these boundaries, supervisors take appro-
priate professional precautions to ensure that judgment is not impaired and that no harm occurs.
F.3.b. SEXUAL RELATIONSHIPS 	Sexual or romantic interactions or relationships with current
supervisees are prohibited. This prohibition applies to both in-person and electronic interactions or
relationships.
F.3.c. SEXUAL HARASSMENT 	Counseling supervisors do not condone or subject supervisees to
sexual harassment.
F.3.d. FRIENDS OR FAMILY MEMBERS 	Supervisors are prohibited from engaging in supervisory
relationships with individuals with whom they have an inability to remain objective.

-- 479 of 593 --

Appendix A 	457
F.4. Supervisor Responsibilities
F.4.a. INFORMED CONSENT FOR SUPERVISION 	Supervisors are responsible for incorporating
into their supervision the principles of informed consent and participation. Supervisors inform
supervisees of the policies and procedures to which supervisors are to adhere and the mechanisms
for due process appeal of individual supervisor actions. The issues unique to the use of distance
supervision are to be included in the documentation as necessary.
F.4.b. EMERGENCIES AND ABSENCES 	Supervisors establish and communicate to supervisees
procedures for contacting supervisors or, in their absence, alternative on-call supervisors to assist
in handling crises.
F.4.c. STANDARDS FOR SUPERVISEES 	Supervisors make their supervisees aware of professional
and ethical standards and legal responsibilities.
F.4.d. TERMINATION OF THE SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIP 	Supervisors or supervisees have the
right to terminate the supervisory relationship with adequate notice. Reasons for considering termi-
nation are discussed, and both parties work to resolve differences. When termination is warranted,
supervisors make appropriate referrals to possible alternative supervisors.
F.5. Student and Supervisee Responsibilities
F.5.a. ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITIES 	Students and supervisees have a responsibility to understand
and follow the ACA Code of Ethics. Students and supervisees have the same obligation to clients as
those required of professional counselors.
F.5.b. IMPAIRMENT 	Students and supervisees monitor themselves for signs of impairment from
their own physical, mental, or emotional problems and refrain from offering or providing profes-
sional services when such impairment is likely to harm a client or others. They notify their faculty
and/or supervisors and seek assistance for problems that reach the level of professional impairment,
and, if necessary, they limit, suspend, or terminate their professional responsibilities until it is deter-
mined that they may safely resume their work.
F.5.c. PROFESSIONAL DISCLOSURE 	Before providing counseling services, students and supervis-
ees disclose their status as supervisees and explain how this status affects the limits of confidential-
ity. Supervisors ensure that clients are aware of the services rendered and the qualifications of the
students and supervisees rendering those services. Students and supervisees obtain client permis-
sion before they use any information concerning the counseling relationship in the training process.
F.6. Counseling Supervision Evaluation, Remediation, and Endorsement
F.6.a. EVALUATION 	Supervisors document and provide supervisees with ongoing feedback
regarding their performance and schedule periodic formal evaluative sessions throughout the super-
visory relationship.
F.6.b. GATEKEEPING AND REMEDIATION 	Through initial and ongoing evaluation, supervisors
are aware of supervisee limitations that might impede performance. Supervisors assist supervisees
in securing remedial assistance when needed. They recommend dismissal from training programs,
applied counseling settings, and state or voluntary professional credentialing processes when those

-- 480 of 593 --

458 	Appendix A
supervisees are unable to demonstrate that they can provide competent professional services to a
range of diverse clients. Supervisors seek consultation and document their decisions to dismiss or
refer supervisees for assistance. They ensure that supervisees are aware of options available to them
to address such decisions.
F.6.c. COUNSELING FOR SUPERVISEES 	If supervisees request counseling, the supervisor assists
the supervisee in identifying appropriate services. Supervisors do not provide counseling services to
supervisees. Supervisors address interpersonal competencies in terms of the impact of these issues
on clients, the supervisory relationship, and professional functioning.
F.6.d. ENDORSEMENTS 	Supervisors endorse supervisees for certification, licensure, employ-
ment, or completion of an academic or training program only when they believe that supervisees are
qualified for the endorsement. Regardless of qualifications, supervisors do not endorse supervisees
whom they believe to be impaired in any way that would interfere with the performance of the
duties associated with the endorsement.
F.7. Responsibilities of Counselor Educators
F.7.a. COUNSELOR EDUCATORS 	Counselor educators who are responsible for developing,
implementing, and supervising educational programs are skilled as teachers and practitioners.
They are knowledgeable regarding the ethical, legal, and regulatory aspects of the profes-
sion; are skilled in applying that knowledge; and make students and supervisees aware of their
responsibilities. Whether in traditional, hybrid, and/or online formats, counselor educators con-
duct counselor education and training programs in an ethical manner and serve as role models for
professional behavior.
F.7.b. COUNSELOR EDUCATOR COMPETENCE 	Counselors who function as counselor educa-
tors or supervisors provide instruction within their areas of knowledge and competence and provide
instruction based on current information and knowledge available in the profession. When using tech-
nology to deliver instruction, counselor educators develop competence in the use of the technology.
F.7.c. INFUSING MULTICULTURAL ISSUES/DIVERSITY 	Counselor educators infuse material
related to multiculturalism/diversity into all courses and workshops for the development of profes-
sional counselors.
F.7.d. INTEGRATION OF STUDY AND PRACTICE 	In traditional, hybrid, and/or online formats,
counselor educators establish education and training programs that integrate academic study and
supervised practice.
F.7.e. TEACHING ETHICS 	Throughout the program, counselor educators ensure that students are
aware of the ethical responsibilities and standards of the profession and the ethical responsibili-
ties of students to the profession. Counselor educators infuse ethical considerations throughout the
curriculum.
F.7.f. USE OF CASE EXAMPLES 	The use of client, student, or supervisee information for the pur-
poses of case examples in a lecture or classroom setting is permissible only when (a) the client,
student, or supervisee has reviewed the material and agreed to its presentation or (b) the information
has been sufficiently modified to obscure identity.

-- 481 of 593 --

Appendix A 	459
F.7.g. STUDENT-TO-STUDENT SUPERVISION AND INSTRUCTION 	When students function in the
role of counselor educators or supervisors, they understand that they have the same ethical obliga-
tions as counselor educators, trainers, and supervisors. Counselor educators make every effort to
ensure that the rights of students are not compromised when their peers lead experiential counseling
activities in traditional, hybrid, and/or online formats (e.g., counseling groups, skills classes, clinical
supervision).
F.7.h. INNOVATIVE THEORIES AND TECHNIQUES 	Counselor educators promote the use of
techniques/procedures/modalities that are grounded in theory and/or have an empirical or scien-
tific foundation. When counselor educators discuss developing or innovative techniques/proce-
dures/modalities, they explain the potential risks, benefits, and ethical considerations of using such
techniques/procedures/modalities.
F.7.i. FIELD PLACEMENTS 	Counselor educators develop clear policies and provide direct assis-
tance within their training programs regarding appropriate field placement and other clinical expe-
riences. Counselor educators provide clearly stated roles and responsibilities for the student or
supervisee, the site supervisor, and the program supervisor. They confirm that site supervisors are
qualified to provide supervision in the formats in which services are provided and inform site super-
visors of their professional and ethical responsibilities in this role.
F.8. Student Welfare
F.8.a. PROGRAM INFORMATION AND ORIENTATION 	Counselor educators recognize that pro-
gram orientation is a developmental process that begins upon students’ initial contact with the coun-
selor education program and continues throughout the educational and clinical training of students.
Counselor education faculty provide prospective and current students with information about the
counselor education program’s expectations, including
1. the values and ethical principles of the profession;
2. the type and level of skill and knowledge acquisition required for successful completion of the
training;
3. technology requirements;
4. program training goals, objectives, and mission, and subject matter to be covered;
5. bases for evaluation;
6. training components that encourage self-growth or self-disclosure as part of the training pro-
cess;
7. the type of supervision settings and requirements of the sites for required clinical field experi-
ences;
8. student and supervisor evaluation and dismissal policies and procedures; and
9. up-to-date employment prospects for graduates.
F.8.b. STUDENT CAREER ADVISING 	Counselor educators provide career advisement for their stu-
dents and make them aware of opportunities in the field.
F.8.c. SELF-GROWTH EXPERIENCES 	Self-growth is an expected component of counselor educa-
tion. Counselor educators are mindful of ethical principles when they require students to engage in
self-growth experiences. Counselor educators and supervisors inform students that they have a right
to decide what information will be shared or withheld in class.

-- 482 of 593 --

460 	Appendix A
F.8.d. ADDRESSING PERSONAL CONCERNS 	Counselor educators may require students to address
any personal concerns that have the potential to affect professional competency.
F.9. Evaluation and Remediation
F.9.a. EVALUATION OF STUDENTS 	Counselor educators clearly state to students, prior to and
throughout the training program, the levels of competency expected, appraisal methods, and timing
of evaluations for both didactic and clinical competencies. Counselor educators provide students
with ongoing feedback regarding their performance throughout the training program.
F.9.b. LIMITATIONS 	Counselor educators, through ongoing evaluation, are aware of and address the
inability of some students to achieve counseling competencies. Counselor educators do the following:
1. assist students in securing remedial assistance when needed,
2. seek professional consultation and document their decision to dismiss or refer students for
assistance, and
3. ensure that students have recourse in a timely manner to address decisions requiring them to
seek assistance or to dismiss them and provide students with due process according to institu-
tional policies and procedures.
F.9.c. COUNSELING FOR STUDENTS 	If students request counseling, or if counseling services are
suggested as part of a remediation process, counselor educators assist students in identifying appro-
priate services.
F.10. Roles and Relationships Between Counselor Educators and Students
F.10.a. SEXUAL OR ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS 	Counselor educators are prohibited from sexual
or romantic interactions or relationships with students currently enrolled in a counseling or related
program and over whom they have power and authority. This prohibition applies to both in-person
and electronic interactions or relationships.
F.10.b. SEXUAL HARASSMENT 	Counselor educators do not condone or subject students to sexual
harassment.
F.10.c. RELATIONSHIPS WITH FORMER STUDENTS 	Counselor educators are aware of the power
differential in the relationship between faculty and students. Faculty members discuss with former
students potential risks when they consider engaging in social, sexual, or other intimate relationships.
F.10.d. NONACADEMIC RELATIONSHIPS 	Counselor educators avoid nonacademic relationships
with students in which there is a risk of potential harm to the student or which may compromise the
training experience or grades assigned. In addition, counselor educators do not accept any form of
professional services, fees, commissions, reimbursement, or remuneration from a site for student or
supervisor placement.
F.10.e. COUNSELING SERVICES 	Counselor educators do not serve as counselors to students cur-
rently enrolled in a counseling or related program and over whom they have power and authority.
F.10.f. EXTENDING EDUCATOR–STUDENT BOUNDARIES 	Counselor educators are aware
of the power differential in the relationship between faculty and students. If they believe that a

-- 483 of 593 --

Appendix A 	461
nonprofessional relationship with a student may be potentially beneficial to the student, they take
precautions similar to those taken by counselors when working with clients. Examples of poten-
tially beneficial interactions or relationships include, but are not limited to, attending a formal cer-
emony; conducting hospital visits; providing support during a stressful event; or maintaining mutual
membership in a professional association, organization, or community. Counselor educators dis-
cuss with students the rationale for such interactions, the potential benefits and drawbacks, and the
anticipated consequences for the student. Educators clarify the specific nature and limitations of the
additional role(s) they will have with the student prior to engaging in a nonprofessional relationship.
Nonprofessional relationships with students should be time limited and/or context specific and initi-
ated with student consent.
F.11. Multicultural/Diversity Competence in Counselor Education and Training
Programs
F.11.a. FACULTY DIVERSITY 	Counselor educators are committed to recruiting and retaining a
diverse faculty.
F.11.b. STUDENT DIVERSITY 	Counselor educators actively attempt to recruit and retain a diverse
student body. Counselor educators demonstrate commitment to multicultural/diversity competence
by recognizing and valuing the diverse cultures and types of abilities that students bring to the train-
ing experience. Counselor educators provide appropriate accommodations that enhance and support
diverse student well-being and academic performance.
F.11.c. MULTICULTURAL/DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 	Counselor educators actively infuse multi-
cultural/diversity competency in their training and supervision practices. They actively train stu-
dents to gain awareness, knowledge, and skills in the competencies of multicultural practice.
SECTION G: RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION
Introduction
Counselors who conduct research are encouraged to contribute to the knowledge base of the profes-
sion and promote a clearer understanding of the conditions that lead to a healthy and more just
society. Counselors support the efforts of researchers by participating fully and willingly whenever
possible. Counselors minimize bias and respect diversity in designing and implementing research.
G.1. Research Responsibilities
G.1.a. CONDUCTING RESEARCH 	Counselors plan, design, conduct, and report research in a man-
ner that is consistent with pertinent ethical principles, federal and state laws, host institutional regu-
lations, and scientific standards governing research.
G.1.b. CONFIDENTIALITY IN RESEARCH 	Counselors are responsible for understanding and adher-
ing to state, federal, agency, or institutional policies or applicable guidelines regarding confidential-
ity in their research practices.
G.1.c. INDEPENDENT RESEARCHERS 	When counselors conduct independent research and do not
have access to an institutional review board, they are bound to the same ethical principles and fed-
eral and state laws pertaining to the review of their plan, design, conduct, and reporting of research.

-- 484 of 593 --

462 	Appendix A
G.1.d. DEVIATION FROM STANDARD PRACTICE 	Counselors seek consultation and observe strin-
gent safeguards to protect the rights of research participants when research indicates that a deviation
from standard or acceptable practices may be necessary.
G.1.e. PRECAUTIONS TO AVOID INJURY 	Counselors who conduct research are responsible for
their participants’ welfare throughout the research process and should take reasonable precautions
to avoid causing emotional, physical, or social harm to participants.
G.1.f. PRINCIPAL RESEARCHER RESPONSIBILITY The ultimate responsibility for ethical research
practice lies with the principal researcher. All others involved in the research activities share ethical
obligations and responsibility for their own actions.
G.2. Rights of Research Participants
G.2.a. INFORMED CONSENT IN RESEARCH 	Individuals have the right to decline requests to
become research participants. In seeking consent, counselors use language that
1. accurately explains the purpose and procedures to be followed;
2. identifies any procedures that are experimental or relatively untried;
3. describes any attendant discomforts, risks, and potential power differentials between research-
ers and participants;
4. describes any benefits or changes in individuals or organizations that might reasonably be
expected;
5. discloses appropriate alternative procedures that would be advantageous for participants;
6. offers to answer any inquiries concerning the procedures;
7. describes any limitations on confidentiality;
8. describes the format and potential target audiences for the dissemination of research findings; and
9. instructs participants that they are free to withdraw their consent and discontinue participation
in the project at any time, without penalty.
G.2.b. STUDENT/SUPERVISEE PARTICIPATION 	Researchers who involve students or supervisees
in research make clear to them that the decision regarding participation in research activities does
not affect their academic standing or supervisory relationship. Students or supervisees who choose
not to participate in research are provided with an appropriate alternative to fulfill their academic or
clinical requirements.
G.2.c. CLIENT PARTICIPATION 	Counselors conducting research involving clients make clear in
the informed consent process that clients are free to choose whether to participate in research activi-
ties. Counselors take necessary precautions to protect clients from adverse consequences of declin-
ing or withdrawing from participation.
G.2.d. CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION 	Information obtained about research participants
during the course of research is confidential. Procedures are implemented to protect confidentiality.
G.2.e. PERSONS NOT CAPABLE OF GIVING INFORMED CONSENT 	When a research participant
is not capable of giving informed consent, counselors provide an appropriate explanation to, obtain
agreement for participation from, and obtain the appropriate consent of a legally authorized person.

-- 485 of 593 --

Appendix A 	463
G.2.f. COMMITMENTS TO PARTICIPANTS 	Counselors take reasonable measures to honor all
commitments to research participants.
G.2.g. EXPLANATIONS AFTER DATA COLLECTION 	After data are collected, counselors provide
participants with full clarification of the nature of the study to remove any misconceptions partici-
pants might have regarding the research. Where scientific or human values justify delaying or with-
holding information, counselors take reasonable measures to avoid causing harm.
G.2.h. INFORMING SPONSORS 	Counselors inform sponsors, institutions, and publication chan-
nels regarding research procedures and outcomes. Counselors ensure that appropriate bodies and
authorities are given pertinent information and acknowledgment.
G.2.i. RESEARCH RECORDS CUSTODIAN 	As appropriate, researchers prepare and disseminate to
an identified colleague or records custodian a plan for the transfer of research data in the case of
their incapacitation, retirement, or death.
G.3. Managing and Maintaining Boundaries
G.3.a. EXTENDING RESEARCHER–PARTICIPANT BOUNDARIES 	Researchers consider the risks and
benefits of extending current research relationships beyond conventional parameters. When a nonre-
search interaction between the researcher and the research participant may be potentially beneficial, the
researcher must document, prior to the interaction (when feasible), the rationale for such an interaction,
the potential benefit, and anticipated consequences for the research participant. Such interactions should
be initiated with appropriate consent of the research participant. Where unintentional harm occurs to the
research participant, the researcher must show evidence of an attempt to remedy such harm.
G.3.b. RELATIONSHIPS WITH RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS 	Sexual or romantic counselor–research
participant interactions or relationships with current research participants are prohibited. This pro-
hibition applies to both in-person and electronic interactions or relationships.
G.3.c. SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS 	Researchers do not condone or
subject research participants to sexual harassment.
G.4. Reporting Results
G.4.a. ACCURATE RESULTS 	Counselors plan, conduct, and report research accurately. Counselors
do not engage in misleading or fraudulent research, distort data, misrepresent data, or deliberately
bias their results. They describe the extent to which results are applicable for diverse populations.
G.4.b. OBLIGATION TO REPORT UNFAVORABLE RESULTS 	Counselors report the results of any
research of professional value. Results that reflect unfavorably on institutions, programs, services,
prevailing opinions, or vested interests are not withheld.
G.4.c. REPORTING ERRORS 	If counselors discover significant errors in their published research,
they take reasonable steps to correct such errors in a correction erratum or through other appropriate
publication means.
G.4.d. IDENTITY OF PARTICIPANTS 	Counselors who supply data, aid in the research of another
person, report research results, or make original data available take due care to disguise the identity

-- 486 of 593 --

464 	Appendix A
of respective participants in the absence of specific authorization from the participants to do other-
wise. In situations where participants self-identify their involvement in research studies, researchers
take active steps to ensure that data are adapted/changed to protect the identity and welfare of all
parties and that discussion of results does not cause harm to participants.
G.4.e. REPLICATION STUDIES 	Counselors are obligated to make available sufficient original
research information to qualified professionals who may wish to replicate or extend the study.
G.5. Publications and Presentations
G.5.a. USE OF CASE EXAMPLES 	The use of participants’, clients’, students’, or supervisees’ infor-
mation for the purpose of case examples in a presentation or publication is permissible only when
(a) participants, clients, students, or supervisees have reviewed the material and agreed to its pre-
sentation or publication or (b) the information has been sufficiently modified to obscure identity.
G.5.b. PLAGIARISM 	Counselors do not plagiarize; that is, they do not present another person’s
work as their own.
G.5.c. ACKNOWLEDGING PREVIOUS WORK 	In publications and presentations, counselors
acknowledge and give recognition to previous work on the topic by others or self.
G.5.d. CONTRIBUTORS 	Counselors give credit through joint authorship, acknowledgment, foot-
note statements, or other appropriate means to those who have contributed significantly to research
or concept development in accordance with such contributions. The principal contributor is listed
first, and minor technical or professional contributions are acknowledged in notes or introductory
statements.
G.5.e. AGREEMENT OF CONTRIBUTORS 	Counselors who conduct joint research with colleagues
or students/supervisors establish agreements in advance regarding allocation of tasks, publication
credit, and types of acknowledgment that will be received.
G.5.f. STUDENT RESEARCH 	Manuscripts or professional presentations in any medium that are
substantially based on a student’s course papers, projects, dissertations, or theses are used only with
the student’s permission and list the student as lead author.
G.5.g. DUPLICATE SUBMISSIONS 	Counselors submit manuscripts for consideration to only one
journal at a time. Manuscripts that are published in whole or in substantial part in one journal or
published work are not submitted for publication to another publisher without acknowledgment and
permission from the original publisher.
G.5.h. PROFESSIONAL REVIEW 	Counselors who review material submitted for publication, research,
or other scholarly purposes respect the confidentiality and proprietary rights of those who submitted
it. Counselors make publication decisions based on valid and defensible standards. Counselors review
article submissions in a timely manner and based on their scope and competency in research method-
ologies. Counselors who serve as reviewers at the request of editors or publishers make every effort to
only review materials that are within their scope of competency and avoid personal biases.

-- 487 of 593 --

Appendix A 	465
SECTION H: DISTANCE COUNSELING, TECHNOLOGY,
AND SOCIAL MEDIA
Introduction
Counselors understand that the profession of counseling may no longer be limited to in-person,
face-to-face interactions. Counselors actively attempt to understand the evolving nature of the pro-
fession with regard to distance counseling, technology, and social media and how such resources
may be used to better serve their clients. Counselors strive to become knowledgeable about these
resources. Counselors understand the additional concerns related to the use of distance counseling,
technology, and social media and make every attempt to protect confidentiality and meet any legal
and ethical requirements for the use of such resources.
H.1. Knowledge and Legal Considerations
H.1.a. KNOWLEDGE AND COMPETENCY 	Counselors who engage in the use of distance counsel-
ing, technology, and/or social media develop knowledge and skills regarding related technical, ethi-
cal, and legal considerations (e.g., special certifications, additional course work).
H.1.b. LAWS AND STATUTES 	Counselors who engage in the use of distance counseling, tech-
nology, and social media within their counseling practice understand that they may be subject to
laws and regulations of both the counselor’s practicing location and the client’s place of residence.
Counselors ensure that their clients are aware of pertinent legal rights and limitations governing the
practice of counseling across state lines or international boundaries.
H.2. Informed Consent and Security
H.2.a. INFORMED CONSENT AND DISCLOSURE 	Clients have the freedom to choose whether to
use distance counseling, social media, and/or technology within the counseling process. In addition
to the usual and customary protocol of informed consent between counselor and client for face-to-
face counseling, the following issues, unique to the use of distance counseling, technology, and/or
social media, are addressed in the informed consent process:
• distance counseling credentials, physical location of practice, and contact information;
• risks and benefits of engaging in the use of distance counseling, technology, and/or social
media;
• possibility of technology failure and alternate methods of service delivery;
• anticipated response time;
• emergency procedures to follow when the counselor is not available;
• time zone differences;
• cultural and/or language differences that may affect delivery of services;
• possible denial of insurance benefits; and
• social media policy.
H.2.b. CONFIDENTIALITY MAINTAINED BY THE COUNSELOR 	Counselors acknowledge the limi-
tations of maintaining the confidentiality of electronic records and transmissions. They inform cli-
ents that individuals might have authorized or unauthorized access to such records or transmissions
(e.g., colleagues, supervisors, employees, information technologists).

-- 488 of 593 --

466 	Appendix A
H.2.c. ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF LIMITATIONS 	Counselors inform clients about the inherent lim-
its of confidentiality when using technology. Counselors urge clients to be aware of authorized and/
or unauthorized access to information disclosed using this medium in the counseling process.
H.2.d. SECURITY 	Counselors use current encryption standards within their websites and/or
technology-based communications that meet applicable legal requirements. Counselors take reason-
able precautions to ensure the confidentiality of information transmitted through any electronic means.
H.3. Client Verification
Counselors who engage in the use of distance counseling, technology, and/or social media to inter-
act with clients take steps to verify the client’s identity at the beginning and throughout the thera-
peutic process. Verification can include, but is not limited to, using code words, numbers, graphics,
or other nondescript identifiers.
H.4. Distance Counseling Relationship
H.4.a. BENEFITS AND LIMITATIONS 	Counselors inform clients of the benefits and limitations of
using technology applications in the provision of counseling services. Such technologies include,
but are not limited to, computer hardware and/or software, telephones and applications, social
media and Internet-based applications and other audio and/or video communication, or data storage
devices or media.
H.4.b. PROFESSIONAL BOUNDARIES IN DISTANCE COUNSELING 	Counselors understand the
necessity of maintaining a professional relationship with their clients. Counselors discuss and estab-
lish professional boundaries with clients regarding the appropriate use and/or application of tech-
nology and the limitations of its use within the counseling relationship (e.g., lack of confidentiality,
times when not appropriate to use).
H.4.c. TECHNOLOGY-ASSISTED SERVICES 	When providing technology-assisted services, coun-
selors make reasonable efforts to determine that clients are intellectually, emotionally, physically,
linguistically, and functionally capable of using the application and that the application is appropri-
ate for the needs of the client. Counselors verify that clients understand the purpose and operation
of technology applications and follow up with clients to correct possible misconceptions, discover
appropriate use, and assess subsequent steps.
H.4.d. EFFECTIVENESS OF SERVICES 	When distance counseling services are deemed ineffective
by the counselor or client, counselors consider delivering services face-to-face. If the counselor is
not able to provide face-to-face services (e.g., lives in another state), the counselor assists the client
in identifying appropriate services.
H.4.e. ACCESS 	Counselors provide information to clients regarding reasonable access to pertinent
applications when providing technology-assisted services.
H.4.f. COMMUNICATION DIFFERENCES IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 	Counselors consider the dif-
ferences between face-to-face and electronic communication (nonverbal and verbal cues) and how
these may affect the counseling process. Counselors educate clients on how to prevent and address
potential misunderstandings arising from the lack of visual cues and voice intonations when com-
municating electronically.

-- 489 of 593 --

Appendix A 	467
H.5. Records and Web Maintenance
H.5.a. RECORDS 	Counselors maintain electronic records in accordance with relevant laws and
statutes. Counselors inform clients on how records are maintained electronically. This includes, but
is not limited to, the type of encryption and security assigned to the records, and if/for how long
archival storage of transaction records is maintained.
H.5.b. CLIENT RIGHTS 	Counselors who offer distance counseling services and/or maintain a pro-
fessional website provide electronic links to relevant licensure and professional certification boards
to protect consumer and client rights and address ethical concerns.
H.5.c. ELECTRONIC LINKS 	Counselors regularly ensure that electronic links are working and are
professionally appropriate.
H.5.d. MULTICULTURAL AND DISABILITY CONSIDERATIONS 	Counselors who maintain websites
provide accessibility to persons with disabilities. They provide translation capabilities for clients
who have a different primary language, when feasible. Counselors acknowledge the imperfect
nature of such translations and accessibilities.
H.6. Social Media
H.6.a. VIRTUAL PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 	In cases where counselors wish to maintain a profes-
sional and personal presence for social media use, separate professional and personal web pages and
profiles are created to clearly distinguish between the two kinds of virtual presence.
H.6.b. SOCIAL MEDIA AS PART OF INFORMED CONSENT 	Counselors clearly explain to their
clients, as part of the informed consent procedure, the benefits, limitations, and boundaries of the
use of social media.
H.6.c. CLIENT VIRTUAL PRESENCE 	Counselors respect the privacy of their clients’ presence on
social media unless given consent to view such information.
H.6.d. USE OF PUBLIC SOCIAL MEDIA 	Counselors take precautions to avoid disclosing confiden-
tial information through public social media.
SECTION I: RESOLVING ETHICAL ISSUES
Introduction
Professional counselors behave in an ethical and legal manner. They are aware that client welfare
and trust in the profession depend on a high level of professional conduct. They hold other counsel-
ors to the same standards and are willing to take appropriate action to ensure that standards are
upheld. Counselors strive to resolve ethical dilemmas with direct and open communication among
all parties involved and seek consultation with colleagues and supervisors when necessary. Counsel-
ors incorporate ethical practice into their daily professional work and engage in ongoing profes-
sional development regarding current topics in ethical and legal issues in counseling. Counselors
become familiar with the ACA Policy and Procedures for Processing Complaints of Ethical Viola-
tions 1 and use it as a reference for assisting in the enforcement of the ACA Code of Ethics.
1See the American Counseling Association website at http://www.counseling.org/knowledge-center/ethics

-- 490 of 593 --

468 	Appendix A
I.1. Standards and the Law
I.1.a. KNOWLEDGE 	Counselors know and understand the ACA Code of Ethics and other applica-
ble ethics codes from professional organizations or certification and licensure bodies of which they
are members. Lack of knowledge or misunderstanding of an ethical responsibility is not a defense
against a charge of unethical conduct.
I.1.b. ETHICAL DECISION MAKING 	When counselors are faced with an ethical dilemma, they use
and document, as appropriate, an ethical decision-making model that may include, but is not lim-
ited to, consultation; consideration of relevant ethical standards, principles, and laws; generation of
potential courses of action; deliberation of risks and benefits; and selection of an objective decision
based on the circumstances and welfare of all involved.
I.1.c. CONFLICTS BETWEEN ETHICS AND LAWS 	If ethical responsibilities conflict with the law,
regulations, and/or other governing legal authority, counselors make known their commitment to the
ACA Code of Ethics and take steps to resolve the conflict. If the conflict cannot be resolved using
this approach, counselors, acting in the best interest of the client, may adhere to the requirements of
the law, regulations, and/or other governing legal authority.
I.2. Suspected Violations
I.2.a. INFORMAL RESOLUTION 	When counselors have reason to believe that another counselor is
violating or has violated an ethical standard and substantial harm has not occurred, they attempt to
first resolve the issue informally with the other counselor if feasible, provided such action does not
violate confidentiality rights that may be involved.
I.2.b. REPORTING ETHICAL VIOLATIONS 	If an apparent violation has substantially harmed or is
likely to substantially harm a person or organization and is not appropriate for informal resolution
or is not resolved properly, counselors take further action depending on the situation. Such action
may include referral to state or national committees on professional ethics, voluntary national cer-
tification bodies, state licensing boards, or appropriate institutional authorities. The confidentiality
rights of clients should be considered in all actions. This standard does not apply when counselors
have been retained to review the work of another counselor whose professional conduct is in ques-
tion (e.g., consultation, expert testimony).
I.2.c. CONSULTATION 	When uncertain about whether a particular situation or course of action
may be in violation of the ACA Code of Ethics, counselors consult with other counselors who are
knowledgeable about ethics and the ACA Code of Ethics, with colleagues, or with appropriate
authorities, such as the ACA Ethics and Professional Standards Department.
I.2.d. ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICTS 	If the demands of an organization with which counselors
are affiliated pose a conflict with the ACA Code of Ethics, counselors specify the nature of such
conflicts and express to their supervisors or other responsible officials their commitment to the ACA
Code of Ethics and, when possible, work through the appropriate channels to address the situation.
I.2.e. UNWARRANTED COMPLAINTS 	Counselors do not initiate, participate in, or encourage the
filing of ethics complaints that are retaliatory in nature or are made with reckless disregard or willful
ignorance of facts that would disprove the allegation.

-- 491 of 593 --

Appendix A 	469
I.2.f. UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION AGAINST COMPLAINANTS AND RESPONDENTS 	Counselors do
not deny individuals employment, advancement, admission to academic or other programs, tenure,
or promotion based solely on their having made or their being the subject of an ethics complaint.
This does not preclude taking action based on the outcome of such proceedings or considering other
appropriate information.
I.3. Cooperation With Ethics Committees
Counselors assist in the process of enforcing the ACA Code of Ethics. Counselors cooperate with
investigations, proceedings, and requirements of the ACA Ethics Committee or ethics committees
of other duly constituted associations or boards having jurisdiction over those charged with a
violation.

-- 492 of 593 --

470
Abandonment—the inappropriate ending or arbitrary ter-
mination of a counseling relationship that puts the client at
risk.
Advocacy—promotion of the well-being of individuals,
groups, and the counseling profession within systems and
organizations. Advocacy seeks to remove barriers and
obstacles that inhibit access, growth, and development.
Assent—to demonstrate agreement when a person is oth-
erwise not capable or competent to give formal consent
(e.g., informed consent) to a counseling service or plan.
Assessment—the process of collecting in-depth informa-
tion about a person in order to develop a comprehensive
plan that will guide the collaborative counseling and ser-
vice provision process.
Bartering—accepting goods or services from clients in
exchange for counseling services.
Client—an individual seeking or referred to the profes-
sional services of a counselor.
Confidentiality—the ethical duty of counselors to protect
a client’s identity, identifying characteristics, and private
communications.
Consultation—a professional relationship that may
include, but is not limited to, seeking advice, information,
and/or testimony.
Counseling—a professional relationship that empowers
diverse individuals, families, and groups to accomplish
mental health, wellness, education, and career goals.
Counselor Educator—a professional counselor engaged
primarily in developing, implementing, and supervising
the educational preparation of professional counselors.
Counselor Supervisor—a professional counselor who
engages in a formal relationship with a practicing coun-
selor or counselor-in-training for the purpose of oversee-
ing that individual’s counseling work or clinical skill
development.
Culture—membership in a socially constructed way of
living, which incorporates collective values, beliefs, norms,
boundaries, and lifestyles that are cocreated with others
who share similar worldviews comprising biological, psy-
chosocial, historical, psychological, and other factors.
Discrimination—the prejudicial treatment of an individ-
ual or group based on their actual or perceived member-
ship in a particular group, class, or category.
Distance Counseling—[the] provision of counseling ser-
vices by means other than face-to-face meetings, usually
with the aid of technology.
Diversity—the similarities and differences that occur
within and across cultures, and the intersection of cultural
and social identities.
Documents—any written, digital, audio, visual, or artistic
recording of the work within the counseling relationship
between counselor and client.
Encryption—process of encoding information in such a
way that limits access to authorized users.
Examinee—a recipient of any professional counseling
service that includes educational, psychological, and
career appraisal, using qualitative or quantitative tech-
niques.
Exploitation—actions and/or behaviors that take advan-
tage of another for one’s own benefit or gain.
Fee Splitting—the payment or acceptance of fees for cli-
ent referrals (e.g., percentage of fee paid for rent, referral
fees).
Forensic Evaluation—the process of forming profes-
sional opinions for court or other legal proceedings, based
on professional knowledge and expertise, and supported
by appropriate data.
Gatekeeping—the initial and ongoing academic, skill,
and dispositional assessment of students’ competency for
professional practice, including remediation and termina-
tion as appropriate.
Impairment—a significantly diminished capacity to per-
form professional functions.
Incapacitation—an inability to perform professional
functions.
Informed Consent—a process of information sharing
associated with possible actions clients may choose to
take, aimed at assisting clients in acquiring a full appreci-
ation and understanding of the facts and implications of a
given action or actions.
Instrument—a tool, developed using accepted research
practices, that measures the presence and strength of a
specified construct or constructs.
Interdisciplinary Teams—teams of professionals serving
clients that may include individuals who may not share
counselors’ responsibilities regarding confidentiality.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS

-- 493 of 593 --

Glossary of Terms 	471
Minors—generally, persons under the age of 18 years,
unless otherwise designated by statute or regulation. In
some jurisdictions, minors may have the right to consent
to counseling without consent of the parent or guardian.
Multicultural/Diversity Competence—counselors’ cul-
tural and diversity awareness and knowledge about self and
others, and how this awareness and knowledge are applied
effectively in practice with clients and client groups.
Multicultural/Diversity Counseling—counseling that
recognizes diversity and embraces approaches that sup-
port the worth, dignity, potential, and uniqueness of indi-
viduals within their historical, cultural, economic,
political, and psychosocial contexts.
Personal Virtual Relationship—engaging in a relation-
ship via technology and/or social media that blurs the pro-
fessional boundary (e.g., friending on social networking
sites); using personal accounts as the connection point for
the virtual relationship.
Privacy—the right of an individual to keep oneself and
one’s personal information free from unauthorized disclo-
sure.
Privilege—a legal term denoting the protection of confi-
dential information in a legal proceeding (e.g., subpoena,
deposition, testimony).
Pro bono publico—contributing to society by devoting a
portion of professional activities for little or no financial
return (e.g., speaking to groups, sharing professional
information, offering reduced fees).
Professional Virtual Relationship—using technology
and/or social media in a professional manner and main-
taining appropriate professional boundaries; using busi-
ness accounts that cannot be linked back to personal
accounts as the connection point for the virtual relation-
ship (e.g., a business page versus a personal profile).
Records—all information or documents, in any medium,
that the counselor keeps about the client, excluding per-
sonal and psychotherapy notes.
Records of an Artistic Nature—products created by the
client as part of the counseling process.
Records Custodian—a professional colleague who
agrees to serve as the caretaker of client records for
another mental health professional.
Self-Growth—a process of self-examination and chal-
lenging of a counselor’s assumptions to enhance profes-
sional effectiveness.
Serious and Foreseeable—when a reasonable counselor
can anticipate significant and harmful possible conse-
quences.
Sexual Harassment—sexual solicitation, physical
advances, or verbal/nonverbal conduct that is sexual in
nature; occurs in connection with professional activities
or roles; is unwelcome, offensive, or creates a hostile
workplace or learning environment; and/or is sufficiently
severe or intense to be perceived as harassment by a rea-
sonable person.
Social Justice—the promotion of equity for all people
and groups for the purpose of ending oppression and
injustice affecting clients, students, counselors, families,
communities, schools, workplaces, governments, and
other social and institutional systems.
Social Media—technology-based forms of communica-
tion of ideas, beliefs, personal histories, etc. (e.g., social
networking sites, blogs).
Student—an individual engaged in formal graduate-level
counselor education.
Supervisee—a professional counselor or counselor-in-
training whose counseling work or clinical skill develop-
ment is being overseen in a formal supervisory relationship
by a qualified trained professional.
Supervision—a process in which one individual, usually
a senior member of a given profession designated as the
supervisor, engages in a collaborative relationship with
another individual or group, usually a junior member(s) of
a given profession designated as the supervisee(s) in order
to (a) promote the growth and development of the
supervisee(s), (b) protect the welfare of the clients seen by
the supervisee(s), and (c) evaluate the performance of the
supervisee(s).
Supervisor—counselors who are trained to oversee the
professional clinical work of counselors and counselors-
in-training.
Teaching—all activities engaged in as part of a formal
educational program that is designed to lead to a graduate
degree in counseling.
Training—the instruction and practice of skills related
to the counseling profession. Training contributes to
the ongoing proficiency of students and professional
counselors.
Virtual Relationship—a non–face-to-face relationship
(e.g., through social media).
Source: Republished with permission of American Counseling Association, from ACA Code of Ethics (2014); permission conveyed
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.

-- 494 of 593 --

472
APPENDIX B
Counseling Disclosure and Agreement Forms
CLIENT INFORMATION AND AGREEMENT FOR COUNSELORS IN PRIVATE PRACTICE
_____________________, MEd, NCC
Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC)
I am pleased you have chosen me as your counselor. This document is designed to inform you about my
background and to ensure that you understand our professional relationship.
I am licensed as a Professional Counselor by the _____________________ Board of Examiners for Licensed
Professional Counselors. Only licensed mental health professionals may provide counseling services in this state. In
addition, I am certified by the National Board of Certified Counselors, a private certifying agency that recognizes
counselors who have distinguished themselves through meeting the board’s standards for education, knowledge,
and experience.
I hold a master’s degree (MEd) in counseling from the University of _____________________. The graduate
program I completed is accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational
Programs (CACREP). I have been a counselor since _____________________. My counseling practice is limited to
adolescents and adults and includes career, personal, couples, marriage, and group counseling. I also am available
for divorce mediation.
I provide services for clients in my private practice who I believe have the capacity to resolve their
own problems with my assistance. A counseling relationship between a Professional Counselor and client is a
professional relationship in which the Professional Counselor assists the client in exploring and resolving difficult
life issues. I believe that as people become more accepting of themselves, they are more capable of finding
happiness and contentment in their lives. Self-awareness and self-acceptance are goals that sometimes take a long
time to achieve. While some clients may need only a few counseling sessions to feel complete, others may require
months or even years of counseling. Clients are in complete control and may end our counseling relationship at any
point, and I will be supportive of that decision. If counseling is successful, clients should feel that they are able to
face life’s challenges in the future without my continuing support or intervention.
My counseling services are limited to the scheduled sessions we have together. In the event you feel your
mental health requires emergency attention or if you have an emotional crisis, you should report to the emergency
room of a local hospital and request mental health services.
Although our sessions will be very intimate, it is important for you to realize that we have a professional,
rather than a personal, relationship. Our contact will be limited to the paid sessions you have with me. Please do
not invite me to social gatherings, offer gifts, or ask me to relate to you in any way outside our counseling sessions.
I will not seek information about you on social media and I ask that you not use social media in an attempt to learn
more about me. You will be best served if our relationship stays strictly professional and if our sessions concentrate
exclusively on your concerns. You will learn a great deal about me as we work together during your counseling
experience. However, it is important for you to remember that you are experiencing me only in my professional
role.
I will keep confidential anything you say to me with the following general exceptions: you direct me to
tell someone else, I determine you are a danger to yourself or others, or I am ordered by a court to disclose
information.
In the event you are dissatisfied with my services for any reason, please let me know. If I am not able to
resolve your concerns, you may report your complaints to the state of _____________________ Licensed Professional
Counselors Board of Examiners (address, telephone number). I hold license #_____________________.

-- 495 of 593 --

Appendix B 	473
In return for a fee of $_____________________ per session, I agree to provide counseling services for you.
Sessions are 50 minutes in duration and may be delivered in-person or virtually using Zoom video, as we mutually
agree upon. It is impossible to guarantee any specific results regarding your counseling goals. However, I assure
you that my services will be rendered in a professional manner consistent with accepted ethical standards.
The fee for each session will be due and must be paid at the conclusion of each session. We will agree upon
payment methods, which could include electronic payments, cash or, personal checks. I will provide you with a
monthly receipt for all fees paid.
In the event you will not be able to keep an appointment, you must notify me 24 hours in advance. If I do not
receive such advance notice, you will be responsible for paying for the session you missed.
If you are a member of an HMO, PPO, or some type of managed health care plan, I can tell you if I am an
authorized provider of services under that plan. If I am an authorized provider, services will be provided to you
under the terms of that plan’s contract. Co-payment fees will be billed and collected according to the requirements
of that plan. If I am not an authorized provider, you may still receive services from me for a fee, but your plan will
not reimburse you for the cost of any of my services. Plans often will reimburse for only a limited number of visits
per year. If you exceed that limit, you may still receive services from me, but your plan will not reimburse you for
the cost of services that exceed its maximum number of visits.
If you wish to seek reimbursement for my services from your health insurance company, I will be happy to
complete any necessary forms related to your reimbursement provided by you or the insurance company. Since
you will be paying each session for my services, any later reimbursement from the insurance company should be
sent directly to you. Please do not assign any payments to me.
Most health insurance companies will reimburse clients for my counseling services, but some will not. Those
that do reimburse usually require that a standard amount be paid by you before reimbursement is allowed and
usually only a percentage of my fee is reimbursable. You should contact a company representative to determine
whether your insurance company will reimburse you and the schedule of reimbursement that is used.
Health insurance companies usually require that I diagnose your mental condition and indicate that you
have an illness before they will agree to reimburse you. In the event a diagnosis is required, I will inform you of the
diagnosis I plan to render before I submit it to the health insurance company.
If you have any questions, feel free to ask. Please sign and date both copies of this form. You keep one and
give the other copy to me. If you are signing this agreement electronically, your typed email address is sufficient if
the agreement is then transmitted to me from that same email address.
_____________________ 	_____________________
Your Signature 	Your Client’s Signature
_____________________ 	_____________________
Date 	Date

-- 496 of 593 --

474 	Appendix B
CLIENT INFORMATION AND AGREEMENT FOR COUNSELORS EMPLOYED IN AN AGENCY
_____________ Community Mental Health Center
_____________ address
_____________ city, state, zip
_____________ telephone number
_____________, MEd, NCC
Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC)
_______________ Community Mental Health Center will be providing counseling services to you, and I have
been assigned as your counselor. This document is designed to inform you about the services provided by this
agency and my background.
_______________ Community Mental Health Center offers a variety of services, which include the following:
_______________. All residents of _______________ County are eligible for services.
I am licensed as a Professional Counselor by the _______________ Board of Examiners for Licensed
Professional Counselors. In addition, I am certified by the National Board of Certified Counselors, a private
certifying agency that recognizes counselors who have distinguished themselves through meeting the board’s
standards for education, knowledge, and experience.
I hold a master’s degree (MEd) in counseling from the University of _______________. The graduate program
I completed is accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs
(CACREP). I have been a counselor since _______________. My counseling practice is limited to adolescents and
adults and includes career, personal, couples, marriage, and group counseling. I also am available for divorce
mediation.
A counseling relationship between a Professional Counselor and client is a professional relationship in which
the Professional Counselor assists the client in exploring and resolving difficult life issues. I believe that as people
become more accepting of themselves, they are capable of finding happiness and contentment in their lives. Self-
awareness and self-acceptance are goals that sometimes take a long time to achieve. While some clients may need
only a few counseling sessions to feel complete, others may require months or even years of counseling. Clients are
in complete control and may end our counseling relationship at any point, and I will be supportive of that decision.
If counseling is successful, clients should feel that they are able to face life’s challenges in the future without my
continuing support or intervention. My counseling services are limited to the scheduled sessions we have together.
In the event you feel your mental health requires emergency attention or if you have an emotional crisis, you should
report to the emergency room of a local hospital and request mental health services.
Although our sessions will be very intimate, it is important for you to realize that we have a professional,
rather than a personal, relationship. Our contact will be limited to the paid sessions you have with me. Please do
not invite me to social gatherings, offer gifts, or ask me to relate to you in any way outside our counseling sessions.
I will not seek information about you on social media and I ask that you not use social media in an attempt to learn
more about me. You will be best served if our relationship stays strictly professional and if our sessions concentrate
exclusively on your concerns. You will learn a great deal about me as we work together during your counseling
experience. However, it is important for you to remember that you are experiencing me only in my professional
role.
I will keep confidential anything you say to me with the following general exceptions: you direct me to
tell someone else, I determine you are a danger to yourself or others, or I am ordered by a court to disclose
information.
In the event you are dissatisfied with my services for any reason, please let me know. If I am not able to resolve
your concerns, you may report your complaints to _______________, my supervisor here at the _______________
Community Mental Health Center.
The general fee for services at _______________ Community Mental Health Center is $_______________
per session. However, if you apply for a reduction in fees for services based on your family’s income, you may be
eligible for a reduction in fees. If you are granted a reduction in fees, United Way, a local charitable organization,
pays the portion of the fees that you cannot afford. Based on your application for a reduction in fees for services,
your fees have been established at $_______________ per session.
Sessions are 50 minutes in duration and may be delivered in-person or virtually using Zoom video, as we
mutually agree upon. It is impossible to guarantee any specific results regarding your counseling goals. However,

-- 497 of 593 --

Appendix B 	475
I assure you that my services will be rendered in a professional manner consistent with accepted ethical standards.
The fee for each session will be collected by this agency according to its procedures. The agency will provide you
with a monthly receipt for all fees paid. In the event you will not be able to keep an appointment, you must notify
the agency 24 hours in advance. If the agency does not receive such advance notice, you will be responsible for
paying for the session you missed.
If you are a member of an HMO, PPO, or some type of managed health care plan, I can tell you if this
agency is an authorized provider of services under that plan. If this agency is an authorized provider, services will
be provided to you under the terms of that plan’s contract. Fees will be billed and collected according to the
requirements of that plan. If this agency is not an authorized provider, you may still receive services from me for
a fee, but your plan will not reimburse you for the cost of any of my services. Plans often will reimburse for only a
limited number of visits per year. If you exceed that limit, you may still receive services from me, but your plan will
not reimburse you for the cost of services that exceed its maximum number of visits.
If you wish to seek reimbursement for my services from your health insurance company, discuss that
possibility with a representative of this agency to determine whether that is possible.
If you have any questions, feel free to ask. Please sign and date both copies of this form. You keep one and
give the other copy to me. If you are signing this agreement electronically, your typed email address is sufficient if
the agreement is then transmitted to me from that same email address.
_____________________ 	_____________________
Your Signature 	Your Client’s Signature
_____________________ 	_____________________
Date 	Date

-- 498 of 593 --

476 	Appendix B
CLIENT INFORMATION AND AGREEMENT FOR COUNSELORS
WHO PROVIDE CHILD CUSTODY EVALUATIONS
The purpose of our relationship is for me to gather information from you and to evaluate you so that I will
be able to render an opinion regarding the best custody situation for your minor child. This process will work best
if you are cooperative in providing me with the information I need and if we maintain a professional relationship
throughout the evaluation.
Nothing that we discuss will be confidential. I will be required to give a written opinion to the judge who
appointed me to your case. I may use any information in that report that you give to me during the duration of our
relationship. In addition, I may be required to testify under oath at legal proceedings regarding interactions we
have had and opinions I have rendered.
I guarantee you that I will be fair and unbiased in rendering my opinions in this case. The best interest of
your child will guide my opinions.
In the event you feel I am acting in an unfair or biased manner, please have your attorney notify the judge
who is presiding in this case and request that the judge determine whether my actions have been unprofessional.
Although I am a Licensed Professional Counselor in this state, I am not serving as your counselor. In the
event you feel a need for counseling, I will be happy to refer you to agencies or individuals who might be able to
assist you.
If you have any questions, feel free to ask. Please sign and date both copies of this form. You keep one and
give the other copy to me. If you are signing this agreement electronically, your typed email address is sufficient if
the agreement is then transmitted to me from that same email address.
_________________________ 	_________________________
Your Signature 	Signature of the Person
Being Evaluated
_________________________ 	_________________________
Date 	Date

-- 499 of 593 --

Appendix B 	477
CLIENT INFORMATION AND AGREEMENT FOR COUNSELORS EMPLOYED IN AN
AGENCY WHO ARE COUNSELING INVOLUNTARY CLIENTS
_____________ Community Mental Health Center
_____________ [address]
_____________ [city, state, zip]
_____________ [telephone number]
_____________, MEd, NCC
Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC)
_______________ Community Mental Health Center will be providing counseling services to you, and I have
been assigned as your counselor. This document is designed to inform you about the services provided by this
agency and my background.
_______________ Community Mental Health Center offers a variety of services, which include the following:
_______________. All residents of _______________ County are eligible for services.
You have been required to obtain counseling sessions from this agency by the judge who is handling your
criminal case. As your counselor, I will be required to report to your probation officer whether you attended
counseling sessions, whether you paid for services received, and whether I believe that you are benefiting from
our counseling sessions. As a result, you must understand that anything you say to me in counseling may be
transmitted to your probation officer and that I may be required to testify regarding the contents of our sessions
at court proceedings regarding your case.
I am licensed as a Professional Counselor by the _______________ Board of Examiners for Licensed
Professional Counselors. In addition, I am certified by the National Board of Certified Counselors, a private
certifying agency that recognizes counselors who have distinguished themselves through meeting the board’s
standards for education, knowledge, and experience.
I hold a Master’s (MEd) degree in counseling from the University of _______________. The graduate program
I completed is accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs
(CACREP). I have been a counselor since _______________. My counseling practice is limited to adolescents and
adults and includes career, personal, couples, marriage, and group counseling. I also am available for divorce
mediation.
A counseling relationship between a Professional Counselor and client is a professional relationship in which
the Professional Counselor assists the client in exploring and resolving difficult life issues. I believe that as people
become more accepting of themselves, they are more capable of finding happiness and contentment in their lives.
Self-awareness and self-acceptance are goals that sometimes take a long time to achieve. While some clients may
need only a few counseling sessions to feel complete, others may require months or even years of counseling.
If counseling is successful, clients should feel that they are able to face life’s challenges in the future without my
continuing support or intervention.
My counseling services are limited to the scheduled sessions we have together. In the event you feel your
mental health requires emergency attention or if you have an emotional crisis, you should report to the emergency
room of a local hospital and request mental health services.
Although our sessions will be very intimate, it is important for you to realize that we have a professional,
rather than a personal, relationship. Our contact will be limited to the paid sessions you have with me. Please do
not invite me to social gatherings, offer gifts, or ask me to relate to you in any way outside our counseling sessions.
I will not seek information about you on social media and I ask that you not use social media in an attempt to learn
more about me. You will be best served if our relationship stays strictly professional and if our sessions concentrate
exclusively on your concerns. You will learn a great deal about me as we work together during your counseling
experience. However, it is important for you to remember that you are experiencing me only in my professional
role.
In the event you are dissatisfied with my services for any reason, please let me know. If I am not able to resolve
your concerns, you may report your complaints to _______________, my supervisor here at the _______________
Community Mental Health Center.
The general fee for services at _______________ Community Mental Health Center is $_______________
per session. However, if you apply for a reduction in fees for services based on your family’s income, you may be
eligible for a reduction. If you are granted a reduction in fees, United Way, a local charitable organization, pays the

-- 500 of 593 --

478 	Appendix B
portion of the fees that you cannot afford. Based on your application for a reduction of fees for services, your fees
have been established at $_______________ per session.
Sessions are 50 minutes in duration and may be delivered in-person or virtually using Zoom video, as we
mutually agree upon. It is impossible to guarantee any specific results regarding your counseling goals. However, I
assure you that my services will be rendered in a professional manner consistent with accepted ethical standards.
The fee for each session will be collected by this agency according to its procedures. The agency will provide
you with a monthly receipt for all fees paid. In the event you will not be able to keep an appointment, you must
notify the agency 24 hours in advance. If the agency does not receive such advance notice, you will be responsible
for paying for the session you missed.
If you are a member of an HMO, PPO, or some type of managed health care plan, I can tell you if this
agency is an authorized provider of services under that plan. If this agency is an authorized provider, services will
be provided to you under the terms of that plan’s contract. Fees will be billed and collected according to the
requirements of that plan. If this agency is not an authorized provider, you may still receive services from me for
a fee, but your plan will not reimburse you for the cost of any of my services. Plans often will reimburse for only a
limited number of visits per year. If you exceed that limit, you may still receive services from me, but your plan will
not reimburse you for the cost of services that exceed its maximum number of visits.
If you wish to seek reimbursement for my services from your health insurance company, discuss that
possibility with a representative of this agency to determine whether that is possible.
If you have any questions, feel free to ask. Please sign and date both copies of this form. You keep one and
give the other copy to me. If you are signing this agreement electronically, your typed email address is sufficient if
the agreement is then transmitted to me from that same email address.
_________________________ 	_________________________
Your Signature 	Your Client’s Signature
_________________________ 	_________________________
Date 	Date

-- 501 of 593 --

Appendix B 	479
CLIENT INFORMATION AND AGREEMENT FOR COUNSELORS
EMPLOYED IN A SCHOOL
Include a statement similar to the one below in a letter to parents at the beginning of the year, in orientation
materials, or in other materials provided to parents. The statement could be easily modified to be addressed to
students themselves and included in a student handbook.
“I’m Your Child’s School Counselor”
The counseling program at _______________ (school) is designed to assist your child to make the most of his
or her educational experiences. As your child’s counselor, I am concerned about his or her emotional well-being,
academic progress, and personal and social development.
I have a master’s degree (MEd) in school counseling from the University of _______________. My graduate
program is accredited by the American Counseling Association’s Council for the Accreditation of Counseling and
Related Educational Programs (CACREP), the nationally recognized accrediting agency for counseling graduate
programs. I am a National Certified Counselor (NCC), National Certified School Counselor (NCSC), and a Licensed
Professional Counselor (LPC) in _______________. In addition, I am certified as a school counselor by the state of
_______________. Before beginning my duties as a counselor at _______________ (school), I held the following
positions: _______________.
The following specific activities are offered by the counseling program:
1. Periodic classroom lessons related to positive personal growth and development
2.
3.
(etc.)
Reasons that I might contact parents regarding their child include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Assistance is needed from you in specific areas to help your child achieve success in school.
2. I determine that your child may be a danger to self or others.
3.
etc.
Unfortunately, I am not able to provide the following services to your child or to parents:
1. Testifying in court in child-custody matters.
2. Providing intensive long-term counseling services when they are needed by a child.
3.
(etc.)
Your child will be participating in the school counseling program on a regular basis. In the event you have
questions about the counseling program, please call me at _______________. I sincerely look forward to working
with you in the coming year to help your child have a successful experience in our school.
_______________________
Your Signature
_______________________
Date

-- 502 of 593 --

480
APPENDIX C
Client Request Form to Transfer Records
[This form was constructed to meet HIPAA requirements. In the event an agency or practice is not subject to HIPAA
requirements, such a form could be simpler.]
I, ________________ (fill in name of client), hereby request that copies of my counseling records as described
below be transferred to the following individual or institution:
______________________________________________________________________________________________________
(name and email address to where records should be transferred)
I agree that my records may be transferred electronically by secure means.
Only copies of records will be sent that are necessary to fulfill the purpose for which you are requesting
this transfer. With that in mind, what is the purpose for requesting that copies of your records be sent?
__________________
Generally, notes made by your counselor after each session (known as psychotherapy notes) are not
transferred. Would you like copies of these psychotherapy notes to be sent also?
_________ Yes
_________ No
Generally, copies of your records are sent one time only as soon as possible, and you would have to
complete and sign a form again for additional requests. If you would like to alter this general procedure in any way,
please indicate your preferences:
To the best of your knowledge, when did you begin and end counseling services at this agency?
_________ Date Counseling Services Began
_________ Date Counseling Services Ended
If you have any questions, feel free to ask. Please sign and date this form. If you are signing this request
electronically, your typed email address is sufficient if the form is then transmitted to me from that same email
address.
________________________ 	________________________
Client Signature 	Date

-- 503 of 593 --

481
APPENDIX D
Client Permission Form to Record
Counseling Session
for Supervision Purposes
I, ________________ [fill in name of client], hereby give my permission for my counselor, ________________ [fill in
your name], to audiotape/videotape our counseling session on ________________ [fill in date, or if over a period of
time, fill in inclusive dates].
I understand that the purpose of this recording is for the clinical supervision of my counselor’s work. I
understand that only my client’s clinical supervisor, ________________ [fill in name of supervisor], will review the
tape and that the tape will be erased after the supervisor has reviewed it.
______________________ 	__________________________
Client’s Signature 	Date

-- 504 of 593 --

482
APPENDIX E
Guidelines for Counseling Case Notes*
1. Write any case notes that assist you in being a more effective counseling practitioner. Notes
may be kept electronically or on paper. Do not hesitate to keep case notes if they help you in
being a better counselor.
2. There is no general legal duty to keep case notes, but because maintaining case notes is a
standard procedure in the counseling profession, it could be considered unusual if a counselor
did not have case notes for a particular case. Some state licensure boards or employers of
counselors may require that case notes be kept.
3. Always assume that any notes you write will someday be read in open court with you and
your client present, along with newspaper, radio, and television reporters.
4. Separate your notes into at least two distinct sections: objective and subjective.
5. In the objective section, record precisely what the client said, what you said, and what you
observed. Do not draw any conclusions or enter any speculations at this point. You might
entitle this section “Observations.”
6. In the subjective section, record any thoughts that you will need for the future: impressions of
the client, speculations about the reasons for the client’s problems, reminders to yourself of
your present thoughts, or plans for the next session would all be acceptable. You might entitle
this section “Impressions.” Avoid writing anything in this section that you would not want the
client or others to see, and be prepared to explain or defend any impressions or speculations
that you put into your notes.
7. If your case notes are written, keep them in locked file drawers and ensure that only clerical
assistants and you have access to your notes. If notes are kept electronically, be sure they are
not accessible by others.
8. There is no general legal principle regarding the length of time you need to keep case notes
once they are recorded. However, there are federal statutes that cover certain federally funded
projects, hospital and counseling center accreditation standards, and particular agency proce-
dures that require that case notes be kept for certain periods of time. Of course, such statutes,
standards, and procedures should be followed if they apply to your situation.
9. Regularly destroy your case notes. When you destroy them, be sure no identifying informa-
tion remains. It is best to shred, burn, or in some other manner totally destroy written records.
Electronic records should be deleted to the extent possible and in a manner that does not allow
them to be retrieved.
10. If there are no requirements in your work setting regarding the length of time for retention,
keep case notes as long as you think you might need them. However, you should destroy case
notes on a systematic basis. For example, some counselors destroy case notes of clients who
*Composed by T. Remley.

-- 505 of 593 --

Appendix E 	483
have ended their counseling sessions 6 months after termination, 1 year after termination, or
3 years after termination. It is a good idea to destroy notes only one or two days each year, for
example, on every December 31.
11. When destroying your case notes, do not include those notes in which you have documented
steps you have taken to protect yourself in the event you are accused of wrongdoing. Keep
these case notes for longer periods of time, perhaps indefinitely.
12. Never, under any circumstances, destroy case notes after you receive a subpoena or if you
think you might be receiving a subpoena in the future. Such acts could be interpreted as
obstruction of justice, and you could be held in contempt of court.

-- 506 of 593 --

484
APPENDIX F
Clinical Supervision Model Agreement
I, __________________, agree to provide supervision for you for the purposes of becoming a
Licensed Professional Counselor (change title if necessary) in the state of (your state). Our supervision
sessions will be conducted virtually by Zoom or in-person, depending as we mutually agree.
I am licensed by the state of (your state) as a Professional Counselor (change title if necessary).
I am also licensed as a Professional Counselor in (list other states, if applicable). I hold (list your degrees)
degrees in counseling from the (list your university). I am a National Certified Counselor (NCC). In the
past, I have served as (tailor this section to your résumé) a high school counselor, community college
counselor, university career counselor, counselor educator, community mental health center counselor,
and counselor in private practice. My areas of counseling expertise include (tailor this section to your
résumé) personal and social adjustment, relationship issues, career decision making, work adjustment,
divorce mediation, anger management, and serious mental illnesses.
It is your responsibility to obtain the degree necessary, to meet the specific course content
requirements, and to complete the required practicum and internship necessary to register our
supervision with the (your state) Licensed Professional Counselors Board of Examiners (change title of
board if necessary) so that you may begin obtaining supervision for the purpose of becoming licensed.
You must complete the necessary LPC Board forms and include all attachments. I will complete the
section of the form for the supervisor, will provide you with a copy of my “Declaration of Practice and
Procedures,” and will sign where necessary. You must then submit the forms to the LPC Board for
approval.
The supervision I provide for you will be individual supervision. You will meet with me 1 hour each
week during the time you are completing your required (insert number of hours required in your state)
hours of supervised experience as a counselor intern. The hourly fee for my services is $__________,
which has been set according to a fee schedule based on the income of you and your spouse or partner.
This fee schedule will be reviewed annually and adjusted as appropriate. Fees are payable by check
before each supervision session begins. In the event you must reschedule a session for some reason,
you must notify me 24 hours in advance. If such notice is not received, you must pay the full fee for
the missed session, plus the fee for the current session prior to the next scheduled session. If you miss
a session for circumstances beyond your control and were unable to contact me prior to missing the
session, no fee will be charged.
Once our supervision relationship has been approved by the licensure board, our supervision
meetings will begin. Our professional relationship will be limited to the formal scheduled hours we have
agreed to for your supervision. In the event situations occur in your role as counselor for which you need
direction and advice, you should consult your immediate supervisor at the site where you are providing
counseling services and follow his or her direction. My regular hourly fee for supervision must be paid
by you for any virtual, telephone, or face-to-face consultation requested by you outside our regularly
scheduled supervision sessions.
My philosophy of supervision is that my role as your clinical supervisor is to assist you in practicing
counseling in the most effective manner possible, given your choice of counseling theories, approaches,
and interventions. I will review your work and give you my impressions of your strengths and weakness
and will assist you in improving your skills as a counselor. In addition, I will evaluate your work on a
continuing basis.
It is your responsibility to notify your administrative supervisor at the site or sites where you
are collecting your hours of experience that you are receiving clinical supervision from me. You should

-- 507 of 593 --

Appendix F 	485
explain the nature of our supervisory relationship. If your administrative supervisor wishes to consult with
me regarding your work, ask him or her to contact me.
In order for me to supervise you, you must be able to videotape one counseling session each
week. You must follow any requirements your site or sites may impose regarding these recordings.
Before each meeting we have, you will provide me with a new tape. You will transfer the tape to me
electronically in the secure fashion we agree upon, and I shall ensure that no one else has access to
the tape. I will keep information revealed in the tape confidential. I will review the tape before our next
meeting and will permanently delete the tape after I have reviewed it.
During the time I am serving as your clinical supervisor, I will make every effort to review with
you cases that you choose to bring to my attention for consultation. In addition, I will review the tapes
of counseling sessions that you provide to me. My duty to you is to provide you with professional
clinical supervision. However, I will not be responsible for your day-to-day activities as a counselor.
Your administrative supervisor or supervisors at your site or sites will be responsible for your ongoing
counseling activities.
Because I must evaluate your professional performance as a counselor, we will not have a personal
friendship during the time I am serving as your supervisor. While we may have a congenial and collegial
professional relationship and may attend social functions together, we should not include each other
in social interactions one of us has initiated. Please do not offer me gifts or invite me to your home or
nonprofessional social events you are hosting during the time I am serving as your clinical supervisor.
You must complete a total of (insert the required number) hours of supervised experience. When
you have completed the first 1,000 hours, I will provide you with a written evaluation of your progress
and performance, including my determination of whether you are progressing satisfactorily toward your
goal of becoming a Licensed Professional Counselor. I will provide you with another written evaluation at
the end of the second 1,000 hours. At the end of your total number of hours of supervised experience,
I will verify the supervision I have provided to you to the LPC Board and will either recommend or not
recommend you for licensure as a Professional Counselor.
I agree to provide clinical supervision to you of your counseling responsibilities in a professional
manner to the extent described within this agreement. Our relationship is limited to the terms and
conditions set forth herein. Either of us, with a 2-week written notice to the other, may cancel this
agreement for any reason. In the event the agreement is canceled by either of us, you agree to notify
the LPC Board immediately, and I agree to provide any evaluations or completed forms required by the
board.
By signing below, I am agreeing to provide you with clinical supervision according to the terms of
this agreement, and you are agreeing to pay my fee and comply with the terms of this agreement as well.
If you have any questions, please feel free to ask. Please sign and date both copies of this form.
You keep one and give the other copy to me. If you are signing this agreement electronically, your typed
email address is sufficient if the agreement is then transmitted to me from that same email address.
______________________ 	______ 	______________________ 	______
Supervisor’s Signature 	Date 	Supervisee’s Signature 	Date

-- 508 of 593 --

486
REFERENCES
Abbott, A. (1988). The system
of professions: An essay on
the division of expert labor.
University of Chicago Press.
Abboud, M. J., Wu, G., Pedneault,
A., Stohr, M. K., & Hemmens,
C. (2020). Educator sexual
misconduct: A statutory analysis.
Criminal Justice Policy Review,
31(1), 133–153. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0887403418806564
Abboud, M. J., Wu, G., Pedneault,
A., Stohr, M. K., & Hemmens,
C. (2018). Educator sexual
misconduct: A statutory analysis.
Criminal Justice Policy Review,
31(1), 31(1), 133–153.
Abortion Finder. (2023). State-
by-sAdams, C. M., Puig,
A., Baggs, A., & Wolf, C. P.
(2015). Integrating religion
and spirituality into counselor
education: Barriers and
strategies. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 54, 44–56.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2015.00069.x
Abreu, R., McEachern, A. G., &
Kenny, M. C. (2017). Myths and
misconceptions about LGBTQ
youth: School counselors’ role
in advocacy. Journal of School
Counseling, 15(8). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v15n8.pdf
Abreu, R. L., Kenny, M. C.,
Hall, J. G., & Huff, J. (2020).
Supporting transgender students:
School counselors’ preparedness,
training efforts, and necessary
support. Journal of LGBT Youth,
17(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/193
61653.2019.1662755
Ackerman, M. J., Bow, J. N., &
Mathy, N. (2021). Child custody
evaluation practices: Where we
were, where we are, and where
we are going. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 52(4), 406–417. https://
doi.org/10.1037/pro0000380
Adams, C. M., Puig, A., Baggs,
A., & Wolf, C. P. (2015).
Integrating religion and
spirituality into counselor
education: Barriers and
strategies. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 54, 44–56.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2015.00069.x
Adams, S. A. (2010). Who is my
client? Maintaining paperwork
when the client changes. The
Family Journal, 18, 70–72.
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena,
515 U.S. 200, 115 Sup. Ct. 2097,
132 L.Ed.2d 158 (1995).
Adkins, K. L., & Joyner, D. A.
(2022). Scaling anti-plagiarism
efforts to meet the needs of
large online computer science
classes: Challenges, solutions,
and recommendations. Journal
of Computer Assisted Learning,
38(6), 1603–1619. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jcal.12710
Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et
seq. (1999).
Ahia, C. E., & Boccone, P. (2017).
Licensure board actions against
professional counselors:
Implications for counselor
training and practice. VISTAS,
Article 39. American Counseling
Association.
AHIMA. (2013). Retention and
destruction of health information.
https://library.ahima.org/
PB/RetentionDestruction#.
ZCyRkXbMI2w
Akinsulure-Smith, A. M., & Conteh,
J. A. (2018). The emergence
of counseling in Sierra Leone.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 96(3), 327–334.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12206
Aktan, M. E., Turhan, Z., & Dolu, I.
(2022). Attitudes and perspectives
towards the preferences
for artificial intelligence in
psychotherapy. Computers in
Human Behavior, 133. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.107273
Alberty, S. C. (2014). Advising small
business. Thomson Reuters.
Alderman, E. M. (2017).
Confidentiality in pediatric and
adolescent gynecology: When we
can, when we can’t, and when we’re
challenged. Journal of Pediatric
and Adolescent Gynecology, 30(2),
176–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpag.2016.10.003
ALGBTIC. (2009). ALGBTIC
competencies for counseling
LGBQIQA. https://www.
counseling.org/docs/default-source/
competencies/algbtic-competencies-
for-counseling-lgbqiqa.
pdf?sfvrsn=1c9c89e_18
Allen, M., Burt, K., Bryan, E., Carter,
D., Orsi, R., & Durkan, L. (2002).
School counselors’ preparation
for and participation in crisis
intervention. Professional School
Counseling, 6, 96–102. http://
www.jstor.org/stable/42732398
Allison v. Patel, 211 Ga. App. 376
(438 S.E.2d 920 1993).
Alvarez, J. M., Saunders, R.,
Neubauer, E., & Brown, C. H.
(2022). School counselors
implementing a trauma-informed
approach through evidence-based
practices. Professional School
Counseling, 26(1a). https://doi.org
/10.1177/2156759X221086742
American Association for Marriage
and Family Therapists. (2004).
Marriage and Family Therapy
Core Competencies.

-- 509 of 593 --

References 	487
American Association for Marriage
and Family Therapy. (2015).
Code of Ethics.
American Association for Marriage
and Family Therapy. Commission
on Accreditation for Marriage and
Family Education. (2015). http://
www.aamft.org
American Association of State
Counseling Boards. (AASCB).
(2023). https://aascb.org
American Bar Association. (2018).
Deciding custody. www.
americanbar.org/portals/public_
resources/aba_home_front/
information_center/family_law/
children/custody/deciding_
custody.html
American Board of Psychiatry and
Neurology. (2014). Application
materials. http://www.abpn.com/
ifas.htm
American Counseling Association.
(2005). 2005 ACA Code of Ethics.
https://www.counseling.org
American Counseling Association.
(2014). 2014 ACA Code
of Ethics. https://www.
counseling.org
American Counseling Association.
(2018a). 20/20: Consensus
definition of counseling. Author.
Retrieved from https://www.
counseling.org/knowledge-
center/20-20-avision-for-
the-future-ofcounseling/
consensus-definitionof-
counseling
American Counseling Association.
(2023). 20/20: Consensus
definition of counseling. https://
www.counseling.org/about-us/
about-aca/20-20-a-vision-for-the-
future-of-counseling/consensus-
definition-of-counseling
American Counseling Association.
(2023c). https://www.counseling.org
American Psychiatric Association.
(2022). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (5th
ed., text rev.).
American Psychological Association.
(2006). Strategies for private
practitioners coping with
subpoenas or compelled
testimony for client records
or test data. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 37, 215–222. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0735-7028.37.2.215
American Psychological
Association. (2007). Record
keeping guidelines. American
Psychologist, 62, 993–1004.
https://www.apa.org/pubs/
journals/features/record-
keeping.pdf
American Psychological Association.
(2013). Guidelines for the
practice of telepsychology.
Washington, DC: Author. http://
www.apapracticecentral.org/
ce/guidelines/telepsychology-
guidelines.pdf
American Psychological
Association. (2014). Marriage
and divorce. http://www.apa.org/
topics/divorce
American Psychological
Association. (2015). APA
statement on services by
telephone, teleconferencing,
and internet. http://www.apa.
org/ethics/education/telephone-
statement.aspx
American Psychological Association.
(2016). Ethical principles
of psychologists and code of
conduct including 2010 and 2016
amendments. https://www.apa.
org/ethics/code
American Psychological Association.
(2017). Ethical principles in the
conduct of research with human
participants.
American Psychological Association.
(2020). Publication manual of
the American Psychological
Association (7th ed.).
American Psychological Association.
Commission on Accreditation.
(2014). Guidelines and principles
for accreditation of programs in
professional psychology. http://
www.apa.org
American School Counselor
Association. (2023). https://www.
schoolcounselor.org
Ametrano, I. M. (2014). Teaching
ethical decision making: Helping
students reconcile personal and
professional values. Journal of
Counseling & Development,
92, 154–161. https://psycnet.
apa.org/doi/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2014.00143.x
Ancis, J. R., & Marshall, D. S.
(2010). Using a multicultural
framework to assess supervisees’
perceptions of culturally
competent supervision. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 88,
277–284. https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.
tb00023.x
Anderson, A. M. N., & Bertram, B.
(2012). The counselor and the law
(6th ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Anderson, C. E. (2000). Dealing
constructively with managed
care: Suggestions from an
insider. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 22, 343–353.
Anderson, D., & Freeman, L. T.
(2006). Report of the ACA Ethics
Committee: 2004–2005. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
84, 225–227. https://doi.org/10.
1002/j.1556-6678.2006.tb00399.x
Anderson, D., & Swanson, C.
D. (1994). Legal issues in
licensure. American Counseling
Association.
Anderson, K. N., Bautista, C.
L., & Hope, D. A. (2019).
Therapeutic alliance, cultural
competence and minority status
in premature termination of
psychotherapy. American Journal
of Orthopsychiatry, 89(1),
104–114. https://doi.org/10.1037/
ort0000342

-- 510 of 593 --

488 	References
Anisimova, A. S., Potemkina,
A., Chervakov, P., Komza, V.,
Maksimov, D., Panin, I., Vaselyuk,
A., & Samsonovish, A. V. (2022).
Procedia Computer Science, 213,
793–800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
procs.2022.11.136
Anvari, S., Neumark, S., Jangra, R.,
Sandre, A., Pasumarthi, K., &
Xenodemetropoulos, T. (2023).
Best practices for the provision
of virtual care: A systematic
review of current guidelines.
Telemedicine Journal and
E-Health, 29(1), 3–22. https://doi.
org/10.1089/tmj.2022.0004
Aponte, J. F., & Wohl, J. (2000).
Psychological intervention and
cultural diversity. Allyn & Bacon.
Appelbaum, P. S., Lidz, C. W., &
Meisel, A. (1987). Informed
consent: Legal theory and clinical
practice. Oxford University Press.
Arenas, M. A., & Paz Sandin, M.
(2009). Intercultural and cross-
cultural communication research:
Some reflections about culture
and qualitative methods. Forum:
Qualitative Social Research, 10,
15–19. https://doi.org/10.17169/
fqs-10.1.1251
Aronoff, K. (2017). Best practice:
Everything you need to know
about starting your successful
private therapy practice.
Arredondo, P., & Aricniega, G. M.
(2001). Strategies and techniques
for counselor training based on
the multicultural counseling
competencies. Journal of
Multicultural Counseling and
Development, 29, 263–273.
Arredondo, P., Toporek, R., Brown,
S. P., Jones, J., Locke, D., Sanchez,
J., & Stadler, H. A. (1996).
Operationalization of the
multicultural counseling
competencies. Journal of
Multicultural Counseling and
Development, 24, 42–78. https://
doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-1912.1996.
tb00288.x
Arthur, G. L., Jr., & Swanson, C.
D. (1993). Confidentiality and
privileged communication.
American Counseling
Association.
Association for Counselor
Education and Supervision.
(1990). Standards for counseling
supervisors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 69, 30–32.
Association for Counselor
Education and Supervision.
(1993). Ethical guidelines for
counseling supervisors. http://
files.acesonline.net/doc/ethical_
guidelines.htm
Association for Counselor Education
and Supervision (ACES). (2011).
Best practices in counselor
supervision. https://www.apsu.
edu/mscounseling/pdfs/ACES_
Best_Practices_Supervision.pdf
Association for Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender
Issues in Counseling. (2009).
Competencies for counseling
transgender individuals. http://
www.algbtic.org
Association for Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual & Transgender
Issues in Counseling. (2012).
Competencies for counseling
LBGTQIA individuals. http://
www.algbtic.org
Association for Multicultural
Counseling and Development
(AMCD). (2015). Multicultural
and social justice competencies.
American Counseling
Association.
Association for Specialists in
Group Work (ASGW). (2000).
Professional standards for the
training of group workers. .
Association for Specialists in Group
Work. (2007). Best practice
guidelines 2007 revisions. Author.
http://asgw.org
Association for Specialists in Group
Work. (2012). Multicultural
and social justice competency
principles for group workers.
Association for Specialists in Group
Work. (2021). ASGW guiding
principles for group work.
https://asgw.org/resources/#tab-
guidinggroupworkdocuments
Astramovich, R. L. (2016).
Program evaluation interest
and skills of school counselors.
Professional School Counseling,
20, 54–64. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-20.1.54
Auerbach, R. S. (2006). New
York’s immediate need for a
psychotherapist-patient privilege
encompassing psychiatrists,
psychologists, and social workers.
Albany Law Review, 69, 889–892.
Avent Harris, J. R., Trepal, H.,
Prado, A., & Robinson, J. (2019).
Women counselor educators’
experiences of microaggressions.
Journal of Counselor Preparation
and Supervision, 12(2). https://
digitalcommons.sacredheart.edu/
jcps/vol12/iss2/2
Bailey, K. A. (2001). Legal
implications of profiling students
for violence. Psychology in the
Schools, 38, 141–155.
Baird, C., & Dooey, P. (2014).
Ensuring effective support in higher
education alleged plagiarism cases.
Innovative Higher Education, 39,
387–400. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10755-014-9285-4
Baird, K. A., & Rupert, P. A.
(1987). Clinical management
of confidentiality: A survey of
psychologists in seven states.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 18,
347–352.
Baker, C. N., Brown, S. M.,
Wilcox, P. D., Overstreet, S., &
Arora, P. (2016). Development
and psychometric evaluation
of the attitudes related to
trauma-informed care (ARTIC)
scale. School Mental Health,
8(1), 61–76. https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/
s12310-015-9161-0

-- 511 of 593 --

References 	489
Baker, E., Zyromski, B., &
Granello, D. H. (2021). School
or guidance counselor: How
the title influences public
perception. Professional School
Counseling, 25(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X20981034
Balkin, R. S., & Lenz, S. (2021).
Contemporary issues in reporting
statistical, practical, and clinical
significance in counseling
research. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 99(2), 227–
237. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12370
Balkin, R. S., Mendoza, S. M.,
Hendricks, L., Harris, N. A.,
Flores, S., Casillas, C., & Wood,
A. (2021). Evaluation of trauma,
forgiveness, and well-being
among African Americans.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 99(3), 315–325.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12377
Banks Van-Allen, C. (2023).
Conceptualizing diagnosis
through a social justice lens.
Counseling Today, 65(1), 45–50.
Banyard, V., Edwards, K. M.,
Waterman, E. A., Mercer Kollar,
L. M., Jones, L. M., & Mitchell,
K. J. (2022). Exposure to a youth-
led sexual violence prevention
program among adolescents:
The impact of engagement.
Psychology of Violence, 12(6),
403–412. https://doi.org/10.1037/
vio0000413
Barak, A., Hen, L., Boniel-Nissim,
M., & Shapira, N. (2008). A
comprehensive review and meta-
analysis of the effectiveness of
internet-based psychotherapeutic
interventions. Journal of
Technology in Human Services,
26, 109–160. https://doi.
org/10.1080/15228830802094429
Barbour, L., Correa, N., & Sallee,
E. (2021). Non-suicidal self
injury (NSSI): What school
counselors need to know to
support their students. Journal of
School Counseling, 19(32). http:/
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v19n32.pdf
Barden, S. M., Sherrell, R. S.,
& Matthews, J. J. (2017). A
national survey on multicultural
competence for professional
counselors: A replication
study. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 95, 203–212.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12132
Bardhoshi, G., Erford, B. T., &
Jang, H. (2019). Psychometric
synthesis of the counselor burnout
inventory. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 97(2), 195–
208. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12250
Bardhoshi, G., & Um, B. (2021).
The effects of job demands and
resources on school counselor
burnout: Self-efficacy as a
mediator. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 99, 289–301.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12375
Barnett, J. E. (2020). Ethics
issues and challenges when
bringing psychotherapy to the
underserved. In J. Zimmerman,
J. E. Barnett, & L. F. Campbell
(Eds.), Bringing psychotherapy
to the underserved: Challenges
and strategies (pp. 303–322).
Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/med-
psych/9780190912727.003.0015
Barnett, J. E., & Johnson, W. B.
(2015). Ethics desk reference for
counselors (2nd ed.). American
Counseling Association.
Barnett, J. E., & Walfish, S. (2012).
Billing and collecting for your
mental health practice: Effective
strategies and ethical practice.
American Psychological
Association.
Barnett, J. E., Wise, E. H., Johnson-
Greene, D., & Bucky, S. F.
(2007). Informed consent:
Too much of a good thing
or not enough? Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 38, 179–186. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0735-7028.38.2.179
Barnett, J. E., Zimmerman, J., &
Walfish, S. (2014). The ethics
of private practice: A practical
guide for mental health clinicians.
Oxford University Press.
Barreto, A. (2012). Counseling
for the training of leaders and
leadership development: A
commentary. The Professional
Counselor, 2(3), 226–234. https://
doi.org/10.15241/abb.2.3.226
Barrett, K. A., & McWhirter, B. T.
(2002). Counselor trainees’
perceptions of clients based on
client sexual orientation. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 41,
219–232. https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1002/j.1556-6978.2002.
tb01285.x
Barrio Minton, C. A., Fernando, D. M.,
& Ray, D. C. (2008). Ten years
of peer-reviewed articles in
counselor education: Where, what,
who? Counselor Education and
Supervision, 48, 133–143. https://
doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6978.2008.
tb00068.x
Barsky, A. E. (2024). Clinicians in
court: A guide to subpoenas,
depositions, testifying, and
everything else you need to know
(3rd ed.). Guilford Press.
Basma, D., DeDiego, A. C., & Dafoe,
E. (2021). Examining wellness,
burnout, and discrimination
among BIPOC counseling
students. Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development,
49(2), 74–86. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jmcd.12207
Bathje, G. J., Pillersdorf, D., & Eddir,
H. (May, 2022). Multicultural
competence as a common factor
in the process and outcome of
counseling. Journal of Humanistic
Psychology. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00221678221099679

-- 512 of 593 --

490 	References
Bayne, H. B., & Branco, S. F. (2018).
A phenomenological inquiry into
counselor of color broaching
experiences. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 96, 75–85.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12179
Bayne, H. B., Harness, L., &
Colburn, A. N. (2022). Religious
counselors and LGBTQ+ clients:
A Q-sort of value navigation.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 61(2), 141–159.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12231
Bayne, H. B., Harness, L., Kane, B.,
& Warfield, M. (2021). Christian
counselors and affirmative
counseling of lesbian and gay
clients. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 99(1),
60–71. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12354
Bean, C. A. L., Aurora, P., Maddox,
C. J., Mekota, R., & Updegraff,
A. (2022). A comparison of
telehealth versus in-person group
therapy: Results from a DBT-
based dual diagnosis IOP. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 78(11),
2073–2086. https://doi.org/10.
uhcno.idm.oclc.org/10.1002/
jclp.23374
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F.
(1994). Principles of biomedical
ethics (3rd ed.). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Beck, E. S. (1999). Mental health
counseling: A stakeholder’s
manifesto. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 21, 203–214.
Becnel, A. T., Irvin, S., & Remley, T.
(2023). Practicum & internship
coordinators’ experiences
amid COVID-19 emergency
remote teaching. Teaching and
Supervision in Counseling, 5(1), 4.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc0550qh
Becnel, A. T., Range, L., &
Remley, T. P., Jr. (2021).
School counselors’ exposure to
suicide, suicide assessment self-
efficacy, and workplace anxiety:
Implications for training, practice,
and research. The Professional
Counselor, 11(3), 327–339.
https://doi.org/10.15241/
atb.11.3.327
Beeson, T., Mead, K. H., Wood,
S., Goldberg, D. G., Shin,
P., & Rosenbaum, S. (2017).
Perspectives on Sexual and
Reproductive Health, 48(1), 17–24.
https://doi.org/10.1363/48e7216
Behavioral Health Innovation.
(2014). Telemental health therapy
comparisons. http://www.
telementalhealthcomparisons.com
Behl, M., Laux, J. M., Roseman,
C. P., Tiamiyu, M., & Spann, S.
(2017). Needs and acculturative
stress of international students in
CACREP programs. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 56,
305–318. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12087
Belton, R., & Avery, D. (1999).
Employment discrimination law
(6th ed.). West.
Belton, R., Avery, D., Ontiveros,
M. L, & Corrada, R. L. (2004).
Employment discrimination law
(7th ed.). Thomson West.
Bemak, F., & Chung, R. C. (2007).
Training social justice counselors.
In C. C. Lee (Ed.), Counseling
for social justice (pp. 239–258).
American Counseling Association.
Bemak, F., & Chung, R. C. (2015).
Cultural boundaries, cultural
norms: Multicultural and social
justice perspectives. In B. Herlihy
& G. Corey (Eds.), Boundary
issues in counseling (3rd ed., pp.
84–89). American Counseling
Association.
Bemak, F., & Chung, R. C. (2017).
Refugee trauma: Culturally
responsive counseling
interventions. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 95,
299–308. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.1214
Bennett, A. G., & Werth, J. L. (2006).
Working with clients who may
harm themselves. In B. Herlihy
& G. Corey (Eds.), ACA Ethical
Standards Casebook (6th ed., pp.
223–228). American Counseling
Association.
Bennett, B. E., Bricklin, P. M., Harris,
E. I., Knapp, S., VandeCreek, L., &
Younggen, J. N. (2006). Assessing
and managing risk in psychological
practice: An individualized
approach. The Trust.
Beren, P., & Bunnin, B. (1983). Author
law and strategies. Nolo Press.
Bergman, D. M. (2013). The role of
government and lobbying in the
creation of a health profession:
The legal foundations of
counseling. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 91, 61–67.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00072.x
Bernard, J. M., & Goodyear, R. K.
(2019). Fundamentals of clinical
supervision (6th ed.). Allyn &
Bacon.
Berner, M. (1998). Informed
consent. In L. E. Lifson & R. I.
Simon (Eds.), The mental health
practitioner and the law (pp.
23–43). Harvard University Press.
Bertoncini, A. L. C., & Serafim,
M. C. (2023). Ethical content in
artificial intelligence systems: A
demand explained in three critical
points. Frontiers in Psychology,
14. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2023.1074787
Bevacqua, F., & Kurpius, S. E. R.
(2013). Counseling students’
personal views and attitudes toward
euthanasia. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 35, 172–188.
Bevly, C., Loseu, S., & Prosek,
E. A. (2017). Infusing social
justice advocacy in supervision
coursework. Journal of Counselor

-- 513 of 593 --

References 	491
Leadership and Advocacy, 4(1),
28–38. https://doi.org/10.1080/23
26716X.2017.1282330
Bienvenu, C., & Ramsey, C. J. (2006).
The culture of socioeconomic
disadvantage: Practical approaches
to counseling. In C. C. Lee (Ed.),
Multicultural issues in counseling:
New approaches to diversity (3rd
ed., pp. 345–353). American
Counseling Association.
Binkley, E., & Elliott, G. (2021). Best
practices in suicide pedagogy:
A quantitative content analysis.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 3(1), Article 1.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc030101
Binkley, E. E., & Leibert, T. W.
(2015). Prepracticum counseling
students’ perceived preparedness
for suicide response. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 54,
98–108. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12007
Birky, I., & Collins, W. (2011).
Facebook: Maintaining ethical
practice in the cyberspace age.
Journal of College Student
Psychotherapy, 25, 193–203.
https://doi.org/10.1080/87568225.
2011.581922
Birrell, P. J., & Bruns, C. M. (2016).
Ethics and relationship: From
risk management to relational
engagement. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 94, 391–397.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cad.12097
Bitter, J. R. (2021). Theory and
practice of couples and family
therapy and counseling (3rd
ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Blackwell, D., Leaman, C.,
Tramposch, R., Osborne, C., &
Liss, M. (2017). Extraversion,
neuroticism, attachment style
and fear of missing out as
predictors of social media use
and addiction. Personality and
Individual Differences, 116,
69–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paid.2017.04.039
Blake, J. J., Banks, C. S., Patience,
B. A., & Lund, E. M. (2014).
School-based mental health
professionals’ bullying assessment
practices: a call for evidence-
based bullying assessment
guidelines. Professional
School Counseling, 18,
136–147. https://doi.org/
10.5330/2156-759X-18.1.136
Blakely, T. J., Smith, K., & Swenson,
M. (2004). The electronic
record as infrastructure.
Psychiatric Rehabilitation
Journal, 27, 271–274. https://doi.
org/10.2975/27.2004.271.274
Blalock, S. M., Ybanez-Llorente,
K., & Morman, M. K. (2021).
Helping beginning supervisors
reduce barriers to licensure:
Ethical roadblocks in supervision.
Journal of Counselor Preparation
and Supervision, 14(3). https://
digitalcommons.sacredheart.edu/
jcps/vol14/iss3/6
Blanchnio, A., Cudo, A., Kot, P.,
Torój, M., Oppong Asante, K.,
Enea, V., Ben-Ezra, M., Caci, B.,
Dominguez-Lara, S. A., Kigbey, N.,
Malik, S., Servidio, R., Tipandjan,
A., & Wright, M. F. (2022).
Cultural and psychological variables
predicting academic dishonesty:
A cross-sectional study in nine
countries. Ethics & Behavior, 32(1),
44–89. https://doi.org/10.1080/1050
8422.2021.1910826
Blease, C., Salmi, L., Rexhipi, H.,
Hagglund, M., & DesRoches, C.
M. (2021). Patients, clinicials and
open notes: Information blocking
as a case of epistemic injustice.
Journal of Medical Ethics, 48,
785–793. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
medethics-2021-107275
Bledsoe, K. G., Logan-McKibben,
S., McKibben, W. B., &
Cook, R. M. (2018). A content
analysis of school counseling
supervision. Professional School
Counseling, 22(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X19838454
Blount, A. H., Taylor, D. D.,
Lanwell Lambie, G. W., &
Anwell, A. N. (2016). Clinical
supervisors’ perceptions of
wellness: A phenomenological
view on supervisee wellness.
The Professional Counselor,
6(4), 360–374. https://doi.
org/10.15241/ab.6.4360
Blumenthal-Barby, J. S. (2014).
Psychiatry’s new manual (DSM-
5): Ethical and conceptual
dimensions. Medical Ethics, 40,
531–536. https://doi.org/10.1136/
medethics-2013-101468
Bobby, C. L. (2013). The evolution
of specialties in the CACREP
standards: CACREP’s role
in unifying the profession.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 91, 35–43.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00068.x
Bogust v. Iverson, 10 Wisc.2d 129
(102 N.W.2d 228 1960).
Bohecker, L., & Eissenstat, S. J.
(2020). Five licensure portability
models for the counseling
profession to consider. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
98(2), 220–229. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12316
Bok, S. (1983). Secrets: On the ethics
of concealment and revelation.
Vintage Books.
Boling v. Superior Court, 105 Cal.
App.3d 430 (164 Cal. Rptr. 432
App. 1980).
Borders, L. D., Gonzalez, L. M.,
Umstead, L. K., & Wester, K. L.
(2019). New counselor educators’
scholarly productivity: Supportive
and discouraging environments.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 58(4), 293–308.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12158

-- 514 of 593 --

492 	References
Borders, L. D., Wester, K. L.,
Granello, D. H., Chang, C.
Y., Hays, D. G., Pepperell,
J., & Spurgeon, S. L. (2012).
Association for Counselor
Education and Supervision
guidelines for research
mentorship: Development and
implementation. Counselor
Education & Supervision,
51, 162–175. https://psycnet.
apa.org/doi/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2012.00012.x
Borkosky, B. G. (2016). “Coping
with subpoenas”: No longer
consistent with law, ethics,
or social policy. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 47, 250–251. https://doi.
org/10.1037/pro0000091
Borsari, B., & Tevyaw, T. O. (2005).
Stepped care: A promising
treatment strategy for mandated
students. NASPA Journal,
42, 381–397. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10550490601184498
Borys, D. S., & Pope, K. S.
(1989). Dual relationships
between therapist and client: A
national study of psychologists,
psychiatrists and social workers.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 20,
283–293.
Bouchard, S., Payeur, R., Rivard,
V., Allard, M., Paquin, B., &
Renaud, P. (2000). Cognitive
behavior therapy for panic
disorder with agoraphobia in
videoconference: Preliminary
results. Cyberpsychology &
Behavior, 3, 999–1007.
Boumil, M. M., Freitas, F. F., &
Freitas, C. F. (2012). Waiver
of the psychotherapist–patient
privilege: Implications for
child custody litigation. Case
Western Reserve University
Health Matrix: Journal of Law–
Medicine, 22, 1–31. http://www.
lexisnexis.com
Boundless. (2014, June 27). What
is social media? Boundless
Marketing. http://www.
boundless.com
Bowen, J. M., & Caron, S. L. (2016).
A qualitative analysis of home-
based counselors’ experiences
in a rural setting. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 94,
129–140. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12070
Bowerbank, J. E. (2006). Do’s
and dont’s about a nonparty’s
response to federal and state court
deposition subpoenas involving
civil litigation. Orange County
Lawyer, 48, 38–41.
Braaten, E. E., Otto, S., &
Handelsman, M. M. (1993). What
do people want to know about
psychotherapy? Psychotherapy,
30, 565–570.
Bradley, R. W., & Cox, J. A. (2001).
Counseling: Evolution of the
profession. In D. C. Locke, J. E.
Myers, & E. L. Herr (Eds.),
The handbook of counseling
(pp. 27–41). Sage.
Brakman, A., Ellsworth, T. R., &
Rose, M. (2018). Confidentiality
remains essential for young
people to seek care. Contraceptive
Technology Update, 39(2), 13–15.
Braun, S. A., & Cox, J. A. (2005).
Managed mental health care:
Intentional misdiagnosis of
mental disorders. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 83,
425–433. https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2005.
tb00364.x
Brausch, A. M., & Gutierrez, P. M.
(2010). Differences in nonsuicidal
suicide and self-injury attempts in
adolescents. Youth Adolescence,
39, 233–242. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10964-009-9482-0
Bray, B. (2013, May 13). CACREP
degree to be required for
counselor licensure in Ohio.
Counseling Today. American
Counseling Association. http://
ct.counseling.org
Bray, B. (2016). Counseling in
isolation. Counseling Today,
59(1), 33–38.
Brennan, C. (2013). Ensuring ethical
practice: Guidelines for mental
health counselors in private
practice. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 35, 245–261. https://
psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.17744/
mehc.35.3.9706313j4t313397
Brennan Center for Justice.
(September 28, 2022). Roe
v. Wade and Supreme Court
abortion cases: Reproductive
rights in the United States
explained. https://www.
brennancenter.org/our-work/
research-reports/roe-v-wade-
and-supreme-court-abortion-
cases#:~:text=In%20
Dobbs%20v.,however%2C%20
independently%20protect%20
abortion%20rights
Brief, D. J., Solhan, M., Rybin, D.,
Enggasser, J. L., Rubin, A., Roy,
M., . . . Keane, T. M. (2018).
Web-based alcohol intervention
for veterans: PTSD, combat
exposure, and alcohol outcomes.
Psychological Trauma, Theory,
Research, Practice, & Policy,
10(2), 154–162. https://doi.
org/10.1037/tra0000281
Britannica ProCon.org. (2023). 10
states and DC have medical aid in
dying (MAID). https://euthanasia.
procon.org/states-with-legal-
physician-assisted-suicide
Brodsky, S. L., & Terrell, J. J. (2011).
Testifying about mitigation:
When social workers and other
mental health professionals face
aggressive cross-examination.
Journal of Forensic Social Work,
1, 73–81. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1936928X.2011.541206
Brooks, M., Whittaker, T. T., Wang,
Y., Adams, J., & Matthews,
T. (2023). Phenomenological

-- 515 of 593 --

References 	493
understanding of Black
counselor education students at
predominately White institutions,
historically Black colleges and
universities, and Hispanic serving
institutions. Counselor Education
and Supervision, pre-publication.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12279
Brott, P. E., DeKruyf, L., Hyun, J.
H., LaFever, C. R., Patterson-
Mills, S., Cook Sandifer, M. I.,
& Stone, V. (2021). The critical
need for peer clinical supervision
among school counselors. Journal
of School-Based Counseling
Policy and Evaluation, 3(2),
51–60. https://doi.org/10.25774/
nr5m-mq71
Brous, E. (2016). Legal
considerations in telehealth and
telemedicine. American Journal
of Medicine, 116(9), 64–67.
https://doi.org/10.1538-7488
Brown, C. H. (2018). Perceptions
of school counselors
surviving a school shooting.
Professional School
Counseling, 22(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X19853250
Brown, E. M., Carlisle, K. L., Burgess,
M., Clark, J., & Hutcheon, A.
(2022). Adverse and positive
childhood experiences of clinical
mental health counselors as
predictors of compassion,
satisfaction, burnout, and secondary
traumatic stress. The Professional
Counselor, 12(1), 49–64. https://
doi.org/10.15241/emb.12.1.49
Brown, M. (2013). A content analysis
of problematic behavior in
counselor education programs.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 52(3), 179–192.
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1002/
j.1556-6978.2013.00036.x
Brown, T., Armstrong, S. A., Bore,
S., & Simpson, C. (2017). Using
an ethical decision-making model
to address ethical dilemmas in
school counseling. Journal of
School Counseling, 15(13). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v15n13.pdf
Brown, T.A., & Armstrong,
S.A. (2022). Use of ethical
decision-making models among
school counselors. Journal
of Professional Counseling:
Practice, Theory, and Research,
49(13), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1
080/15566382.2022.2073176
Browne-James, L., Litam, S. D.
A., & McRae, L. (2021). Child
sex trafficking: Strategies for
identification, counseling,
and advocacy. International
Journal for the Advancement
of Counselling, 43, 113–125.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10447-020-09420-y
Brown-Rice, K. A., & Furr, S.
(2013). Preservice counselors’
knowledge of classmates’
problems of professional
competency. Journal of
Counseling & Development,
91, 224–233.
Brown-Rice, K., & Furr, S. (2014).
Lifting the empathy veil: Engaging
in competent supervision. VISTAS
online, Article 11.
Brown-Rice, K., & Furr, S. (2015).
Gatekeeping ourselves: Counselor
educators’ knowledge of
colleagues’ problematic behaviors.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 54, 176–188. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12012
Brown-Rice, K., & Furr, S. (2016).
Counselor educators and students
with problems of professional
competence: A survey and
discussion. The Professional
Counselor, 6(2), 134–146. https://
doi.org/10.15241/kbr.6.2.134
Brown-Rice, K., & Furr, S. (2019).
Am I my peers’ keeper?
Problems of professional
competency in doctoral students.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 1(1), 4.
Bruff v. North Mississippi Health
Services Inc., 244 F.3d 495
(5th Cir. 2001).
Bruton, S., & Childers, D. (2016).
The ethics and politics of policing
plagiarism: A qualitative study
of faculty views on plagiarism
and Turnitin. Assessment &
Evaluation in Higher Education,
41(2), 316–330. https://doi.org/10
.1080/02602938.2015.1008981
Buckner, C. J., & Sall, R. K. (2008).
Ethically speaking: Point/
counterpoint—Sex with clients:
Prohibition or permission?
Orange County Lawyer, 50, 38.
Bunnin, B. (1998). The writer’s legal
companion (3rd ed.). Perseus
Books.
Burgoyne, N., & Cohn, A. S. (2020).
Lessons from the transition to
relational teletherapy during
COVID-19. Family Process,
59(3), 974–988.
Burian B., & Slimp, A. O. (2000).
Social dual-role relationships
during internship: A decision-
making model. Professional
Psychology Research and
Practice, 31(3), 332–338.
Burkholder, D., Hall, S. F., &
Burkholder, J. (2014). Ward v.
Wilbanks: Counselor educators
respond. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 53, 267–283.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2014.00062.x
Burkholder, J., Burkholder, D., &
Gavin, M. (2020). The role of
decision-making models and
reflection in navigating ethical
dilemmas. Counseling and
Values, 65, 108–121. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cvj.12125
Burnham, J. J., Wright, V. H.,
& Houser, R. A. (2011).
Cyberbullying: Emergent concerns
for adolescents and challenges for
school counselors. Journal of School
Counseling, 9(15). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v9n15.pdf

-- 516 of 593 --

494 	References
Burns, S. & Cruickshanks, D. R.
(2017). Evaluating independently
licensed counselors’ articulation
of professional identity
using structural coding. The
Professional Counselor, 7(2),
185–207. https://doi.org/doi:
10.15241/sb.7.2.185
Burns, S. T. (2019). Students’
ethical decision-making when
considering boundary-crossings
with counselor educators.
Counseling and Values, 64(1),
53–71. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cvj.12094
Burns, S. T. (2020). Power’s
influence on boundary-crossings
between counselor educators and
counselor education students.
Cogent Education, 7(1), 1795048.
Burns, S. T., & Cruikshanks, D.
R. (2019). Impact of selected
ethical information resources on
counselor educators’ decision-
making regarding boundary
crossings. Counseling and Values,
64(2), 204–226. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cvj.12115
Burt, I. (2019). Modern-day slavery
in the U.S.: Human trafficking
and counselor awareness.
International Journal for the
Advancement of Counselling, 41,
187–200. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10447-018-9366-7
Buser, J. K., Buser, T. J., & Rutt,
C. C. (2017). Nonsuicidal self-
injury and spiritual/religious
coping. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 39, 132–148. https://
doi.org/10.17744/mehc.39.2.04
Buser, J. K., & Saponara, E. (2011).
School counseling prevention and
intervention for child witnesses of
intimate partner violence. Journal
of School Counseling, 9(8). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v9n8.pdf
Buser, T. J., & Buser, J. K.
(2013). Helping students with
emotional abuse: A critical
area of competence for school
counselors. Journal of School
Counseling, 11(9). http://www.
jsc.montana.edu/articles/v11n9.
pdf
Buser, T. J., Buser, J. K., & Rutt,
C. C. (2017). Predictors of
unintentionally severe harm
during nonsuicidal self-injury.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 95, 2–17. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12113
Buser, T. J., & Peterson, C. H.
(2016). Brief severity index
for nonsuicidal self-injury:
Initial validation of a self-report
measure. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 38, 28–46.
https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.38.1.03
Butler, M. H., Rodriguez, M. A.,
Roper, S. O., & Feinauer, L.
L. (2010). Infidelity secrets in
couple therapy: Therapists’ views
on the collision of competing
ethics around relationship-
relevant secrets. Sexual
Addiction & Compulsivity,
17, 82–105. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10720161003772041
Butler, S. F. (1998). Assessment
preparation and practices
reported by mental health and
related professionals [Unpublished
doctoral dissertation]. University
of New Orleans.
Butler, S. K., Locke, A. F., &
Filmore, J. M. (Eds.). (2022).
Introduction to 21st century
counseling: A multicultural &
social justice approach. Cognella.
Byne, J. S., & Shufelt, B. (2014).
Factors for personal counseling
among counseling trainees.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 53, 178–189.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2014.00056.x
Byrd, R., & Hays, D. G. (2012).
School counselor competency
and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and questioning
(LGBTQ) youth. Journal of
School Counseling, 10(3). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v10n3.pdf
Callaghan, J. E. M., Fellin, L.
C., Mavrou, S., Alexander, J.,
& Sixsmith, J. (2017). The
management of disclosure in
children’s accounts of domestic
violence: Practices of telling
and not telling. Journal of Child
and Family Studies, 26, 3370–
3387. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10826-017-0832-3
Calmes, S. A., Piazza, N. J., & Laux,
J. M. (2013). The use of touch in
counseling: An ethical decision-
making model. Counseling
and Values, 58, 59–68. https://
doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-
007X.2013.00025.x
Calvo, N., Sara García-González,
S., Perez-Galbarro, C.,
Regales-Peco, C., Lugo-
Marin, J., Ramos-Quiroga,
J. A., & Ferrer, M. (2022).
Psychotherapeutic interventions
specifically developed for
NSSI in adolescence: A
systematic review. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 58,
86–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
euroneuro.2022.02.009
Campbell, C. D., & Gordon, M.
C. (2003). Acknowledging
the inevitable: Understanding
multiple relationships in
rural practice. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 34, 430–434.
Cannon, E. P. (2010). Measuring
ethical sensitivity to racial and
gender intolerance in schools.
Journal of School Counseling,
8(20). http://www.jsc.montana.
edu/articles/v8n20.pdf
Canterbury v. Spence, 464 F.2d 772
(D.C. Cir 1972).
Caoilte, N. O., Lambert, S., Murphy,
R., & Murphy, G. (2023). Podcasts

-- 517 of 593 --

References 	495
as a tool for enhancing mental
health literacy: An investigation
of mental health–related podcasts.
Mental Health & Prevention,
30, Article 200285. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mhp.2023.200285
Caplow, T. (1966). The sequence
of professionalization. In H. M.
Vollmer & D. L. Mills (Eds.),
Professionalization (pp. 19–21).
Prentice-Hall.
Cappa, C., & Jijon, I. (2021, April 24).
COVID-19 and violence against
children: A review of early studies.
Child Abuse & Neglect.
Capuzzi, D. (2002). Legal and ethical
challenges in counseling suicidal
students. Professional School
Counseling, 6, 36–45.
Carlisle, K. L., Carlisle, R. M.,
Polychronopoulos, G. B.,
Goodman-Scott, E., & Kirk-
Jenkins, A. (2016). Exploring
internet addiction as a process
addiction. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 38, 170–182. https://
doi.org/10.17744/mehc.38.2.07
Carlisle, K. L., Levitt, D. H., &
Neukrug, E. S. (2022). Mental
health counselors’ perceptions of
ethical behaviors. Counseling and
Values, 67(1), 88–115.
Carlisle, R., Hays, D. G., Pribesh,
S., & Wood, C. T. (2017).
Education technology and
distance supervision in counselor
education. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 56(1), 33–49.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12058
Carney, J. M., & Jefferson, J. F.
(2014). Consultation for mental
health counselors: Opportunities
and guidelines for private
practice. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 36, 302–314.
Carrola, P., & Corbin-Burdick, M.
(2015). Counseling military
veterans: Advocating for
culturally competent and holistic
interventions. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 37(1), 1–14.
Carter, P. M., Cuningham, R.
M., Eisman, A. B., Resnicow,
K., Roche, J. S., Cole, J. T.,
Goldstick, J., Kilbourne, A. M., &
Walton, M. A. (2022). Translating
violence prevention programs
from research to practice:
SafERteens implementation in
an urban emergency department.
The Journal of Emergency
Medicine, 62(1), 109–124.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jemermed.2021.09.003
Cartwright, A. D., Mountain, J.,
Lindo, N. A., & Bore, S. K. (2018).
Inescapable self-disclosure: The
lived experiences of pregnant
counselors working with sexual
abusers. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 40, 75–91. https://doi.
org/10.17744/mehc.40.1.06
Cartwright, A. D., Stark, M. D.,
Boswell, J. N., & Oller, M. L.
(2021). Black female doctoral
students’ mentorship experiences
in counselor education. Journal
of Counselor Leadership and
Advocacy, 8(2), 87–99.
Casares, D. R., Jr. (2022). Embracing
the podcast era: Trends,
opportunities, & implications for
counselors. Journal of Creativity
in Mental Health, 17(1), 123–138.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15401383.
2020.1816865
Casares, D. R., Jr., & Binkley E. E.
(2021). Podcasts as an evolution
of bibliotherapy. Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 43(1),
19–39. https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.43.1.02
Casares, D. R., Jr., & Binkley E.
E. (2022). An unfiltered look at
idealized images: A social media
intervention for adolescent girls.
Journal of Creativity in Mental
Health, 17(3), 313–331. https://
doi.org/10.1080/15401383.2021.
1892556
Casas, J. M., Park, Y. S., & Cho, B.
(2010). The multicultural and
internationalization counseling
psychology movements: When all is
said and done, it’s all multicultural,
isn’t it? In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M.
Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M.
Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of
multicultural counseling (3rd ed.,
pp. 189–200). Sage.
Cashwell, C. C., Shcherbakova, J.,
& Cashwell, T. H. (2003). Effect
of client and counselor ethnicity
on preference for counselor self-
disclosure. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 81, 196–201. https://
doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2003.
tb00242.x
Cates, K. A., Gunderson, C., & Keim,
M. A. (2012). The ethical frontier:
Ethical considerations for frontier
counselors. The Professional
Counselor, 2(1), 22–32. https://
doi.org/10.15241/kac.2.1.22
Center for Credentialing & Education
(CCE). (2023). https://www.cce-
global.org
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. (2023). https://www.
cdc.gov
Cepelewicz, B. B. (2014, May
23). Text messaging with
patients: Steps physicians
must take to avoid liability.
Modern Medicine Network.
http://medicaleconomics.
modernmedicine.com
Chafee, Z. (1943). Privileged
communications: Is justice served
or obstructed by closing the
doctor’s mouth on the witness
stand? Yale Law Journal, 52,
607–612.
Chambers, R. A., Zyromski, B.,
Asner-Self, K. K., & Kimemia,
M. (2010). Prepared for school
violence: School counselors’
perceptions of preparedness
for responding to acts of
school violence. Journal of
School Counseling, 8(33). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v8n33.pdf

-- 518 of 593 --

496 	References
Chamlou, N. (March 22, 2023).
Therapists who don’t accept
insurance. Psychology.Org.
https://www.psychology.org/
resources/therapists-who-dont-
accept-insurance/
Charnley, D. (2021). Counselor
education doctoral students’
gatekeeper experiences at a large,
public Midwestern university: A
pilot study. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
14(3). https://digitalcommons.
sacredheart.edu/jcps/vol14/iss3/5
Chauvin, J. C., & Remley, T. P., Jr.
(1996). Responding to allegations
of unethical conduct. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
563–568.
Chen, S. Y., Wathen, C., & Speciale,
M. (2020). Online clinical training
in the virtual remote environment:
Challenges, opportunities, and
solutions. Professional Counselor,
10(1), 78–91.
Cheng, H., Wang, C., McDermott,
R. C., Kridel, M., & Rislin, J. L.
(2018). Self-stigma, mental
health literacy, and attitudes
toward seeking psychological
help. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 96, 64–74. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12178
Chiang, F.K., Zhu, D., & Yu, W.
(2022). A systematic review of
academic dishonesty in online
learning environments. Journal
of Computer Assisted Learning,
38(4), 907–928. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jcal.12656
Chiara, G., Romaioli, D., &
Contarello, A. (2022). Self-
positions and narratives
facilitating or hindering
posttraumatic growth: A
qualitative analysis with
migrant women of Nigerian
descent survivors of trafficking.
Psychological Trauma: Theory,
Research, Practice, and Policy.
Advance online publication.
https://doi.org/10.1037/
tra0001245
Chibbaro, J. S., Ricks, L., & Lanier,
B. (2019). Digital awareness:
A model for school counselors.
Journal of School Counseling,
17(22). http:/www.jsc.montana.
edu/articles/v17n22.pdf
Child Welfare Information Gateway.
(2023). State statute search.
U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. https://
www.childwelfare.gov/topics/
systemwide/laws-policies/state/
Children’s Rights Council. (2014).
http://www.crckids.org
Childress-Beatty, L., & Koocher,
G. P. (2013). Dealing with
subpoenas. In G. P. Koocher, J. C.
Norcross, & B. A. Greene (Eds.),
Psychologists’ desk reference
(3rd ed., pp. 564–567). Oxford
University Press.
Choate, L. H., & Gintner, G. G.
(2011). Prenatal depression: Best
practice guidelines for diagnosis
and treatment. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 89,
373–382.
Christian, D. D., McCarty, D. L., &
Brown, C. L. (2021). Experiential
education during the COVID-19
pandemic: A reflective process.
Journal of Constructivist
Psychology, 34(3), 264–277.
Chronister, K. M., & McWhirter,
E. H. (2003). Applying social
cognitive career theory to the
empowerment of battered
women. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 81, 418–425.
Cinotti, D. (2014). Competing
professional identity models in
school counseling: A historical
perspective and commentary.
The Professional Counselor,
4(5), 417–425. https://doi.
org/10.15241/dc.4.5.417
Cizek, G. J. (1999). Cheating on
tests: How to do it, detect it, and
prevent it. Erlbaum.
Claim of Gerkin, 106 Misc.2d 643,
434 N.Y.S.2d 607 (1980).
Clark, M., Moe, J., Chan, C. D.,
Best, M. D., & Mallow, L. M.
(2022). Social justice outcomes
and professional counseling: An
11-year content analysis. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
100(3), 284–295. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12427
Clark, M., Moe, J., & Hays, D.
G. (2017). The relationship
between counselors’ multicultural
counseling competence and
poverty beliefs. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 56,
259–273. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12084
Clausen v. Clausen, 675 P.2d 562
(Utah, 1983).
CNA, & Healthcare Providers
Service Organization. (2019).
Counselor liability claim report
(2nd ed.). http://www.hpso.com
Cohn, T. J., & Hastings, S. L. (2013).
Building a practice in rural
settings: Special considerations.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 35, 228–244.
Coker, K., Snow, W., and Hinkle,
S. (2021). The past, present
and future of online counselor
education. Journal of Technology
in Counselor Education and
Supervision, 1(1), Article 6.
https://doi.org/10.22371/
tces/0006
Colburn, A. A. N., Grothaus, T.,
Hays, D. G., & Milliken, T.
(2016). A Delphi study and
initial validation of counselor
supervision competencies.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 55, 2–15.
Cole, R. F., Cowan, R. G., Dunn, H.,
& Lincoln, T. (2021). Military
spouses’ perceptions of suicide in
the military spouse community.
The Professional Counselor,
11(2), 203–217. https://doi.
org/10.15241/rfc.11.2.203

-- 519 of 593 --

References 	497
Colistra, A., & Brown-Rice, K.
(2011). When the rubber hits
the road: Applying multicultural
competencies in cross-cultural
supervision. http://www.
counselingoutfitters.com/vistas/
vistas11/Article_43.pdf
Collins, P. H. (2000). Gender, Black
feminism, and Black political
economy. The Annals of the
American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 568, 41–53. http://
www.jstor.org/stable/1049471
Collison, B. B. (2001). Professional
associations, standards, and
credentials in counseling. In D.
C. Locke, J. E. Myers, & E. L.
Herr (Eds.), The handbook of
counseling (pp. 55–68). Sage.
Comaz-Dias, L., & Brown, L. S.
(2016). Multicultural theories.
In J. Norcros, G. R. VandenBos,
& D. K. Freedheim (Eds.), APA
handbook of clinical psychology
(Vol. 2, pp. 241–272). American
Psychological Association.
Comer, R. J., & Comer, J. S. (2021).
Abnormal psychology (11th ed.).
Worth.
Commission on Accreditation of
Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF).
(2018). http://www.carf.org
Commission on Rehabilitation
Counselor Certification (CRCC).
(2023). https://crccertification.com
Commonwealth ex rel. Platt v. Platt,
404 A.2d 410 (Pa. Super. 1979).
Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment
and Rehabilitation Act of 1972, 42
U.S.C.A. § 290dd-2 (West, 1997).
Conine, D. E., Campau, S. C.,
& Petronelli, A. K. (2021).
LBGTQ+ conversion therapy and
applied behavioral analysis: A
call to action. Journal of Applied
Behavioral Analysis, 9999, 1–13.
Connell, A. (2015). Boundary
issues and in-home counseling
for clients with disabilities. In
B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
Boundary issues in counseling
(3rd ed., pp. 271–272). American
Counseling Association.
Connelly v. University of Vermont,
244 F.Supp. 156 (D.Vt. 1965).
Constantine, M. G. (2001). Addressing
racial, ethnic, gender, and social
class issues in counselor training
and practice. In D. B. Pope-Davis
& H. L. K. Coleman (Eds.), The
intersection of race, class and
gender in multicultural counseling
(pp. 341–350). Sage.
Constantine, M. G. (2002). The
intersection of race, ethnicity,
gender, and social class in
counseling: Examining selves
in cultural contexts. Journal for
Multicultural Counseling and
Development, 30, 210–215.
Cook, J. E., & Doyle, C. (2002).
Working alliance in online
therapy: Preliminary results.
Cyberpsychology and Behavior,
5, 95–105.
Cook, J. M., Ong, L. Z., &
Zavgorodnya, O. (2021). A
mixed-methods examination
of counselors' social class and
socioeconomic status perceptions.
Journal of Humanistic
Counseling, 60(2), 117–136.
Cook, R. M., & Fye, H. J. (2022).
Trauma-informed supervision
and related predictors of burnout
and secondary traumatic stress
among prelicensed counsellors
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
International Journal for the
Advancement of Counselling,
459(2), 1–20. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10447-022-09493-x
Cook, R. M., Fye, H. J., & Wind, S.
A. (2020). An examination of the
counselor burnout inventory using
item response theory in early
career post-master’s counselors.
Measurement and Evaluation in
Counseling and Development.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07481756.
2020.1827439
Cook, R. M, & Sackett, C. R. (2018).
Exploration of prelicensed
counselors’ experiences
prioritizing information for clinical
supervision. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 94(4), 449–460.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12226
Cook, R. M., Welfare, L. E., &
Jones, C. T. (2020). Incidence
of intentional nondisclosure in
clinical supervision by prelicensed
counselors. The Professional
Counselor, 10(1), 25–38. https://
doi.org/10.15241/rmc.10.1.25
Cook, R. M., Welfare, L. E.,
& Romero, D. E. (2018).
Counselor-in-training intentional
nondisclosure in onsite
supervision: A content analysis.
The Professional Counselor,
8(2), 115–130. https://doi.
org/10.15241/rmc.8.2.115
Corey, G. (2016). Theory and
practice of group counseling
(9th ed.). Brooks/Cole.
Corey, G., Corey, M. S., & Corey,
C. (2024). Issues & ethics in the
helping professions (10th ed.).
Cengage.
Corey, G., Haynes, R., Moulton, P.,
& Muratori, M. (2010). Clinical
supervision in the helping
professions: A practical guide
(2nd ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Corey, G., Muratori, M., Austin, J.
T., II, & Austin, J. A. (2024).
Counselor self-care (2nd ed.).
American Counseling Association.
Corey, M., Corey, G., & Corey, C.
(2018). Groups: Process and
practice (10th ed.). Cengage
Learning.
Corley, S. M., Lloyd-Hazlett, J.,
Schuermann, H., & Blessing,
N. (2020). A phenomenological
investigation of doctoral students’
gatekeeping experiences.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 2(1), 95–105. https://
doi.org/10.7290/tsc020109

-- 520 of 593 --

498 	References
Corr, C. A., & Balk, D. E. (2010).
Children’s encounters with
death, bereavement, and coping.
Springer.
Cosgrove, L., & Wheeler, E. E.
(2013). Industry’s colonization
of psychiatry: Ethical and
practical implications of financial
conflicts of interest in the DSM-5.
Feminism & Psychology, 23(1),
93–106.
Costa, M., Reis, G., Pavlo, A.,
Bellamy, C., Ponte, K., &
Davidson, L. (2021). Tele-mental
health utilization among people
with mental illness to access care
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Community Mental Health
Journal, 57(4), 720–726.
Cottle, M. (1956). Witnesses—
Privilege-communications to
psychotherapists. University
of Kansas Law Review, 4,
597–599.
Cottone, R. R. (1985). The need
for counselor licensure: A
rehabilitation counseling
perspective. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 63,
625–629.
Cottone, R. R. (2001). A social
constructivism model of ethical
decision making in counseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 79, 39–45.
Cottone, R. R. (2005). Detrimental
therapist–client relationships—
Beyond thinking of “dual” or
“multiple” roles: Reflections on
the 2001 AAMFT Code of Ethics.
American Journal of Family
Therapy, 33, 1–17.
Cottone, R. R., & Tarvydas, V.
M. (2007). Counseling ethics
and decision making (3rd ed.).
Pearson Merrill Prentice-Hall.
Cottone, R. R., Tarvydas, V. M., &
Hartley, M. T. (2022). Ethics and
decision making in counseling
and psychotherapy (5th ed.).
Springer.
Council for Accreditation of
Counseling and Related
Educational Programs. (2009).
2009 Standards. http://www.
cacrep.org
Council for Accreditation of
Counseling and Related
Educational Programs. (2024).
2024 Standards. http://www.
cacrep.org
Council on Social Work Education.
(2014). Educational policy and
accreditation standards. http://
www.cswe.org
Cowan, R. G., Blum, C., Szirony,
G., & Cicchetti, R. J. (2020).
Supporting survivors of public
mass shootings. Journal of Social,
Behavioral, and Health Sciences,
14(1), 12.
Cox v. Warwick Valley Central
School District, 2010 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 142734 (S.D.N.Y., Aug.
16, 2010).
Coyle, D., Matthews, M., Sharry,
J., Nisbet, A., & Doherty, G.
(2005). Personal investigator:
A therapeutic 3D game for
adolescent psychotherapy.
Journal of Interactive Technology
& Smart Education, 2, 73–88.
Crane, D. R., & Law, D. D. (2002).
Conducting medical offset
research in a health maintenance
organization: Challenges,
opportunities, and insights.
Journal of Marital and Family
Therapy, 28, 15–19.
Crawford, R. L. (1994). Avoiding
counselor malpractice. American
Counseling Association.
Creed, T. A., Salama, L., Slevin, R.,
Tanana, M., Imel, Z., Narayanan,
S., & Atkins, D. C. (2022).
Enhancing the quality of cognitive
behavioral therapy in community
mental health through artificial
intelligence generated fidelity
feedback (Project AFFECT):
A study protocol. BMC Health
Services Research 22 (1177).
https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12913-022-08519-9
Creswell, J. W. (2016). Qualitative
inquiry and research design:
Choosing among five traditions
(4th ed.). Sage.
Crisp-Han, H., Gabbard, G. O., &
Martinez, M. (2011). Professional
boundary violations and mentalizing
in the clergy. Journal of Pastoral
Care and Counseling, 65, 1–11.
Crittenden, C. A., Gimlin, A. M.,
Bennett, A., & Garland, T.
S. (2021). Exploring faculty
and students’ attitudes about
consensual sexual relationships
and sexual harassment on college
campuses. Educational Policy,
35(1), 41–66.
Crockett, J. E., Cashwell, C. S.,
Marszalek, J. F., & Willis, B.
T. (2018). A phenomenological
inquiry of identity development,
same-sex attraction, and religious
upbringing. Counseling and
Values, 63, 91–109. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cvj.12075
Crockett, J. E., Gill, D. L., Cashwell,
T. H., & Myers, J. E. (2017).
Integrating non-technological
and technological peripheral
biofeedback in counseling.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 39, 163–179. https://
doi.org/10.17744/mehc.39.2.06
Crockett, J. E., & Ivers, N. N. (2022).
Counselors in training educational
impacts and perceived adequacy
of supports amidst COVID-19.
Journal of Technology in
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 2(2), Article 5.
https://doi.org/10.22371/tces/0021
Cruikshanks, D. R., & Burns, S.
T. (2017). Sexual boundary
violations in counselor training
and supervision. In C. Schwilk,
R. Stevenson, & D. Bateman
(Eds.), Sexual misconduct in the
education and human services
sector (pp. 67–89). IGI Global.

-- 521 of 593 --

References 	499
Crunk, A. E., Burke, L. A., & Robinson,
M. E. (2017). Complicated
grief: An evolving theoretical
landscape. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 95, 226–233. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12134
Culver, L. M. (2011). Counselor
perceptions of the efficacy of
training and implementation
of self-care strategies related
to trauma work [Unpublished
dissertation]. University of New
Orleans.
Curd, T. (1938). Privileged
communications between the
doctor and his patient—An
anomaly of the law. West Virginia
Law Review, 44, 165–174.
Cureton, J. L., & Fink, M. (2019).
SHORES: A practical mnemonic
for suicide protective factors.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 97(3), 325–335.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12272
Currie, C. L., Kuzmina, M. V.,
& Nadyuk, R. I. (2012). The
counseling profession in
Russia: Historical roots, current
trends, and future perspectives.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 90, 488–493.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2012.00060.x
Curtis, G. J., & Tremayne, K. (2021).
Is plagiarism really on the rise?
Results from four 5-yearly
surveys. Studies in Higher
Education, 46(9), 1816–1826.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.
2019.1707792
Cynthia B. v. New Rochelle Hospital,
86 A.D.2d 256, 449 N.Y.S.2d 755
(App. Div. 1982).
Dadfar, M., & Lester, D. (2021). A
study of callers to a telephone
counseling service. Illness, Crisis &
Loss, 29(4), 275–289. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1054137319833299
Dailey, S. F., Gill, C. S., Karl, S.
L., & Barrio Minton, C. A.
(2014a). Historical underpinnings,
structural alterations and
philosophical changes:
Counseling practice implications
of the DSM-5. The Professional
Counselor, 4, 166–178. https://
doi.org/10.15241/sfd.4.3.166
Dailey, S. F., Gill, C. S., Karl, S. L.,
& Barrio Minton, C. A. (2014b).
DSM-5: Learning companion for
counselors. American Counseling
Association.
D’Andrea, M. (2004).
Comprehensive school-based
violence prevention training: A
developmental–ecological training
model. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 82, 277–286.
Daniel, S. S., & Goldston, D. B.
(2012). Hopelessness and lack
of connectedness to others as
risk factors for suicidal behavior
across the lifespan: Implications
for cognitive-behavioral
treatment. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 19, 288–
300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cbpra.2011.05.003
Daniels, J. A. (2002). Assessing
threats of school violence:
Implications for counselors.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 80, 215–218.
Danzinger, P. R., & Welfel, E. R.
(2000). Age, gender, and health
bias in counselors: An empirical
analysis. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 22, 135–149.
Danzinger, P. R., & Welfel, E. R.
(2001). The impact of managed
care on mental health counselors:
A survey of perceptions,
practices, and compliance with
ethical standards. Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 23,
137–150.
Darcy, M. G., & Abed-Faghri, N.
M. (2013). The relationship
between counselors and their
state professional association:
Exploring counselor professional
identity. The Professional
Counselor, 3(3), 152–160. https://
doi.org/10.15241/mgd.3.3.152
Davidson, V. (1977). Psychiatry’s
problem with no name:
Therapist-patient sex. American
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 37,
43–50.
Davis, J. L., & Mickelson, D. J.
(1994). School counselors: Are
you aware of ethical and legal
aspects of counseling? The School
Counselor, 42, 5–13.
Davis, M. S., Wester, K. L., &
King, B. (2008). Narcissism,
entitlement, and questionable
research practices in counseling:
A pilot study. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 86,
200–210.
Day, S. X., & Schneider, P. (2002).
Psychotherapy using distance
technology: A comparison
of face-to-face, video, and
audio treatment. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 49,
499–503.
Day-Vines, N. L. (2007). The
escalating incidence of suicide
among African Americans:
Implications for counselors.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 85, 370–377.
Day-Vines, N. L., Booker Ammah,
B., Steen, S., & Arnold, K. M.
(2018). Getting comfortable with
discomfort: Preparing counselor
trainees to broach racial, ethnic,
and cultural factors with clients
during counseling. Journal for the
Advancement of Counselling, 40,
89–104. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10447-017-9308-9.
Day-Vines, N. L., Cluxton-Keller,
F., Agosor, C., & Gubara, S.
(2021). Strategies for broaching
the subjects of race, ethnicity, and
culture. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 99, 348–357.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2014.00000.x

-- 522 of 593 --

500 	References
Day-Vines, N. L., Cluxton-Keller,
F., Agorsor, C., Gubara, S.,
& Otabil, N. (2020). The
multidimensional model of
broaching behavior. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 98,
107–118. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12304
Dean, L. A., & Meadows, M. E.
(1995). College counseling:
Union and intersection. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
139–142.
DeCino, D. A., Waalkes, P. L., &
Chang, V. (2022). Gatekeeper
identity development: An
application of bioecological
systems theory. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 61(1),
55–70.
DeCino, D. A., Waalkes, P. L., &
Dalbey, A. (2020). “They stay
with you”: Counselor educators’
emotionally intense gatekeeping
experiences. Professional
Counselor, 10(4), 548–561.
DeCino, D. A., Waalkes, P. L., &
Iverson, V. (2023). Rural school
counselors’ experiences with dual
relationships. Journal of Child
and Adolescent Counseling, pre-
publication, 1–15. https://doi.org/
10.1080/23727810.2023.2195229
DeCino, D. A., Waalkes, P. L., &
Matos, C. (2017). “Be ready
for it”: School counselors’
experiences with subpoena
and testifying in court.
Professional School
Counseling, 21(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X18786450
DeCino, D. A., Waalkes, P. L.,
& McKibben, W. B. (2019).
A content analysis of school
counselors’ legal experiences
through self-reflective letter
writing. Journal of School
Counseling, 17(3). http:/www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v17n3.pdf
DeDiego, A. C., & Burgin, E. C.
(2016). The doctoral student as
university supervisor: Challenges
in fulfilling the gatekeeping role.
Journal of Counselor Leadership
and Advocacy, 3(2), 173–183.
https://doi.org/full/10.1080/23267
16X.2016.1187096
DeDiego, A. C., Chan, C. D., &
Basma, D. (2022). Emerging
leaders: Leadership development
experiences of counselor
education doctoral students.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 61(3), 262–275.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12241
DeKruyf, L., Auger, R., & Trice-
Black, S. (2013). The role of school
counselors in meeting students’
mental health needs: Examining
issues of professional identity.
Professional School Counseling,
16, 271–282. https://doi.
org/10.5330/PSC.n.2013-16.271
DeParle, J., & Tavernise, S. (2012,
February 17). For women under
30, most births occur outside of
marriage. New York Times. http://
www.nytimes.com
Deroche, M. D., Eckart, E., Lott, E.,
Park, C. N, & Raddler, L. (2015).
A review of ethical decision
making models. In B. Herlihy
& G. Corey (Eds.), ACA ethical
standards casebook (7th ed., pp.
16–20). American Counseling
Association.
Deroche, M. D., Herlihy, B., &
Lyons, M. L. (2020). Counselor
trainee self-perceived disability
competence: Implications for
training. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 59(3), 187–199.
DeStefano, J., Hutman, H., &
Gazzola, N. (2019). Putting on the
face: A qualitative study of power
dynamics in clinical supervision.
The Clinical Supervisor, 36(2),
223–240.
Diana, D. P. (2010). Marketing for
the mental health professional: An
innovative guide for practitioners.
John Wiley.
Dickens, K. N., Ebrahim, C. H., &
Herlihy, B. (2016). Counselor
education doctoral students’
experiences with multiple roles
and relationships. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 55,
234–249. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12051
Dickerson, J. E. (2022). Privacy,
confidentiality, and security
of healthcare information.
Anaesthesia & Intensive Care
Medicine, 23(11), 740–743.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mpaic.2022.08.014
Didelot, M. J., Hollingsworth,
L., & Buckenmeyer, J. A.
(2012). Internet addiction:
A logotherapeutic approach.
Journal of Addictions and
Offender Counseling, 33, 18–33.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-
1874.2012.00002.x
Dienlin, T., & Trepte, S. (2015). Is
the privacy paradox a relic of
the past? An in-depth analysis
of privacy attitudes and privacy
behaviors. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 45, 285–297.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2049
Diesen, C. (2008). Therapeutic
jurisprudence at the conference of
the International Association of
Law and Mental Health in Padua,
Italy: The justice obsession
syndrome. Thomas Jefferson Law
Review, 30, 487. http://www.
lexisnexis.com
Digal, J. J., & Gagnon, M. M. (2020).
Parental influences on university
students’ mental help-seeking
intentions. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 98(2), 136–146.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12308
Dillon, F. R., Odera, L., Fons-
Scheyd, A., Sheu, H. B.,
Ebersole, R. C., & Spanierman,
L. B. (2016). A dyadic study of
multicultural competence. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 63(1),
57–66.

-- 523 of 593 --

References 	501
Diperna v. The Chicago School of
Professional Psychology (March
13, 2017). USDC Eastern District
of Illinois (Case 1:14-dv-00057,
Document #128).
Dispenza, F., & O’Hara, C. (2016).
Correlates of transgender
and gender nonconforming
counseling competencies among
psychologists and mental health
practitioners. Psychology of
Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity, 3(2), 156–164. https://
doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000151
Dixon-Saxon, S., & Buckley, M.
R. (2020). Student selection,
development, and retention:
A commentary on supporting
student success in distance
counselor education. The
Professional Counselor, 10(1),
57–77. https://doi.org/10.15241/
sds.10.1.57
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Organization, 597 U.S. 2022;
2022 U.S. LEXIS 3057.
Doll, B., Strein, W., Jacob, S., &
Prasse, D. P. (2011). Youth
privacy when educational records
include psychological records.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 42,
259–268. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0023685
Dollarhide, C. T., Gibson, D. M., &
Moss, J. M. (2013). Professional
identity development of
counselor education doctoral
students. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 52, 137–150.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2013.00034.x
Dollarhide, C. T., & Hale, S. C.
(2021). A new model for social
justice supervision. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 99,
104–113. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12358
Dong, X., Simon, M., Mendes de
Leon, C., Fulmer, T., Beck,
T., & Hebert, L. (2009). Elder
self-neglect and abuse and
mortality risk in a community-
dwelling population. Journal
of the American Medical
Association, 302(5), 517–526.
https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2009.1109
Donohue, P., Goodman-Scott,
E., & Betters-Bugon, J.
(2015–2016). Using universal
screening for early identification
of students at risk: A case
example from the field.
Professional School Counseling,
19, 133–143. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-19.1.133
Dorken, H., & Webb, J. T. (1980).
1976 third-party reimbursement
experience: An interstate
comparison by insurance carrier.
American Psychologist, 35,
355–363.
Dorre, A., & Kinnier, R. T. (2006).
The ethics of bias in counselor
terminology. Counseling and
Values, 51, 66–79.
Dougherty, A. M. (2014).
Psychological consultation and
collaboration in school and
community settings (6th ed.).
Cengage Brooks/Cole.
Dowling, M., & Richwood, D.
(2013). Online counseling
and therapy for mental health
problems: A systematic review
of individual synchronous
interventions using chat. Journal
of Technology in Human Services,
31, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15228835.2012.728508
Drummond, R. J., & Jones, K. D.
(2010). Assessment procedures
for counselors and helping
professionals (7th ed.). Pearson.
Duan, C., & Roehlke, H. (2001). A
descriptive “snapshot” of cross-
racial supervision in university
counseling center internships.
Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 29,
131–146.
Duarte, D., & Hatch, T. (2014).
Successful implementation of
a federally funded violence
prevention elementary
school counseling program:
Results bring sustainability.
Professional School
Counseling, 18, 71–81.
https://doi.org/10.5330/
prsc.18.1.vtl5g6343m4130v7
Dufrene, R., & Henderson, K.
L. ( 2009). A framework for
remediation plans for counseling
trainees. In G. R. Walz, S. C.
Bleuer, & R. K. Yep (Eds.),
Compelling counseling images:
The best of VISTAS 2009 (pp.
149–159). American Counseling
Association.
Dugan, W. E. (1965). Preface. In J.
W. Loughary, R. O. Stripling,
& P. W. Fitzgerald (Eds.),
Counseling, a growing profession
(pp. i–iii). American Counseling
Association.
Dugger, S. M., & Francis, P. C.
(2014). Surviving a lawsuit
against a counseling program:
Lessons learned from Ward v.
Wilbanks. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 92, 135–141.
Durodoye, B. A. (2013). Ethical
issues in multicultural counseling.
In C. C. Lee (Ed.), Multicultural
issues in counseling: New
approaches to diversity (4th ed.,
pp. 295–308). American
Counseling Association.
Dutile, F. N. (2001). Students and
due process in higher education:
Of interests and procedures.
Florida Coastal Law Journal, 2,
243–255.
Dworkin, S. H., & Yi, H. (2003).
LGBT identity, violence, and
social justice: The psychological
is political. International
Journal for the Advancement of
Counselling, 25, 269–279.
Education for All Handicapped
Children Act, U.S.C. § 6 (1975).

-- 524 of 593 --

502 	References
Edwards, D. C. (2006). Duty-
to-warn—Even if it may be
hearsay? The implications of a
psychotherapist’s duty-to-warn a
third person when information is
obtained from someone other than
his patient. Indiana Health Law
Review, 3, 171–179.
Edwin, M., & Daniels, A. D. (2022).
The impact of racial trauma on
Black students’ college and career
outcomes: An antiracist approach.
Professional School Counseling,
26(1b). https://doi.org/10.1177/21
56759X221106813
Egede, L. E., Ruggiero, K. J., &
Frueh, B. C. (2020, October).
Ensuring mental health access
for vulnerable populations
in COVID era. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 129, 147–
148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpsychires.2020.07.011
Eisel v. Board of Education of
Montgomery County, 597 A.2d
447 (Md. 1991).
Elander, J., Pittam, G., Lusher, J.,
Fox, P., & Payne, N. (2010).
Evaluation of an intervention to
help students avoid unintentional
plagiarism by improving their
authorial identity. Assessment &
Evaluation in Higher Education,
35, 157–171. https://doi.
org/10.1080/02602930802687745
Ellington, B. (2022). Warning signs
of threats to student safety:
Recommendations for virtual
school counseling. Professional
School Counseling, 26(1).
https://doi.org/10.1177/21567
59X211067964
Elliott, A., Bohecker, L., Elliott, G.
M., Townsend, B. T., Johnson, V.,
Lopez, A., Horn, E. D., & Roach,
K. (2019). Interstate licensure
portability: Logistics and barriers
for professional counselors.
The Professional Counselor,
9(3), 252–266. http://tpcjournal.
nbcc.org © 2019 NBCC, Inc.
and Affiliates. https://doi.
org/10.15241/ae.9.3.252
Elliott, G. M., & Henniger, J.
(2020). Online teaching and self-
efficacy to work with suicidal
clients. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 59(4), 283–296.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12189
Ellis, M. V., Berger, L., Hanus, A.,
Ayala, E. E., Swords, B. A., &
Siembor, M. J. (2014). Inadequate
and harmful clinical supervision:
Testing a revised framework
and assessing occurrence.
The Counseling Psychologist,
42, 434–472. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0011000013508656
Ellis, M. V., Creaner, M., Hutman,
H. B., & Timulak, L. (2015).
A comparative study of clinical
supervision in the Republic of
Ireland and the U.S. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 62,
621–631. https://doi.org/10.1037/
cou0000110
Ellis v. Ellis, 472 S.W.2d 741 (Tenn.
App. 1971).
Emelianchik-Key, K., Byrd, R. J.,
& La Guardia, A. C. (2016).
Adolescent non-suicidal self-
injury: Analysis of the your risk
behavior survey trends. The
Professional Counselor, 6(1),
61–75. https://doi.org/10.15241/
kk.6.1.61
Emener, W. G., & Cottone, R. R.
(1989). Professionalization,
deprofessionalization, and
reprofessionalization of
rehabilitation counseling
according to criteria of
professions. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 67,
576–581.
Empire State College. (2011).
Plagiarism and how to avoid it
(guidelines for students). http://
www7.esc.edu/hshapiro/writing_
program/Orientation/main/
plagiarism.htm
Engels, D. W., Minor, C. W.,
Sampson, J. P., Jr., & Splete, H.
H. (1995). Career counseling
specialty: History, development,
and prospect. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
134–l38.
Enough Abuse Campaign. (2023).
Criminalizing educator sexual
misconduct map. https://
enoughabuse.org
Epstein, J., & Bequette, A. W. (2013).
Smart phone applications in
clinical practice. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 4, 283–295.
Erford, B. T., Erford, B. M.,
Lattanzi, G., Weller, J., Schein,
H., Wolf, E., . . . Peacock, E.
(2011). Counseling outcomes
from 1990–2008 for school-aged
youth with depression: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 89, 439–458.
Erickson, A., & Abel, N. (2013).
A high school counselor’s
leadership in providing school-
wide screenings for depression
and enhancing suicide awareness.
Professional School Counseling,
16, 283–289. https://doi.
org/10.5330/PSC.n.2013-16.283
Erickson, D., & Monk, G. (2018).
Applying narrative therapy
with young people who engage
in video gaming. Journal of
Systemic Therapies, 37(1),
1–14. https://doi.org/10.1521/
jsyt.2018.37.1.1
Erickson, K. P., & McAuliffe, G. J.
(2006). Constructive development
and counselor competence.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 45, 180–192.
Ermis-Demirtas, H., Luo, Y., &
Huang, Y. J. (2022). The trauma of
COVID-19–fueled discrimination:
Posttraumatic stress in Asian
American adolescents.
Professional School Counseling,
26(1b). https://doi.org/
10.1177/2156759X221106814

-- 525 of 593 --

References 	503
Eschenauer, R., & Chen-Hayes, S.
F. (2005). The transformative
individual school counseling
model: An accountability model
for urban school counselors.
Professional School Counseling,
8, 244–248.
Espelage, D. L., Bosworth, K., &
Simon, T. R. (2000). Examining
the social context of bullying
behaviors in early adolescence.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 78, 326–333.
Estrada, D., Frame, M. W., &
Williams, C. (2004). Cross-
cultural supervision: Guiding
the conversation toward race and
ethnicity. Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 32,
307–319.
Etzioni, A. (1969). The semi-
professions and their
organization. The Free Press.
Euthanasia.procon.org. (2018).
State-by-state guide to physician-
assisted suicide. Santa Monica,
CA: Author. https://euthanasia.
procon.org
Evans Zalewski, S. L. (2022).
Burnout, self-care, and
supervision in middle school
counselors. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
15(1), 4.
Even, T. A., & Robinson, C. R.
(2013). The impact of CACREP
accreditation: A multiway
frequency analysis of ethics
violations and sanctions.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 91, 26–34.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00067.x
Ewe, E., & Ng, K. M. (2022). The
professional identity development
of counseling students during
extreme stressors: Lessons
learned in the COVID-19
pandemic. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
15(3), 3.
Ey, S., Moffit, M., Kinzie, M., &
Brunett. (2016). Feasibility of
a comprehensive wellness and
suicide prevention program: A
decade of caring for physicians in
training and practice. Journal of
Graduate Medical Education, 8,
747–753. https://doi.org/10.4300/
JGME-D-16-00034.1
Fabian, E. S. (2007). Counselor
advocacy for access: Addressing
the challenges of disability. In
C. C. Lee (Ed.), Counseling
for social justice (2nd ed., pp.
75–94). American Counseling
Association.
Fadus, M. C., Ginsburg, K. R.,
Sobowale, K., Halliday-Boykins,
C. A., Bryant, B. E., Gray, K.
M., & Squeglia, L. M. (2020).
Unconscious bias and the
diagnosis of disruptive behavior
disorders and ADHD in African
American and Hispanic youth.
Academic Psychiatry, 44,
95–102.
Fall, K. A., & Levitov, J. E. (2002).
Using actors in experiential group
counseling leadership training.
The Journal for Specialists in
Group Work, 27, 122–135.
Fall, K. A., Levitov, J. E., Jennings,
M., & Eberts, S. (2000). The
public perception of mental
health professions: An empirical
examination. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 22, 122–134.
Fall, M., & Sutton, J. M., Jr. (2004).
Supervision of entry level licensed
counselors: A descriptive study.
The Clinical Supervisor, 22,
139–151. https://doi.org/10.1300/
J001v22n02_09
Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act of 1974, 20 U.S.C.A.
§ 1232g (West, 1997).
Fang, L., Tarshis, S., McInroy, L., &
Mishna, F. (2018). Undergraduate
student experiences with text-
based online counselling.
British Journal of Social Work,
48, 1774–1790. https://doi.
org/10.1093/bjsw/bcx111
Farber, B. A., & Heifetz, L. J. (1982).
The process and dimensions
of burnout in psychotherapists.
Professional Psychology, 13,
293–301.
Fearing, G., Sheppard, C. L.,
McDonald, L., Beaulieu, M., &
Hitzig, S. L. (2017). A systematic
review on community-based
interventions for elder abuse and
neglect. Journal of Elder Abuse
and Neglect, 29(2–3), 102–133.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08946566.
2017.1308286
Feisthamel, K. P., & Schwartz,
R. C. (2009). Differences in
mental health counselors’
diagnoses based on client race:
An investigation of adjustment,
childhood, and substance-related
disorders. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 31, 47–59.
Feldwisch, R. P., & Whiston, S.
C. (2015). Examining school
counselors’ commitments
to social justice advocacy.
Professional School Counseling,
19, 166–175. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-19.1.166
Fernando, D. M. (2013). Supervision
by doctoral students: A study of
supervisee satisfaction and self-
efficacy, and comparison with
faculty supervision outcomes. The
Clinical Supervisor, 32, 1–14.
Fickling, M. J. (2016). An
exploration of career counselors’
perspectives on advocacy.
The Professional Counselor,
6(2), 174–188. https://doi.
org/10.15241/mf.6.2.174
Fickling, M. J., & Gonzales, L. M.
(2016). Linking multicultural
counseling and social justice
through advocacy. Journal
of Counselor Leadership
and Advocacy, 3(2), 85–94.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23267
16X.2015.1124814

-- 526 of 593 --

504 	References
Fickling, M. J., Tangen, J. L.,
Graden, M. W., & Grays, D.
(2019). Multicultural and social
justice competence in clinical
supervision. Counselor Education
& Supervision, 58, 309–316.
Field, T. A. (2017). Clinical mental
health counseling: A 40-year
retrospective. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 39, 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.39.1.01
Fine, M., Torre, M. E., Oswald,
A. G., & Avory, S. (2021).
Critical participatory action
research: Methods and praxis
for intersectional knowledge
production. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 68(3),
344–356. https://doi.org/10.1037/
cou0000445
Finn, S. E., & Tonsager, M. E.
(1992). Therapeutic effects
of providing MMPI-2 test
feedback to college students
awaiting therapy. Psychological
Assessment, 4, 278–287.
Finnerty, P., Kocet, M., Lutes, J., &
Yates, C. (2017). Disaffirming
therapy, the ascent & descent of
sexual orientation change efforts.
In M. M. Giancola, C. Smith,
& J. Filmore (Eds.), Affirmative
counseling for LGBTQ+
individuals (pp. 87–95). American
Counseling Association.
Fioravanti, G., Casale, S., Benucci,
S. B., Prostamo, A., Falone, A.,
Ricca, V., & Rotella, F. (2021).
Fear of missing out and social
networking sites use and abuse:
A meta-analysis. Computers in
Human Behavior, 122, Article
106839. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.
chb.2021.106839
Firth, J., Torous, J., Carney R.,
Newby, J., Cosco, T. D.,
Christensen, H., & Sarris,
J. (2018, May 19). Digital
technologies in the treatment
of anxiety: Recent innovations
and future directions. Current
Psychiatry Reports, 20(6),
44. https://doi.org/10.1007%
2Fs11920-018-0910-2
Fish, J. N., & Mittal, M. (2021).
Mental health providers during
COVID-19: Essential to the US
public health workforce and in
need of support. Public Health
Reports, 136(1), 14–17.
Fisher, C. B., Cea, C. D., Davidson,
P. W., & Fried, A. (2006).
Capacity of persons with
mental retardation to consent to
participate in randomized clinical
trials. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 163, 1–8.
Fisher, C. B., & Oransky, M. (2008).
Informed consent to psychotherapy:
Protecting the dignity and
respecting the autonomy of patients.
Journal of Clinical Psychology: In
Session, 64, 576–588.
Fisher, M. (2018, January 17). How
record access suit may spur
broader changes. Health Data
Management. https://www
.healthdatamanagement.com/
opinion/how-record-access-suit-
may-spur-broader-changes
Fisher, M. A. (2008). Protecting
confidentiality rights: The need
for an ethical practice model.
American Psychologist, 63, 1–13.
Fisher, M. A. (2016). Confidentiality
limits in psychotherapy: Ethics
checklists for mental health
professionals. American
Psychological Association.
Fisher, R. M. (1964). The
psychotherapeutic professions
and the law of privileged
communications. Wayne Law
Review, 10, 609–654.
Fiske A., Henningsen, P., & Buyx, A.
(2019). Your robot therapist will
see you now: Ethical implications
of embodied artificial intelligence
in psychiatry, psychology,
and psychotherapy. Journal
of Medical Internet Research,
21(5), 13216. https://doi.
org/10.2196/13216
Fitfield, A. O., & Oliver, J. K.
(2016). Enhancing the perceived
competence and training of rural
mental health practitioners.
Journal of Rural Mental Health,
40(1), 77–83.
Flaskerud, J. H. (2009). The
“human right” to mental health
care. Issues in Mental Health
Nursing, 30, 796–797. https://doi.
org/10.3109/01612840903019740
Florang, J. E. (2020). Cyberbullying:
New approaches for school
counselors. Journal of School
Counseling, 18(17). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v18n17.pdf
Foley & Lardner, LLP. (2014). 2014
telemedicine survey: Executive
summary. http://www.foley.com
Fontes, L. A. (2002). Child
discipline in immigrant Latino
families: Reducing violence and
misunderstandings. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 80,
31–40.
Forester-Miller, H., & Davis, T. E.
(1995). A practitioner’s guide
to ethical decision making.
Alexandria, VA: American
Counseling Association.
Forester-Miller, H., & Moody, E. E.
(2015). Rural communities: Can
dual relationships be avoided?
In B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
Boundary issues in counseling
(3rd ed., pp. 251–253). American
Counseling Association.
Foster, J. M., Leppma, M., &
Hutchinson, T. S. (2014).
Students’ perspectives on
gatekeeping in counselor
education: A case study.
Counselor Education &
Supervision, 53, 190–203.
Foster, V. A., & McAdams, C.
R. (2009). A framework for
creating a climate of transparency
for professional performance
assessment: Fostering student

-- 527 of 593 --

References 	505
investment in gatekeeping.
Counselor Education &
Supervision, 48, 271–284.
Fowler, J. E. (2003). Avoiding
plagiarism: A student survival
guide. Mississippi State
University. http://www.ece.
msstate.edu/~fowler/Classes/
plagiarism.pdf
Fox, K. R., Huang, X., Guzmán,
E. M., Funsch, K. M., Cha, C.
B., Ribeiro, J. D., & Franklin,
J. C. (2020). Interventions for
suicide and self-injury: A meta-
analysis of randomized controlled
trials across nearly 50 years of
research. Psychological Bulletin,
146, 1117–1145. https://doi.
org/10.1037/bul0000305
Fox, P. K. (2010). Commentary: So
the pendulum swings—Making
sense of the duty to protect.
Journal of the American Academy
of Psychiatry and the Law, 38,
474–478.
Fox, R. E. (1994). Training
professional psychologists for the
twenty-first century. American
Psychologist, 49, 200–206.
Frame, M. W., & Williams, C. B.
(2005). A model of ethical decision
making from a multicultural
perspective. Counseling and
Values, 49, 165–179.
Frances, A. (2014). DSM,
psychotherapy, counseling and
the medicalization of mental
illness: A commentary from
Allen Frances. The Professional
Counselor, 4(3), 282–284. https://
doi.org/10.15241/afm.4.3.282
Francis, P. C. (2015). Evolution of
the ACA ethical standards and
the casebook. In B. Herlihy &
G. Corey (Eds.), ACA ethical
standards casebook (7th ed.,
pp. 4–12). American Counseling
Association.
Francis, P. C., & Dugger, S. M.
(2014). Professionalism, ethics,
and values-based conflicts in
counseling: An introduction to
the special section. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 92,
131–134.
Francis, P. C., & Farrell, I. C.
(2022). Ethics and ethical
behavior. In S. K. Butler, A. F.
Locke, & J. M. Filmore (Eds.),
Introduction to 21st century
counseling: A multicultural &
social justice approach (pp.
60–91). Cognella.
Freeman, B., Woodliff, T., &
Martinez, M. (2020). Teaching
gatekeeping to doctoral
students: A qualitative study of
a developmental experiential
approach. The Professional
Counselor, 10(4), 562–580.
https://doi.org/10.15241/
bf.10.4.562
Freeman, B. J., Garner, C. M.,
Fairgrieve, L. A., & Pitts, M. E.
(2016). Gatekeeping in the field:
Strategies and practices. Journal
of Professional Counseling,
Practice, Theory, and Research,
43(2), 28–41.
Freeman, B. J., Garner, C. M.,
Scherer, R., & Trachok, K.
(2019). Discovering expert
perspectives on dispositions
and remediation: A qualitative
study. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 58(3), 209–
224. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12151
Freeman, S. J. (2000). Ethics:
An introduction to philosophy
and practice. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Fridhandler, B., & Lehmer, M.
(2014). Ethical issues in coparent
counseling. Journal of Child
Custody: Research, Issues, and
Practices, 11, 139–158. https://
doi.org/10.1080/15379418.2014
.921590
Friedson, E. (1983). The theory of
professions: State-of-the-art. In R.
Dingwall & P. Lewis (Eds.), The
sociology of the professions. St.
Martin’s Press.
Froehlich, R. J., Henry, J. S., Tichy,
N., Hill, J. C., & Thompson,
K. (2023). Rehabilitation
counselors and technology,
social media, and distance
counseling: Contemporary
considerations. Rehabilitation
Counseling Bulletin. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00343552221147219
Frye, W. S., Gardner, L., & Mateus,
J. S. (2022). Utilising telemental
health in a paediatric outpatient
psychology clinic: Therapeutic
alliance and outcomes.
Counselling & Psychotherapy
Research, 22(2), 322–330. https://
doi.org/10.1002/capr.12450
Fullen, M. C., Dolbin-MacNab, M. L.,
Wiley, J. D., Brossoie, N., &
Lawson, G. (2021). The impact of
excluded providers on Medicare
beneficiaries’ mental health
care. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 100(2),
123–133. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12409
Fullen, M. C., Lawson, G., & Sharma, I.
(2020a). Analyzing the impact
of the Medicare coverage gap on
counseling professionals: Results
of a national study. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
98(2), 207–219. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12315
Fullen, M. C., Lawson, G., &
Sharma, J. (2020b). Medicare
reimbursement for counselors:
Counseling professionals’
advocacy beliefs and behavior.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 59(1), 16–31. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12163
Fulmer, R., Davis, T., Costello,
C., & Joerin, A. (2021).
The ethics of psychological
artificial intelligence: Clinical
considerations. Counseling and
Values, 66, 131–144. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cvj.12153

-- 528 of 593 --

506 	References
Fulmer, R., Joerin, A., Gentile,
B., Lakerink, L., & Rauws, M.
(2018). Using psychological
artificial intelligence (Tess) to
relieve symptoms of depression
and anxiety: Randomized
controlled trial. JMIR Mental
Health, 5(4), 64. https://doi.
org/10.2196/mental.9782
Fuqua, D. R., Newman, J. L.,
Simpson, D. B., & Choi, N.
(2012, April). Who is the client
in organizational consultation?
Consulting Psychology Journal:
Practice and Research. [No
pagination specified]. https://doi.
org/1037/a0027722
Fye, H. J., Bergen, S., & Baltrinic,
E. R. (2020). Exploring the
relationship between school
counselors’ perceived ASCA
National Model implementation,
supervision satisfaction, and
burnout. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 98, 53–62. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12299
Fye, H. J., Cook, R. M., Baltrinic, E. R.,
& Baylin, A. (2020). Examining
individual and organizational
factors of school counselor
burnout. The Professional
Counselor, 10, 235–250. https://
doi.org/10.15241/hjf.10.2.23
Gabbard, G. O. (1995, April). What
are boundaries in psychotherapy?
The Menninger Letter, 3, 1–2.
Gabriel, T. (2010, August 1).
Plagiarism lines blur for students
in digital age. New York Times.
http://www.nytimes.com
Gale, A. U., & Austin, B. D. (2003).
Professionalism’s challenges to
professional counselors’ collective
identity. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 81, 3–10.
Gallagher, R. P. (2015). National
survey of college counseling
centers 2014. http://d-scholarship.
pitt.edu/28178/1/survey_2014.pdf
Gallo, L., & Wachter Morris, C. A.
(2022). Suicide intervention in
schools: If not school counselors,
then who? Teaching and
Supervision in Counseling, 4(2),
Article 6. https://doi.org/10.7290/
tsc043z3v
Gallo, L. L. (2017). Professional
issues in school counseling and
suicide prevention. Journal of
School Counseling, 15(11).
https://doi.org/EJ1151461
Gallo, L. L., Moro, R., & Moran,
M. (2022). Students’ experiences
conducting telehealth counseling
during a pandemic. Journal
of Technology in Counselor
Education and Supervision,
2(1), 3.
Gallo, L. L., Rausch, M., Smith,
C., & Wood, S. (2016). School
counselors’ experiences working
with digital natives: A qualitative
study. Professional School
Counseling, 20, 14–24. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-20.1.14
Gara, M. A., Minsky, S., Silverstein,
S. M., Miskimen, T., &
Strakowski, S. M. (2019). A
naturalistic study of racial
disparities in diagnoses at an
outpatient behavioral health
clinic. Psychiatric Services, 70(2),
130–134.
Garb, H. N. (2021). Race bias and
gender bias in the diagnosis of
psychological disorders. Clinical
Psychology Review, 90, 102087.
Garcia, J., Glosoff, H. L., & Smith,
J. L. (1994). Report of the ACA
Ethics Committee: 1993–1994.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 73, 253–256.
Garcia, J., Salo, M., & Hamilton, W.
M. (1995). Report of the ACA
Ethics Committee: 1994–1995.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 72, 221–224.
Garcia, J. G., Cartwright, B.,
Winston, S. M., & Borzuchowska,
B. (2003). A transcultural
integrative model for ethical
decision making in counseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 81, 268–277.
Garfield, S. L. (1994). Research on
client variables in psychotherapy.
In A. E. Bergen & S. L.
Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy and behavior
change (4th ed., pp. 190–228).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Garland, D. R., & Argueta, C. (2012).
How clergy sexual misconduct
happens: A qualitative study of
first-hand accounts. Social Work
and Christianity, 37, 5.
Garner, B. A. (Ed.). (2014). Black’s
law dictionary (10th ed.).
Thomson West.
Garner, C., Freeman, B., Stewart, R.,
& Coll, K. (2020). Assessment
of dispositions in program
admissions: The Professional
Disposition Competence
Assessment-Revised Admission
(PDCA-RA). The Professional
Counselor, 10(3), 337–350.
https://doi.org/10.15241/
cg.10.3.337
Gartrell, N., Herman, J., Olarte, S.,
Feldstein, M., & Localio, R.
(1987). Reporting practices
of psychologists who knew
of sexual misconduct by
colleagues. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 57, 287–295.
Gaubatz, M. D., & Vera, E.
M. (2002). Do formalized
gatekeeping procedures increase
programs’ follow-up with
deficient trainees? Counselor
Education and Supervision, 41,
294–305.
Gay, J. L., & Swank, J. M. (2021).
School counselor educators’
experiences navigating
practicum and internship
during COVID-19. Counselor
Education and Supervision,
60(4), 291–305.
General Revision of the Copyright
Law, 17 U.S.C. 101 et seq.
(1999).

-- 529 of 593 --

References 	507
Genia, V. (2000). Religious issues in
secularly based psychotherapy.
Counseling and Values, 44,
213–222.
Gentry, J. E., Webber, J. M., &
Baranowsky, A. B. (2018).
Compassion fatigue: Our
Achilles’ heel. In J. M. Webber
& J. B. Mascari (Eds.), Disaster
mental health counseling (4th ed.,
pp. 79–96). American Counseling
Association.
Gerton, J. M., Aoyagi, K., León, G.
A., Bludworth, J., Spille, S., &
Holzapfel, J. (2023). Outcomes
in clients transitioning from
in-person counselling to telehealth
counselling with trainees.
Counselling & Psychotherapy
Research, 23(1), 188–197. https://
doi./10.1002/capr.1254 1
Ghazi-Saidi, L., Criffield, A., Kracl,
C. L., McKelvey, M., Obasi, S.
N., & Vu, P. (2020). Moving from
face-to-face to remote instruction
in a higher education institution
during a pandemic: Multiple case
studies. International Journal
of Technology in Education
and Science, 4(4), 370–383.
(EJ1271208). ERIC. https://eric.
ed.gov/
Ghoston, M., Grimes, T., Graham, J.,
Grimes, J., & Field, T. A. (2020).
Faculty perspectives on strategies
for successful navigation of the
dissertation process in counselor
education. The Professional
Counselor, 10(4), 615–631. https://
doi.org/10.15241/mg.10.4.615
Gibson, D. (2022). Validating school
counselor professional identity:
Response to “suicide intervention
in schools.” Teaching and
Supervision in Counseling, 4(2),
Article 8. https://doi.org/10.7290/
tsc04edkk
Gibson, R. L., & Mitchell, M. H.
(2008). Introduction to counseling
and guidance (7th ed.). Merrill/
Prentice-Hall.
Gibson, W. T., & Pope, K. S. (1993).
The ethics of counseling: A
national survey of certified
counselors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 71, 330–336.
Gilabert, K. (2014). Top five reasons
80% of all new businesses fail.
Small Business Administration.
www.sba.gov
Gilbert, A., Neuer Colburn, A. A.,
Todd, S., & Erwin, K. (2019).
Counselor educators’ experiences
of gatekeeping in online counselor
education programs. Journal
of Counselor Preparation and
Supervision, 12(4), 6. https://
digitalcommons.sacredheart.edu/
jcps/vol12/iss4/6
Gilbert, H. L. (2007). Minors’
constitutional right to informational
privacy. University of Chicago Law
Review, 74, 1375–1397.
Gilbert, M. L. (2002). “Time-out”
for student threats?: Imposing a
duty to protect on school officials.
UCLA Law Review, 49, 917.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different
voice: Psychological theory and
women’s development. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ginter, E. J. (2004). JCD’s special
section on school violence:
Reactions and thoughts of a
counselor. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 82, 310–312.
Giordano, A., Clarke, P., & Borders,
L. D. (2013). Using motivational
interviewing techniques to
address parallel process in
supervision. Counselor Education
& Supervision, 52, 15–29.
Giordano, A. L., Bevly, C. M.,
Tucker, S., & Prosek, E. A.
(2018). Psychological safety
and appreciation of differences
in counselor training programs:
Examining religion, spirituality,
and political beliefs. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
96(3), 278–288. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12202
Giordano, A. L., Schmit, M. K.,
Clement, K., Potts, E. E.,
& Graham, A. R. (2022).
Pornography use and sexting
trends among American
adolescents: Data to inform
school counseling programming
and practice. Professional School
Counseling, 26(1). https://doi.org/
10.1177/2156759X221137287
Giordano, A., L., Schmit, M. K.,
& McCall, J. (2023). Exploring
adolescent social media and
internet gaming addiction: The
role of emotion regulation.
Journal of Addictions and
Offender Counseling, 44(1),
69–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jaoc.12116
Giordano, A. L., Schmit, M. K.,
& Schmit, E. L. (2021). Best
practice guidelines for publishing
rigorous research in counseling.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 99(2), 123–133.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12360
Gladding, S. T. (2020). Groups: A
counseling specialty (7th ed.).
Pearson/Merrill/Prentice Hall.
Glassgold, J. M. (2022). Research on
sexual orientation change efforts:
A summary. In D. C. Haldeman
(Ed.), The case against conversion
“therapy”: Evidence, ethics, and
alternatives (pp. 19–50).
American Psychological
Association. https://doi
.org/10.1037/0000266-002
Glickhauf-Hughes, C., & Mehlman, E.
(1996). Narcissistic issues
in therapists: Diagnostic and
treatment considerations.
Psychotherapy, 32, 213–221.
Glosoff, H. L. (2015). Multiple
relationship issues in private
practice. In B. Herlihy & G.
Corey (Eds.), Boundary issues
in counseling (3rd ed., pp.
229–236). American Counseling
Association.

-- 530 of 593 --

508 	References
Glosoff, H. L., Corey, G., & Herlihy,
B. (2006). Avoiding detrimental
multiple relationships. In B.
Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.), ACA
ethical standards casebook (6th
ed., pp. 209–215). American
Counseling Association.
Glosoff, H. L., Herlihy, B., &
Spence, B. (2000). Privileged
communication in the counselor–
client relationship. Journal of
Counseling & Development,
78, 454–462. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2000.
tb01929.x
Glosoff, H. L., & Pate, R. H. (2002).
Privacy and confidentiality in
school counseling. Professional
School Counseling, 6, 20–28.
Glosoff, H. L., Renfro-Michel, E.,
& Nagaragan, S. (2016). Ethical
issues related to the use of
technology in clinical supervision.
In T. Rousmaniere & E. Renfro-
Michel (Eds.), Using technology
to enhance clinical supervision
(pp. 31–46). Wiley.
Gluck, A. R., & Scott-Railton, T.
(2020). Affordable Care Act
entrenchment. Georgetown Law
Journal, 108, 495.
Goldberg, S. B., Flemotomos, N.,
Martinez, V. R., Tanana, M. J., Kuo,
P. B., Pace, B. T., Villatte, J. L.,
Georgiou, P. G., Van Epps, J., Imel,
Z. E., Narayanan, S. S., & Arkins,
D. C. (2020). New approaches to
exploring processes of change in
counseling psychology. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 67(4),
438–448. https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1037/cou0000382
Goldstein, M. L. (2016). Ethical
issues in child custody
evaluations. In M. L. Goldstein
(Ed.), Handbook of child custody
(pp. 3–9). Springer International
Publishing.
Gomez, A., & Knight, S. C. (2013).
Disclosure of mental health
records in court-mandated
outpatient treatment proceedings
and the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA). Journal of the
American Academy of Psychiatry
and the Law, 41, 460–461.
Goodman, R. D., Vesely, C. K., &
Letiecq, B. (2018). Counseling
refugees. In J. M. Webber & J. B.
Mascari (Eds.), Disaster mental
health counseling: A guide to
preparing and responding (4th ed.,
pp. 179–192). American Counseling
Association.
Goodman, R. D., Vesely, C. K.,
Letiecq, B., & Cleaveland, C. L.
(2017). Trauma and resilience
among refugee and undocumented
immigrant women. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 95,
309–321. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12145
Goodman-Scott, E., & Boulden,
R. (2019). School counselors’
experiences with the Section 504
process: “I want to be a strong
team member . . . [not] a case
manager.” Professional School
Counseling, 23(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X20919378
Goodyear, R. K. (2000). An
unwarranted escalation
of counselor–counseling
psychologist professional
conflict: Comments on Weinrach,
Lustig, Chan, and Thomas
(1998). Journal of Counseling &
Development, 78, 103–106.
Goodyear, T., Kinitz, D. J., Dromer,
E., Gesink, D., Ferlatte, O.,
Knight, R., & Salway, T. (2022).
“They want you to kill your inner
queer but somehow leave the
human alive”: Delineating the
impacts of sexual orientation and
gender identity and expression
change efforts. Journal of Sex
Research, 59(5), 599–609.
Gori, A., Topino, E., & Griffiths,
M. D. (2023). The associations
between attachment, self-esteem,
fear of missing out, daily time
expenditure, and problematic
social media use: A path analysis
model. Addictive Behaviors,
141, Article 107633. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2023.107633
Gottlieb, M. C. (1993). Avoiding
exploitive dual relationships:
A decision-making model.
Psychotherapy Theory,
Research, Practice, Training,
30, 41–48. https://doi.org/doi:
10.1037/0033-3204.30.1.41
Gould, D. (1998). Listen to your
lawyer. In L. E. Lifson & R. I.
Simon (Eds.), The mental
health practitioner and the
law (pp. 344–356). Harvard
University Press.
Gould, J. W. (1998). Conducting
scientifically crafted child custody
evaluations. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Grabois, E. W. (1997/1998). The
liability of psychotherapists for
breach of confidentiality. Journal
of Law and Health, 12, 39.
http://seg802.ocs.lsu.edu:2077/
universe/document?_m=582c9ea
a09083fd41b92e849a2f4baf8&_
docnum=9&wchp=dGLbVzz-
zSkVb&_md5=db8f2cb26af0c89
8d724e65ca80ee62b
Grahl, T. (2014). The 6 types
of social media. Out:think.
https://booklaunch.com/
the-6-types-of-social-media/
Granello, P. F., & Hanna, F. J. (2003).
Incarcerated and court-involved
adolescents: Counseling an at-risk
population. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 81, 11–18.
Granello, P. F., & Zyromski, B. (2018).
Developing a comprehensive
school suicide prevention
program. Professional School
Counseling, 22(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X18808128
Gray, S. W. (2011). Competency-
based assessments in mental
health practice. Wiley.

-- 531 of 593 --

References 	509
Green, R. G., Baskind, F. R.,
Mustian, B. E., Reed, L. N., &
Taylor, H. R. (2007). Professional
education and private practice: Is
there a disconnect? Social Work,
52, 151–159.
Greenspan, M. (2002). Out of
bounds. In A. A. Lazarus & O.
Zur (Eds.), Dual relationships
and psychotherapy (pp. 425–431).
Springer.
Gricus, M., & Wysiekierski,
L. (2021). Social workers’
perceptions of their peers’
unprofessional behavior.
Journal of Social Work, 22(3),
735–757. https://doi
.org/10.1177/14680173211012576
Griep, S. K., & MacKinnon, D.
F. (2020). Does nonsuicidal
self-injury predict later suicidal
attempts? A review of studies.
Archives of Suicide Research, 26,
428–446. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13811118.2020.1822244
Griesbach, D., Russell, P., Dolev, R.,
& Lardner, C. (2008). The use
and impact of Applied Suicide
Intervention Skills Training
(ASIST) in Scotland: A literature
review and evaluation. Scottish
Government.
Grieve, R., Indian, M., Witteveen,
G. A., & Tolan, J. M. (2013).
Face-to-face or Facebook: Can
social connectedness be derived
online? Computers in Human
Behavior, 29, 604–609. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.11.017
Griffiths, K. M., & Christensen, H.
(2006). Review of randomized
controlled trials of internet
interventions for mental disorders
and related conditions. Clinical
Psychologist, 10, 16–19.
Griffiths, M. D. (2013). Social
networking addiction:
Emerging themes and
issues. Addiction Research
& Therapy, 4. https://doi.
org/10.4172/2155-6105.1000e118
Grover, S. (2005). Reification
of psychiatric diagnoses as
defamatory: Implications
for ethical clinical practice.
Ethical Human Psychology and
Psychiatry, 7, 77–86.
Grzanka, P. R., DeVore, E. N.,
Frantell, K. A., Miles, J. R.,
& Spengler, E. S. (2020).
Conscience clauses and sexual
and gender minority mental health
care: A case study. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 67(5),
551–567. https://doi.org/10.1037/
cou0000396
Grzanka, P. R., Spengler, E. S.,
Miles, J. R., Frantell, K. A., &
DeVore, E. N. (2020). “Sincerely
held principles” or prejudice?
The Tennessee Counseling
Discrimination Law. The
Counseling Psychologist, 48(2),
223–248.
Guiffrida, D., Tansey, M., & Miller,
D. (2019). A constructive
approach to help counselors
work with clients who express
discriminatory views. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
97(1), 105–112. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12240
Guiney, M. C., & Zibulsky, J.
(2017). Competent consultation:
Developing self-efficacy for
process and problem aspects
of consultation. Journal of
Educational and Psychological
Consultation, 27(1), 52–71.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10474412.
2016.1171718
Güllü, H., Karahan, E., & Akçay,
A. O. (2023). A comprehensive
investigation of cyberbullying
and cyber victimization among
secondary school students.
Education and Information
Technologies. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10639-023-11687-8
Guo, Y., Wang, S., Combs, D. C.,
Lin, Y., & Johnson, V. (2013).
Professional counseling in
Taiwan: Past to future. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 91,
331–335. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6676.2013.00101.x
Gushue, G. V., Lee, T. R., & Kim,
J. E. (2022). Racial triangulation
and shifting standards in mental
health assessments. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
100(3), 330–338. https://doi
.org/10.1002/jcad.12420
Guth, L. A., McAuliffe, G., &
Michalak, M. (2014). Counselors
abroad: Outcomes of an
international institute in Ireland.
The Professional Counselor, 4(1),
28–34. https://doi.org/10.15241/
ljg.4.1.2
Gutheil, T. G., & Drogin, E. Y.
(2013). The mental health
professional in court. American
Psychiatric Association.
Gutheil, T. G., & Gabbard, G. O.
(1993). The concept of boundaries
in clinical practice: Theoretical
and risk-management dimensions.
American Journal of Psychiatry,
150, 188–196.
Guthmann, D., Heines, W., & Kolvitz,
M. (2019). One client: Many
provider roles—Dual relationships
in counseling setting. JADARA,
33(3). https://nsuworks.nova.edu/
jadara/vol33/iss3/4
Gutierrez, D., Fox, J., Jones,
K., & Fallon, E. (2018).
The treatment planning of
experienced counselors: A
qualitative examination. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
96(1), 86–96. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12180
Gutierrez, D., & Mullen, P. R.
(2016). Emotional intelligence
and the counselor: Examining
the relationship of trait
emotional intelligence to
counselor burnout. Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 39,
1–11. https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.38.3.01

-- 532 of 593 --

510 	References
Guttmacher, M., & Weihofen,
H. (1952). Privileged
communications between
psychiatrist and patient. Indiana
Law Journal, 28, 32–44.
Gysbers, N. C. (2004).
Comprehensive guidance and
counseling programs: The
evolution of accountability.
Professional School Counseling,
8, 1–14.
Haberstroh, S., Barney, L., Foster,
N., & Duffey, T. (2014). The
ethical and legal practice of online
counseling and psychotherapy:
A review of mental health
professions. Journal of
Technology in Human Services,
32, 149–157. https://doi.org/10.10
80/15228835.2013.872074
Haberstroh, S., Duffey, T., Evans, M.,
Gee, R., & Trepal, H. (2007). The
experience of online counseling.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 29, 269–282.
Haddock, L., Cannon, K., & Grey, E.
(2020). A comparative analysis of
traditional and online counselor
training program delivery and
instruction. The Professional
Counselor, 10(1), 92–105. https://
doi.org/10.15241/1h.10.1.92
Haggärd-Grann, U. (2007).
Assessing violence risk: A
review and clinical
recommendations. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 3,
294–301. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2007.
tb00477.x
Halbert, C. H., Bary, F. K., Weathers,
B., Delmoor, E., Coyne, J.,
Wileyto, O. . . . Malkowicz,
S. B. (2007). Differences in
cultural beliefs and values among
African American and European
American men with prostate
cancer. Cancer Control, 14,
277–284.
Hale, E. (2023, April 27). ChatGPT
is giving therapy. A mental health
revolution may be next. Aljazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/
economy/2023/4/27/could-your-
next-therapist-be-ai-tech-raises-
hopes-concerns
Hall, C. R., Dixon, W. A., &
Mauzey, E. (2004). Spirituality
and religion: Implications for
counselors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 82, 504–507.
Hall, J. G. (2015). The school
counselor and special education:
Aligning training with practice.
The Professional Counselor,
5(2), 217–224. https://doi.
org/10.15241/jgh.5.2.217
Hall, K. G., Barden, S., & Conley,
A. (2014). A relational–cultural
framework: Emphasizing
relational dynamics and
multicultural skill development.
Professional Counselor, 4(1),
71–81.
Hall, K. R., Rushing, J. L., & Beale,
A. V. (2010). Are you a legally
literate school counselor? Journal
of School Counseling, 8(22).
http://www.jsc.montana.edu/
articles/v8n22.pdf
Hamburger, Y. A., & Ben-Artzi, E.
(2000). The relationship between
extraversion and neuroticism and
the different uses of the internet.
Computers in Human Behavior,
16, 441–449.
Hamelin, G., Viviers, S., Litalien, D.,
& Boulet, J. (2022). Bringing
light to school counselors’
burnout: The role of occupational
identity suffering. International
Journal for Educational and
Vocational Guidance, 1–21.
Hamilton, R. W., Macey, J. H.,
& Moll, D. X. (2012). Cases
and materials on corporations
including partnerships and
limited liability companies
(11th ed.). West.
Hammer, S., & Kessler, K. H. (2012).
Ethical and legal aspects of
private practice. In C. E. Stout
(Ed.), Getting better at private
practice (pp. 52–68). John Wiley.
Hammonds, D. S., & Purgason,
L. L. (2022). Advocating for
holistic admissions review:
Implications for master’s level
counselor education programs.
Journal of Counselor Preparation
and Supervision, 15(2). https://
digitalcommons.sacredheart.edu/
jcps/vol15/iss2/26
Handelsman, M. M. (2001). Accurate
and effective informed consent.
In E. R. Welfel & R. E. Engersoll
(Eds.), The mental health desk
reference (pp. 453–458). Wiley.
Handler, J. F. (1990). Law and the
search for community. University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Haniff, D. (2007). Mental health
issues and pervasive computing.
In D. Ramduny-Ellis & D.
Rachovides (Eds.), BCS-HCI ’07
Proceedings of the 21st British
HCI group annual conference on
people and computers: HCI . . .
but not as we know it (Vol. 2,
pp. 171–172). British Computer
Society.
Hanjorgiris, W. F., & O’Neill, J.
H. (2006). Counseling people
with disabilities: A sociocultural
minority group perspective. In C.
C. Lee (Ed.), Multicultural issues
in counseling: New approaches to
diversity (3rd ed., pp. 321–342).
American Counseling
Association.
Hannon, M. D., White, E. E., &
Fleming, H. (2023). Ambivalence
to action: Addressing systemic
racism in counselor education.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 62, 108–117. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12264
Hansen, J. T. (2003). Including
diagnostic training in counseling
curricula: Implications for
professional identity development.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 43, 96–107.

-- 533 of 593 --

References 	511
Hansen, J. T. (2005). The devaluation
of inner subjective experiences
by the counseling profession: A
plea to reclaim the essence of the
profession. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 83, 406–415.
Hansen, J. T. (2006). Is the best
practices movement consistent
with the values of the counseling
profession? A critical analysis of
best practices ideology. Counseling
and Values, 50, 154–160.
Hansen, J. T. (2007). Should
counseling be considered a health
care profession? Critical thoughts
on the transition to a health care
ideology. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 85, 286–293.
Hansen, J. T. (2012). Extending
the humanistic vision: Toward
a humanities foundation for
the counseling profession.
The Journal of Humanistic
Counseling, 51, 133–144.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-
1939.2012.00011.x
Hansen, J. T., Speciale, M., &
Lemberger, M. E. (2014).
Humanism: The foundation and
future of professional counseling.
The Journal of Humanistic
Counseling, 53, 170–190.
Hardy, N. R., Maier, C. A., & Gregson,
T. J. (2021). Couple teletherapy in
the era of COVID-19: Experiences
and recommendations. Journal of
Marital and Family Therapy, 47(2),
225–243.
Harrichand, J. J., Kimball, P. L., Kirk,
K. E., Phillips, L. C., & Takacs,
M. S. (2022). Gatekeeping and
psychological safety: Qualitative
analysis of early-career counselor
educators. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
15(4). https://digitalcommons.
sacredheart.edu/jcps/vol15/iss4/4
Harrichand, J. J., Litam, S. D. A., &
Ausloos, C. D. (2021). Infusing
self-care and wellness into
CACREP curricula: Pedagogical
recommendations for counselor
educators and counselors during
COVID-19. International
Journal for the Advancement of
Counselling, 43(3), 372–385.
Harrington, J. A. (2013).
Contemporary issues in private
practice: Spotlight on the
self-employed mental health
counselor. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 35, 189–197.
Harris, A. D. (1997). Licensing
requirements (2nd ed.).
Alexandria, VA: American
Counseling Association.
Hatchett, G. (2023). A
reconsideration of dispositional
assessment in counselor
education. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
17(2). https://digitalcommons.
sacredheart.edu/ jcps/vol17/iss2/2
Hatchett, G., Sylvestro, H., &
Coaston, S. (2020). Publication
patterns of counselor educators
at comprehensive universities.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 59(1), 32–45. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12164
Hatchett, G. T., Lawrence, C., &
Coaston, S. C. (2017). International
Journal for the Advancement of
Counselling, 39(1), 70–81.
Havlik, S. A., Rowley, P., Puckett,
J., Wilson, G., & Neason, E.
(2017). “Do whatever you
can to try to support that kid”:
School counselors’ experiences
addressing student homelessness.
Professional School Counseling,
21, 26–36. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-21.1.47
Hawke, L. D., Hayes, E., Darnay,
K., & Henderson, J. (2021).
Mental health among transgender
and gender diverse youth: An
exploration of effects during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Psychology
of Sexual Orientation and Gender
Diversity, 8(2), 180–187. https://
doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000467
Hawton, K., Lascelles, K., Pitman,
A., Gilbert, S., & Silverman, M.
(2022). Assessment of suicide risk
in mental health practice: Shifting
from prediction to therapeutic
assessment, formulation,
and risk management. The
Lancet Psychiatry, 9(11),
922–928. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(22)00232-2
Hayden, S. C. W., Williams, D.
J., Canton, A. I., & Finklea,
T. (2015). Shelter from the
storm: Addressing vicarious
traumatization through wellness-
based clinical supervision.
The Professional Counselor,
4(5), 529–542. https://doi.
org/10.15241/scwh.5.4.529
Hays, D. G., Crockett, S. A., &
Michel, R. (2021). A grounded
theory of counselor educators’
academic leadership development.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 60(1), 51–72. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12196
Hays, D. G., & McKibben, W. B.
(2021). Promoting rigorous
research: Generalizability and
qualitative research. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
99(2), 178–188. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12365
Hays, D. G., & Singh, A. A. (2012).
Qualitative inquiry in clinical and
educational settings. The Guilford
Press.
Hays, D. G., & Wood, C. (2011).
Infusing qualitative traditions
in counseling research designs.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 89, 288–295.
Hays, D. G., Wood, C., Dahl, H., &
Kirk-Jenkins, A. (2016).
Methodological rigor in Journal
of Counseling and Development
qualitative research articles:
A 15-year review. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 94,
172–184. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12074

-- 534 of 593 --

512 	References
Hazler, R. J. (2001). Bullying:
Counseling perpetrators and
victims. In D. C. Locke, J. E.
Myers, & E. L. Herr (Eds.),
Handbook of multicultural
counseling (pp. 191–198). Sage.
Healey, A. C., & Hays, D. G. (2012).
A discriminant analysis of gender
and counselor professional
identity development. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 90,
55–62. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1556-6676.2012.00008.x
Healthcare Providers Service
Organization (HPSO). (2014).
Understanding counselor liability
risk. http://www.hpso.com
Hedges, L. E. (1993, July/August).
In praise of dual relationships.
Part II: Essential dual relatedness
in developmental psychotherapy.
The California Therapist, 42–46.
Hedlund v. Superior Court of Orange
County, 34 Cal. 3d 695, 669 P.2d
41, 194 Cal. Rptr. 805 (1983).
Hegarty, W. (2012). Snapshot. In
D. H. Granello & M. E. Young
(Eds.), Counseling today:
Foundations of professional
identity (p. 399). Pearson.
Heinlen, K. T., Welfel, E. R.,
Richmond, E. N., & Rak, C. F.
(2003). The scope of
WebCounseling: A survey of
services and compliance with
NBCC standards for the ethical
practice of WebCounseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 81, 61–69.
Heller, M. S. (1957). Some
comments to lawyers on the
practice of psychiatry. Temple
Law Quarterly, 30, 401–407.
Helms, J. E., & Cook, D. A. (1999).
Using race and culture in
counseling and psychotherapy:
Theory and practice. Allyn &
Bacon.
Henderson, K. L. (2010). The
remediation of students in
counseling graduate programs:
Behavioral indicators,
terminology, and interventions.
Unpublished dissertation,
University of New Orleans.
Henderson, K. L., & Dufrene, R. L.
(2011). Student remediation:
Practical considerations
for counselor educators
and supervisors. http://
counselingoutfitters.com/vistas/
vistas11/Article_45.pdf
Hendrick, S. S. (1988). Counselor
self-disclosure. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 66,
419–424.
Hendrix, D. H. (1991). Ethics and
intrafamily confidentiality in
counseling with children. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling, 13,
323–333.
Henn, H. G. (1991). Henn on
copyright law: A practitioner’s
guide. Practicing Law Institute.
Henriksen, R. C., Jr., Henderson,
S. E., Liang, Y., Watts, R. E., &
Marks, D. F. (2019). Counselor
supervision: A comparison across
states and jurisdictions. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
97(2), 160–170. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12247
Herdian, H., Mildaeni, I. N., &
Wahidah, F. R. (2021). “There
are always ways to cheat”:
Academic dishonesty strategies
during online learning. Journal
of Learning Theory and
Methodology, 2(2). https://doi.
org/10.17309/jltm.2021.2.02
Herlihy, B., & Corey, G. (2008).
Boundaries in counseling: Ethical
and clinical issues. Ethical Issues
in Professional Counseling, 11,
13–23.
Herlihy, B., & Corey, G. (2015a).
ACA ethical standards casebook
(7th ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Herlihy, B., & Corey, G. (2015b).
Boundary issues in counseling:
Multiple roles and responsibilities
(3rd ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Herlihy, B., & Dufrene, R. L.
(2011). Current and emerging
ethical issues in counseling: A
Delphi study of expert opinions.
Counseling and Values, 56,
10–24.
Herlihy, B., & Remley, T. P.,
Jr. (2001). Legal and ethical
challenges in counseling. In D.
C. Locke, J. E. Myers, & E. L.
Herr (Eds.), The handbook of
counseling (pp. 69–89). Sage.
Herlihy, B., James, A. E., &
Swanson, K. S. (2018). Social
justice and counseling ethics.
In C. C. Lee (Ed.), Counseling
for social justice (3rd ed., pp.
334–360). American Counseling
Association.
Herlihy, B., & Watson, Z. E. (2003).
Ethical issues and multicultural
competence in counseling. In F.
D. Harper & J. McFadden (Eds.),
Culture and counseling: New
approaches (pp. 363–378). Allyn
& Bacon.
Herlihy, B., & Watson, Z. E.
(2004). Ethical issues in
assisted suicide. In D. Capuzzi
(Ed.), Suicide across the life
span. American Counseling
Association.
Herlihy, B., & Watson, Z. E. (2006).
Social justice and counseling
ethics. In C. C. Lee (Ed.),
Counseling for social justice.
Alexandria, VA: American
Counseling Association.
Herlihy, B., Watson, Z. E., &
Patureau-Hatchett, M. (2008).
Ethical concerns in diagnosing
culturally diverse clients. Ethical
Issues in Professional Counseling,
11, 25–33.
Hermann, M. A. (2001). Legal issues
in counseling: Incident preparation
and consultation [Unpublished
doctoral dissertation]. University
of New Orleans.

-- 535 of 593 --

References 	513
Hermann, M. A., & Finn, A. (2002).
An ethical and legal perspective
on the role of school counselors
in preventing violence in schools.
Professional School Counseling,
6, 46–54.
Hermann, M. A., & Remley, T. P.,
Jr. (2000). Guns, violence, and
schools: The results of school
violence—Litigation against
educators and students—
Shedding more constitutional
rights at the school house gate.
Loyola Law Review, 46, 389–439.
Hermann, M. A., Remley, T. P., Jr.,
& Huey, W. C. (Eds.). (2011).
Ethical and legal issues in school
counseling (3rd ed.). American
School Counselor Association.
Hershenson, D. B., & Berger, G. P.
(2001). The state of community
counseling: A survey of directors
of CACREP-accredited programs.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 79, 188–193.
Hershenson, D. B., Power, P. W., &
Waldo, M. (1996). Community
counseling: Contemporary theory
and practice. Allyn & Bacon.
Hertlein, K. M., Blumer, M. L.
C., & Mihaloliakos, J. H.
(2014). Marriage and family
counselors’ perceived ethical
issues related to online therapy.
The Family Journal: Counseling
and Therapy for Couples and
Families, 23(1), 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1066480714547184
Hesse, T. (2017, January 18). How
hard is it for a university to revoke
a Ph.D.? The Chronicle of Higher
Education. www.chronicle.com
Higbee, M., Wright, E. R., &
Roemerman, R. M. (2022).
Conversion therapy in the
Southern United States:
Prevalence and experiences
of the survivors. Journal of
Homosexuality, 69(4), 612–631.
Hill, M., Glaser, K., & Harden, J.
(1995). A feminist model for
ethical decision making. In E.
J. Rave & C. C. Larsen (Eds.),
Ethical decision making in therapy:
Feminist perspectives (pp. 18–37).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Hill, N. R., Leinbaugh, T., Bradley,
C., & Hazler, R. (2005). Female
counselor educators: Encouraging
and discouraging factors in
academia. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 83, 374–380.
Hilliard, J. (1998). Termination
of treatment with troublesome
patients. In L. E. Lifson & R. I.
Simon (Eds.), The mental health
practitioner and the law (pp. 216–
221). Harvard University Press.
Hinduja, S., & Patchin, J. W.
(2019). Summary of our
cyberbullying research (2007–
2019). Cyberbullying Research
Center. https://cyberbullying.
org/2019-cyberbullying-data
Hipolito-Delgado, C. P., Estrada, D.,
& Garcia, M. (2021). Disrupting
the narrative on recruiting
graduate students of color in
counselor education. Teaching
and Supervision in Counseling,
3(1), 31–42, Article 4. https://doi.
org/10.7290/tsc030104
Ho, E. Y., D’Agostine, T. A., Yadegar,
V., Burke, A., & Bylund, C.
(2012). Teaching patients how to
talk with biomedical providers
about their complementary and
alternative medicine use. Patient
Education and Counseling,
89(3), 405–410. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pec.2012.03.009
Hodges, S. (2011). Through a glass
darkly—Envisioning the future
of the counseling profession: A
commentary. The Professional
Counselor, 1(3), 191–200. https://
doi.org/10.15241/shh.1.3.191
Höffler, K., Meyer, M., & Möller,
V. (2022). Risk assessment—The
key to more security? Factors,
tools, and practices in dealing
with extremist individuals.
European Journal on Criminal
Policy and Research, 28,
269–295. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10610-021-09502-6
Hoffman, R. M., & Kress, V. E.
(2010). Adolescent nonsuicidal
self-injury: Minimizing client
and counselor risk and enhancing
client care. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 32, 342–353.
Hohenshil, T. H., Amundson, N. E.,
& Niles, S. G. (Eds.). (2017).
Counseling around the world: An
international handbook. American
Counseling Association.
Hollander, J. T., Bauer, S., Herlihy, B.,
& McCollum, V. (2006). Beliefs
of board certified substance abuse
counselors regarding multiple
relationships. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 28, 84–94.
Holliman, R. P., & Muro, L. (2015).
Professional isolation and the
counselor. The Practitioner
Scholar: Journal of Counseling
and Professional Psychology,
4(1), 15–26.
Hoop, J. G., DiPasquale, T.,
Hernandez, J. M., & Roberts,
L. W. (2008). Gay and lesbian
social justice: Strategies for social
advocacy. Ethics and Behavior,
18, 353–372.
Hopewell v. Adebimpe, 130 Pitt. L. J.
107 (1982).
Hormes, J. M., Kearns, B., &
Timko, C. A. (2014). Craving
Facebook? Behavioral addiction
to online social networking and
its association with emotion
regulation deficits. Addiction,
109, 2079–2088. https://doi.
org/10.1111/add.12713
Horn, R. L., & Weisz, J. R. (2020).
Can artificial intelligence improve
psychotherapy research and
practice? Administration and
Policy in Mental Health and
Mental Health Services Research,
47, 852–855. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10488-020-01056-9

-- 536 of 593 --

514 	References
Horowitz v. Board of Curators of the
University of Missouri, 435 U.S.
78 (1978).
Hospital and Community Psychiatry.
(1979). Virginia court ruling stirs
concern about confidentiality
protections in group therapy.
Hospital and Community
Psychiatry, 30, 428.
Huber, C. H., & Baruth, L. G. (1987).
Ethical, legal and professional
issues in the practice of marriage
and family therapy. Merrill/
Prentice Hall.
Huey, W. C. (1996). Counseling
minor clients. In B. Herlihy &
G. Corey (Eds.), ACA ethical
standards casebook (5th ed., pp.
241–245). American Counseling
Association.
Hughes, E. C. (1965). Professions. In
K. S. Lynn (Ed.), The professions
in America (pp. 1–14). Houghton
Mifflin.
Hunt, B. (2011). Publishing
qualitative research in
counseling journals. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 89,
296–300.
Hunt, B., Matthews, C., Milsom, A.,
& Lammel, J. A. (2006). Lesbians
with physical disabilities:
A qualitative study of their
experiences with counseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 84, 163–174.
Hunt, H. (2004). Essentials of private
practice. W. W. Norton.
Huss, S. N., Bryant, A., & Mulet, S.
(2008). Managing the quagmire of
counseling in a school: Bringing
the parents on board. Professional
School Counseling, 11, 362–
367. https://doi.org/10.5330/
PSC.n.2010-11.362
Hutchens, N., Block, J., & Young,
M. (2013). Counselor educators’
gatekeeping responsibilities
and students’ First Amendment
rights. Counselor Education &
Supervision, 52, 82–95.
Ibtesam, R. (2017). On teenage
‘sexting’ and the law. Mitchell
Hamline Law Journal of Public
Policy and Practice, 37(1), Article
4. http://digitalcommons.hamline.
edu/jplp/vol36/iss1/4
Ideal Publishing Corp. v. Creative
Features, 59 A.2d 862, 399
N.Y.S.2d 118 (1977).
Imig, A. (2014). Small but
mighty: Perspectives of rural
mental health counselors.
The Professional Counselor,
4(4), 404–412. https://doi.
org/10.15241/aii.4.4.404
Ingersoll, R. E., Bauer, A., &
Burns, L. (2004). Children and
psychotropic medication: What
role should advocacy counseling
play? Journal of Counseling &
Development, 82, 337–342.
Ingraham, C. L. (2017). Educating
consultants for multicultural
practice of consultee-centered
consultation. Journal of
Educational and Psychological
Consultation, 27(1),
72–95. https://doi.org/doi:
10.1080/10474412.2016.1174936
Insureon. (2023). How to
prevent malpractice lawsuits
against your therapy or
counseling practice. https://
www.insureon.com/blog/
malpractice-for-counselors
Interiano-Shiverdecker, C.
G., Prasath, P. R., & Eren,
R. N. A. (2022). Foreign-
born counselor educators:
Strengths, challenges, and
areas of support. International
Journal for the Advancement
of Counselling, 44, 126–144.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10447-021-09456-8
Interiano-Shiverdecker, C. G.,
Romero, D. E., & Elliott, J.
(2023). Development of child
sex trafficking counselling
competencies in the United
States: A Delphi study. Journal
of Interpersonal Violence,
38(1–2), 1397–1423. https://doi.
org/10.1177/08862605221090569
International Association of
Counseling Services (IACS).
(2018). http://www.iacsinc.org/
International Association of Marriage
and Family Counselors (IAMFC).
(2017). IAMFC Code of Ethics.
https://www.iamfconline.org/
public/-11.cfm
International Legal Technology
Association. (2023). Resources.
https://www.iltanet.org/home
International Registry of Counsellor
Education Programs. (2018).
http://www.ircep.org/
International Society for Mental
Health Online. (2008). Suggested
principles for the online provision
of mental health services. http://
www.ismho.org
International Society for the Study of
Self-Injury. (2023). Definition of
non-suicidal self-injury. https://
www.itriples.org
International Test Commission.
(2013). International guidelines
for test use. International Journal
of Testing, 1, 93–114.
In the Matter of Miguel M. v.
Barron, 950 N.E.2d 107 (N.Y.
2011).
Isaacs, D. (2011). Plagiarism is not
OK. Journal of Pediatrics and
Child Health, 47, 159. https://
doi.org/doi: 10.1111/j.1440-
1754.2011.02050.x
Isaacs, M. L., & Stone, C.
(1999). School counselors
and confidentiality: Factors
affecting professional choices.
Professional School Counseling,
2, 258–266.
Isaacs, M. L., & Stone, C. (2001).
Confidentiality with minors:
Mental health counselors’
attitudes toward breaching or
preserving confidentiality. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling, 23,
342–356.

-- 537 of 593 --

References 	515
Ivers, N. N., Johnson, D. A.,
Clarke, P. B., Newsome, D.
W., & Berry, R. A. (2016). The
relationship between mindfulness
and multicultural counseling
competence. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 94, 72–82.
Ivey, A., Ivey, M., Myers, J.,
& Sweeney, T. (2005).
Developmental counseling and
therapy: Promoting wellness over
the lifespan. Houghton Mifflin.
Ivey, A. E., D’Andrea, M., Ivey, M.
B., & Simek-Morgan, L. (2007).
Theories of counseling and
psychotherapy: A multicultural
perspective (6th ed.). Allyn &
Bacon.
Ivey, A. E., & Ivey, M. B. (1999).
Toward a developmental
diagnostic and statistical manual:
The vitality of a contextual
framework. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 77, 484–490.
Jablonski v. United States, 712 F.2d
391 (9th Cir. 1983).
Jacob, C. J., Byrd, R., Donald, E. J.,
Milner, R. J., & Flowers, T. (2022).
Avoiding boundary violations:
Recommendations for managing
attraction to and from clients
in response to the Healthcare
Providers Service Organization's
2019 report. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 44(1), 6–17.
Jacob, C. J., & Prikhidko, A. (2022).
Exploring emotion regulation
in counselors’ management of
attraction to clients. Journal of
Creativity in Mental Health,
17(3), 278–291.
Jacobs, E. E., Schimmel, C., Masson,
R. L., & Harvill, R. L. (2016).
Group counseling: Strategies and
skills (8th ed.). Brooks/Cole.
Jadaszewski, S. (2017). Ethically
problematic value change as an
outcome of psychotherapeutic
interventions. Ethics & Behavior,
27(4), 297–312. https://doi.org/10
.1080/10508422.2016.1195739
Jaffee v. Redmond et al., WL 314841
(U.S. June 13, 1996).
Jagger, G. E., & Sterner, W. R. (2016).
Excoriation: What counselors
need to know about skin picking
disorder. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 38, 281–297. https://
doi.org/10.17744/mehc.38.4.01
James, J. (1996, May 11). University
to adopt rules that put limits on
dating. Register-Guard (Eugene,
OR), pp. 1, 6A.
Jamison, S. (2012). Legalized
physician-assisted suicide would
improve treatment of the terminally
ill. In N. Merino (Ed.), Assisted
suicide: Current controversies (pp.
115–121). Jossey-Bass.
Jencius, M. (2003). Applications
of technological advances
for multicultural counseling
professionals. In F. D. Harper &
J. McFadden (Eds.), Culture and
counseling: New approaches
(pp. 350–362). Pearson.
Jencius, M. (2015). Technology, social
media, and online counseling. In
B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
ACA ethical standards casebook
(7th ed., pp. 245–254). American
Counseling Association.
Jencius, M., & Sager, D. E. (2001).
The practice of marriage and
family counseling in cyberspace.
The Family Journal, 9, 295–301.
Jencius, M., & West, J. (2003).
Traditional counseling theories and
cross-cultural implications. In F.
D. Harper & J. McFadden (Eds.),
Culture and counseling: New
approaches (pp. 339–349). Pearson.
Joe, J. R. (2018). Counseling to end an
epidemic: Revisiting the ethics of
HIV/AIDS. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 96, 197–205.
John R. v. Oakland Unified School
District, 48 Ca.3d 438, 256 Cal.
Rptr. 766, 769 P.2d 948 (1989).
Johnson, A., & Williams, D. (2015).
White racial identity, color-blind
racial attitudes, and multicultural
counseling competence. Cultural
Diversity and Ethnic Minority
Psychology, 21(3), 440–449.
Johnson, G. S., & Purgason, L.
L. (2021). School counselors’
experiences with ethical decision
making. Professional School
Counseling, 25(1). https://doi.org/
10.1177/2156759X211018640
Johnson, K. F., Blake, J., & Ramsey,
H. E. (2021). Professional
counselors’ experiences on
interprofessional teams in hospital
settings. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 99(4), 406–417.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12393
Johnson, K. F., Ieva, K., & Byrd,
J. (2022). Introduction to the
special issue on school counselors
addressing education, health,
wellness, and trauma disparities.
Professional School Counseling,
26(1b). https://doi.org/10.1177/21
56759X221105451
Johnson, M. K., Weeks, S. N.,
Peacock, G. G., & Domenech
Rodriguez, M. M. (2022). Ethical
decision-making models: A
taxonomy of models and review
of issues. Ethics & Behavior,
32(3), 195–209. https://doi.org/10
.1080/10508422.2021.1913593
Johnson, S. J. (2000). Promoting
professional identity in an era of
educational reform. Professional
School Counseling, 4, 31–40.
Johnson, W. B. (2015). Multiple
relationships in military mental
health counseling. In B. Herlihy
& G. Corey (Eds.), Boundary
issues in counseling (3rd ed., pp.
254–259). American Counseling
Association.
Johnson, W. B., Barnett, J. E., Elman,
N. S., Forrest, L., & Kaslow,
N. J. (2012). The competent
community: Toward a vital
reformulation of professional
ethics. American Psychologist,
67, 557–569. https://psycnet.apa.
org/doi/10.1037/a0027206

-- 538 of 593 --

516 	References
Johnson, W. B., & Johnson, S.
J. (2017). Unavoidable and
mandated multiple relationships
in military settings. In O. Zur
(Ed.), Multiple relationships in
psychotherapy and counseling:
Unavoidable, common, and
mandatory dual relationships in
therapy (pp. 49–60). Routledge,
Taylor & Francis.
Johnson, W. B., Ralph, J., &
Johnson, S. J. (2005). Managing
multiple roles in embedded
environments: The case of aircraft
carrier psychology. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 36, 73–81.
Johnson, W. K., & Roark, D. B.
(1996). A copyright sampler.
American Library Association.
Joiner, T. E., Van Orden, K. A.,
Witte, T. K., & Rudd, M. D.
(2009). The interpersonal theory
of suicide: Guidance for working
with suicidal clients. American
Psychological Association.
The Joint Commission. (2018).
https://www.jointcommission.org/
Jolly, H. K. (2019). I’m human too:
Person-centered counsellors’
lived experiences of therapist
self-disclosure. European Journal
for Qualitative Research in
Psychotherapy, 9, 12–26.
Jordan, A. E., & Meara, N.
M. (1990). Ethics and the
professional practice of
psychologists. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 21, 107–114.
Jordan, J. V., & Duffey, T. (2020).
The counseling relationship.
In T. Duffey & S. Haberstroh
(Eds.), Introduction to crisis
and trauma counseling ( pp.
25–42). American Counseling
Association.
Jordan, K. (2018). Trauma-informed
counseling supervision:
Something every counselor
should know about. Asia Pacific
Journal of Counselling and
Psychotherapy. https://doi.org/10.
1080/21507686.2018.1450274
Jordan, M., & Marshall, H.
(2010). Taking counseling and
psychotherapy outside: Destruction
or enrichment of the therapeutic
frame? European Journal of
Psychotherapy & Counselling, 12,
345–359. https://doi.org/10.1080/1
3642537.2010.530105
Jorgenson, L. M. (1995). Sexual
contact in fiduciary relationships.
In J. C. Gonsiorek (Ed.), Breach
of trust: Sexual exploitation by
health care professionals and
clergy (pp. 237–283). Sage.
Jorgensen, M., Brown-Rice, K., &
Olson, S. D. (2018). Clinical
supervisors’ knowledge of
supervisees with problems of
professional competence. The
Journal of Counselor Preparation
and Supervision, 10(1). https://
repository.wcsu.edu/jcps/vol10/
iss1/4
Jorgensen, M. F., & Brown-Rice,
K. (2016). Analyzing CACREP-
accredited programs’ utilization
of criminal background checks.
The Professional Counselor,
6(4), 375–386. https://doi.
org/10.15241/mfj.6.4.375
Journal of Counseling and
Development. (2020).
Introduction to the special issue:
Integrating the multicultural
and social justice counseling
competencies into practice,
research, and advocacy. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
98(3), 235–237. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12318
Juhnke, B. A., Juhnke, G. A., Curtis,
R. C., Thompson, E. H., Coll,
K. M., Fangzhou, Y., . . . Mullett,
A. (2013). Using motivational
interviewing with school-age
bullies: A new use for a proven,
evidence-based intervention.
Journal of School Counseling,
11(14). http://www.jsc.montana.
edu/articles/v11n14.pdf
Kakhnovets, R., Young, H. L.,
Purnell, A., L., Huebner, E., &
Bishop, C. (2010). Self-reported
experience of self-injurious
behavior in college students.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 32, 309–323.
Kåmpf, A. (2009). Confidentiality
for mental health professionals:
A guide to ethical and legal
principles. Australian Academic
Press.
Kane, A. W. (1995). The effects
of criminalization of sexual
misconduct by therapists. In J. C.
Gonsiorek (Ed.), Breach of trust:
Sexual exploitation by health care
professionals and clergy
(pp. 317–332). Sage.
Kane, M. N. (2013). Catholic priests’
knowledge of pastoral codes of
conduct in the United States.
Ethics & Behavior, 23, 199–213.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10508422.
2012.737690
Kaplan, D., & Martz, E. (2014a,
July). An overview of the revised
ACA Code of Ethics. Counseling
Today, 20–21.
Kaplan, D., & Martz, E. (2014b,
November). Raising the bar for
counselor educators. Counseling
Today, 26–27.
Kaplan, D. M., Francis, P. C.,
Hermann, M. A., Baca, J. V.,
Goodnough, G. E., Hodges, S.,
& Wade, M. E. (2017). New
concepts in the 2014 Code of
Ethics. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 95, 110–116.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12122
Kaplan, D. M., Kocet, M. M.,
Cottone, R. R., Glosoff, H. L.,
Miranti, J. G., Moll, C. . . .
Tarvydas, V. M. (2009). New
mandates in the revised ACA Code
of Ethics. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 87, 241–256.

-- 539 of 593 --

References 	517
Kaplan, D. M., Tarvydas, V. M., &
Gladding, S. T. (2014). 20/20:
A vision for the future of
counseling: The new consensus
definition of counseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 92, 366–372.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2014.00164.x
Kaplan, R., & Zirkel, P. A. (2017,
October 18–21). Are student
communications with school
psychologists legally privileged?
NASP Communique, 46(2), 1.
Kaplin, W. A., & Lee, B. A. (1995).
The law of higher education
(3rd ed.). Jossey-Bass.
Kassirer, S. J., Delaney, N. M.,
Goldstein, L. M., Taylor, M. E.,
Dobmeier, R. A., & Hernandez,
T. J. (2013). Scope of practice
impact on employability in
New York state: Director and
counselor views. Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 35,
360–376.
Katherine, A. (1991). Boundaries:
Where you end and I begin.
Simon & Schuster.
Kattari, S. K. (2020). Ableist
microaggressions and the
mental health of disabled adults.
Community Mental Health
Journal, 56(6), 1170–1179.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10597-020-00615-6
Kearney, M. (1984). Confidentiality
in group psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy in Private
Practice, 2, 19–20.
Keeton v. Anderson-Wiley, et al.,
U.S. Court of Appeals, 11th
Circuit, 664 F3d 865; 2011 U.A.
App. LEXIS 25007; 23 Fla. L.
Weekly Fed. C 647 (2011).
Keim, M. A., & Cobia, D. (2010).
Legal and ethical implications of
working with minors in Alabama:
Consent and confidentiality.
Alabama Counseling Association
Journal, 35, 28–34.
Keith-Spiegel, P. (2014). Red flags
in psychotherapy: Stories of
ethics complaints and resolutions.
Routledge.
Keller, A., Moore, E., Hamilton,
D., Terrell, D., & Hahn, L.
(2010, March). Facebook:
Implications for counselor
education students, faculty and
practitioners [Paper presentation].
American Counseling Association
Conference.
Kelly, K. R. (2001). Introduction
to the revised AMHCA Code of
Ethics. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 23, 1–21.
Kennedy, J. A. (2003). Psychiatric
treatment planning (2nd ed.).
American Psychiatric Publishing.
Kennedy, S., & Baker, S. (2014).
School counseling websites: Do
they have content that serves
diverse students? Professional
School Counseling, 18, 49–60.
https://doi.org/10.5330/
prsc.18.1.8015445n7034xr36
Kenny, M., Staniforth, L., &
Vernals, J. (2023). The impact of
working with human trafficking
survivors. Traumatology, 29(2),
265–276. https://doi.org/10.1037/
trm0000390
Kiekens, G., Hasking, P., Boyes, M.,
Claes, L., Mortier, P., Auerbach,
R. P., Cuijpers, P., Demyttenaere,
K., Greene, J. G., Kessler, R.
C., Myin-Germeys, I., Nock, M.
K., & Bruffaerts, R. (2018). The
associations between non-suicidal
self-injury and first onset suicidal
thoughts and behaviors. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 239, 171–
179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jad.2018.06.033
Killian, T., & Floren, M. (2020).
Exploring the relationship
between pedagogy and counselor
trainees’ multicultural and social
justice competence. Journal of
Counseling & Development,
98(3), 295–307.
Kimball, P. L., Phillips, L. C., Kirka,
K. E., & Harrichand, J. J. S.
(2019). Gatekeeping: A counselor
educator’s responsibility to
the counseling profession and
community. International Journal
on Responsibility, 3(2), 54–66.
https://commons.lib.jmu.edu/ijr/
vol3/iss2/6
King, J. H., & Anderson, S. M.
(2004). Therapeutic implications
of pharmacotherapy: Current
trends and ethical issues. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
82, 329–336.
King, K. A., Tribble, J. L., & Price,
J. H. (1999). School counselors’
perceptions of nonconsensual
sexual activity among high school
students. Professional School
Counseling, 2, 286–290.
Kiracofe, N. M., & Wells, L. (2007).
Mandated disciplinary counseling
on campus: Problems and
possibilities. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 85, 269–268.
Kiriakaki, S., Tzovanou, M., Sotiriou,
A., Lampou, M., & Varsamidou,
E. (2022). Online counseling:
Advantages, disadvantages and
ethical issues. Homo Virtualis,
5(1), 32–59. https://doi.
org/10.12681/homvir.30316
Kiselica, M. S., & Morrill-Richards,
M. (2007). Sibling maltreatment:
The forgotten abuse. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 85,
148–161.
Kiselica, M. S., & Robinson, M.
(2001). Bringing advocacy
counseling to life: The history,
issues, and human dramas of
social justice work in counseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 79, 387–397.
Kitchener, K. S. (1992). Posttherapy
relationships: Ever or never? In B.
Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.), Dual
relationships in counseling (pp.
145–148). American Counseling
Association.

-- 540 of 593 --

518 	References
Kitchener, K. S., & Harding, S. S.
(1990). Dual role relationships.
In B. Herlihy & L. Golden (Eds.),
Ethical standards casebook (4th
ed., pp. 145–148). American
Counseling Association.
Kitzrow, M. A. (2002). Survey
of CACREP-accredited
programs: Training counselors
to provide treatment for
sexual abuse. Counselor
Education & Supervision,
42(2), 107–118. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6978.2002.
tb01803.x
Knapp, S., & VandeCreek, L. (1987).
Privileged communications in the
mental health professions. Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Knapp, S., & VandeCreek, L. (2008).
The ethics of advertising, billing,
and finances in psychotherapy.
Journal of Clinical Psychology:
In Session, 64, 613–625.
Knapp, S. J. (2017). Confidentiality,
privileged communications,
and record keeping. In S. J.
Knapp, L. D. VandeCreek, &
R. Fingerhut (Eds.), Practical
ethics for psychologists: A
positive approach (pp. 125–147).
American Psychological
Association.
Knezevic, B., & Olson, S. (2014).
Counseling people displaced by
war: Experiences of refugees
from the former Yugoslavia.
The Professional Counselor,
4(4), 316–331. https://doi.
org/10.15241/bkk.4.4.316
Knox, B., Christoffersen, P.,
Leggitt, K., Woodruff, Z., &
Haber, M. H. (2023). Justice,
vulnerable populations, and
the use of conversational AI in
psychotherapy. The American
Journal of Bioethics, 23(5),
48–50. https://doi.org/10.1080/15
265161.2023.2191040
Kocet, M. M., & Herlihy, B.
(2014). Addressing value-based
conflicts within the counseling
relationship: A decision-making
model. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 92, 180–186.
Kolbert, J. B., Schultz, D., & Crothers,
L. M. (2014). Bullying prevention
and the parent involvement model.
Journal of School Counseling,
12(7). http://www.jsc.montana.
edu/articles/v12n7.pdf
Königbauer, J., Letsch, J., Doebler,
P., Ebert, D., & Baumeister, H.
(2017). Internet- and mobile-
based depression interventions for
people with diagnosed depression:
A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 223, 28–40. https://doi.
org/2017-38080-008
Koocher, G. P., & Keith-Spiegel, P.
(2016). Ethics in psychology and
the mental health professions:
Standards and cases (4th ed.).
Oxford University Press.
Kopelovich, S. L., Monroe-DeVita,
M., Buck, B. E., Brenner, C.,
Moser, L., Jarskog, L. F. . . .
& Chwastiak, L. A. (2021).
Community mental health care
delivery during the COVID-19
pandemic: Practical strategies for
improving care for people with
serious mental illness. Community
Mental Health Journal, 57,
405–415.
Kosenko, K., Luurs, G., & Binder,
A. R. (2017). Sexting and
sexual behavior, 2011–2015:
A critical review and meta-
analysis of a growing literature.
Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 22(3), 141–
160. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jcc4.12187
Kottler, J. A., & Schofield, M.
(2001). When therapists face
stress and crisis: Self-initiated
coping strategies. In E. R. Welfel
& R. E. Ingersoll (Eds.), The
mental health desk reference
(pp. 426–432). Wiley.
Kowalski, R. M., Giumetti, G. W.,
Schroeder, A. N., & Lattanner, M.
R. (2014). Bullying in the digital
age: A critical review and meta-
analysis of cyberbullying research
among youth. Psychological
Bulletin, 140, 1073–1137. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0035618
Kramer, D. T. (1994). Legal rights of
children (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Kramer, J. J. (1999). Dead men’s
lawyers tell no tales: The attorney–
client privilege survives death.
The Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology, 89(3), 941–972.
Kraus, R., Stricker, G., & Speyer, C.
(Eds.). (2010). Online counseling:
A handbook for mental health
professionals (2nd ed.). Academic
Press.
Krennerich, S., Haiyasoso, M., &
Flasch, P. S. (2021). Professional
counselors’ experiences counseling
and working in areas repeatedly
impacted by hurricanes. Teaching
and Supervision in Counseling,
3(1), Article 6. https://doi.
org/10.7290/tsc030106
Kress, V. E., & Dixon, A. (2007).
Consensual faculty–student
sexual relationships in counselor
education: Recommendations
for counselor educators’ decision
making. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 47, 110–122.
Kress, V. E., Hoffman, R. M.,
Adamson, N., & Eriksen, K.
(2013). Informed consent,
confidentiality, and diagnosing:
Ethical guidelines for counselor
practice. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 35, 15–28.
Kress, V. E., Hoffman, R. M., &
Eriksen, K. (2010). Ethical
dimensions of diagnosing:
Considerations for clinical mental
health counselors. Counseling and
Values, 55, 101–112.
Kress, V. E., & Protivnak, J. T.
(2009). Professional development
plans to remedy problematic

-- 541 of 593 --

References 	519
counseling student behaviors.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 48, 154–166.
Krieger Cohen, P. E., & Johnson,
A. T. (2022). Career counselors
self-disclosing to first-
generation college students:
A grounded theory study.
Journal of Career Development,
49(3), 491–504. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0894845320941251
Krienert, J. L., Walsh, J. A., &
Cannon, K. D. (2021). Changes
in the tradecraft of cheating:
Technological advances in
academic dishonesty. College
Teaching, 70(3), 309–318. https://
doi.org/10.1080/87567555.2021.
1940813
Kronbluh, M. (2015). Combatting
challenges to establishing
trustworthiness in qualitative
research. Qualitative Research in
Psychology, 12, 397–414. https://
doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2015.
1021941
Kuo, P., Woo, H., & Washington,
A. (2018). Professional identity
development of international
counselor education doctoral
students. Journal of Counselor
Leadership and Advocacy.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23267
16X.2018.1452079
Kurasaki, K. S., Sue, S., Chun, C., &
Gee, K. (2000). Ethnic minority
intervention and treatment
research. In J. E. Aponte & J.
Wohl (Eds.), Psychological
intervention and cultural diversity
(pp. 234–249). Allyn & Bacon.
Kurt, L. J. (2017). Creating school
climates that foster inclusive
community attitudes toward gender
nonconforming students. Journal
of School Counseling, 15(1).
Retrieved from http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v15n1.pdf
Labardee, L. (2009, Summer). Online
counseling crosses the chasm.
EAP Digest, 12–20.
Lachs, M., & Pillemer, K. (2015).
Elder abuse. New England
Journal of Medicine, 373, 1947–
1956. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMra1404688
Lachs, M. S. (2016, June 14). The
prevalence of resident-to-resident
elder mistreatment in nursing
homes. Annals of Internal
Medicine. http://annals.org/
aim/article-abstract/2528279/
prevalence-resident-resident-
elder-mistreatment-nursing-homes
Ladany, N., Mori, Y., & Mehr, K. E.
(2013). Effective and ineffective
supervision. The Counseling
Psychologist, 41, 28–47.
LaFleur, L. B., Hebert, Z. J., &
Dupuy, A. S. (2018). Leveling
up your game: The use of video
games as a therapeutic modality.
Journal of Creativity in Mental
Health, 13(1), 58–67.
LaFountain, R. M., & Baer, E. C.
(2001). Increasing CACREP’s
name recognition: The effect
of written correspondence on
site supervisors’ awareness
level. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 79, 194–199.
Lagan, S., & Torous, J. (2021,
June 23). How to navigate the
overwhelming volume of mental
health apps. National Alliance of
Mental Illness. https://nami.org
Lamanna, J., Shillingford, M. A.,
Parrish, M., & Sheffield, R.
(2010). Counseling group
curriculum for parents on
bullying. Journal of School
Counseling, 8(28). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v8n28.pdf
Lambie, G. W., Ascher, D. L., Sivo,
S. A., & Hayes, B. G. (2014).
Counselor education doctoral
program faculty members’
refereed article publications.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 92, 338–346.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2014.00161.x
Lambie, G. W., & Haugen, J. S.
(2022). Assessment of clinical
mental health counseling
competencies for preparation
programs. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 61(1), 15–24.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12221
Lancaster, C., Balkin, R. S., Garcia,
R., & Valarezo, A. (2011). An
evidence-based approach to
reducing recidivism in court-
referred youth. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 89,
488–492.
Landau, R., & Werner, S. (2012).
Ethical aspects of using GPS for
tracking people with dementia:
Recommendations for practice.
International Psychogeriatrics,
29, 358–366. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1041610211001888
Lanier, B. A., & Carney, J. S. (2019).
Practicing counselors, vicarious
trauma, and subthreshold PTSD:
Implications for counselor
educators. The Professional
Counselor, 9(4), 334–346. https://
doi.org/10.15241/bal.9.4.334
Lanzillo, E. C., Zhang, I., Jobes,
D. A., & Brausch, A. M. (2021).
The influence of cyberbullying
on nonsuicidal self-injury and
suicidal thoughts and behavior
in a psychiatric adolescent
sample. Archives of Suicide
Research, 27(1), 156–163.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1381111
8.2021.1973630
Large, M. M. (2018). The role
of prediction in suicide
prevention. Dialogues in Clinical
Neuroscience, 20(3), 197–205.
https://doi.org/10.31887%2FDCN
S.2018.20.3%2Fmlarge
Lasser, J., & Gottlieb, M. C. (2017).
Facilitating informed consent: A
multicultural perspective. Ethics
& Behavior, 27, 106–117. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10508422.2016.
1174121

-- 542 of 593 --

520 	References
Lawley, J. S. (2012). HIPAA,
HITECH and the practicing
counselor: Electronic records
and practice guidelines. The
Professional Counselor,
2(3), 192–200. https://doi.
org/10.15241/jsl.2.3.192
Lawrence, C. M. (2023). Therapeutic
rapport building with adolescent
females engaging in nonsuicidal
self-injury [Unpublished doctoral
dissertation]. University of Holy
Cross.
Lawrence, G., & Robinson Kurpius,
S. E. (2000). Legal and ethical
issues involved when counseling
minors in nonschool settings.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 78, 130–137.
Lawson, D. M. (2001). The
development of abusive
personality: A trauma response.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 79, 505–509.
Lawson, D. M. (2003). Incidence,
explanations, and treatment of
partner violence. Journal of
Counseling & Development,
81, 19–32. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2003.
tb00221.x
Lawson, D. M. (2017). Treating
adults with complex trauma:
An evidence-based case study.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 95(3), 288–298.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12143
Lawson, G. (2007). Counselor
wellness and impairment:
A national survey. Journal
of Humanistic Counseling,
Education and Development, 46,
20–34.
Lawson, G. (2015). Boundaries in
disaster mental health. In B. Herlihy
& G. Corey (Eds.), Boundary
issues in counseling: Multiple
roles and responsibilities (3rd ed.,
pp. 224–228). American
Counseling Association.
Lawson, G. (2016). On being
a profession: A historical
perspective on counselor licensure
and accreditation. Journal of
Counselor Leadership and
Advocacy, 3. https://doi.org/10.10
80/2326716X.2016.1169955
Lawson, G., & Myers, J. E. (2011).
Wellness, professional quality
of life, and career-sustaining
behaviors: What keeps us
well? Journal of Counseling &
Development, 89, 163–171.
Lawson, G., Trepal, H. C., Lee,
R. W., & Kress, V. (2017).
Advocating for educational
standards in counselor licensure
laws. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 56, 162–176.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12070
Lawson, J. L., Doran, J. M., O’Shea,
M., & Abel, E. A. (2022). The
good, the bad, the uncertain:
Diverse provider experiences with
telemental health during
COVID-19. Psychiatric Quarterly,
93(3), 753–774. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11126-022-09990-7
Lazarus, A. A. (2006). Transcending
boundaries in psychotherapy. In
B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
Boundary issues in counseling:
Multiple roles and responsibilities
(2nd ed., pp. 16–19). American
Counseling Association.
Lazarus, A. A., & Zur, O. (Eds.).
(2002). Dual relationships and
psychotherapy. Springer.
Lazovsky, R. (2008). Maintaining
confidentiality with minors:
Dilemmas of school counselors.
Professional School Counseling,
11, 235–245.
Leaffer, M. A. (1989). Understanding
copyright law. Matthew Bender.
Leahy, M. J., & Szymanski, E. M.
(1995). Rehabilitation counseling:
Evolution and current status.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 74, 163–166.
Leatherman, C. (1993). In the debate
over faculty–student dating, the
talk turns to ethics, sex, even love.
Chronicle of Higher Education,
24, A15–A17.
Lebow, J. L. (2020). Family in
the age of COVID-19. Family
Process, 59(2), 309.
Lebow, J. L., & Stroud, C. B.
(2016). Family therapy. In J.
Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, &
D. K. Freedheim (Eds.), APA
handbook of clinical psychology
(Vol. 3, pp. 327–349). American
Psychological Association.
Lee, A. (2018). Clinical supervision
of international supervisees:
Suggestions for multicultural
supervision. International
Journal for the Advancement of
Counselling, 40(1), 60–71.
Lee, C. C. (2001). Defining and
responding to racial and ethnic
diversity. In D. C. Locke, J. E.
Myers, & E. L. Herr (Eds.),
Handbook of multicultural
counseling (pp. 581–588). Sage.
Lee, C. C. (2013). The CACREP
site visit process. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 91,
50–54. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6676.2013.00070.x
Lee, C. C. (Ed.). (2013).
Multicultural issues in
counseling: New approaches
to diversity (4th ed.). American
Counseling Association.
Lee, C. C. (Ed.). (2015). Social
justice and counseling across
cultures. In B. Herlihy & G.
Corey (Eds.), ACA ethical
standards casebook (7th ed., pp.
155–162). American Counseling
Association.
Lee, D. J., Heyman, A. N., Winkelman,
L., Sneed, Z., & Sametz, R. (2023).
Effectiveness of teletherapy during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling,
45(2), 147–165. https://doi
.org/10.17744/mehc.45.2.04

-- 543 of 593 --

References 	521
Lee, I., Duys, D. K., & Wood, S.
M. (2022). Doctoral students’
publication and editorial feedback
experiences: A phenomenological
inquiry. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 61(2), 174–192.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12235
Lee, J., Lee, D., Nam, S., Jeong, J.,
& Na, G. (2022). Dynamics of
online engagement: Counseling
students’ experiences and
perceptions in distance learning.
Journal of Technology in
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 2(2), 11. https://doi.
org/10.22371/tces/0027
Lee, S. (2010). Contemporary issues
of ethical e-therapy. Journal of
Ethics in Mental Health, 5, 1–5.
Lee, S. M., Suh, S., Yang, E., &
Jang, Y. J. (2012). History,
current status, and future
prospects of counseling in South
Korea. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 90, 494–499.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2012.00061.x
Lee, Y. (2011). Understanding anti-
plagiarism software adoption: An
extended protection motivation
theory perspective. Decision
Support Systems, 50, 361–369.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dss.2010.07.009
Lee, Y. C., Yamashita, N., & Huang,
Y. (2020). Designing a chatbot
as a mediator for promoting
deep self-disclosure to a real
mental health professional.
Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction,
4(CSCW1), 1–27.
Leibert, T., Archer, J., Munson, J., &
York, K. (2006). An exploratory
study of client perceptions of internet
counseling and the therapeutic
alliance. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 28, 69–83.
Leichliter, J. S., Copen, C., & Dittus,
P. J. (2017). Confidentiality issues
and use of sexually transmitted
disease services among sexually
experienced persons aged 15–25
years—United States, 2013–
2015. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, 66(9), 237–241.
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6609a1
Lemberger, M. E., Carbonneau,
K. J., Selig, J. P., & Bowers,
H. (2018). The role of social-
emotional mediators on middle
school students’ academic growth
as fostered by an evidence-
based intervention. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 96,
27–40. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12175
Lemberger, M. E., Morris, C. A. W.,
Clemens, E. V., & Smith, A. L.
(2010). A qualitative investigation
of the referral process from
school counselors to mental
health providers. Journal of
School Counseling, 8(32). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v8n32.pdf
Leppma, M., & Jones, K. D. (2013).
Multiple assessment methods and
sources in counseling: Ethical
considerations. http://www.
counseling.org/knowledge-center/
vistas/vistas-2013
Leppma, M., & Young, M. E. (2014).
Loving-Kindness meditation
and empathy: A wellness group
intervention for counseling
students. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 94, 297–
305. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12086
Letourneau, J. L. H. (2016).
A decision-making model
for addressing problematic
behaviors in counseling students.
Counseling and Values, 61,
206–222. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cvj.12038
Levenson, J. S., Craig, S. L., &
Austin, A. (2023). Trauma-
informed and affirmative mental
health practices with LGBTQ+
clients. Psychological Services,
20(Suppl 1), 134–144. https://doi.
org/10.1037/ser0000540
Levers, L. L., & Hyatt-Burkhart, D.
(Eds.). (2020). Clinical mental
health counseling: Practicing
in integrated systems of care.
Springer.
Levinson, C. A. et al. (2023).
Personalizing eating disorder
treatment using idiographic
models: An open series trial.
Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 91(1), 14.
Levitt, D. H., Crawford, C. R., &
Pamphile, S. (2022). Ethical
decision-making of supervisors
of color. Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 50,
59–72. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jmcd.12239
Levitt, D. H., Farry, T. J., &
Mazzarella, J. R. (2015).
Counselor ethical reasoning:
Decision making practice
versus theory. Counseling
and Values, 60, 84–99.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
j2061-007X.2015.00062.x
Levitt, D. H., & Moorhead, H. J. H.
(Eds.). (2013). Values and ethics
in counseling: Real-life ethical
decision making. Routledge.
Levy, I. P., & Lemberger-Truelove,
M. E. (2021). Educator–
counselor: A nondual identity for
school counselors. Professional
School Counseling, 24(1_part_3).
https://doi.org/10.1177/21567
59X211007630
Levy, J., Galambos, G., &
Skarbek, Y. (2014). The
erosion of psychiatrist–patient
confidentiality by subpoenas.
Australasian Psychiatry,
22, 332–336. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1039856214536241
Lewis, J. A., & Grzanka, P. (2016).
Applying intersectionality theory
to research on perceived racism.

-- 544 of 593 --

522 	References
In A. N. Alvarez, C. T. H. Liang,
& H. A. Neville (Eds.), The cost
of racism for people of color:
Contextualizing experiences
of discrimination (pp. 31–54).
American Psychological
Association. https://doi.
org/10.1037/14852-003
Lewis, J. A., Ratts, M. J., Paladino,
J., & Toporek, R. (2011). Social
justice counseling and advocacy:
Developing new leadership roles
and competencies. Journal for
Social Action in Counseling and
Psychology, 3, 5–16.
Li, D. (2022). Predictors of counselor
trainees’ satisfaction with
online learning during COVID-
19. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 61(4), 379–390.
Li, D., & Su, Y. (2021). Online
teaching and learning in counselor
education: A 23-year content
analysis. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 60(4), 316–330.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12219
Li, H., & Peters, H. C. (2022).
Supervision of school counseling
leadership for school counselors
in training. Professional School
Counseling, 26(1). https://doi.org/
10.1177/2156759X221087658
Liang, C. T. H., Liu, L., Beachy, S.,
& Bhatt, N. (2022). The influence
of childhood trauma and
masculine ideology on teacher
ratings of student risk behavior.
Professional School Counseling,
26(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/215
6759X211067957
Limberg, D., Gnilka, P. B., &
Broda, M. (2021). Advancing
the counseling profession by
examining relationships among
variables. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 99(2), 145–155.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.1236
Limberg, D., Newton, T., Nelson,
K., Barrio Minton, C. A., Super,
J. T., & Ohrt, J. (2020). Research
identity development of counselor
education doctoral students: A
grounded theory. The Professional
Counselor, 10(4), 488–500. https://
doi.org/10.15241/dl.10.4.488
Lin, C., Pham, H., Zhu, Y., Clingan,
S. E., Lin, L., Murphy, S. M.,
Campbell, C. I., Sorrell, T. R.,
Liu, Y., Mooney, L. J., & Hser, Y.
(2022). Telemedicine along the
cascade of care for substance use
disorders during the COVID-19
pandemic in the United States.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
drugalcdep.2022.109711
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985).
Naturalistic inquiry. Sage.
Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., &
Ward-Ciesielski, E. F. (2012).
Assessing and managing risk with
suicidal individuals. Cognitive
and Behavorial Practice, 19, 218–
232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cbpra.2010.11.008
Linton, J. M. (2012). Ethics and
accreditation in addictions
counselor training: Possible field
placement issues for CACREP-
accredited addictions counseling
programs. Journal of Addictions
and Offender Counseling, 33,
48–61. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.2161-1874.2012.0004.x
Linville, D., Hertlein, K. M., &
Lyness, A. M. P. (2007). Medical
family therapy: Reflecting on
the necessity of collaborative
healthcare research. Families,
Systems, & Health, 38, 150–157.
Lipari v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 836
F.2d 209 (1987).
Lipschitz, J. M., Connolly, S. L., Van
Boxtel, R., Potter, J. R., Nixon, N.,
& Bidargaddi, N. (2022). Provider
perspectives on telemental
health implementation: Lessons
learned during the COVID-19
pandemic and paths forward.
Psychological Services. Advance
online publication. https://doi.
org/10.1037/ser0000625
Lisa M. v. Henry Mayo Newhall
Memorial Hosp., 12 Cal.4th 291,
48 Cal.Rptr.2d 510, 907 P.2d 358
(1995).
Litam, S. D. A. (2020). Take
your kung-flu back to Wuhan:
Counseling Asians, Asian
Americans, and Pacific Islanders
with race-based trauma related
to COVID-19. The Professional
Counselor, 10(2), 144–156.
https://tpcjournal.nbcc.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/05/
Pages-144-156-Litam-Take-Your-
Kung-Flu-Back-to-Wuhan.pdf
Litam, S. D. A., Ausloos, C. D., &
Harrichand, J. J. (2021). Stress
and resilience among professional
counselors during the COVID-19
pandemic. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 99(4), 384–395.
Litam, S. D. A., & Balkin, R. S.
(2021). Moral injury in health-
care workers during COVID-19
pandemic. Traumatology, 27(1),
14–19. https://doi.org/10.1037/
trm0000290
Litam, S. D. A., & Chan, C. D.
(2021). Breaking the bamboo
ceiling: Practical strategies for
Asian American and Pacific
Islander counselor educators.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 60(3), 174–189.
Litam, S. D. A., & Hipolito-
Delgado, C. P. (2021). When
being “essential” illuminates
disparities: Counseling clients
affected by COVID-19. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
99(1), 3–10. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12349.
Litam, S. D. A., & Lam, E. T. C.
(2021). Sex trafficking beliefs in
counselors: Establishing the need
for human trafficking training in
counselor education programs.
International Journal for the
Advancement of Counselling, 43,
1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10447-020-09408-8

-- 545 of 593 --

References 	523
Litam, S. D. A., & Oh, S. (2020).
Effects of COVID-19 racial
discrimination on Chinese
Americans: Ethnic identity and
coping strategy as moderators.
Counseling Outcome Research
and Evaluation. https://doi.org/10
.1080/21501378.2020.1814138
Litam, S. D. A., Oh, S., & Chang,
C. (2021). Resilience and coping
as moderators of stress-related
growth in Asians and AAPIs
during COVID-19. Professional
Counselor, 11(2), 248–266.
Little, J. N. (2001). Embracing
gay, lesbian, bisexual, and
transgendered youth in school-
based settings. Child and Youth
Care Forum, 30, 99–110.
Lloyd-Hazlett, J., Hobbs, J. R., &
Honderich, E. M. (2017). Student
counselors’ perceptions of ethical
client referrals. Counseling and
Values, 62(2), 180–197. https://
doi.org/10.1002/cvj.12058
Logan v. District of Columbia,
D.C.D.C., 447 F.Supp. 1328
(1978).
Long, S. M., Clark, M., Reed, L., &
Raghavan, E. (2022). Wellness
integration in professional
counseling: A grounded theory.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 100, 442–453.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12431
Lonn, M. R., & Juhnke, G. (2017).
Nondisclosure in triadic
supervision: A phenomenological
study of counseling students.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 56, 82–97. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12064
Lorelle, S., Byrd, R., & Crockett,
S. (2012). Globalization and
counseling: Professional issues
for counselors. The Professional
Counselor, 2(2), 115–123. https://
doi.org/10.15241/sll.2.2.115
Lotito, M., & Cook, E. (2015). A
review of suicide risk assessment
instruments and approaches.
Suicidality and Self-Injurious
Behavior, 5(5), 216–223. https://
doi.org/10.9740/mhc.2015.09.216
Louisell, D. W., & Sinclair, K., Jr.
(1971). The Supreme Court of
California, 1969–70–Forward:
Reflections on the law of
privileged communications—The
psychotherapist–patient privilege
in perspective. California Law
Review, 59, 30–55.
Louisiana Licensed Mental Health
Counselor Act, La. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§37. (West, 1999).
Lowell, V. L., & Alshammari, A.
(2019). Experiential learning
experiences in an online 3D virtual
environment for mental health
interviewing and diagnosis role-
playing: A comparison of perceived
learning across learning activities.
Educational Technology Research
and Development, 67, 825–854.
Lowman, R. L. (2006). Case 58:
Confronting unethical behavior.
In R. L. Lowman (Ed.), The
ethical practice of psychology in
organizations (2nd ed., pp. 241–
244). American Psychological
Association.
Ludes, F. J., & Gilbert, H. J.
(1998). Fiduciary. Corpus Juris
Secundum, 36A, 381–389.
Luepker, E. T. (2012). Record
keeping in psychotherapy and
counseling (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Luke, C., Beeson, E. T., Miller,
R., Field, T. A., & Jones, L. K.
(2020). Counselors’ perceptions
of ethical considerations for
integrating neuroscience with
counseling. The Professional
Counselor, 10(2), 204–219.
https://doi:1015241/cl.10.2.204
Luke, M. Gilbride, D., & Goodrich,
K. M. (2017). School counselors’
approach to ethical decision
making. Journal of Counselor
Leadership and Advocacy, 4(1),
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/232
6716X.2016.1223569
Luke, M., Hinkle, J. S., Schweiger,
W., & Henderson, D. (2016).
Mental Health Facilitator (MHF)
service implementation in schools
in Malawi, Africa: A strategy for
increasing community human
resources. The Professional
Counselor, 6(1), 1–21. https://doi.
org/10.15241/ml.6.1.1
Lukpat, A. (2023, May 30). AI poses
“rick of extinction” on part with
pandemic and nuclear war, tech
executives warn. The Wall Street
Journal. https://apple.news/
AJiMWQglRSp-htMJzbm2vaA
Lum, D. (2007). Culturally
competent practice: A framework
for understanding diverse groups
and justice issues. Thomson
Brooks/Cole.
Lunceford, B. (2011). The new
pornographers: Legal and ethical
considerations of sexting. In B.
E. Drushel & K. German (Eds.),
The ethics of emerging media:
Information, social norms,
and new media (pp. 99–118).
Continuum International.
Lund, E. M. (2020). Interpersonal
violence against people with
disabilities: Additional concerns
and considerations in the COVID-
19 pandemic. Rehabilitation
Psychology, 65(3), 199–205.
https://doi.org/10.1037/rep0000347
Lund, E. M. (2021). Even more
to handle: Additional sources
of stress and trauma for clients
from marginalized racial and
ethnic groups in the United States
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Counselling Psychology
Quarterly, 34(3–4), 321–330.
Lundquist, B., Rubel, D., & Ng,
K. M. (2020). Experiences of
counselor education doctoral
student mothers with young
children. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 59(4),
267–282. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12188

-- 546 of 593 --

524 	References
Lyons, M., & Brewer, G. (2021).
Experiences of intimate partner
violence during lockdown and the
COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of
Family Violence, 1–9.
Lyons, M. L. (2015). If you will excuse
me. In B. Herlihy & G. Corey
(Eds.), ACA ethical standards
casebook (7th ed., pp. 226–229).
American Counseling Association.
Macbeth, J. E., Wheeler, A.
M., Sither, J. W., & Onek,
J. N. (1994). Legal and risk
management issues in the practice
of psychiatry. Psychiatrists
Purchasing Group.
MacCluskie, K. C. (2001).
Responsible documentation. In E.
R. Welfel & R. E. Ingersoll (Eds.),
The mental health desk reference
(pp. 459–465). Wiley.
Machorro, V. D., & Suck, A. T.
(2014). Professional identity
of counselors in Mexico: A
commentary. The Professional
Counselor, 4(1), 84–92. https://
doi.org/10.15241/vdm.4.1.84
Machuca, R. (2015). Boundary issues
in counseling Latino clients. In
B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
Boundary issues in counseling
(3rd ed., pp. 100–103). American
Counseling Association.
Madigan, S., Ly, A., Rash, C., Van
Ouytsel, J., & Temple, J. R.
(2018, February 26). Prevalence
of multiple forms of sexting
behavior among youth: A
systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Pediatrics.
https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2017.5314
Magnuson, S., Norem, K., &
Wilcoxon, A. (2000). Clinical
supervision of prelicensed
counselors: Recommendations
for consideration and practice.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 22, 176–188.
Maier, C. A., Riger, D., & Morgan-
Sowada, H. (2021). “It’s splendid
once you grow into it”: Client
experiences of relational teletherapy
in the era of COVID-19. Journal of
Marital and Family Therapy, 47(2),
304–319.
Malott, K. M., Yee, T., &
Barraclough, S. (2023).
Overcoming barriers to social
justice learning in multicultural
counselor education. International
Journal for the Advancement of
Counselling, 45(2), 356–369.
Manhal-Baugus, M. (2001).
E-therapy: Practical, ethical, and
legal issues. Cyberpsychology &
Behavior, 4, 551–563.
Manis, A. A. (2012). A review
of the literature on promoting
cultural competence and social
justice agency among students
and counselor trainees: Piecing
the evidence together to advance
pedagogy and research. The
Professional Counselor, 2, 48–57.
Manis, A. A., & Bodenhorn, N.
(2006). Preparation for counseling
adults with terminal illness:
Personal and professional
parallels. Counseling & Values,
50, 197–207.
Manning, R. (1992). Speaking from
the heart: A feminist perspective
on ethics. Rowman & Littlefield.
Manno v. McIntosh, 519 NW2d 815
(Iowa App. 1994).
Maramba, G. G., & Nagayama Hall,
G. C. (2002). Meta-analyses
of ethnic match as a predictor of
dropout, utilization, and level of
functioning. Cultural Diversity &
Ethnic Minority Psychology, 8,
290–297.
Marc, L. G., Goldhammer, H.,
Mayer, K. H., Cahill, S.,
Massaquoi, M., Northup, E.,
Cohen, S. M., Psihopaidas,
D. A., Carney, J. T., &
Keuroghlian, A. S. (2022). Rapid
implementation of evidence-
informed interventions to improve
HIV health outcomes among
priority populations: The E2i
Initiative. Public Health Reports,
137(4), 617–624. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00333549211027849
Margolin, G. (1982). Ethical and
legal considerations in marital
and family therapy. American
Psychologist, 37, 788–801.
Margolin, G., Chien, D., & Duman,
S. E. (2005). Ethical issues in
couple and family research.
Journal of Family Psychology, 19,
157–167.
Mariani, M., Webb, L., Villares, E.,
& Brigman, G. (2015). Effect of
participation in student success
skills on prosocial and bullying
behavior. The Professional
Counselor, 5(3), 341–353. https://
doi.org/10.15241/mm.5.3.341
Mark, K. P., & Schuman, D. L.
(2020). A scoping review of
the practice recommendations
of secrets in couple’s therapy.
Journal of Family Psychotherapy,
31(1–2), 56–71.
Martz, E., & Kaplan, D. (2014,
October). New responsibilities
when making referrals.
Counseling Today, 57(4), 24–25.
Mascari, J. B., & Webber, J. (2013).
CACREP accreditation: A
solution to license portability
and counselor identity problems.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 91, 15–25.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00066.x
Mascari, J. B., & Webber, J. M.
(2006). Salting the slippery slope:
What licensing violations tell
us about preventing dangerous
ethical situations. In G. R. Walz,
J. Bleuer, & R. K. Yep (Eds.),
VISTAS: Compelling perspectives
on counseling, 2006 (pp.
165–168). American Counseling
Association.
Maslach, C., & Leiter, M. P. (2016).
Understanding the burnout
experience: Recent research and

-- 547 of 593 --

References 	525
its implications for psychiatry.
World Psychiatry, 15(2),
103–111. https://doi.org/10.1002/
wps.20311
Maslow, A. (1968). Toward a
psychology of being (rev. ed.). Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Mason, E. C. M., Land, C., Brodie,
I., Collins, K., Pennington, C.,
Sands, K., & Sierra, M. (2016).
Data and research that matter:
Mentoring school counselors
to publish action research.
Professional School Counseling,
20, 84–193. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-20.1.184
Mather, M. (2016, January). Fact
Sheet: Aging in the United States.
Population Reference Bureau.
http://www.prb.org/Publications/
Media-Guides/2016/aging-
unitedstates-fact-sheet.aspxelete
Matise, M. (2015). An exploration
of the personal experiences and
effects of counselors’ crying
in session. The Professional
Counselor, 5(1), 28–38. https://
doi.org/10.15241/mm.5.1.28
Matsangidou, M., Otkhmezuri, B.,
Ang, C. S., Avraamides, M.,
Riva, G., Gaggioli, A., Iosif,
D., & Karekla, M. D (2020).
“Now I can see me” designing a
multi-user virtual reality remote
psychotherapy for body weight
and shape concerns. Human-
Computer Interaction, 37(4),
314–340. https://doi.org/10.1080/
07370024.2020.1788945
Matthews, J. J., Barden, S. M.,
& Sherrell, R. S. (2018).
Examining the relationships
between multicultural counseling
competence, multicultural self-
efficacy, and ethnic identity
development of practicing
counselors. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 40(2),
129–141.
Mattie T. v. Johnson, D.C. Miss. 74
F.R.D. 498 (1976).
Matusek, J. A., & O’Dougherty,
A. (2010). Ethical dilemmas
in treating clients with eating
disorders: A review and
application of an integrative
ethical decision-making model.
European Eating Disorders
Review, 18, 434–452.
Maxim, K., Parecki, J., & Cornett,
C. (2022, July). How to build a
trust and safety team in a year:
A practical guide from lessons
learned (so far) at Zoom. Journal
of Online Trust and Safety. https://
doi.org/10.5501/jots.v1/4.81
McAdams, C., Shillingford, M.
A., & Trice-Black, S. (2011).
Putting research into practice
in school violence prevention
& intervention: How is school
counseling doing? Journal of
School Counseling, 9(12). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v9n12.pdf
McAdams, C. R., & Foster, V.
A. (2000). Client suicides:
Its frequency and impact on
counselors. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 22, 107–121.
McAdams, C. R., & Foster, V.
A. (2007). A guide to just and
fair remediation of counseling
students with professional
performance deficiencies.
Counselor Education &
Supervision, 47, 2–13.
McAdams, C. R., Foster, V. A., &
Ward, T. T. (2007). Remediation
and dismissal policies in
counselor education: Lessons
learned from a challenge
in federal court. Counselor
Education & Supervision, 46,
212–229.
McAdams, C. R., & Wyatt, K.
L. (2010). The regulation of
technology-assisted distance
counseling and supervision in
the United States: An analysis
of current extent, trends,
and implications. Counselor
Education & Supervision, 49,
179–192.
McAdams, J. M. (2019, December
31). Non-compete agreements:
A review of the literature.
SSRN. https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3513639
McCarthy, J. (2011). Counselor
preparation in England and
Ireland: A look at six programs.
The Professional Counselor,
1(3), 176–190. https://doi.
org/10.15241/jmm.1.3.176
McCarthy, J. (2014). Counselor
preparation in England and
Ireland: A look at six programs.
The Professional Counselor,
1(3). https://tpcjournal.nbcc.
org/counselor-preparation-in-
england-and-ireland-a-look-at-
six-programs
McCaughan, A. M., & Hill, N.
R. (2014). The gatekeeping
imperative in counselor education
admission protocols: The
criticality of personal qualities.
International Journal for the
Advancement of Counselling, 36,
445–453. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10444-014-9223-2
McConnell, W. A., & Kerbs, J. J.
(1993). Providing feedback in
research with human subjects.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 24,
266–270.
McCord, C. E., Tarlow, K. R., &
Terrebonne, T. M. G. (2022).
In teletherapy we trust—Now
what? Three questions for
mental health care stakeholders.
Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 29(2), 179–181. https://
doi.org/10.1037/cps0000070
McCormac, M. E. (2014). Preventing
and responding to bullying:
An elementary school’s
4-year journey. Professional
School Counseling, 18(1),
1–14. https://doi.org/10.5330/
prsc.18.1.55607227n4428tkp

-- 548 of 593 --

526 	References
McCormick, C. T., Broun, K. S., &
Dix, G. E. (2006). McCormick on
evidence (6th ed., rev). Thomson/
West.
McCreary, J. R. (2011). Tell me
no secrets: Sharing, discipline,
and the clash of ecclesiastical
abstention and psychotherapeutic
confidentiality. Quinnipiac Law
Review, 29, 77–122.
McCullough, R., Dispenza, F.,
Parker, L. K., Viehl, C. J., Chang,
C. Y., & Murphy, T. M. (2017).
The counseling experiences
of transgender and gender
nonconforming clients. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 95,
423–434. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12157
McEachern, A. G., Aluede, O., &
Kenny, M. C. (2008). Emotional
abuse in the classroom:
Implications and interventions for
counselors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 86, 3–10.
McEachern, A. G., McEachern-
Ciattoni, R. T., & Martin, F. (2012).
Sexting: New challenges for
schools and professional school
counselors. Journal of School
Counseling, 10(20). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v10n20.pdf
McFarland, W. P., & Dupuis, M.
(2001). The legal duty to protect
gay and lesbian students from
violence in school. Professional
School Counseling, 4, 171–179.
McFarlin, S. L., & McGough, K.
(2021). Research-informed
adaptable model for the
prevention of suicide in schools
(RAMPSS). Professional School
Counseling, 25(1). https://doi.org/
10.1177/2156759X211023107
McGlothlin, J., Page, B., & Jager,
K. (2016). Validation of the
SIMPLE STEPS model of suicide
assessment. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 38, 298–307.
https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.38.4.02
McGlothlin, J. M., Rainey, S., &
Kindsvatter, A. (2005). Suicidal
clients and supervisees: A model
for considering supervisor
roles. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 45, 135–146.
McGuckin, C., Perren, S.,
Corcoran, L., Cowie, H.,
Dehue, F., Sevcikova, A., &
Vollink, T. (2013). Coping with
cyberbullying: How can we
prevent cyberbulling and how
victims can cope with it. In P.
K. Smith & G. Steffgen (Eds.),
Cyberbullying through the
new media: Findings from an
international network (pp. 121–
135). Psychology Press.
McIntosh, P. (1998). White privilege,
color, and crime: A personal
account. In C. R. Mann & M. S.
Zatz (Eds.), Images of color, images
of crime (pp. 207–216). Roxbury.
McKenna, L., & Manis, A. A.
(2021). Counselor education
online curriculum design: Social
justice considerations. Journal
of Technology in Counselor
Education and Supervision, 1(1), 8.
McKibben, W. B., Umstead, L.
K., & Borders, L. D. (2017).
Identifying dynamics of
counseling leadership: A content
analysis study. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 95,
192–202. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12131
McKinney, B. L. (2011). Therapists’
perceptions of walk and talk
therapy: A grounded study
[Unpublished dissertation].
University of New Orleans.
McKinsey, J. A., & Burke, D. D.
(2015). Carper’s understanding
of the law (7th ed.). Cengage
Learning.
Meany-Walen, K. K., Carnes-Holt,
K., Minton, C. A. B., Purswell,
K., & Pronchenko-Jain, Y. (2013).
An exploration of counselors’
professional leadership
development. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 91,
206–215. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6676.2013.00087.x
Meara, N. M., Schmidt, L. D., &
Day, J. D. (1996). Principles and
virtues: A foundation for ethical
decisions, policies, and character.
Counseling Psychologist, 24, 4–77.
MedicineNet. (2008). Mental health
center. https://www.medicinenet.
com/mental_health/focus.htm
Mehr, K. E., Ladany, N., & Caskie,
G. I. L. (2014, March 24). Factors
influencing trainee willingness to
disclose in supervision. Training
and Education in Professional
Psychology [No pagination
specified].
Melamed, O. C., Hauck, T. S.,
Buckley, L., Selby, P., & Mulsant,
B. H. (2020). COVID-19
and persons with substance
use disorders: Inequities and
mitigation strategies. Substance
Abuse, 41(3), 286–291.
Mellin, E. A., Hunt, B., & Nichols,
L. M. (2011). Counselor
professional identity: Findings and
implications for counseling and
interprofessional collaboration.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 89, 140–147.
Melonas, J. M. (2011). Patients at
risk for suicide: Risk management
and patient safety considerations
to protect the patient and the
physician. Innovations in Clinical
Neuroscience, 8, 45–49.
Méndez-Diaz, N., Parker-Barnes,
L., Akabr, G., & Diamond, G.
S. (2023). The power of a click:
Impact of social media usage on
family therapists. International
Journal of Systemic Therapy,
34(2), 95–111. https://doi.org/10.
1080/2692398X.2023.2174772
Merlone, L. (2005). Record keeping
and the school counselor.
Professional School Counseling,
8, 272–276.

-- 549 of 593 --

References 	527
Merry, S. N., & Stasiak, K. (2012).
The effectiveness of SPARX,
a computerised self help
intervention for adolescents
seeking help for depression:
Randomised controlled non-
inferiority trial. British Medical
Journal, 344(e2598). https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.e2598
Messina, J. J. (1999). What’s next
for the profession of mental
health counseling? Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 21,
285–294.
Midgett, A., Doumas, D., Sears,
D., Lundquist, A., & Hausheer,
R. (2015). A bystander bullying
psychoeducation program
with middle school students:
A preliminary report. The
Professional Counselor,
5(4), 486–500. https://doi.
org/10.15241/am.5.4.486
Midgett, A., Doumas, D., Trull,
R., & Johnston, A. D. (2017).
A randomized controlled study
evaluating a brief, bystander
bullying intervention with junior
high school students. Journal of
School Counseling, 15(9). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v15n9.pdf
Mifsud, A., & Herlihy, B. (2022).
Ethical standards for a post-
COVID-19 world. Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 44(1),
82–96. https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.44.1.07
Miller, G. M., & Wooten, H. R., Jr.
(1995). Sports counseling: A new
counseling specialty area. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
74, 172–173.
Miller, L. D., Short, C., Garland, E.
J., & Clark, S. (2010). The ABCs
of CBT (Cognitive Behavior
Therapy): Evidence-based
approaches to child anxiety in
public school settings. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 88,
432–439.
Miller, L. G., McGlothlin, J. M., &
West, J. D. (2013). Taking the
fear out of suicide assessment and
intervention: A pedagogical and
humanistic practice. The Journal
of Humanistic Counseling, 52,
106–121. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.2161-1939.2013.00036.x
Miller, S. M., Larwin, K. H.,
Kautzman-East, M., Williams,
J. L., Evans, W. J., Williams, D.
D., Abramski, A. L., & Miller, K.
L. (2019). A proposed definition
and structure of counselor
dispositions. Measurement and
Evaluation in Counseling and
Development. https://doi.org/10.1
080/07481756.2019.1640618
Millikin, M. A. (2017). Boundaries
and ethics for mental health
practitioners in 12-step programs
[Unpublished dissertation].
Argosy University.
Millner, V., & Hanks, R. B.
(2002). Induced abortion:
An ethical conundrum
for counselors. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
80(1), 57–63. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2002.
tb00166.x
Mintert, J., Tran, A. G., & Kurpius,
S. (2020). Religious and/or
spiritual social justice advocacy:
Guidance from the multicultural
and social justice counseling
competencies. Counseling and
Values, 65(1), 2–14.
Mitchell, C. W., Disque, J. G.,
& Robertson, P. (2002).
When parents want to know:
Responding to parental demands
for confidential information.
Professional School Counseling,
6, 156–161.
Mitchell, K. J., Finkelhor, D., Jones,
L. M., & Wolak, J. (2012).
Prevalence and characteristics of
youth sexting: A national study.
Pediatrics, 129, 13–20. https://
doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-1730
Mitchell, M. D., & Butler, S.
K. (2021). Acknowledging
intersectional identity in
supervision: The multicultural
integrated supervision model.
Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 49,
101–115. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jmcd.12209
Mitchell, R. W. (2007).
Documentation in counseling
records: An overview of ethical,
legal, and clinical issues
(3rd ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Miu, A. S., Joseph, A., Hakim, E.,
Cox, E. D., & Greenwald, E.
(2022). Peer consultation: An
enriching necessity rather than a
luxury for psychologists during
and beyond the pandemic. Journal
of Health Service Psychology, 48,
13–19.
Mnookin, R. H., & Weisberg, D. K.
(1995). Child, family and state:
Problems and materials on
children and the law. Little, Brown.
Moberly, M. D. (2007). Protecting
confidential communications:
Employees and work counseling.
Arizona Attorney, 44, 10–11.
Mogul, F. (2016, June 13). Nursing
home residents often mistreat
each other: Report. https://www.
wnyc.org/story/nursing-home-
residents-often-mistreat-each-
other
Moleski, S. M., & Kiselica, M. S.
(2005). Dual relationships: A
continuum ranging from the
destructive to the therapeutic.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 83, 3–11.
Moore, M. T., & Griffin, B. W.
(2007). Identification of factors
that influence authorship name
placement and decisions to
collaborate in peer-reviewed,
education-related publications.
Studies in Educational
Evaluation, 32, 125–135.

-- 550 of 593 --

528 	References
Morena, C., Wykes, T., Galderisi,
S., Nordentoft, M., Crossley, N.,
Jones, N., Cannon, M., Correll,
C., Byrne, L., Carr, S., Chen, E.
Y. H., Gorwood, P., Johnson, S.,
Kärkkäinen, H., Krystal, J. H.,
Lee, J., Lieberman, J., López-
Jaramillo, C., Mäannikkö, M.,
Phillips, M. R. . . . Arango, C.
(2020). How mental health care
should change as a consequence
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(9),
813–824. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(20)30307-2
Moreno, C., Wykes, T., Galderisi,
S., Nordentoft, M., Crossley,
N., Jones, N., . . . & Arango, C.
(2020). How mental health care
should change as a consequence
of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
Lancet Psychiatry, 7(9), 813–824.
Morgan, E. (1943). Suggested
remedy for obstructions to expert
testimony by rules of evidence.
University of Chicago Law
Review, 10, 285–298.
Morgen, K., Miller, G., & Stretch, L.
S. (2012). Addiction counseling
licensure issues for licensed
professional counselors. The
Professional Counselor, 2(1), 58–65.
https://doi.org/10.15241/kmm.2.1.58
Mori, C., Park, J., Temple, J. R., &
Madigan, S. (2022). Are youth
sexting rates still on the rise? A
meta-analytic update. Journal of
Adolescent Health, 70(4), 531–
539. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2021.10.026
Morris, C. A. W., & Minton C. A. B.
(2012). Crisis in the curriculum?
New counselors’ crisis
preparation, experiences, and self-
efficacy. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 51, 256–269.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2012.00019.x
Morris, C. A. W., Wester, K. L.,
Jones, C. T., & Fantahun, S.
(2021). School counselors and
unified educator–counselor
identity: A data-informed
approach to suicide prevention.
Professional School Counseling,
24(1_part_3). https://doi.org/10.1
177/2156759X211011909
Mosher, P. W., & Berman, J.
(2015). Confidentiality and its
discontents: Dilemmas of privacy
in psychotherapy. Fordham
University Press.
Mosley, D. V., Hargons, C. N.,
Meiller, C., Angyal, B., Wheeler,
P., Davis, C., & Stevens-Watkins,
D. (2021). Critical consciousness
of anti-black racism: A practical
model to prevent and resist racial
trauma. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 68(1), 1–16. https://
doi.org/10.1037/cou0000430
Moss, J. M., Gibson, D. M., &
Dollarhide, C. T. (2014).
Professional identity
development: A grounded theory
of transformational tasks of
counselors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 92, 3–12.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2014.00124.x
Moss, L. S. (2018). Collaboration,
confidentiality, and care.
Psychological Services, 14(4),
443–450. https://doi.org/1037/
ser0000155
Moyer, M., & Sullivan, J. (2008).
Student risk-taking behaviors:
When do school counselors break
confidentiality? Professional
School Counseling, 11, 236–245.
Moyer, M., Sullivan, J., & Growcock,
J. (2012). When is it ethical to
inform administrators about
student risk-taking behaviors?
Perceptions of school counselors.
Professional School Counseling,
15, 98–109.
Muehleman, T., Pickens, B. K., &
Robinson, F. (1985). Informing
clients about the limits to
confidentiality, risks, and their
rights: Is self-disclosure inhibited?
Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 16, 385–397.
Muench, F. (2010, April 8).
Technology and mental health:
Using technology to improve our
lives. Psychology Today. http://
www.psychologytoday.com
Mullen, P. R., Backer, A., Chae,
N., & Li, H. (2020). School
counselors’ work-related
rumination as a predictor of
burnout, turnover intentions,
job satisfaction, and work
engagement. Professional
School Counseling, 24(1).
https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1177/2156759X20957253
Mullen, P. R., & Crowe, A. (2017).
Self-stigma of mental illness
among school counselors. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
95, 401–411. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12155
Mullen, P. R., Griffith, C., Greene, J. H.,
& Lambie, G. W. (2014). Social
media and professional school
counselors: Ethical and legal
considerations. Journal of School
Counseling, 12(8). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v12n8.pdf
Mullen, P. R., & Gutierrez, D.
(2016). Burnout, stress and direct
student services among school
counselors. The Professional
Counselor, 6(4), 344–359. https://
doi.org/10.15241/pm.6.4.344
Mumery, A., Srishti, S., Richardson-
Bejigaard, R., & Akinsulure-
Smith, A. M. (2020). Mental health
needs of sex trafficking survivors
in New York City: Reflections
on exploitation, coping, and
recovery. Psychological Trauma:
Theory, Research, Practice, and
Policy, 13(2), 185–192. https://doi.
org/10.1037/tra0000603
Muratori, M. C. (2001). Examining
supervisor impairment from the
counselor trainee’s perspective.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 41, 41–56.

-- 551 of 593 --

References 	529
Murphy, E. J., Speidel, R. E., &
Ayres, I. (1997). Contract law
(5th ed.). The Foundation Press.
Murray, C. E. (2009). Diffusion
of innovation theory: A bridge
for the research–practice gap in
counseling. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 87, 108–116.
Muse-Burke, J. L., Hanko, A. S.,
& Barna, J. S. (2018). The role
of gatekeeping in counselor
education. In L. R. Haddock &
J. S. Whitman (Eds.), Preparing
the educator in counselor
education. Routledge. https://doi.
org/10.4324/9781315521695
Myer, R. A. (2001). Assessment
for crisis intervention: A triage
assessment model. Brooks/Cole.
Myers, J. E. (1995). Specialties in
counseling: Rich heritage or force
for fragmentation? Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
115–116.
Myers, J. E., Mobley, A. K., & Booth,
C. S. (2003). Wellness of counseling
students: Practicing what we
preach. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 42, 264–274.
Myers, J. E., & Sweeney, T. J.
(2001). Specialties in counseling.
In D. C. Locke, J. E. Myers, & E.
L. Herr (Eds.), The handbook of
counseling (pp. 43–54). Sage.
Myers, J. E., & Sweeney, T. J. (2004).
Advocacy for the counseling
profession: Results of a national
survey. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 82, 466–472.
Myers, J. E., Sweeney, T. J., &
Witmer, J. M. (2000). The wheel of
wellness counseling for wellness:
A holistic model for treatment
planning. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 78, 251–266.
NAADAC. (2021). Code of Ethics.
https://www.naadac.org/
code-of-ethics
NAADAC: The Association for
Addiction Professionals. (2011).
Code of Ethics. Standard 3:
Dual Relationships. http://www.
naadac.org
NAADAC: The Association for
Addiction Professionals. (2023).
https://www.naadac.org
Nadal, K. L., Griffin, K. E., Wong,
Y., Hamit, S., & Rasmus, M.
(2014). The impact of racial
microaggressions on mental
health: Counseling implications
for clients of color. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 92,
57–66. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6676.2014.00130.x
Nadan, Y., Shachar, R., Cramer, D.,
Leshem, T. Y., Levenbach, D.,
Rozen, R., Salton, N., & Cramer,
S. (2020). Behind the (virtual)
mirror: Online live supervision in
couple and family therapy. Family
Process, 59, 997–1006. https://
doi.org/10.1111/famp.12573
Nagayama-Hall, G. C. (2001).
Psychotherapy research with
ethnic minorities: Empirical,
ethical, and conceptual
issues. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology,
69, 502–510. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0022-006X.69.3.502
Nagle v. Hooks, 295 Md. 133, 460
A.2d 49 (1983).
Nagpal, S., & Richie, M. H. (2002).
Selection interviews of students for
master’s programs in counseling:
An exploratory study. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 41,
207–218. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6978.2002.tb01284.x
Namburi, N., & Tadi, P. (2023).
Managed care economics.
StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK556053/
National Alliance on Mental Illness.
(2014). Technology is used to
access mental health care and
information. http://www.nami.org
National Association of Social
Workers. (1997). Social work
speaks: NASW policy statements
(4th ed., pp. 156–163).
National Association of Social
Workers. (2021). Code of Ethics.
National Board for Certified
Counselors. (2016). National
Board for Certified Counselors
(NBCC) policy regarding the
provision of distance professional
services. https://www.nbcc.
org/Assets/Ethics/NBCCPolicy
RegardingPracticeofDistance
CounselingBoard.pdf
National Board for Certified
Counselors (NBCC). (2023,
January 19). Medicare recognition
for counselors becomes law.
NBCC Visions Newsletter.
National Board for Certified
Counselors. (2023a). Federal
Occupational Classification. The
NBCC Creed. https://www.nbcc.
org/govtaffairs/federalemployment
National Board for Certified Counselors.
(2023b). Government affairs. https://
www.nbcc.org/govtaffairs
National Board for Certified
Counselors. (2023c). Medicare
and professional counselors. The
NBCC Creed. https://www.nbcc.
org/govtaffairs/medicare
National Board for Certified
Counselors. (2023d). VA
premiers occupational series for
counselors. The NBCC Creed.
https://www.nbcc.org/govtaffairs/
newsroom/va-premiers-
occupational-series-for-counselors
National Board for Certified Counselors
& Chi Sigma Iota. (2016). Clients
rights and responsibilities. https://
www.nbcc.org/assets/Ethics/
NBCC_CSI-Booklet.pdf
National Board for Certified
Counselors—International.
(2018). http://www.
nbccinternational.org
National Board of Certified
Counselors (NBCC). (2024,
March 15–16). Bridging the gap
symposium: Eliminating mental
health disparities [Symposium].
Washington DC.

-- 552 of 593 --

530 	References
National Career Development
Association. (2014). NCDA
guidelines for the use of the
internet for provision of career
information and planning
services. http://ncda.org/aws/
NCDA/pt/sp/guidelines_internet
National Center on Elder
Abuse. (2018). https://www.
elderabusecenter.org/default.html
National Center on Elder
Abuse. (2023). Program
and policy areas. https://acl.
gov/programs/elder-justice/
national-center-elder-abuse
National Council on Aging. (2023).
Older adults. https://www.ncoa.org/
National Fair Access Coalition on
Testing. (2014). fairaccess.org
National Research Act of 1974
Regulations, 45 C.F.R. § 46.
NBCC Foundation. (2023). https://
www.nbccf.org
Neale-McFall, C., Eckart, E.,
Hermann, M., Haskins, N.,
& Ziomek-Daigle, J. (2018).
Counselor educator mothers:
A quantitative analysis of job
satisfaction. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 57(2), 147–
159. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12099
Nealy, E. C. (2019). Working
with LGBT families. In M.
McGoldrick & K. V. Hardy
(Eds.), Re-visioning family
therapy: Addressing diversity in
clinical practice (pp. 363–387).
The Guilford Press.
Neighbors, H. W., Ford, B. C., Tri-
erweiler, S. J., & Stillman, P.
(2002). African American mental
health disparities: Prevalence, uti-
lization, diagnosis, and treatment.
In J. Berry, D. Baldwin, & P. Mar-
shall (Eds.), Eliminating dispari-
ties in the treatment of African
Americans with mental health and
substance abuse disorders. Sub-
stance Abuse & Mental Health
Services Administration.
Neighbors, H. W., Trierweiler, S.
J., Ford, B. C., & Muroff, J. A.
(2003). Racial differences in DSM
diagnosis using semi-structured
instruments: The importance of
clinical judgment in the diagnosis
of African Americans. Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 43,
237–256.
Nelson, K. W., Oliver, M., Reeve,
J., & McNichols, C. (2010).
Gatekeeping and supervisory
intervention: Complex ethical
processes. http://www.
counselingoutfitters.com/vistas/
vistas10/Article_42.pdf
Nelson, M. D., & Piccin, R. (2016).
Working with nonsuicidal self-
injurious adolescents. Journal of
School Counseling, 14(12). http://
www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/
v14n14.pdf
Nelson, M. D., & Tarabochia, D.
S. (2017). Helping secondary
school students understand and
regulate stress. Journal of School
Counseling, 15(17).
Nelson, M. L., Gizara, S., Hope,
A. C., Phelps, R., Steward,
R., & Weitzman, L. (2006). A
feminist multicultural perspective
on supervision. Journal of
Multicultural Counseling and
Development, 34, 116–128.
Neuer Colburn, A. A. (2013). Endless
possibilities: Diversifying service
options in private practice.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 35(3), 198–210.
https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.35.3.8870230745378517
Neufeld, P. J. (2002). School
violence—Family responsibility.
The Family Journal, 10, 207–209.
Neukrug, E., Milliken, T., & Walden,
S. (2001). Ethical complaints
made against credentialed
counselors: An updated survey of
state licensing boards. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 41,
57–70.
Neukrug, E. S., Healy, M., & Herlihy,
B. (1992). Ethical practices of
licensed professional counselors:
An updated survey of state licensing
boards. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 32, 130–141.
Neukrug, E. S., & Milliken, T.
(2011). Counselors’ perceptions
of ethical behaviors. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 89,
206–216.
Newhart, S., Mullen, P. R., Blount,
A. J., & Hagedorn, W. B. (2020).
Factors influencing publication
rates among counselor educators.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 2(1), Article 5.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc020105
Newlin, C. M., Adolph, J. L., &
Kreber, L. A. (2004). Factors that
influence fee setting by male and
female psychologists. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 35, 548–552.
Newsome, S., Waldo, M., & Gruszka,
C. (2012). Mindfulness group
work: Preventing stress and
increasing self-compassion among
helping professionals in training.
Journal for Specialists in Group
Work, 37, 297–311.
New York State Task Force on Life
and the Law. (1994). When death
is sought: Assisted suicide and
euthanasia in the medical context.
Nieuwboer, C. C., Fukkink, R. G. &
Hermanns, J. M. A. (2015). Single
session email consultation for
parents: An evaluation of its effect
on empowerment. British Journal
of Guidance & Counselling,
43(1), 131–143.
Nock, M. K., Holmberg, E. B.,
Photos, V. I., & Michel, B. D.
(2007). Self-injurious thoughts
and behaviors interview:
Development, reliability, and
validity in an adolescent sample.
Psychological Assessment,
19, 309–317. https://doi.
org/10.1037/1040-3590.19.3.309

-- 553 of 593 --

References 	531
Nock, M. K., Prinstein, M.
J., & Sterba, S. K. (2010).
Revealing the form and
function of selfinjurious
thoughts and behaviors: A real-
time ecological assessment
study among adolescents and
young adults. Psychology of
Violence, 1, 36–52. https://doi.
org/10.1037/2152-0828.1.S.36
Norcross, J. C., Pfund, R. A.,
& Cook, D. M. (2022). The
predicted future of psychotherapy:
A decennial e-Delphi poll.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 53(2),
109–115. https://doi.org/10.1037/
pro0000431
Nugent, F. (1981). Professional
counseling: An overview. Brooks/
Cole.
Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. __
(2015); 135 S.Ct. 2584 (2015).
O’Dwyer, K. (2012). Camus’s
challenge: The question
of suicide. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology,
52, 165–177. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0022167811402999
Office of Research Integrity.
(2011). Guidelines for avoiding
plagiarism, self-plagiarism,
and other questionable writing
practices. U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.
http://www.ori.hhs.gov/education
Oh, S., Chang, C. Y., Priest, A., &
Kwag, D. (2022). Relationship
between orientation toward
multicultural competence,
multicultural competent
behaviors, and working alliance:
Examining a multigroup
mediation model. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 101,
3–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12441
O’Hara, C., Chang, C. Y., &
Giordano, A. L. (2021).
Multicultural competence
in counseling research: The
cornerstone of scholarship.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 99(2), 200–209.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12367
Ojeda, L., Flores, L. Y., Meza, R. R.,
& Morales, A. (2011). Culturally
competent qualitative research
with Latino immigrants. Hispanic
Journal of Behavioral Sciences,
33, 184–203.
Okoye, K., Rodriguez-Tort, J. A.,
Escamilla, J., & Hosseini, S.
(2021). Technology-mediated
teaching and learning process:
A conceptual study of educators’
response amidst the Covid-
19 pandemic. Education and
Information Technologies, 26,
7225–7257.
Öksüz, E. E., & Brubaker, M. D.
(2020). Deconstructing disability
training in counseling: A critical
examination and call to the
profession. Journal of Counselor
Leadership and Advocacy, 7(2),
163–175. https://doi.org/10.1080/
2326716X.2020.1820407
Olenik-Shemesh, D., Heiman, T., &
Eden, S. (2012). Cyberbullying
victimisation in adolescence:
Relationships with loneliness and
depressive mood. Emotional and
Behavioural Difficulties, 17(3–4),
361–374. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13632752.2012.704227
Olivari, C., Munoz Sastre, M. T.,
Sorum, P. C., & Mullet, E. (2015).
Is it acceptable for a psychologist
to break a young client’s
confidentiality? Comparing Latin
American (Chilean) and Western
European (French) viewpoints.
Universitas Psychologica, 14(1),
231–244.
Oliveira, J. T., & Silveus, S. A.
(2023). Practicum student
counselor identity development
through the COVID-19 pandemic.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 5(1), Article 2.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc05n88d
Oller, M. L., & Teeling, S. S.
(2021). Cross-cultural mentoring
in counselor education: A call to
action. Teaching and Supervision
in Counseling, 3(1), Article 5.
https://doi.org/10.7290/
tsc030105
Olson, S., Brown-Rice, K., &
Keller, N. (2016). Mental
health practitioners’ knowledge
of colleagues’ problems of
professional competence. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling,
38, 308–326. https://doi.
org/10.17744/mehc.38.4.03
O’Mahony, K. (2011). The 10 biggest
mistakes physicians make after
a licensing board complaint has
been filed against them. Allen,
McCain & O’Mahony. http://
www.amolawfirm.com
O’Malley, R. L., & Holt, K. M.
(2022). Cyber sextortion:
An exploratory analysis of
different perpetrators engaging
in a similar crime. Journal
of Interpersonal Violence,
37(1–2), 258–283. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0886260520909186
O’Reilly, J. T., & Chalmers, M. S.
P. (2014). The clergy sex abuse
crisis and the legal responses.
Oxford University Press.
Osborne, P. H. (2015). The law of
torts (5th ed.). Irwin Law.
Overton, S. L., & Medina, S. L.
(2008). The stigma of mental
illness. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 86, 143–151.
Pabian, Y. L., Welfel, E., & Beebe,
R. S. (2009). Psychologists’
knowledge of their states’
laws pertaining to Tarasoff-
type situations. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 40, 8–14. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0014784
Pacer National Bullying Prevention
Center. (2023). How is bullying
defined. https://www.pacer.org/
bullying

-- 554 of 593 --

532 	References
Packman, W. L., & Harris, E. A.
(1998). Legal issues and risk
management in suicidal patients.
In B. Bongar, A. I. Berman, R.
W. Maris, M. M. Silverman, E. A.
Harris, & W. L. Packman (Eds.),
Risk management with suicidal
patients (pp. 150–186). Guilford
Press.
Page, R. C., & Bailey, J. B.
(1995). Addictions counseling
certification: An emerging
counseling specialty. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
167–171.
Paisley, P. O. (1997). Personalizing
our history: Profiles of theorists,
researchers, practitioners, and
issues. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 76, 4–5.
Paisley, P. O., & Borders, L. D.
(1995). School counseling: An
evolving specialty. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
150–153.
Pakdaman, S., Shafranske, E., &
Falender, C. (2015). Ethics in
supervision: Consideration of
the supervisory alliance and
countertransference management
of psychology doctoral students.
Ethics & Behavior, 25(5), 427–
441. https://doi.org/10.1080/1050
8422.2014.947415
Palmo, A. J. (1999). The MHC child
reaches maturity: Does the child
seem short for its age? Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 21,
215–228.
Paone, T. R., & Malott, K. M. (2008).
Using interpreters in mental
health counseling. A literature
review and recommendations.
Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 36,
130–141.
Parham, T. A., & Caldwell, L. D.
(2015). Boundaries in the context
of a collective community: An
African-centered perspective. In
B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
Boundary issues in counseling
(3rd ed., pp. 96–100). American
Counseling Association.
Parigi, P., & Henson, W., II.
(2014). Social isolation in
America. Annual Review
of Sociology, 40, 153–171.
https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-soc-071312-145646
Parimbelli, E., Bottalico, B., Losiouk,
E., Tomasi, M., Santosuosso,
A., Lanzola, G., . . . Bellazzi, R.
(2018). Trusting telemedicine:
A discussion on risks, safety,
legal implications and liability
of involved stakeholders.
International Journal of
Medical Informatics, 112,
90–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmedinf.2018.01.012
Parker, L. K., Chang, C. Y., Corthell,
K. K., Walsh, M. E., Brack,
G., & Grubbs, N. K. (2014). A
grounded theory of counseling
students who report problematic
peers. Counselor Education &
Supervision, 53, 111–125.
Parker-Barnes, L., Degges-White,
S., Walker, D. A., Wickman,
S., Linneman, B., Rowley,
C., . . . McKillip, N. (2023).
From exploration of classism
to anticlassist counseling:
Implications for counselors and
counselor educators. Journal
of Counselor Preparation and
Supervision, 17(1), 3.
Patchin, J. W., & Hinduja, S. (2018).
Deterring teen bullying. Youth
Violence & Juvenile Justice,
16(2), 190–207. https://doi.
org/10.128228051
Patel, S. H., & Choate, L. H. (2014).
Conducting child custody
evaluations: Best practices for
mental health counselors who are
court-appointed as child custody
evaluators. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 36, 18–30.
Paterson, R. J. (2011). Private
practice made simple: Everything
you need to know to set up and
manage a successful mental
health practice. New Harbinger
Publications.
Patry, W. F. (1986). Latman’s The
copyright law (6th ed.). The
Bureau of National Affairs.
Patsiopoulos, A. T., & Buchanan,
M. J. (2011). The practice of
self-compassion in counseling:
A narrative inquiry. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 42, 301–307. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0024482
Paulson, B. L., & Worth, M. (2002).
Counseling for suicide: Client
perspectives. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 80, 86–93.
Paulson, L. R., Casile, W. J., &
Jones, D. (2015). Tech it out:
Implementing an online peer
consultation network for rural
mental health professionals.
Journal of Rural Mental Health,
39(3–4), 125–136.
Pease-Carter, C., & Barrio Minton,
C. (2012). Counseling programs’
informed consent processes: A
survey of student preferences.
Counselor Education &
Supervision, 51, 308–319.
Peck v. Counseling Service of
Addison County, Inc., 146 Vt. 61,
499 (A.2d 422. 1985).
Pemberton, J. V., & Loeb, T. B.
(2020). Impact of sexual and
interpersonal violence and trauma
on women: Trauma-informed
practice and feminist theory.
Journal of Feminist Family
Therapy, 32(1–2), 115–131.
People v. Cohen, 98 Misc.2d 874,
414 N.Y.S.2d 642 (1979).
People v. Lobaito, 133 Mich. App.
547, 351 N.W.2d 233 (App.
1984).
People v. Taylor, 618 P.2d 1127
(Colo. 1980).
Pepping, C. A., Cronin, T. J., Halford,
W. K., & Lyons, A. (2019).
Minority stress and same-sex

-- 555 of 593 --

References 	533
relationship satisfaction: The
role of concealment motivation.
Family Process, 58(2), 496–508.
Perera-Diltz, D., & Sauerheber, J.
D. (2017). Mentoring and other
valued components of counselor
education doctoral training:
A Delphi study. International
Journal of Mentoring and
Coaching in Education, 6(2),
116–127. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JMCE-o9-2016-0064
Perez v. City of Chicago, 2004 U.S.
Dist. LEXIS 7415 (April 28, 2004).
Perkins Nerlich, A., Anderson, C.
A., Johnston, S. P., & Keegan,
J. P. (2021). Advocacy in the
time of COVID-19: A “shot
across the bow” for rehabilitation
counseling. Journal of
Rehabilitation, 87(1).
Perritt, H. H., Jr. (2013). Employee
dismissal law and practice (5th
ed. & Supp. 2007–2012). Aspen
Publishers.
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. (2011).
Adolescents’ online privacy:
Toward a developmental
perspective. In S. Trepte & L.
Reinecke (Eds.), Privacy online
(pp. 221–234). Springer.
Petersen v. State, 100 Wash. 2d 421,
671 P.2d 230 (1983) (en banc).
Peterson, D. B., Hautamaki, J. B., &
Walton, J. L. (2007). Ethics and
technology. In R. R. Cottone & V.
M. Tarvydas (Eds.), Counseling
ethics and decision making
(pp. 184–211). Pearson Merrill
Prentice Hall.
Peterson, J., Freedenthal, S.,
Sheldon, C., & Andersen, R.
(2008). Nonsuicidal self injury
in adolescents. Psychiatry
(Edgmont), 5(11), 20–26.
Phillips, B. N. (1982). Regulation and
control in psychology. American
Psychologist, 37, 919–926.
Phillips-Green, M. J. (2002). Sibling
incest. The Family Journal, 10,
195–202.
Phillis, N. (2011). When sixteen
ain’t so sweet: Rethinking the
regulation of adolescent sexuality.
Michigan Journal of Gender &
Law, 17, 271–312. http://www.
lexisnexis.com
Pifer, R. (2023, February 21).
HIPAA complaints, breaches
increased from 2017 to 2021
as HHS urges more funding.
HealthCareDive. https://www.
healthcaredive.com/news
Pilkington, N. W., & D’Augelli,
A. R. (1995). Victimization of
lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth
in community settings. Journal of
Community Psychology, 23, 34–56.
Plaintiff v. Rector and Board of
Visitors of the College of William
and Mary, No. 03-2119 (4th Cir.
February 8, 2005).
Pope, K. S. (1986). Research and
laws regarding therapist–patient
sexual involvement: Implications
for therapists. American Journal
of Psychotherapy, 40, 564–571.
Pope, K. S. (1988). How clients are
harmed by sexual contact with
mental health professionals: The
syndrome and its prevalence.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 67, 222–226.
Pope, K. S., & Keith-Spiegel, P.
(2008). A practical approach to
boundaries in psychotherapy:
Making decisions, bypassing
blunders, and mending fences.
Journal of Clinical Psychology:
In Session, 64, 638–652.
Pope, K. S., Tabachnick, B. G., &
Keith-Spiegel, P. (1987). Good and
poor practices in psychotherapy:
National survey of beliefs of
psychologists. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 19, 547–552.
Pope, K. S., & Vasquez, M. J. T.
(2005). How to survive and thrive
as a therapist: Information, ideas,
and resources for psychologists in
practice. American Psychological
Association. https://doi.
org/10.1037/11088-005
Pope, K. S., & Vasquez, M. J. T.
(2016). Ethics in psychotherapy
and counseling: A practical guide
(5th ed.). Jossey-Bass.
Pope, K. S., & Vasquez, M. J. T.
(2021). Ethics in psychotherapy
and counseling: A practical guide
(6th ed.). Jossey-Bass.
Pope, K., Vasquez, M. J. T., Chavez-
Dueñas, & Adames, H. Y. (2021).
Ethics in psychotherapy and
counseling: A practical guide
(6th ed.). Wiley.
Pow, A. M., & Cashwell, C. S.
(2017). Posttraumatic stress
disorder and emotion-focused
coping among disaster mental
health counselors. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
95(3), 322–331. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12146
Prikhidko, A., & Swank, J. M.
(2018). Emotion regulation in
counselors. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 96(2), 206–
212. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12193
Primack, B. A., Shensa, A., Sidani,
J. E., Whaite, E. O., Lin, L. Y.,
Rosen, D., Colditz, J. B., . . .
Miller, E. (2017). Social media
use and perceived social isolation
among young adults in the U.S.
American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 53(1), 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.amepre.2017.01.010
Pringer, S. M., & Wagner, N. J.
(2020). Use of trauma-informed
care with incarcerated offenders.
Journal of Addictions & Offender
Counseling, 41(1), 52–64. https://
psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1002/
jaoc.12075
Prober, M. (2005). Please don’t
tell my parents: The validity
of school policies mandating
parental notification of a student’s
pregnancy. Brooklyn Law Review,
71, 557–580.

-- 556 of 593 --

534 	References
Prosek, E. A. (2020). Research of
teaching in counselor education:
A collective effort of improved
rigor. Teaching and Supervision
in Counseling, 2(2), Article 8.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc020208
Prosek, E. A., & Gibson, D. M.
(2021). Promoting rigorous
research by examining lived
experiences: A review of four
qualitative traditions. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
99(2), 167–177. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12364
Prosek, E. A., & Holm, J. M.
(2014). Counselors and the
military: When protocol and
ethics conflict. The Professional
Counselor, 4(2), 93–102. https://
doi.org/10.15241/eap.4.2.93
Prosek, E. A., Holm, J. M., & Daly,
C. M. (2013). Benefits of required
counseling for counseling
students. Counselor Education &
Supervision, 52, 242–254.
Pruett, M. K., & DiFonzo, J. H.
(2014). AFCC Think Tank final
report: Closing the gap: Research,
policy, practice, and shared
parenting. Family Court Review,
52, 152.
Przeworski, A., Peterson, E., &
Piedra, A. (2021). A systematic
review of the efficacy, harmful
effects, and ethical issues related
to sexual orientation change
efforts. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 28(1),
81–100. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cpsp.12377
Przybylski, A. K., Murayama, K.,
DeHaan, C. R., & Gladwell, V.
(2013). Motivational, emotional,
and behavioral correlates of
fear of missing out. Computers
in Human Behavior, 29, 1841–
1848. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chb.2013.02.014
Purgason, L. L., Lloyd-Hazlett, J., &
Harris, J. R. A. (2018). Mentoring
counselor education students:
A Delphi study with leaders in
the field. Journal of Counselor
Leadership and Advocacy.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23267
16X.2018.1452080
Radatz, D. L., & Zoe Hilton, N.
(2022). The Ontario Domestic
Assault Risk Assessment:
Predicting violence among
men with a police record of
intimate partner violence in
the United States. Criminal
Justice and Behavior,
49(3), 371–388. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00938548211035816
Rapp, C. A., & Goscha, R. J. (2012).
The strengths model: A recovery-
oriented approach to mental
health services (3rd ed.). Oxford
University Press.
Rapp, M. C., Moody, S. J., &
Stewart, L. A. (2018). Becoming
a gatekeeper: Recommendations
for preparing doctoral students
in counselor education. The
Professional Counselor,
8(2), 190–199. https://doi.
org/10.15241/mcr.8.2.190
Ratts, M. J., Anthony, L., &
Santos, K. N. T. (2012). The
dimensions of social justice
model: Transforming traditional
group work into a socially
just framework. Journal for
Specialists in Group Work, 35,
160–168.
Rave, E. J., & Larsen, C. C. (1995).
Ethical decision making in
therapy: Feminist perspectives.
Guilford Press.
Ray, D. C., Huffman, D. D.,
Christian, D. D., & Wilson, B.
J. (2016). Experiences of male
counselor educators: A study
of relationship boundaries.
The Professional Counselor,
6(2), 107–120. https://doi.
org/10.15241/dr.6.2.107
Ray, D. C., Hull, D. M., Thacker,
A. J., Pace, L. S., Swan, K. L.,
Carlson, S. E., & Sullivan, J. M.
(2011). Research in counseling:
A 10-year review to inform
practice. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 89, 349–359.
Reamer, F. G. (2020). Boundary
issues and dual relationships in
the human services. Columbia
University Press.
Reese, R. J., Conoley, C. W., &
Brossart, D. F. (2006). The
attractiveness of telephone
counseling: An empirical
investigation of client perceptions.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 84, 54–60.
Reeve, D. (2000). Oppression within
the counseling room. Disability
and Society, 15, 669–682.
Reeves, A. (2011, September/
October). Therapy and Skype.
Family Therapy Magazine, 48–49.
Regents of the University of
Michigan v. Ewing, 474 U.S. 214
(1985).
Reid, W. H. (2010). When lawyers
call clinicians. Journal of
Psychiatric Practice, 16, 253–257.
Reiner, S. M., Dobmeier, R. A.,
& Hernandez, T. J. (2013).
Perceived impact of professional
counselor identity: An exploratory
study. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 91, 174–183.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00084.x
Remley, T. P., Jr. (1991). Preparing
for court appearances. American
Counseling Association.
Remley, T. P., Jr. (1993).
Consultation contracts. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 72,
157–158.
Remley, T. P., Jr. (1995). A proposed
alternative to the licensing of
specialties in counseling. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
74, 126–129.
Remley, T. P., Jr., Bacchini, E., &
Krieg, P. (2010). Counseling in
Italy. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 88, 28–32.

-- 557 of 593 --

References 	535
Remley, T. P., Jr., Herlihy, B., &
Herlihy, S. (1997). The U.S.
Supreme Court decision in Jaffee
v. Redmond: Implications for
counselors. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 75, 213–218.
Renshaw, D. C. (2001). Bullies. The
Family Journal, 9, 341–342.
Reppucci, N. D., Weithorn, L. A.,
Mulvey, E. P., & Monahan, J.
(1984). Children, mental health,
and the law. Sage.
Reynolds, C. R., Altmann, R. A., &
Allen, D. N. (2021). Mastering
modern psychological testing
(2nd ed.). Springer.
Ribeiro, J. D., Franklin, J. C., Fox,
K. R., Bentley, K. H., Kleiman,
E. M., Chang, B. P., & Nock,
M. K. (2015). Self-injurious
thoughts and behaviors as risk
factors for future suicide ideation,
attempts, and death: A meta-
analysis of longitudinal studies.
Psychological Medicine, 46,
225–236. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0033291715001804
Richards, D., & Vigano, N. (2013).
Online counseling: A narrative
and critical review of the
literature. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 69, 994–1011.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.21974
Richards, T. N., & Nystrom, A.
(2022). Examining faculty-
to-student consensual sexual
relationship policies on campus:
Have there been changes in
the era of #MeToo. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 37(3–4),
NP1835–NP1859.
Riches, S., Azevedo, L., Vora, A.,
Kaleva, I., Taylor, L., Guan, P.,
Jeyarajaguru, P., McIntosh, H.,
Petrou, C., Pisani, S., & Hammons,
N. (2021). Therapeutic engagement
in robot-assisted psychological
interventions: A systematic
review. Clinical Psychology &
Psychotherapy, 29(3), 857–873.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cpp.2696
Ricks, L., Tuttle, M., & Ellison, S.
E. (2022). Child abuse reporting:
Understanding factors impacting
veteran school counselors.
The Professional Counselor,
12(2). https://tpcjournal.nbcc.
org/child-abuse-reporting-
understanding-factors-impacting-
veteran-school-counselors
Rios v. Read, D.C.N.Y. 73 F.R.D.
589 (1977).
Ritchie, M. H., & Huss, S. N. (2000).
Recruitment and screening of
minors for group counseling.
Journal for Specialists in Group
Work, 25, 146–156.
Rivera, D. P., Forquer, E.
E., & Rangel, R. (2010).
Microaggressions and the
life experience of Latina/o
Americans. In D. W. Sue (Ed.),
Microagressions and marginality:
Manifestation, dynamics, and
impact (pp. 59–84). Wiley.
Roach, L. F., & Young, M. E. (2007).
Do counselor education programs
promote wellness in their
students? Counselor Education
and Supervision, 47, 29–45.
Roberts, A. R., Monferrari, I., & Yeager,
K. R. (2008). Avoiding malpractice
lawsuits by following risk
assessment and suicide prevention
guidelines. Brief Treatment and
Crisis Intervention, 8, 5–14.
Roberts v. Superior Court, 9 Cal.3d
330, 107 Cal. Rptr. 309, 508 P.2d
309 (1973).
Roberts, W. B., & Morotti, A. A.
(2000). The bully as victim:
Understanding bully behaviors
to increase the effectiveness of
interventions in the bully–victim
dyad. Professional School
Counseling, 4, 148–155.
Robertson, D. W., Powers, W., Jr.,
Anderson, D. A., & Wellborn, O.
G. (2011). Cases and materials
on torts (4th ed.). West.
Robinson, A. (2020, June 3). Are
you unintentionally committing
insurance fraud? Therapy Notes.
https://blog.therapynotes.com/are-
you-unintentionally-committing-
insurance-fraud
Robinson, E., Amburgey, R., Swank,
E., & Faulker, C. (2004). Test
cheating in a rural college: Studying
the importance of individual and
situational factors. College Student
Journal, 38, 380–395.
Robinson, M., & Robertson, S. (2010).
Young men’s health promotion and
new information communication
technologies: Illuminating the
issues and research agendas.
Health Promotion International,
25(3), 363–370. https://doi.
org/10.1093/heapro/daq022
Robinson-Wood, T. L. (2009). The
convergence of race, ethnicity,
and gender: Multiple identities in
counseling (3rd ed.). Pearson.
Rochlen, A. B., Beretvas, N. S., & Zack,
J. S. (2004). The online and face-
to-face counseling attitudes scales:
A validation study. Measurement
and Evaluation in Counseling and
Development, 36, 95–111.
Rodriguez-Seijas, C., Morgan, T. A., &
Zimmerman, M. (2021). Is there a
bias in the diagnosis of borderline
personality disorder among
lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients?
Assessment, 28(3), 724–738.
Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
Rogers-Sirin, L. (2017).
Psychotherapy from the margins:
How the pressure to adopt
evidence-based treatments
conflicts with social justice–
oriented practice. Journal for
Social Action in Counseling and
Psychology, 9(1), 55–78.
Roig, M. (2009). Avoiding
plagiarism, self-plagiarism,
and other questionable writing
practices: A guide to ethical
writing. http://facpub.stjohns.
edu/~roigm/plagiarism
Rollins, D., Herbert, L., & Wright,
G. (2022). Logged in, zoomed

-- 558 of 593 --

536 	References
out: Creating and maintaining
virtual engagement for counselor
education students. Journal
of Technology in Counselor
Education and Supervision, 2(1).
https://doi.org/10.22371/tces/0016
Rom, S., Miskovic, W. J., Barakat,
S., Aouad, P., Fuller, T. M., &
Maguire, S. (2022). Evaluating
the feasibility and potential
efficacy of a brief eTherapy for
binge-eating disorder: A pilot
study. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 55(11), 1614–
1620. https://doi.org.uhcno.idm.
oclc.org/10.1002/eat.23803
Rosaline, S., & Kasaraneni, H.
(2022). Surge in extramarital
affairs during work from home:
What we know so far. The Family
Journal, 10664807221123548.
Rosenberg, J. I., Getzelman, M. A.,
Arcinue, F., & Oren, C. Z. (2005).
An exploratory look at students’
experiences of problematic
peers in academic professional
psychology programs.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 36(6),
665–673.
Ross, S., & Heath, N. (2002). A
study of the frequency of self-
mutilation in a community sample
of adolescents. Journal of Youth
and Adolescence, 31, 67–77.
Rouse, K. E. T., & Horn, E. A. D.
(2022). Ethical remediation
practices addressing values
conflicts: A Delphi study.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 61(2), 99–111.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12228
Rowen, J., Giedgowd, G., &
Baran, D. (2022). Effective
and accessible telephone-based
psychotherapy and supervision.
Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 32(1), 3–18. https://
psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/
int0000257
Rowley, W. J., & MacDonald, D.
(2001). Counseling and the law: A
cross-cultural perspective. Journal
of Counseling and Development,
79, 423–429.
Roy, K., Guar, M., Soltani, M.,
Rawte, V., Kalyan, A., & Sheth,
A. (2023, January 9). ProKnow:
Process knowledge for safety
constrained and explainable
question generation for mental
health diagnostic assistance.
Frontiers in Big Data, 5(1).
https://doi.org/10.3389/
fdata.2022.1056728
Roy, V., Fournier, C., Thibault, S.,
Tudeau, M., & Dumont-Blais, A.
(2023). Factors shaping gay men’s
experience of intimate partner
violence: An ecological view.
Journal of Homosexuality. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2023.
2217515
Rudow, H. (2013). Resolution of EMU
case confirms ACA Code of Ethics,
counseling profession’s stance
against client discrimination.
http://ct.counseling.org/2013/01/
resolution-of-emu-case-confirms-
aca-code-of-ethics-counseling-
professions-stance-against-client-
discrimination/
Rummell, C. M., & Joyce, N. R.
(2010). “So wat do u want to
wrk on 2day?”: The ethical
implications of online counseling.
Ethics & Behavior, 20, 482–496.
Rupert, P. A., & Baird, K. A.
(2004). Managed care and
the independent practice of
psychology. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 35, 185–193.
Rust, J. P., Raskin, J. D., & Hill, M. S.
(2013). Problems of professional
competence among counselor
trainees: Programmatic issues and
guidelines. Counselor Education
& Supervision, 52, 30–42.
Rutt, C. C., Buser, T. J., & Buser, J.
K. (2016). Evaluating a training
intervention for assessing
nonsuicidal self-injury: The HIRE
Model. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 55, 123–136. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12037
Ryan, C., Toomey, R. B., Diaz, R.
M., & Russell, S. T. (2020).
Parent-initiated sexual orientation
change efforts with LGBT
adolescents: Implications for
young adult mental health
and adjustment. Journal of
Homosexuality, 67(2), 159–173.
Ryan, W. S., Legate, N., &
Weinstein, N. (2015). Coming out
as lesbian, gay, or bisexual: The
lasting impact of initial disclosure
experiences. Self and Identity,
14(5), 549–569.
Sacco-Bene, C., Walsh, M. J.,
Dawson, R. D., Petrino, J., &
Boening, E. (2022). Virtual
enhanced education in counselor
education: Is this for real?
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 61(3), 276–292.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12245
Sackett, C. R., Hartig, N.,
Bodenhorn, N., Farmer, L. B.,
Ghoston, M. R., Graham, J., &
Lile J. (2015). Advising master’s
students pursuing doctoral study:
A survey of counselor educators
and supervisors. The Professional
Counselor, 5(4), 473–485. https://
doi.org/10.15241/crs.5.4.473
Safran, J. D., & Kriss, A. (2014).
Psychoanalytic psychotherapies.
In D. Wedding & R. J. Corsini
(Eds.), Current psychotherapies
(10th ed., pp. 19–54). Brooks/
Cole, Cengage Learning.
Saia, T., Nerlich, A. P., & Johnston,
S. P. (2021). Why not the “new
flexible”?: The argument for not
returning to “normal” after COVID-
19. Rehabilitation Counselors and
Educators Journal, 11(1).
Salerno, J. P., Williams, N. D., &
Gattamorta, K. A. (2020). LGBTQ

-- 559 of 593 --

References 	537
populations: Psychologically
vulnerable communities in
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Psychological Trauma: Theory,
Research, Practice, and Policy,
12(S1), S239–S242. https://doi.
org/10.1037/tra0000837
Salgo v. Leland Stanford Jr. Univ.
Bd. of Trustees, 317 P.2d 170
(Cal. Ct. App. 1957).
Salisbury, W. A., & Kinnier, R.
T. (1996). Posttermination
friendship between counselors
and clients. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 74, 495–500.
Sallee, E., Cazares-Cervantes, A., &
Ng, K. M. (2022). Interpersonal
predictors of suicide ideation
and attempt among middle
adolescents. The Professional
Counselor, 12(1), 1–16. https://
doi.org/10.15241/es.12.1.1.
Sallee, E., Ng, K. M., & Cazares-
Cervantes, A. (2021).
Interpersonal predictors of suicide
ideation and attempt among early
adolescents. Professional School
Counseling, 25(1). https://doi.org/
10.1177/2156759X211018653
Salo, M. (2015). Counseling
minor clients. In B. Herlihy &
G. Corey (Eds.), ACA ethical
standards casebook (7th ed., pp.
205–207). American Counseling
Association.
Saloner, B., Krawczyk, N., Solomon,
K., Allen, S. T., Morris, M.,
Haney, K., & Sherman, S.
G. (2022). Experiences with
substance use disorder treatment
during the COVID-19 pandemic:
Findings from a multistate survey.
International Journal of
Drug Policy, 101, 103537.
https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.
drugpo.2021.103537
Salpietro, L., Clark, M., Kress, V.,
Laux, J., & Walker, T. (2021).
Remedial interventions to
address receptivity to feedback
in master's-level counseling
students. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 60(4), 274–290.
Salpietro, L., Clark, M., Walker,
T., Ausloos, C., & Prosek, E. A.
(2022). Effective remediation
in master’s level counseling
students. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
15(2). https://digitalcommons.
sacredheart.edu/jcps/vol15/iss2/11
Sampson, J. P., Jr., & Bloom, J. W.
(2001). The potential for success
and failure of computer applications
in counseling and guidance. In D.
C. Locke, J. E. Myers, & E. L. Herr
(Eds.), The handbook of counseling
(pp. 613–627). Sage.
Sanabria, S. (2018). Self-care and
guilt in the wake of the Orlando
shooting. In J. M. Webber & J. B.
Mascari (Eds.), Disaster mental
health counseling (4th ed., pp.
127–130). American Counseling
Association.
Sanders, R. K. (2018). Maintaining
a balance: The challenge of
multiple relationships for
Christian therapists. Journal of
Psychology and Christianity,
35(4), 320–329.
Sandhu, D. S. (2000). Special issue:
School violence and counselors.
Professional School Counseling,
4, iv–v.
Sandusky, B., Ramsay-Seaner, K.,
Born, S., Heckmann, C., & Davies,
F. (2022). A qualitative case study
of supervisors’ experiences related
to distance-based supervision.
Journal of Counselor Preparation
and Supervision, 15(2). https://
digitalcommons.sacredheart.edu/
jcps/vol15/iss2/5
Santilli, S., Ginevra, M. C., Di
Maggio, I., Soresi, S., & Nota,
L. (2021). In the same boat? An
online group career counseling
with a group of young adults in the
time of COVID-19. International
Journal for Educational and
Vocational Guidance, 1–19.
Sapyta, J., Goldston, D. B., Erkanli,
A., Daniel, S. S., Heilbron, N.,
Mayfield, A., & Treadway, S. L.
(2012). Evaluating the predictive
validity of suicidal intent and
medical lethality in youth. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 80, 222–231. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0026870
Satran, S. (2022). From craft
to labor: How automation is
transforming the practice of
psychotherapy. Culture, Medicine,
and Psychiatry. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11013-022-09771-8
Saunders, J. L., Barros-Bailey,
M., Rudman, R., Dew, D. W.,
& Garcia, J. (2007). Ethical
complaints and violations
in rehabilitation counseling:
An analysis of Commission
on Rehabilitation Counselor
Certification data. Rehabilitation
Counseling Bulletin, 51, 7–13.
Savage, T. A., Harley, D. A., &
Nowak, T. M. (2005). Applying
social empowerment strategies
as tools for self-advocacy in
counseling lesbian and gay male
clients. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 83, 131–137.
Savitz-Romer, M., Rowan-Kenyon, H.
T., Nicola, T. P., Alexander, E., &
Carroll, S. (2021). When the kids
are not alright: School counseling
in the time of COVID-19. Aera
Open, 7, 23328584211033600.
Schank, J. A., & Skovholt, T. M.
(2006). Ethical practice in
small communities: Challenges
and rewards for psychologists.
American Psychological
Association.
Schmidt, R. B. (2016). Mental
health practitioners’ perceived
levels of preparedness, levels of
confidence and methods used in
the assessment of youth suicide.
The Professional Counselor, 6(1),
76–88. https://doi.org/10.15241/
qs.4.5.519

-- 560 of 593 --

538 	References
Schmidt, S. W., Glass, J. S., &
Wooten, P. (2011). School
counselor preparedness:
Examining cultural competence
regarding gay, lesbian, and
bisexual issues. Journal of School
Counseling, 9(11). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v9n11.pdf
Schofield, M. J. (2013). Counseling
in Australia: Past, present, and
future. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 91, 234–239.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00090.x
Schouten, R. (Ed.). (2017). Mental
health practice and the law.
Oxford University Press.
Schuermann, H., Harris, J. R. A.,
& Lloyd-Hazlett, J. (2018).
Academic roles and perceptions
of gatekeeping in counselor
education. Counselor Education
& Supervision, 75, 51–65. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12093
Schultze, N. G. (2006). Success factors
in internet-based psychological
counseling. Cyberpsychology &
Behavior, 9, 623–626.
Schuster, J. E., Rocha, L., Sevillano,
A., Green-Johnson, F., & Gerlach,
J. (2021). ADVOCATE: A
legislative advocacy model for
counseling students. Teaching and
Supervision in Counseling, 3(1),
Article 9. https://doi.org/10.7290/
tsc030109
Schwartz, R. C., Lent, J., & Geihsler,
J. (2011). Gender and diagnosis of
mental disorders: Implications for
mental health counseling. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling, 33,
347–358.
Schwartz, V. E., Kelly, K., & Partlett,
D. F. (2010). Cases and materials
on torts (12th ed.). Foundation
Press.
Schweiger, W. K., Henderson, D. A.,
McCaskill, K., Clawson, T. W., &
Collins, D. R. (2012). Counselor
preparation: Programs, faculty,
trends (13th ed.). Routledge.
Schwiebert, V. L., Myers, J. E., &
Dice, C. (2000). Ethical guidelines
for counselors working with older
adults. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 78, 123–129.
Scott, A. M., Clark, J., Greenwood,
H., Krzyzaniak, N., Cardona, M.,
Peiris, R., Sims, R., & Glasziou,
P. (2022). Telehealth v. face-to-
face provision of care to patients
with depression: A systematic
review and meta-analysis.
Psychological Medicine, 52(14),
1–9 https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0033291722002331
Scott, D. A., Valley, B., & Simecka,
B. A. (2017). Mental health
concerns in the digital age.
International Journal of Mental
Health and Addiction, 15(3),
604–613. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11469-016-9684-0
Scott, W. R. (1969). Professional
employees in a bureaucratic
structure: Social work. In
A. Etzioni (Ed.), The semi-
professions and their organization
(pp. 102–156). The Free Press.
Sedlakova, J., & Trachsel, M.
(2023). Conversational artificial
intelligence in psychotherapy:
A new therapeutic tool or
agent? The American Journal of
Bioethics, 23(5), 4–13. https://doi.
org/10.1080/15265161.2022.20
48739
Self-Injury and Recovery Research
and Resources. (2018). What is
self-injury? Cornell University.
http://www.selfinjury.bctr.cornell.
edu/about-self-injury.html
Self-Injury and Recovery Resources.
(2023). Resources. https://
www.selfinjury.bctr.cornell.edu/
resources.html
Seligman, L. (1999). Twenty years of
diagnosis and the DSM. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling, 21,
229–239.
Sells, J. N., & Hagedorn, B. (2016).
CACREP accreditation, ethics,
and the affirmation of both
religious and sexual identities:
A response to Smith and Okech.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 94, 265–279.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12083
Senyonyi, R. M., & Ochieng, L.
A. (2012). The development
of professional counseling in
Uganda: Current status and future
trends. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 90, 500–504.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2012.00062.x
Sexton, T. L. (2001). Evidence-based
counseling intervention programs:
Practicing “best practices.” In
D. C. Locke, J. E. Myers, & E.
L. Herr (Eds.), The handbook of
counseling (pp. 499–512). Sage.
Seymour, J. W., & Rubin, L. (2006).
Principles, principals, and
process (P3): A model for play
therapy ethics problem solving.
International Journal of Play
Therapy, 15, 101–123.
Shannonhouse, L., Lin, Y. D.,
Shaw, K., & Porter, M. (2018).
Suicide intervention training
for counselor trainees: A quasi-
experimental study on skill
retention. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 57(3), 194–210.
Shannonhouse, L., Lin, Y. D., Shaw,
K., & Porter, M. (2017). Suicide
intervention training for K–12
schools: A quasi-experimental
study on ASIST. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
95, 3–13. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12112
Shannonhouse, L., & Myers, J.
E. (2014). Global links and
gaps in counselor education
programs: Establishing a baseline.
The Professional Counselor,
4(4), 353–362. https://doi.
org/10.15241/lss.4.4.353
Shaw, C., Chrysikou, V., Davis,
S., Gessler, S., Rodin, G., &
Lanceley, A. (2017). Inviting

-- 561 of 593 --

References 	539
end-of-life in initial CALM
therapy sessions: A conversation
analytic study. Patient Education
& Counseling, 100(2), 259–266.
Shaw, E. (2015). Ethical practice
in couple and family therapy:
Negotiating rocky terrain.
Australian & New Zealand
Journal of Family Therapy, 36,
504–517.
Shaw, H. E., & Shaw, S. F. (2006).
Critical ethical issues in online
counseling: Assessing current
practices with an ethical
intent checklist. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
84(1), 41–53. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2006.
tb00378.x
Shea, M. L., Cinotti, D., & Stone,
C. (2018). An examination
of school counselors’ use of
electronic case notes. Journal
of School Counseling, 16(18).
http://www.jsc.montana.edu/
articles/v16n18.pdf
Sheehan, L., Oexie, N., Armas, S.
A., Wan, H. T., Bushman, M.,
Glover, L., Lewy, S., & Laique, A.
(2021). The context of disclosing
suicidality: An exploration with
attempt survivors. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
100(2), 18–193. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12414
Shell, E. M., Teodorescu, D.,
& Williams, L. D. (2021).
Investigating race-related
stress, burnout, and secondary
traumatic stress for Black
mental health therapists.
Journal of Black Psychology,
47(8), 669–694. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00957984211033963
Sheperis, D. S., Coker, J. K., Haag,
E., & Salem-Pease, F. (2020a).
Online counselor education: A
student–faculty collaboration.
The Professional Counselor,
10(1), 133–143. https://doi.
org/10.15241/dss.10.1.133
Sheperis, D. S., Korani, K., Milan-
Nichols, M., & Sheperis, C. J.
(2019). Marketing of professional
counselors: A Q-Sort study of best
practices. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 97(1), 25–32.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12232
Sheperis, D. S., Ordway, A., &
Lamar, M. (2020b). Legal
and ethical challenges in
online counselor education.
The Professional Counselor,
10(1), 106–119. https://doi.
org/10.15241/dss.10.1.106
Shi, Q., Liu, X., & Leuwerke, W.
(2014). Students’ perceptions
of school counselors: An
investigation of two high schools
in Beijing, China. The Professional
Counselors, 4(5), 519–530.
Shulman, G. P., Holt, N. R., Hope,
D. A., Mocarski, R., Eyer, J., &
Woodruff, N. (2017). A review of
contemporary assessment tools for
use with transgender and gender
nonconforming adults. Psychology
of Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity, 4(3), 304–313. https://
doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000233
Shuman, D. W, & Weiner, M. F.
(1987). American lecture series,
No. 1070. The psychotherapist–
patient privilege: A critical
examination. Charles C. Thomas.
Sikes, A., Remley, T., Jr., & Hays,
D. G. (2010). Experiences of
school counselors during and
after making suspected child
abuse reports. Journal of School
Counseling, 8(21). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v8n21.pdf
Simon, R. I. (1991). Psychological
injury caused by boundary
violations: Precursors to
therapist–patient sex. Psychiatry
Annals, 19, 104–112.
Simons, J. D. (2021). School
counselor advocacy for gender
minority students. Plos One.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0248022
Simpson, C., Armstrong, S. A.,
Couch, L., & Bore, S. K. (2010).
Understanding non-suicidal self-
injury: Perceptions of school
counselors. Journal of School
Counseling, 8(37). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v8n37.pdf
Simpson, L. R., & Glowiak, M. V.
(2012). Supervision, coaching,
and consultation. In D. Capuzzi
& M. D. Stauffer (Eds.), Career
counseling: Foundations,
perspectives, and applications
(2nd ed., pp. 279–312). Routledge.
Sims v. State, 251 Ga. 877, 311
S.E.2d 161 (1984).
Singh, A. A., Nassar, S. C.,
Arredondo, P., & Toporek,
R. (2020). The past guides
the future: Implementing the
Multicultural and Social Justice
Counseling Competencies. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12319
Singh, A. A., & Salazar, C. F. (2014).
Using groups to facilitate social
justice change. In J. L. Delucia-
Waack, C. R. Kalodner, & M. T.
Riva (Eds.), Handbook of group
counseling and psychotherapy
(2nd ed.,; pp. 288–300). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Singh, D. (2022). A review on
current and potential applications
of robotics in mental health care.
Researchberg Review of Science
and Technology-2022, 2(1),
https://researchberg.com/index.
php/rrst/article/view/77
Singley, S. J. (1998). Failure to report
suspected child abuse: Civil
liability of mandated reporters.
Journal of Juvenile Law, 19, 236.
http://seg802.ocs.lsu.edu:2077/
universe/document?_m=8868c24
f3aca250391ddeb692e4f286a&_
docnum=12&wchp=dGLbVzz-
zSkVb&_md5=875a5ad9f921317
af340d225e56a7b93
Sinko, L., He, Y., Kishton, R., Ortiz,
R., Jacobs, L., & Fingerman, M.
(2022). “The stay at home order is

-- 562 of 593 --

540 	References
causing things to get heated up”:
Family conflict dynamics during
COVID-19 from the perspectives
of youth calling a national child
abuse hotline. Journal of Family
Violence, 37(5), 837–846.
Sistad, R. E., Enggasser, J.,
Livingston, N. A., & Brief, D.
(2023). Comparing substance use
treatment initiation and retention
between telehealth delivered during
COVID-19 and in-person treatment
pre-COVID-19. American Journal
on Addictions, 32(3), 301–308.
https://doi-org.uhcno.idm.oclc.
org/10.1111/ajad.13385
Skovholt, T. M. (2001). The resilient
practitioner: Burnout prevention and
self-care strategies for counselors,
therapists, teachers, and health
professionals. Allyn & Bacon.
Skovholt, T. M. (2012). Becoming a
therapist: On the path to mastery.
Wiley.
Slaiba, Y., & Barden, S. (2017).
Counselors and workplace
wellness programs: A conceptual
model. The Professional
Counselor, 7(2), 104–113. https://
doi.org/10.15241/ys.7.2.104
Sleek, P. (1996, April). Ensuring
accuracy in clinical decisions.
APA Monitor, 26, 30.
Slovenko, R. (1960). Psychiatry
and a second look at the medical
privilege. Wayne Law Review, 6,
174–203.
Slovenko, R. (1998). Psychotherapy
and confidentiality: Testimonial
privileged communication, breach
of confidentiality, and reporting
duties. Charles C. Thomas
Publisher.
Slovenko, R., & Usdin, G. (1961).
The psychiatrist and privileged
communication. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 4, 431–444.
Small Business Administration
(SBA). (2023). Start your
business in 10 steps. https://www.
sba.gov/
Smarinsky, E. C., Brown, C.
L., & Popejoy, E. (2023).
Recommendations for counselor
education and supervision programs
to improve gatekeeping processes
developed from doctoral student
experiences. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision, 17(1).
https://digitalcommons.sacredheart.
edu/jcps/vol17/iss1/6
Smith Lee, J. R., & Robinson, M.
A. (2019). “That’s my number
one fear in life. It’s the police”:
Examining young Black men’s
exposures to trauma and loss
resulting from police violence and
police killings. Journal of Black
Psychology, 45(3), 143–184.
Smith, D., & Fitzpatrick, M. (1995).
Patient–therapist boundary
issues: An integrative review of
theory and research. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 26, 499–506.
Smith, D. C., & Sandhu, D. S. (2004).
Toward a positive perspective on
violence prevention in schools:
Building connections. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 82,
287–293.
Smith, H. B. (2001). Counseling:
Professional identity for
counselors. In D. C. Locke, J.
E. Myers, & E. L. Herr (Eds.),
The handbook of counseling (pp.
569–579). Sage.
Smith, H. B., & Robinson, G. P.
(1995). Mental health counseling:
Past, present, and future. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
75, 158–162.
Smith, J. M., & Mallen, R. E. (1989).
Preventing legal malpractice. West.
Smith, K. A. (2010). Correlates
of perceived multicultural
competence: Experience and
ethnic identity [Unpublished
master’s thesis]. California State
University Sacramento.
Smith, L., Foley, P. F., & Chaney, M.
P. (2008). Addressing classism,
ableism, and heterosexism in
counselor education. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 86,
303–309. https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2008.
tb00513.x
Smith, L. C., & Okech, J. E. A.
(2016a). Ethical issues raised
by CACREP accreditation of
programs within institutions that
disaffirm or disallow diverse
sexual orientations. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
94, 252–264. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12082
Smith, L. C., & Okech, J. E. A.
(2016b). Negotiating CACREP
accreditation practices, religious
diversity, and sexual orientation
diversity: A rejoinder to Sells
and Hagedorn. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 94,
280–284. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12084
Smith, R. L., Carlson, J., Stevens-
Smith, P., & Dennison, M. (1995).
Marriage and family counseling.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 74, 154–157.
Smith, R. L., & Valarezo, M. A.
(2013). The foundation of
counseling in the Republic of
Ecuador. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 91, 120–124.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2013.00080.x
Smith, S. (2006). Confronting the
unethical vocational counselor
in forensic practice. Journal of
Vocational Rehabilitation, 25,
133–136.
Snider, P. D. (1985). The duty
to warn: A potential issue of
litigation for the counseling
supervisor. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 25, 66–73.
Snow, W. H., & Coker, K. (2020).
Distance counselor education: Past,
present, future. The Professional
Counselor, 10(1), 40–56. https://
doi.org/10.15241/whs.10.1.40

-- 563 of 593 --

References 	541
Snow, W. H., Lamar, M. R.,
Hinkle, J. S., & Speciale, M.
(2018). Current practices in
online counselor education.
The Professional Counselor,
8(2), 131–145. https://doi.
org/10.15241/whs.8.2.131
Snyder, D. K., & Doss, B. D. (2005).
Treating infidelity: Clinical and
ethical directions. Journal of
Clinical Psychology: In Session,
61, 1453–1465.
Son, H. (2023). Ethical
consideration on addiction
counselors’ multiple
relationships. Asia-Pacific
Journal of Convergent Research
Interchange, 9(1), 473–483.
Sonne, J. L. (2005). Dual
relationships, multiple
relationships, and boundary
decisions. The Independent
Practitioner, 25, 1–14.
Sotero, L., Major, S., Escudero,
V., & Relvas, A. P. (2016).
The therapeutic alliance with
involuntary clients: How does
it work? Journal of Family
Therapy, 38(1), 36–58. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1467-6427.12046
Spargo, A. L., Orr, J., & Chang,
C. (2010). Group counseling
pedagogy: A comparison of
counselor training groups and
clinical growth groups. http://
www.counselingoutfitters.com/
vistas/vistas10/Article_55.pdf
Speight, S. L. (2012). An exploration
of boundaries and solidarity in
counseling relationships. The
Counseling Psychologist, 40,
133–157.
Sperry, L. (2007). The ethical and
professional practice of counseling
and psychotherapy. Pearson.
Spindel, P. (2015). Working with
families: A guide for health and
human services professionals.
Canadian Scholars’ Press.
Squyres, E. (1986). An alternative
view of the spouse of the therapist.
Journal of Contemporary
Psychology, 16, 97–106.
Srivastava, A., & Grover, N.
(2016). Reflections about being
offered gifts in psychotherapy:
A descriptive case study.
Psychological Studies,
61(1), 83–86. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12646-015-0350-6
Stade, E. C., Stirman, S. W., Ungar, L.
H., Boland, C. L., Schwartz, H. A.,
Yaden, D. B., Sedoc, J., DeRubeis,
R., Weller, R., & Eichstaedt, J. C.
(2023, April 24). Large language
models could change the future of
behavioral healthcare: A proposal
for responsible development and
evaluation. LLMs for Behavioral
Health, Preprint v1.6. https://doi.
org/10.31234/osf.io/cuzvr
Stadler, H. A. (1986). Making hard
choices: Clarifying controversial
ethical issues. Counseling and
Human Development, 19, 1–10.
Stadler, H. A. (2001). Impairment
in the mental health professions.
In E. R. Welfel & R. E. Ingersoll
(Eds.), The mental health desk
reference (pp. 413–418). Wiley.
Stanger-Hall, K. F., & Hall,
D. W. (2011). Abstinence-
only education and teen
pregnancy rates: Why we need
comprehensive sex education
in the US. PLOS ONE, 6(10),
e24658. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0024658
Stargell, N. A., Zoldan, C. A., Kress,
V. E., Walker-Andrews, L. M., &
Whisenhunt, J. L. (2017–2018).
Student non-suicidal self-injury:
A protocol for school counselors.
Professional School Counseling,
21, 37–46. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-21.1.37
State of Louisiana v. Atterberry, 664
So.2d 1216 (La. App. 1 Cir. 1995).
State v. Andring, 342 N.W.2d 128
(Minn. 1984).
State v. Brown, 376 N.W.2d 451,
review denied (Minn. App. 1985).
State v. Hungerford, 84 Wisc.2d 236,
267 (N.W.2d 258. 1978).
State v. Kupchun, 117 N.H. 417, 373
(A.2d 1325. 1977).
State v. Magnuson, 682 P.2d 1365,
210 (Mont. 401. 1984).
Staton, A. R., & Kielty, M. (2023).
A lurking threat: Counselor
practices to guard against cyber
thefts. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 45, 20–23.
Steele, D. (2012). The million dollar
private practice: Using your
expertise to build a business that
makes a difference. John Wiley.
Steele, J. M., Bischof, G. H., &
Craig, S. E. (2014). Political
ideology and perceptions of social
justice advocacy among members
of the American Counseling
Association. International
Journal for the Advancement of
Counseling, 36, 450–467.
Steele, T., Nuckols, G., & Stone, C.
(2020). Technology trends in school
counseling. Journal of School
Counseling, 18(10). http:/www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v18n10.pdf
Steen, R. L., Engels, D., & Thweatt,
W. T. (2006). Ethical aspects
of spirituality in counseling.
Counseling and Values, 50,
108–118.
Steijn, W. M. P. (2014). Developing a
sense of privacy: An investigation
of privacy and the differences
between young and old in
the context of social network
sites [Doctoral dissertation].
Tilburg University, Netherlands.
https://pure.uvt.nl/portal/en/
publications/developing-a-sense-
of-privacy(6a060916-8be2-463e-
b5fe392322a95ad7).html
Steijn, W. P., Schouten, A. P., &
Vedder, A. H. (2016). Why
concern regarding privacy differs:
The influence of age and (non-)
participation on Facebook.
Cyberpsychology, 10(1), 88–99.
https://doi.org/10.5817/CP2016-1-3

-- 564 of 593 --

542 	References
Stern, E. B., & Havlicek, L. (1986).
Academic misconduct: Results of
faculty and undergraduate student
surveys. Journal of Allied Health,
15, 129–142.
Stern, R. C., & DiFonzo, J. H.
(2007). Terminal ambiguity:
Law, ethics and policy in the
assisted dying debate. The Boston
University Public Interest Law
Journal, 17, 99–135.
Stetson University College of Law.
(2023). Statutory updates. Center
for Excellence in Elder Law. https://
www.stetson.edu/law/academics/
elder/home/statutory-updates.php
Stewart-Sicking, J. A., Deal, P.
J., & Fox, J. (2017). The ways
paradigm: A transtheoretical
model for integrating spirituality
into counseling. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
95(2), 234–241. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12135
St. Germaine, J. (1993). Dual
relationships: What’s wrong with
them? American Counselor, 2,
25–30.
Stickl Haugen, J., Waalkes, P. L., &
Lambie, G. W. (2021). A national
survey of school counselors’
experiences with student death
by suicide. Professional School
Counseling, 25(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X21993804
Stokes, L. S., & Remley, T. P., Jr.
(2001). Counselors as expert
witnesses. In E. R. Welfel & R.
E. Ingersoll (Eds.), The mental
health desk reference (pp. 404–
410). Wiley.
Stone, C. (2002). Negligence in
academic advising and abortion
counseling: Courts rulings and
implications. Professional School
Counseling, 6, 28–35.
Stone, C. (2021). Suicide
assessments: The medical
profession affirms school
counselors’ truth. ASCA School
Counselor. https://www.
schoolcounselor.org/Magazines/
July-August2021/Suicide-
Assessments-The-Medical-
Professional-Affir
Stone, C. (2022). School counselors’
vital role in suicide intervention:
A response to Gallo and Wachter
Morris. Teaching and Supervision
in Counseling, 4(2), Article 7.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc04n2mz
Stone, C., & Zirkel, P. (2010).
School counselor advocacy:
When law and ethics may
collide. Professional School
Counseling, 13, 244–247.
https://doi.org/10.10.5330/
PSC.n.2010-13.244
Storlie, C. A., Baltrinic, E. R.,
Mostade, S. J., & Darby, T.
(2017). Professional functioning:
Exploring developmental
narratives of counselor trainees.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 56, 225–240. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12074
Storlie, C. H., Parker-Wright, M.,
& Woo, H. (2015). Multicultural
leadership development: A
qualitative analysis of emerging
leaders in counselor education.
Journal of Counselor Leadership
and Advocacy, 2, 154–169.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23267
16X.2015.1054078
Stout, C. E., & Grand, L. C. (2006).
Getting started in private
practice: The complete guide
to building your mental health
practice. John Wiley.
Stroud, A. M., Pacyna, J. E., & Sharp,
R. R. (2023). Ethical aspects of
machine listening in healthcare.
The American Journal of
Bioethics, 23(5). https://doi.org/10
.1080/15265161.2023.2199646
Students for Fair Admissions v.
Harvard, 600 U.S.___ (2023).
Stutey, D. M. (2015). Sibling
abuse: A study of school
counselors’ shared attitudes
and beliefs. The Professional
Counselor, 5(3), 390–406.
https://doi.org/10.15241/
ds.5.3.390
Stutey, D. M., & Clemens, E. V.
(2014). Hidden abuse within
the home: Recognizing and
responding to sibling abuse.
Professional School Counseling,
18, 206–216. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-18.1.206
Stutey, D. M., Cureton, J. L, Severn,
K., & Fink, M. (2021). Suicide
protective factors: Utilizing
SHORES in school counseling.
The Professional Counselor,
11(1), 16–30. http://doi.
org/10.15241/dms.11.1.16
Sude, M. E. (2013). Text messaging
and private practice: Ethical
challenges and guidelines
for developing personal best
practices. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 35, 211–227.
Sue, D. W., Bucceri, J., Lin, A. I.,
Nadal, K. L., & Torino, G. C.
(2007). Racial microaggression
and the Asian American
experience. Cultural Diversity
and Ethnic Minority Psychology,
13, 72–81. https://doi.
org/10.1037/1948-1985.S.1.88
Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M.,
& Holder, A. M. B. (2008).
Racial microaggressions in
the life experience of Black
Americans. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 39, 329–336. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0735-7028.39.3.329
Sue, D. W., & Spanierman, L. (2020).
Microaggressions in everyday life.
John Wiley & Sons.
Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013).
Counseling the culturally
diverse: Theory and practice
(6th ed.). Wiley.
Sue, D. W., Sue, D., Neville, H. A.,
& Smith, L. (2022). Counseling
the culturally diverse: Theory
and practice (9th ed.). John
Wiley & Sons.

-- 565 of 593 --

References 	543
Sullivan, T., Martin, W. L., &
Handelsman, M. M. (1993).
Practical benefits of an informed
consent procedure: An empirical
investigation. Professional
Psychology: Research and
Practice, 24, 160–163.
Sun, Y., & Zhang, Y. (2021).
A review of theories and
models applied in studies
of social media addiction
and implications for further
research. Addictive Behaviors,
114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
addbeh.2020.106699
Surette, T., & Brenton, K. (2022).
Reflection and readiness: Shared
benefits of using an oral final
evaluation to assess counselor
competency. Teaching and
Supervision in Counseling, 3(3),
Article 6. https://doi.org/10.7290/
tsc030306
Swan, K. L., Schottelkorb, A. A., &
Lancaster, S. (2015). Relationship
conditions and multicultural
competence for counselors of
children and adolescents. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
93, 481–490.
Swank, J. M., & Smith-Adcock,
S. (2014). Gatekeeping during
admissions: A survey of counselor
education programs. Counselor
Education & Supervision,
53, 47–61. https://psycnet.
apa.org/doi/10.1002/j.1556-
6978.2014.00048.x
Sweeney, T. (1995). Accreditation,
credentialing, professionalization:
The role of specialties. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 74,
117–125.
Sweeney, T. J. (2001). Counseling:
Historical origins and
philosophical roots. In D. C.
Locke, J. E. Myers, & E. L.
Herr (Eds.), The handbook of
counseling (pp. 3–26). Sage.
Swenson, L. C. (1997). Psychology
and the law for the helping
professions (2nd ed.). Brooks/Cole.
Swidler & Berlin v. United States,
118 S. Ct. 2081 (1998).
Swift, J. K., Greenberg, R. P.,
Whipple, J. L., & Kominiak, N.
(2012). Practice recommendations
for reducing premature
termination in therapy.
Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 43(4),
379–387.
Sydow, N. (2006). A “shrink”—ing
privilege: United States v. Romano
and the “course of diagnosis”
requirement of the psychotherapist-
patient privilege. Harvard Civil
Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review,
41, 265–270.
Szymanski, E. M., & Parker, R.
M. (2001). Epistemological
and methodological issues in
counseling. In D. C. Locke, J.
E. Myers, & E. L. Herr (Eds.),
Handbook of counseling (pp.
455–466). Sage.
Tanigoshi, H., Kontos, A. P., &
Remley, T. P., Jr. (2008). The
effectiveness of individual
wellness counseling on the
wellness of law enforcement
officers. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 86, 64–75.
Tarasoff v. Regents of University of
California, 529 P.2d 553, 118 Cal.
Rptr. 129 (1974); vacated, 17 Cal.
3d 425, 551 P.2d 334, 131 Cal.
Rptr. 14 (1976).
Tarvydas, V. M., Levers, L. L., &
Teahen, P. R. (2017). Ethical
guidelines for mass trauma
and complex humanitarian
emergencies. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 95,
260–288. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12140
Tarvydas, V. M., Ramos, R. A. V., &
Estrada-Hernandez, N. (2015).
Applied participatory ethics:
Bridging the social justice chasm
between counselor and client.
Counseling and Values, 60(2),
218–233. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cvj.12015
Taubitz, F. S., Büdenbender, B., &
Alpers, G. W. (2022). What the
future holds: Machine learning to
predict success in psychotherapy.
Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 156(104116).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
brat.2022.104116
Tavaokkoli, S. N., Nejadsarvan, N.,
& Ebrahimi, A. (2015). Analysis
of medical confidentiality from
the Islamic ethics perspective.
Journal of Religion and Health,
54(2), 427–434. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10943-013-9795-x
Taylor, J. F., Williams, R. L., &
Blythe, M. (2015). Healthcare
reform, EHRs, and adolescent
confidentiality. Contemporary
OB/GYN, 60(8), 34–37.
Taylor Rouse, K. E., & Doughty
Horn, E. A. (2022). Ethical
remediation practices
addressing values conflicts:
A Delphi study. Counselor
Education and Supervision,
61(2), 99–111.
Tebes, J. K., Matlin, S. L., Migdole,
S. J., Farkas, M. S., Money, R.
W., Shulman, L., & Hoge, M. A.
(2011). Providing competency
training to clinical supervisors
through an interactional
supervision approach. http://rsw.
sagepub.com
Tedder-King, A., & Czyz, K. (2016).
Tips for preparing the expert
witness. The Jury Expert, 28(1),
8–19.
Teixeira, V. B. (2017). Gatekeeping
practices of counselor educators
in master’s level counseling
programs. Journal of Counselor
Preparation and Supervision,
9(1), 1–25. https://doi.org/
org/10.7729/91.1177
Teles Oliveira, J., & Silveus, S.
A. (2023). Practicum student
counselor identity development
through the COVID-19 pandemic.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 5(1), 2.

-- 566 of 593 --

544 	References
ten Napel-Schutz, M. C., Abma,
T. A., Bamelis, L. L. M., &
Arntz, A. (2017). How to train
experienced therapists in a new
method: A qualitative study
into therapists’ views. Clinical
Psychology & Psychotherapy, 24,
359–372. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cpp.2004
Texas State Board of Examiners of
Professional Counselors. (2009).
What to expect from your licensed
professional counselor. www.
dshs.state.tx.us/counselor/lpc_
brochure.pdf
Thacker, N. E., & Blueford, J.
M. (2018). Resolving value
conflicts with physician-assisted
death: A systemic application
of the counselor values-based
conflict model. The Professional
Counselor, 8(3), 249–261. https://
doi.org/10.15241/net.8.3.249
Thacker, N. E., Minton, C. A. B., &
Riley, K. B. (2021). Marginalized
counselor educators' experiences
negotiating identity: A narrative
inquiry. Counselor Education and
Supervision, 60(2), 94–111.
Thakore-Dunlap, U., & Van Velsor,
P. (2014). Group counseling with
South Asian immigrant high
school girls: Reflections and
commentary of a group facilitator.
The Professional Counselor,
4(5), 505–518. https://doi.
org/10.15241/pvv.4.5.505
Thapar v. Zezulka, 994 S.W.2d 635
(Tex. 1999).
Thomas, R., & Henning, S. (2012).
Counseling in Switzerland: Past,
present, and future. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 90,
505–509. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6676.2012.00063.x
Thomas, R. V., & Pender, D. A.
(2008). Association for Specialists
in Group Work: Best practice
guidelines 2007 revisions. The
Journal for Specialists in Group
Work, 33, 111–117.
Thompson, A. (2008, August).
Counselors’ right to privacy:
Potential boundary crossings
through membership in online
communities. Counseling Today,
44–45.
Tigertext. (2014). Secure texting for
physicians. http://www.tigertext.com
Tillman, K. S., Prazak, M. D.,
Burrier, L., Miller, S., Benezra,
M., & Lynch, L. (2015). Factors
influencing school counselors’
suspecting and reporting of
childhood physical abuse:
Investigating child, parent,
school, and abuse characteristics.
Professional School Counseling,
19, 103–115. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-19.1.103
Tinstmann Jones, J. L., Campbell,
L. O., Stickl Haugen, J.,
& Sutter, C. C. (2019).
Cyberbullying considerations
for school counselors:
A social media content
analysis. Professional School
Counseling, 23(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X20919365
Title I of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42
U.S.C. § 1211 et seq.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000f et seq.
Toporek, R. L., Ortega-Villalobos,
L., & Pope-Davis, D. B.
(2004). Critical incidents in
multicultural supervision:
Exploring supervisees’ and
supervisors’ experiences. Journal
of Multicultural Counseling and
Development, 32, 66–83.
Toprak, S., Cetin, I., Guven, T.,
Can, G., & Demircan, C. (2011).
Self-harm, suicidal ideation and
suicide attempts among college
students. Psychiatric Research,
187, 140–144.
Toren, N. (1969). Semi-
professionalism and social
work: A theoretical perspective.
In A. Etzioni (Ed.), The
semi-professions and their
organization (pp. 12–63). The
Free Press.
Trepal, H., Haberstroh, S., Duffey,
T., & Evans, M. (2007).
Considerations and strategies
for teaching online counseling
skills: Establishing relationships
in cyberspace. Counselor
Education and Supervision,
46, 266–279. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6978.2007.
tb00031.x
Trice-Black, S., Riechel, M. E. K.,
& Shillingford, M. A. (2013).
School counselors’ constructions
of student confidentiality. Journal
of School Counseling, 11(12).
http://www.jsc.montana.edu/
articles/v11n12.pdf
Triplett, N. T., Kingzette, A.,
Slivinski, L., & Niu, T. (2022).
Ethics for mental health
influencers: MFTs as public
social media personalities.
Contemporary Family Therapy,
44, 125–135. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10591-021-09632-3
Tromski-Klingshirn, D. M., &
Davis, T. E. (2007). Supervisees’
perceptions of their clinical
supervision: A study of the
dual role of clinical and
administrative supervisor.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 46, 294–304.
Truax v. Raich, 239 U.S. 33, 36
(S.Ct. 7, 60 L.Ed. 131. 1915).
Trudeau, L. S., Russell, D. W., de la
Mora, A., & Schmitz, M. F. (2001).
Comparisons of marriage and
family therapists, psychologists,
psychiatrists, and social workers on
job-related measures and reactions
to managed care in Iowa. Journal
of Marital and Family Therapy, 27,
501–507.
Truffo, C. (2007). Be a wealthy
therapist: Finally, you can make
a living making a difference. MP
Press.

-- 567 of 593 --

References 	545
Truscott, D., & Evans, J. (2001).
Responding to dangerous clients.
In E. R. Welfel & R. E. Ingersoll
(Eds.), The mental health desk
reference (pp. 271–276). Wiley.
Tubbs, P., & Pomerantz, A. M.
(2001). Ethical behavior of
psychologists: Changes since
1987. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 57, 395–399.
Turner, B. J., Austin, S. B., &
Chapman, A. L. (2014).
Treating nonsuicidal self-
injury: A systematic review
of psychological and
pharmacological interventions.
The Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 59, 576–585.
https://doi.org/10.1177
%2F070674371405901103
Tylitzki v. Triple X Service, Inc., 126
Ill. App.2d 144, 261 N.E.2d 533
(1970).
Uhl, S., Bloschichak, A., Moran,
A., McShea, K., Nunemaker,
M. S., McKay, J. R., & D’Anci,
K. E. (2022, May). Telehealth
for substance use disorders: A
rapid review for the 2021 U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs
and U.S. Department of Defense
guidelines for management of
substance use disorders. Annals
of Internal Medicine. https://doi.
org/10.7326/M21-3931
Ulupinar, D., Zalaquett, C., Kim,
S. R., & Kulikowich, J. M.
(2021). Performance of mental
health counselors in integrated
primary and behavioral health
care. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 99(1), 37–46.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12352
Um, B., & Bardhoshi, G. (2022).
Demands, resources, meaningful
work, and burnout of counselors-
in-training. Counselor Education
and Supervision, 61(2), 160–173.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12232
United States v. Miami University,
294 F.3d 797 (6th Cir. 2002).
University of Essex. (2013, April
29). Do you fear you are missing
out? ScienceDaily. www.
sciencedaily.com
Urkmez, B., Pinkney, C.,
Amparbeng, D. B., Gunawan,
N., Isiko, J. O., Tomlinson, B., &
Bhat, C. S. (2021). Experience
of graduate counseling students
during COVID-19: Application
for group counseling training.
Professional Counselor, 11(4),
475–492.
Urofsky, R. I. (2013). The Council
for Accreditation of Counseling
and Related Educational
Programs: Promoting quality in
counselor education. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 91,
6–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1556-6676.2013.00065.x
U.S. Census Bureau. (2021).
Computers and internet use in the
United States: 2018. https://www.
census.gov/content/dam/Census/
library/publications/2021/acs/
acs-49.pdf
United States Census Bureau. (2023).
https://www.census.gov
U.S. Department of Education.
(2014). Family Education Rights
and Privacy Act (FERPA). http://
www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/
fpco/ferpa/index.html
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS). (2014).
Health information privacy.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. (2018).
Health information privacy
complaints received by calendar
year. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/
privacy/hipaa/enforcement/data/
complaintsyear.html
U.S. Department of Justice. (2023a).
Child exploitation and obscenity
section (CEOS). https://www.
justice.gov/criminal-ceos
U.S. Department of Justice.
(2023a). Keeping children
safe online. https://www.
justice.gov/coronavirus/
keeping-children-safe-online
U.S. Department of Justice. (2023b).
State elder abuse statutes.
Elder Justice Initiative. https://
www.justice.gov/elderjustice/
elder-justice-statutes-0
U.S. Department of Justice. (2023b).
Elder abuse initiative. https://
www.justice.gov/elderjustice
U.S. Department of State. (2019).
Trafficking in persons report.
https://www.state.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2019/06/2019-
Trafficking-in-Persons-Report.pdf
U.S. Electronic Signatures in Global
and National Commerce (ESIGN)
Act. (2000). 15 U.S. Code
Chapter 96.
Vaccaro, N., & Lambie, G. W.
(2007). Computer-based
counselor-in-training supervision:
Ethical and practical implications
for counselor educators
and supervisors. Counselor
Education & Supervision, 47,
46–57. https://psycnet.apa.org/
doi/10.1002/j.1556-6978.2007.
tb00037.x
Vasquez, M. J. T., Bingham, R.
P., & Barnett, J. E. (2008).
Psychotherapy termination:
Clinical and ethical
responsibilities. Journal of
Clinical Psychology: In Session,
64, 653–665. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jclp.20478
Veach, L. J. (2015). Boundary issues
in addictions and substance
abuse counseling. In B. Herlihy
& G. Corey, Boundary issues
in counseling (3rd ed., pp.
237–241). American Counseling
Association.
Vera, G. D. (2011). Venezuelan
counseling: Advancement
and current challenges. The
Professional Counselor, 1(1),
5–9. https://doi.org/10.15241/
gdv.1.1.5

-- 568 of 593 --

546 	References
Vermaas, J. D., Green, J., Haley, M.,
& Haddock, L. (2017). Predicting
the mental health literacy of
clergy: An informational resource
for counselors. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 39, 225–241.
https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.39.3.04
Vernon, A., & Davis-Gage, D.
(2018). Individual and group
helping relationships. In S. Nassar
& S. G. Niles (Eds.), Orientation
to professional counseling: Past,
present, and future trends (pp.
65–88). American Counseling
Association.
Vilardaga, R., Luoma, J. B., Hayes,
S. C., Pistorello, J., Levin, M.
E., Hildebrandt, M. . . . Bond,
F. (2011). Burnout among the
addiction counseling workforce:
The differential roles of
mindfulness and values-based
processes and work-site factors.
Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment, 40, 323–335.
Villares, E., Starrett, A., & Limberg,
D. (2022). Exploring school
counseling during the first
wave of COVID-19. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
100(4), 386–398.
Wachter Morris, C. A., & Gallo, L.
(2022). School counselor suicide
response: A final rejoinder.
Teaching and Supervision in
Counseling, 4(2), Article 11.
https://doi.org/10.7290/tsc04w4be
Wagner, N. J., Grunhaus, C. M.
L., & Tuazon, V. E. (2020).
Agency responses to counselor
survivors of client suicide. The
Professional Counselor, 10(2),
251–265. http://doi.org/10.15241/
njw.10.2.251
Walden, S. L. (2015). Inclusion of the
client’s voice in ethical practice.
In B. Herlihy & G. Corey (Eds.),
Boundary issues in counseling
(3rd ed., pp. 63–69). American
Counseling Association.
Walden v. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. No.
1:08-cv-02278-JEC (U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of
Georgia, March 18, 2010).
Walfish, S., & Barnett, J. E. (2009).
Financial success in mental
health practice: Essential tools
and strategies for practitioners.
American Psychological
Association.
Walsh, B. W. (2006). Treating self-
injury: A practical guide. Guilford
Press.
Walsh, R., & Gibson, D. M.
(2019). “What don’t we
do?”: The experiences of
school counseling directors in
relation to leadership and job
satisfaction. Professional School
Counseling, 23(1). https://doi.
org/10.1177/2156759X19886823
Ward v. Wilbanks. (2010). U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 127038 (E.D. Mich., July 26,
2010). http://www.lexisnexis.com
Ward v. Wilbanks. (2012). 667 F.3d
727; 2012 U.S. App. LEXIS
1479; 2012 FED App. 0024P (6th
Cir.). http://www.lexisnexis.com
Warren, J., & Douglas, K. I. (2012).
Falling from grace: Understanding
an ethical sanctioning experience.
Counseling and Values, 57,
131–146. https://doi.org/10.1002/
j.2161-007X.2012.00013.x
Warren, J., Morgan, M. M., Morris,
L. B., & Morris, T. M. (2010).
Breathing words slowly: Creative
writing and counselor self-care—
the writing workout. Journal of
Creativity in Mental Health, 5,
109–124. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15401383.2010.485074
Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 (U.S.
702. 1997).
Washington, A. R., Byrd, J. A.,
& Williams, J. M. (2021).
Decolonizing the counseling
canon. In C. Holcomb-McCoy
(Ed.), Anti-racist counseling in
schools and communities
(pp. 17–31). American
Counseling Association.
Washington, A. R., Williams, J. M.,
& Byrd, J. A. (2023). Exposing
blindspots and the hidden
curriculum within counselor
supervision models. Counselor
Education and Supervision,
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12260
Wathen, C. C., Speciale, M., Chen,
S. Y., & Sheperis, D. (2021).
Effective online synchronous
group counselor training:
Challenges, strengths, and
solutions. Journal of Technology
in Counselor Education and
Supervision, 1(1), 10.
Watson, J. C., Ho, C., & Boham, M.
(2021). Advancing the counseling
profession through intervention
research. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 99(2), 134–
144. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12361
Watson, J. C., & Sheperis, C. J.
(2010). Counselors and
the right to test: Working
toward professional parity
(ACAPCD-31). American
Counseling Association.
Watson, M. F., Turner, W. L., &
Hines, P. M. (2020). Black
lives matter: We are in the same
storm but we are not in the same
boat. Family Process, 59(4),
1362–1373.
Watson, Z. E., Herlihy, B. R., &
Pierce, L. A. (2006). Forging
the link between multicultural
competence and ethical practice:
A historical perspective.
Counseling & Values, 50, 99–108.
Watts, R. E. (2015). Research and
publication. In B. Herlihy &
G. Corey (Eds.), ACA ethical
standards casebook (7th ed., pp.
273–275). American Counseling
Association.
Watts, R. E., Bruhn, R., Nichter, M.,
& Nelson, J. (2018). Marriage,

-- 569 of 593 --

References 	547
couples, and family counseling.
In S. Nassar & S. G. Niles
(Eds.), Orientation to professional
counseling: Past, present,
and future trends
(pp. 251–284). American
Counseling Association.
Webber, J. M., Kitzinger, R., Runte,
J. K., Smith, C. M., & Mascari,
B. (2017). Traumatology trends:
A content analysis of three
counseling journals from 1994–
2014. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 95(3),
249–259. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12139
Webb v. Quincy City Lines, Inc., 73
Ill. App.2d 405, 219 N.E.2d 165
(1966).
Wehrman, J. D., Williams, R.,
Field, J., & Schroeder, S. D.
(2010). Accountability through
documentation: What are best
practices for school counselors?
Journal of School Counseling,
8(38). http://www.jsc.montana.
edu/articles/v8n38.pdf
Weigold, I. K., Weigold, A., Russell,
E. J., Wolfe, G. L., Prowell,
J. L., & Martin-Wagar, C. A.
(2020). Personal growth initiative
and mental health: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 98(4),
376–390. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12340
Weinberg, H. (2020). Online group
psychotherapy: Challenges and
possibilities during COVID-19—A
practice review. Group Dynamics:
Theory, Research, and Practice,
24(3), 201–211. https://doi.
org/10.1037/gdn0000140
Weinrach, S. G. (1989). Guidelines
for clients of private practitioners:
Committing the structure to
print. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 67, 299–300.
Weinrach, S. G., Lustig, D.,
Chan, F., & Thomas, K. R.
(1998). Publication patterns of
The Personnel and Guidance
Journal/Journal of Counseling
& Development: 1978–1993.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 76, 427–435.
Weinrach, S. G., Thomas, K. R., &
Chan, F. (2001). The professional
identity of contributors to
the Journal of Counseling &
Development: Does it matter?
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 79, 166–170.
Welfare, L. E., & Sackett, C.
R. (2011). The authorship
determination process in
student–faculty collaborative
research. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 89, 479–487.
Welfare, W. E., Wagstaff, J., &
Haynes, J. R. (2017). Counselor
education and Title IX: Current
perceptions and questions.
Counselor Education and
Supervision, 56, 193–207. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12072
Welfel, E. R. (2016). Ethics in
counseling & psychotherapy
(6th ed.). Cengage.
Welfel, E. R., Danzinger, P. R., &
Santoro, S. (2000). Mandated
reporting of abuse/maltreatment
of older adults: A primer
for counselors. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
78(3), 284–292. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2000.
tb01909.x
Wendler, D. (2016). Clicking with
clients: Online marketing for
private practice therapists.
CreateSpace.
Werth, J. L., Jr. (Ed.). (2013).
Counseling clients near the end of
life: A practical guide for mental
health professionals. Springer.
Werth, J. L., & Crow, L. (2009).
End-of-life care: An overview for
professional counselors. Journal
of Counseling & Development,
87, 194–202. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j:1556
Werth, J. L., & Gordon, J. R. (2002).
Amicus curiae brief for the
United States Supreme Court on
mental health issues associated
with “physician-assisted suicide.”
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 80, 160–163.
Westbook v. Penley, 231 S.W.3d 389,
392 (Tex. 2007).
Westcott, J. B., Fullen, M. C., &
Jordan, J. (2022). Advancing
access to Medicare-funded mental
health treatment during the opioid
epidemic: A counselor advocacy
analysis. Journal of Counseling
and Development. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12452
Wester, K. L. (2007). Teaching
research integrity in the field
of counseling. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 46,
199–211.
Wester, K. L. (2011). Publishing
ethical research: A step-by-step
overview. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 89, 301–307.
Wester, K. L., Ivers, N., Villalba,
J. A., Trepal, H. C., & Henson,
R. (2016). The relationship
between nonsuicidal self-injury
and suicidal ideation. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
94, 3–12. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcad.12057
Wester, K. L., & McKibben, W. B.
(2016). Participants’ experiences
of nonsuicidal self-injury:
Supporting existing theory and
emerging conceptual pathways.
Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 38, 12–27. https://
doi.org/10.17744/mehc.38.1.02
Wester, K. L., Morris, C. A. W.,
Trustey, C. E., Cory, J. S.,
& Grossman, L. M. (2021).
Promoting rigorous research
using innovative qualitative
approaches. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
99(2), 189–199. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12366

-- 570 of 593 --

548 	References
Wester, K. L, Morris, C. W., &
Williams, B. (2017). Nonsuicidal
self-injury in the schools: A
tiered prevention approach
for reducing social contagion.
Professional School Counseling,
21, 142–151. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-21.1.142
Wheeler, A. M., & Bertram, B.
(2012). The counselor and the
law: A guide to legal and ethical
practice. American Counseling
Association.
Wheeler, A. M., & Bertram, B.
(2019). The counselor and the law
(7th ed.). American Counseling
Association.
Whetten-Goldstein, K., Nguyen,
T. Q., & Sugarman, J. (2001).
So much for keeping secrets:
The importance of considering
patients’ perspectives on
maintaining confidentiality. AIDS
Care, 13(4), 457–466.
Whisenhunt, J., Chang, C., Brack, G.,
Orr, J., Adams, L., Paige, M. . . .
O’Hara, C. (2014). Professional
counselors’ conceptualizations of
the relationship between suicide
and self-injury. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 36, 263–282.
https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.36.3.gu744380310581u5
Whiston, S. C., Tai, W. L.,
Rahardja, D., & Eder, K. (2011).
School counseling outcome:
A meta-analytic examination
of interventions. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 89,
37–55.
White, J. (2013). Research finds
link between social media
and the “fear of missing out.”
Washington Post. http://www.
washingtonpost.com
White, M. G. (2014). What types
of social networks exist? http://
socialnetworking.lovetoknow.com
Whiting, D., Lichtenstein, P., &
Fazel, S. (2020). Violence and
mental disorders: A structured
review of associations by
individual diagnoses, risk
factors, and risk assessment.
The Lancet Psychiatry, 8(2),
140–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(20)30262-5
Whitman, M. A., & Wagers, T. P.
(2005). Assessing relationship
betrayals. Journal of Clinical
Psychology: In Session, 61,
1383–1391.
Wichansky v. Wichansky, 126 N.J.
Super. 156, 313 (A.2d 222. 1973).
Wickline v. State of California, 192
Cal.App.3d 1630 (1986); 239 Cal.
Rptr. 810 (Ct. App. 1986).
Wigmore, J. H. (1961). Evidence
in trials at common law (Vol. 8,
McNaughton Rev.). Little, Brown.
Wilcoxon, S. A., Magnuson, S., &
Norem, K. (2008). Institutional
values of managed mental health
care: Efficiency or oppression?
Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 36,
143–154.
Wilcoxon, S. A., Remley, T. P., Jr., &
Gladding, S. T. (2013). Ethical,
legal, and professional issues in the
practice of marriage and family
therapy (updated 5th ed.). Pearson.
Wilczenski, F. L., & Cook, A. L.
(2011). Virtue ethics in school
counseling: A framework for
decision making. Journal of School
Counseling, 9(7). http://www.jsc.
montana.edu/articles/v9n7.pdf
Wilkinson, T., & Reinhardt, R.
(2015). Technology in counselor
education: HIPAA and HITECH
as best practice. The Professional
Counselor, 5(3), 407–418. https://
doi.org/10.15241/tw.5.3.407
Wilkinson, T., Smith, D., &
Wimberly, R. (2019). Trends in
ethical complaints leading to
professional counseling licensing
boards disciplinary actions.
Journal of Counseling and
Development, 97(1), 98–104.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12239
Wilkinson, W. K., & McNeil, K.
(1996). Research for the helping
professions. Brooks/Cole.
Williams, C. B. (2001). Ethics
complaints: Procedures for filing
and responding. In E. R. Welfel &
R. E. Ingersoll (Eds.), The mental
health desk reference
(pp. 441–447). Wiley.
Williams, J., & Ramsey, V. (2017).
The need for law enforcement
wellness interventions: A critical
review. Sport Journal, 9/7/2017,
2. https://doi.org/125076602
Williams, K. M., Craig, N., &
Paulhus, D. L. (2010). Identifying
and profiling scholastic cheaters:
Their personality, cognitive
ability, and motivation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 16(3), 293–307. https://
doi.org/ 10.1037/a0020773
Wilson, L. (2022). Despite revisions
in the DSM-5-TR, there is still a
long road ahead to make clinical
science inclusive and affirming.
Psychiatry Research, 317,
114800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
psychres.2022.114800
Wilson v. Blue Cross, 271 Cal.Rptr.
876 (Ct. App. 1990).
Winer, J. P., & Halgin, R. P. (2016).
Assessing and responding to threats
of targeted violence by adolescents:
A guide for counselors. Journal
of Mental Health Counseling, 38,
248–262. https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.38.3.05
Winston, M. E. (1991). AIDS,
confidentiality, and the right to know.
In T. A. Mappes & J. S. Zembaty
(Eds.), Biomedical ethics (3rd ed.,
pp. 173–180). McGraw-Hill.
Wise, E. H., Bieschke, K. J., Forrest,
L., Cohen-Filipic, J., Hathaway,
W. L., & Douce, L. A. (2015).
Psychology’s proactive approach
to conscience clause court
cases and legislation. Training
and Education in Professional
Psychology, 9(4), 259–268.

-- 571 of 593 --

References 	549
Wisenhunt, J. L., Chang, C. Y.,
Brack, G. L., Orr, J., Adams, L.
G., Paige, M. R., & O’Hara, C.
(2014). Professional counselors’
conceptualizations of the
relationship between suicide and
self-injury. Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 36, 263–282.
Wohlberg, J. W. (1999). Treatment
subsequent to abuse by a mental
health professional: The victim’s
perspective of what works and
what doesn’t. Journal of Sex
Education & Counseling, 24,
252–261.
Wolfe, S. E., Marcum, C. D.,
Higgins, G. E., & Ricketts,
M. L. (2014). Routine cell
phone activity and exposure
to sext messages. Crime &
Delinquency. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0011128714541192
Wong, L. C. J., Wong, P. T., &
Ishiyama, F. I. (2013). What helps
and what hinders in cross-cultural
clinical supervision: A critical
incident study. The Counseling
Psychologist, 41, 66–85.
Woo, B., & Jun, J. (2021).
COVID-19 racial discrimination
and depressive symptoms
among Asian Americans: Does
communication about the incident
matter? Journal of Immigrant
and Minority Health, 24(1),
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10903-021-01167-x
Woo, H., Storlie, C. A., & Baltrinic,
E. R. (2016). Perceptions of
professional identity development
from counselor educators in
leadership positions. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 55,
278–293. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ceas.12054
Wood, A. W., Dorais, S., Gutierrez,
D., Moore, C. M., & Schmit,
M. K. (2021). Advancing the
counseling profession through
contemporary quantitative
approaches. Journal of
Counseling and Development,
99(2), 156–166. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12363
Woody, R. H. (2007). Avoiding
expert testimony about
family therapy. American
Journal of Family Therapy,
35, 389–393. https://doi.
org/10.1080/01926180701291238
Woody, R. H. (2011). The financial
conundrum for mental health
practitioners. American Journal of
Family Therapy, 39, 1–10. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01926187.2010
.530170
Woody, R. H. (2013). Legal self-
defense for mental health
practitioners. Springer.
Wootton, A. R., McCuistian, C.,
Legnitto Packard, D. A., Gruber,
V. A., & Saberi, P. (2020).
Overcoming technological
challenges: Lessons learned from
a telehealth counseling study.
Telemedicine and e-Health,
26(10), 1278–1283. https://doi.
org/10.1089/tmj.2019.0191
Wortham, J. (2011, April 9). Feel like
a wallflower? Maybe it’s your
Facebook wall. New York Times.
http://www.nytimes.com
Wrenn, G. (1962). The counselor
in a changing world. American
Personnel and Guidance
Association.
Wright, V. H. (2012). Cyberbullying
prevention: The development of
virtual scenarios for counselors in
middle schools. The Professional
Counselor, 2(2), 169–177. https://
doi.org/10.15241/vhw.2.2.169
The Writing Place. (2005). Avoiding
plagiarism. Northwestern
University. http://www.writing.
northwestern.edu/avoiding_
plagiarism.html
Wu, Y., Ngai, E. W. T., Wu, P., &
Wu, C. (2022). Fake news on
the internet: A literature review,
synthesis and directions for future
research, Internet Research,
32(5), 1662–1699. https://doi.
org/10.1108/INTR-05-2021-0294
Wyatt, T., & Daniels, M. H. (2000).
Noncompetition agreements
and the counseling profession:
An unrecognized reality for
private practitioners. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 78,
14–20.
Wylie, M. S. (1995, May/June). The
power of DSM-IV: Diagnosing for
dollars. Networker, 22–32.
Yakunina, E. S., Weigold, I. K., &
McCarthy, A. S. (2011). Group
counseling with international
students: Practical, ethical,
and cultural considerations.
Journal of College Student
Psychotherapy, 25, 67–78.
https://doi.org/10.1080/87568225
.2011.532672
Yalom, I. D. (2005). The theory and
practice of group psychotherapy
(5th ed.). Basic Books.
Yalom, I. D., & Leszcz, M. (2020).
Theory and practice of group
psychotherapy (6th ed.). Basic
Books.
Yancey, G. (2011). Compromising
scholarship: Religious and
political bias in American higher
education. Baylor University
Press.
Yang, K., Ji, S., Zhang, T., Xie, Q.,
Kuang, Z., & Ananiadou, S.
(2023, May 16). Towards
interpretable mental health
analysis with CHATGPT.
https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2304.03347
Yaron v. Yaron, 83 Misc.2d 276, 372
N.Y.S.2d 518 (Sup. 1975).
Yeo, N. T., Mendenhall, R.,
Harwood, S. A., & Huntt, M.
B. (2019). Asian international
student and Asian American
student: Mistaken identity and
racial microaggressions. Journal
of International Students, 9(1),
39–65. https://doi.org/10.32674/
jis.v9i1.278

-- 572 of 593 --

550 	References
Young, A., Dollarhide, C. T., &
Baughman, A. (2015). The voices
of school counselors: Essential
characteristics of school counselor
leaders. Professional School
Counseling, 19, 36–45. https://doi.
org/10.5330/1096-2409-19.1.36
Young, A. N. (2022). Guide to
providing culturally competent
behavioral health services via
telehealth. Practice Innovations,
7(3), 170–177. https://doi.
org/10.1037/pri0000173
Young, K. S. (2023). Internet
addiction: A growing epidemic.
https://netaddiction.com/
Young, M., Kleist, D., & Bitter, J. R.
(2021). Virtue, ethics, and legality
in couples and family practice.
In J. R. Bitter (Ed.), Theory and
practice of family therapy and
counseling (3rd ed., pp. 79–102).
American Counseling Association.
Younggren, J. N. (2002). Ethical
decision-making and dual
relationships. http://kspope.com/
dual/younggren.php
Yuen, M., Leung, A., & Chan,
R. T. H. (2014). Professional
counseling in Hong Kong.
Journal of Counseling &
Development, 92, 99–103.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-
6676.2014.00135.x
Yunus, R. M., Hain, N. N., & Choo,
W. Y. (2017, February 22).
Consequences of elder abuse and
neglect: A systematic review of
observational studies. Trauma,
Violence, & Abuse. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1524838017692798
Zalaquett, C. P., Fuerth, K. M., Stein,
C., Ivey, A. E., & Ivey, M. B.
(2008). Reframing the DSM-IV-TR
from a multicultural/social justice
perspective. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 86, 364–371.
Zazzarino, A. S., Shelton, D., &
Haley, M. (2021). 5 legal, ethical,
and professional issues. In D
Capuzzi & M. D. Stauffer (Eds.),
Foundations of couples, marriage,
and family counseling (pp.
83–109). Wiley.
Zetterqvist, M. (2015). The DSM-5
diagnosis of nonsuicidal self-
injury disorder: A review of
the empirical literature. Child
& Adolescent Psychiatry &
Mental Health, 9(31). https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13034-015-0062-7
Zhou, S., Zhao, J., & Zhang, L.
(2022). Application of artificial
intelligence on psychological
interventions and diagnosis: An
overview. Frontiers in Psychiatry,
13(811665). https://doi.org/10.33
89%2Ffpsyt.2022.811665
Zhu, J. M., Myers, R., McConnell,
K. J., Levander, X., & Lin, S.
C. (2022). Trends in outpatient
mental health services use before
and during the COVID-19
pandemic: Study examines
trends in outpatient mental health
service using before and during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Health
Affairs, 41(4), 573–580.
Ziskin, J. (1995). Coping with
psychiatric and psychological
testimony (Vols. I–III, 5th ed.).
Law and Psychology Press.
Ziv, S. (2014, November 12).
Technology’s latest quest:
Tracking mental health.
Newsweek. Retrieved from http://
www.newsweek.com
Zuberi, D. (2006). Differences
that matter: Social policy and
the working poor in the United
States and Canada. Cornell
University Press. https://doi.
org/10.7591/9781501711251
Zur, O. (2007). Boundaries in
psychotherapy: Ethical and
clinical explorations. American
Psychological Association.
Zur, O. (2011a). Therapist burnout:
Fact, causes and prevention.
http://www.zurinstitute.com/
therapeutic_ethics
Zur, O. (2011b). When the board
comes knocking: How to
respond to a licensing board
investigation and protect your
license, professional career, and
livelihood. Zur Institute. http://
www.zurinstitute.com/index.html
Zur, O., & Nordmarken, N. (2010).
DSM: Diagnosing for money
and power: Summary of the
critique of the DSM. http://www.
zurinstitute.com/dsmcritique.
html
Zyromski, B., Hudson, T. D., Baker,
E., & Granello, D. H. (2018).
Guidance counselors or school
counselors: How the name of the
profession influences perceptions
of competence. Professional
School Counseling, 22(1).
https://doi.org/10.1177/21567
59X19855654

-- 573 of 593 --

551
NAME INDEX
A
Abbott, A., 44
Abboud, M. J., 386
Abed-Faghri, N. M., 49
Abel, N., 178, 203, 291
Abreu, R., 302
Adams, C. M., 75
Adams, S. A., 320
Adkins, K. L., 418
Akinsulure-Smith, A. M., 61
Aktan, M. E., 281
Alberty, S. C., 350
Alderman, E. M., 129
Allen, M., 200
Alshammari, A., 161
Alvarez, J. M., 416
Ametrano, I. M., 372
Amundson, N. E., 60
Ancis, J. R., 405–406
Anderson, A. M. N., 143, 211
Anderson, C. E., 362
Anderson, D. A., 112, 165, 218
Anderson, K. N., 94
Anderson, S. M., 190
Anisimova, A. S., 281
Anvari, S., 267
Aponte, J. F., 72
Appelbaum, P. S., 97–98
Arenas, M. A., 423
Argueta, C., 238
Aristotle, 11
Armstrong, S. A., 19
Aronoff, K., 355
Arredondo, P., 64
Arthur, G. L., Jr, 319, 331
Asner-Self, K. K., 299
Astramovich, R. L., 415–416
Auerbach, R. S., 118
Austin, B. D., 28
Avent Harris, J. R., 383
Avery, D., 83
B
Baer, E. C., 40
Bailey, J. B., 50
Bailey, K. A., 208
Baird, C., 418
Baird, K. A., 114, 357
Baker, C. N., 239
Baker, E., 36
Baker, S., 282
Balk, D. E., 285, 286, 303
Balkin, R. S., 65, 66, 173, 416, 422
Banks Van-Allen, C., 192
Barak, A., 266
Barbour, L., 200, 292
Barden, S., 172, 187
Bardhoshi, G., 173, 377
Barnett, J. E., 19, 97, 162, 163, 169, 240,
242, 353, 354, 355
Barreto, A., 49
Barrett, K. A., 78
Barrio Minton, C. A., 370, 432
Barsky, A. E., 155
Baruth, L. G., 319, 331
Basma, D., 177
Bayne, H. B., 69, 78, 379
Bean, C. A. L., 266
Beauchamp, T. L., 12
Becnel, A. T., 200, 259, 291, 368, 369
Beeson, T., 129
Behl, M., 372
Belton, R., 83
Bemak, F., 89, 247, 248, 302
Ben-Artzi, E., 265
Bennett, A. G., 307, 308
Bennett, B. E., 102
Bequette, A. W., 259
Beren, P., 434
Berger, G. P., 52
Bergman, D. M., 37
Berman, J., 110
Bernard, J. M., 391, 393, 396, 406
Berner, M., 98
Bertoncini, A. L. C., 281
Bertram, B., 20, 82, 85, 93, 94, 97, 143, 211,
226, 407
Bevacqua, F., 82
Bevly, C., 373
Bienvenu, C., 73
Binkley, E. E., 164, 201, 261, 280
Birky, I., 277
Birrell, P. J., 15, 232
Bitter, J. R., 313, 317, 324, 325
Blackwell, D., 261
Blake, J. J., 300, 416
Blakely, T. J., 149
Blanchnio, A., 417
Blease, C., 148
Bledsoe, K. G., 393
Bloom, J. W., 260
Blount, A. H., 397
Blumenthal-Barby, J. S., 189
Bobby, C. L., 36, 52
Bodenhorn, N., 81
Bohecker, L., 52
Bok, S., 111
Borders, L. D., 50, 383, 421, 430
Borkosky, B. G., 155
Borsari, B., 89
Borys, D. S., 240
Borzuchowska, B., 18
Bouchard, S., 265
Boulden, R., 57
Boumil, M. M., 119
Boundless, 260
Bowen, J. M., 239
Bowerbank, J. E., 156
Braaten, E. E., 103
Bradley, R. W., 42, 510
Brakman, A., 129
Branco, S. F., 69
Braun, S. A., 187
Brausch, A. M., 201
Bray, B., 40, 52, 236
Brennan, C., 348
Brenton, K., 378
Brewer, G., 317
Brief, D. J., 266
Brodsky, S. L., 180
Brooks, M., 387
Brott, P. E., 169, 393
Brous, E., 270
Brown, C. H., 174, 226
Brown, E. M., 174
Brown, L. S., 191
Brown, S. M., 226
Brown, T., 17, 19
Brown, T. A., 19
Browne-James, L., 167
Brown-Rice, K., 370, 377, 379, 380, 405
Brubaker, M. D., 73
Bruns, C. M., 15, 232
Bruton, S., 419
Buchanan, M. J., 177
Buckley, M. R., 163
Buckner, C. J., 153
Bunnin, B., 434
Burgin, E. C., 378, 379, 399
Burgoyne, N., 312, 318, 320
Burian B., 243, 250
Burke, A., 90
Burke, D. D., 116
Burke, L. A., 82
Burkholder, D., 379
Burkholder, J., 19, 379
Burnham, J. J., 203, 262
Burns, S. T., 29, 239, 252
Burt, I., 167
Buser, J. K., 50, 75, 178, 181, 203, 299, 318
Buser, T. J., 50, 75, 178, 181, 203, 299
Butler, M. H., 321
Butler, S. F., 53
Butler, S. K., 69, 406
Bylund, C., 90
Byne, J. S., 379
Byrd, R., 172
C
Caldwell, L. D., 244
Callaghan, J. E. M., 318
Calmes, S. A., 198
Calvo, N., 201
Campbell, C. D., 236
Caoilte, N. O., 280
Caplow, T., 44, 45

-- 574 of 593 --

552 	Name Index
Cappa, C., 317
Capuzzi, D., 200, 204
Carlisle, K. L., 181, 230, 245–247, 249,
261, 275
Carlisle, R. M., 181, 261, 275
Carney, J. M., 338
Carney, J. S., 416
Caron, S. L., 239
Carrola, P., 188
Cartwright, A. D., 248, 387
Cartwright, B., 18
Casares, D. R., Jr, 261, 280
Casas, J. M., 130
Cashwell, C. C., 248
Cashwell, C. S., 174
Cashwell, T. H., 248
Cates, K. A., 236
Cepelewicz, B. B., 270
Chafee, Z., 116
Chalmers, M. S. P., 116
Chambers, R. A., 178, 207, 299
Chamlou, N., 358
Chan, C. D., 383
Charnley, D., 379
Chauvin, J. C., 215, 218, 219
Cheng, H., 177
Chen-Hayes, S. F., 416
Chen, S. Y., 239
Chiang, F.-K., 416, 418
Chiara, G., 300
Chibbaro, J. S., 261
Childers, D., 419
Childress-Beatty, L., 155
Childress, J. F., 12
Choate, L. H., 180, 322, 416
Christensen, H., 266
Christian, D. D., 368
Chronister, K. M., 34
Chung, R. C., 89, 247, 248, 302
Cinotti, D., 29
Cizek, G. J., 417
Clark, M., 73
Clemens, E. V, 178, 297
Coaston, S. C., 370
Cobia, D., 294
Cohn, A. S., 312, 318, 320
Cohn, T. J., 236, 348
Coker, K., 275, 368, 369
Colburn, A. A. N., 396
Cole, R. F., 200
Colistra, A., 405
Collins, P. H., 76
Collins, W., 277
Collison, B. B., 51
Comaz-Dias, L., 191
Comer, R. J., 187
Conine, D. E., 91
Connell, A., 239
Constantine, M. G., 76
Conteh, J. A., 61
Cook, A. L., 11
Cook, D. A., 186
Cook, E., 203
Cook, J. E., 265
Cook, R. M., 72, 173, 376, 404, 405
Corbin-Burdick, M., 188
Corey, C., 2, 13, 20, 135, 199, 230, 237, 288,
295, 313, 318, 406, 413
Corey, G., 2, 3, 13, 19, 20, 77, 87, 88, 91,
93, 96, 102, 114, 124, 135, 161, 164,
168, 173, 177, 199, 219, 226, 228,
229, 230, 236, 237, 250, 255, 288,
295, 313, 316, 318, 324, 325, 327,
328, 329, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335,
370, 387, 400, 403, 406, 413
Corey, M. S., 2, 13, 20, 87, 135, 199, 230,
237, 288, 295, 313, 318, 406, 413
Corley, S. M., 379
Corr, C. A., 285, 286, 303
Cosgrove, L., 188
Costa, M., 66
Cottle, M., 117
Cottone, R. R., 15, 19, 39, 155, 233, 235,
260
Cowan, R. G., 83
Cox, J. A., 42, 51, 187
Coyle, D., 280
Crane, D. R., 416
Crawford, R. L., 219
Creed, T. A., 281
Creswell, J. W., 422
Crisp-Han, H., 238
Crittenden, C. A., 239
Crockett, J. E., 76, 91, 259, 369
Crothers, L. M., 300
Crowe, A., 177
Crow, L., 307
Cruikshanks, D. R., 29, 239, 252
Crunk, A. E., 82
Culver, L. M., 177
Curd, T., 116
Cureton, J. L., 199
Currie, C. L., 60
Curtis, G. J., 418
Czyz, K., 181
D
Dailey, S. F., 34, 187, 191
Daniel, S. S., 201
Daniels, A. D., 66
Daniels, J. A., 208
Danzinger, P. R., 187, 309
Darcy, M. G., 49
Davidson, V., 251
Davis, J. L., 287
Davis, M. S., 416
Davis, T. E., 18, 393
Davis-Gage, D., 330
Day, S. X., 265
Day-Vines, N. L., 70, 200, 373
Dean, L. A., 50
DeCino, D. A., 157, 236, 379, 381
DeDiego, A. C., 49, 378, 379, 399
DeKruyf, L., 29, 187
DeParle, J., 322
Deroche, M. D., 19, 73
DeStefano, J., 398
Diana, D. P., 355
Dickens, K. N., 384, 388, 399
Dickerson, J. E., 148
Didelot, M. J., 261
Dienlin, T., 110
Diesen, C., 216
DiFonzo, J. H., 307, 322
Digal, J. J., 294
Dillon, F. R., 172
Dispenza, F., 74
Dixon, A., 386
Dixon-Saxon, S., 163
Dollarhide, C. T., 29, 406
Doll, B., 151
Dong, X., 305
Donohue, P., 178, 291
Dooey, P., 418
Dorken, H., 45
Dorre, A., 193
Doss, B. D., 321
Dougherty, A. M., 392, 409, 411, 412–413
Doughty Horn, E. A., 379
Douglas, K. I., 215
Dowling, M., 263
Doyle, C., 265
Drogin, E. Y., 155
Drummond, R. J., 181
Duan, C., 406
Duarte, D., 207, 299
Duffey, T., 12
Dufrene, R. L., 372, 379, 402
Dugan, W. E., 44
Dugger, S. M., 77, 381
Dupuis, M., 82, 302
Durodoye, B. A., 64
Dutile, F. N., 380
E
Edwards, D. C., 126
Edwin, M., 66
Egede, L. E., 265, 282
Eissenstat, S. J., 52
Elander, J., 418
Ellington, B., 197
Elliott, A., 166
Elliott, G., 201
Elliott, G. M., 197, 275, 369
Ellis, M. V., 405
Emelianchik-Key, K., 178
Emener, W. G., 39
Engels, D. W., 50
Epstein, J., 259
Erford, B. T., 416
Erickson, A., 178, 203, 291
Erickson, D., 280
Ermis-Demirtas, H., 66
Eschenauer, R., 416
Espelage, D. L., 300
Estrada, D., 406
Estrada-Hernandez, 19
Etzioni, A., 44, 50
Evans, J., 208
Evans Zalewski, S. L., 173
Even, T. A., 36
Ey, S., 31
F
Fabian, E. S., 73
Fadus, M. C., 192

-- 575 of 593 --

Name Index 	553
Fall, K. A., 53, 376
Fall, M., 405
Farber, B. A., 173
Farrell, I. C., 67
Fearing, G., 305
Feisthamel, K. P., 192
Feldwisch, R. P., 64
Fernando, D. M., 398
Fickling, M. J., 64, 73, 406
Field, T. A., 29, 42
Fink, M., 199
Finn, A., 207, 291, 299
Finn, S. E., 185
Finnerty, P., 91
Fioravanti, G., 262
Firth, J., 259
Fish, J. N., 66\
Fisher, C. B., 96, 102, 103, 105
Fisher, M., 149
Fisher, M. A., 109, 125
Fisher, R. M., 117
Fiske, A., 161, 281
Fitfield, A. O., 236
Fitzpatrick, M., 229, 240
Flaskerud, J. H., 356
Florang, J. E., 262, 293
Floren, M., 373
Fontes, L. A., 303
Forester-Miller, H., 18, 236
Foster, J. M., 377, 379
Foster, V. A., 199, 377, 379
Fowler, J. E., 419
Fox, K. R., 201
Fox, R. E., 50
Frame, M. W., 18
Frances, A., 187
Francis, P. C., 4, 8, 15, 17, 67, 77, 80, 381
Freeman, B. J., 379
Freeman, L. T., 112
Freeman, S. J., 10
Fridhandler, B., 322
Friedson, E., 44
Froehlich, R. J., 269
Fullen, M. C., 45, 49, 356, 359
Fulmer, R., 161
Fuqua, D. R., 410
Furr, S. R., 377, 379, 380
Fye, H. J., 173
G
Gabbard, G. O., 240, 249
Gabriel, T., 418
Gagnon, C., 55
Gagnon, M. M., 294
Galambos, G., 155
Gale, A. U., 28
Gallagher, R. P., 294
Gallo, L. L., 199–201, 261, 369
Gara, M. A., 192
Garb, H. N., 192
Garcia, J. G., 18, 112
Garcia, R., 416
Garland, D. R., 238
Garner, B. A., 109, 197, 371
Gartrell, N., 251
Gaubatz, M. D., 377
Gay, J. L., 369
Genia, V., 75
Gentry, J. E., 174
Gerton, J. M., 266
Ghazi-Saidi, L., 368
Ghoston, M., 384
Gibson, D., 201
Gibson, D. M., 29, 57
Gibson, R. L., 42
Gibson, W. T., 201
Gilabert, K., 355
Gilbert, A., 163, 379
Gilbert, H. J., 85
Gilbert, H. L., 207, 294
Gilbert, M. L., 291
Gilligan, C., 12
Ginter, E. J., 207
Gintner, G. G., 416
Giordano, A., L., 78, 261, 262, 280, 293,
381, 422
Gladding, S. T., 331, 334
Glaser, K., 18
Glassgold, J. M., 325
Glickhauf-Hughes, C., 174
Glosoff, H. L., 121, 236, 243, 248, 293, 294,
398, 405
Glowiak, M. V., 408, 411
Gluck, A. R., 356
Goldberg, S. B., 281
Goldstein, M. L., 181
Goldston, D. B., 201
Gomez, A., 151
Gonzalez, L. M., 64
Goodman, R. D., 191
Goodman-Scott, E., 57, 236
Goodyear, R. K., 42, 391, 393, 396, 406
Goodyear, T., 325
Gordon, J. R., 307
Gordon, M. C., 236
Gori, A., 262
Goscha, R. J., 191, 192
Gottlieb, M. C., 19, 105
Gould, D., 214
Grabois, E. W., 112
Grahl, T., 260
Grand, L. C., 355
Granello, P. F., 90, 291
Gray, S. W., 187
Green, M. A., 355
Green, R. G., 355
Greenspan, M., 235
Gricus, M., 222
Griep, S. K., 201
Griesbach, D., 61, 200
Grieve, R., 262
Griffin, B. W., 430
Griffiths, K. M., 266
Griffiths, M. D., 261
Grover, N., 245
Grover, S., 189
Grzanka, P., 76
Grzanka, P. R., 80
Guba, E. G., 422
Guiffrida, D., 78, 380
Guiney, M. C., 337
Güllü, H., 262
Guo, Y., 60
Gushue, G. V., 71
Gutheil, T. G., 240, 249
Guth, L. A., 60
Guthmann, D., 236
Gutierrez, D, 173, 187, 188
Gutierrez, P. M., 201
Guttmacher, M., 117
Gysbers, N. C., 416
H
Haberstroh, S., 269
Haddock, L., 275, 368, 369
Hagedorn, B., 78
Haggard-Grann, U., 208
Halbert, C. H., 75
Hale, E., 281
Hale, S. C., 406
Halgin, R. P., 178, 207
Hall, C. R., 75
Hall, D. W., 293–294
Hall, J. G., 73
Hall, K. G., 372
Hall, K. R., 24
Hamburger, Y. A., 265
Hamelin, G., 173
Hamilton, R. W., 351, 352
Hammer, S., 354
Hammonds, D. S., 163, 372
Handelsman, M. M., 96, 103, 105
Handler, J. F., 103
Haniff, D., 280
Hanjorgiris, W. F., 73
Hanks, R. B., 78
Hanna, F. J., 90
Hannon, M. D., 369, 372
Hansen, J. T., 33, 90
Harden, J., 18
Harding, S. S., 233
Hardy, N. R., 312
Harrichand, J. J., 177, 381
Harrington, J. A., 348
Harris, E. A., 94
Harris, J. R. A., 372
Hastings, S. L., 236, 348
Hatch, T., 207, 299
Hatchett, G., 370, 371, 383, 432
Haugen, J. S., 378
Havlicek, L., 417
Havlik, S. A., 73
Hawke, L. D., 66
Hawton, K., 200, 211
Hayden, S. C. W., 397
Hays, D. G., 28, 29, 172, 385, 422
Hazler, R. J., 300
Healey, A. C., 28
Heath, N., 201
Hedges, L. E., 235
Hegarty, W., 226
Heifetz, L. J., 173
Heinlen, K. T., 265
Heller, M. S., 117
Helms, J. E., 186
Henderson, K. L., 163, 379, 402

-- 576 of 593 --

554 	Name Index
Hendrick, S. S., 103
Hendrix, D. H., 286
Henn, H. G., 433
Henniger, J., 197, 275, 369
Henning, S., 60
Henriksen, R. C., Jr, 354, 398
Herdian, H., 416, 418
Herlihy, B. R., 4, 15, 17–20, 69, 80, 81, 89,
114, 124, 161, 164, 168, 186, 187,
192, 219, 229, 230, 231, 236, 241,
244, 250, 301, 307, 316, 331, 332,
335, 370, 372, 387, 400, 403
Hermann, M. A., 200, 207, 291, 299
Hershenson, D. B., 42, 52
Hertlein, K. M., 259
Hesse, T., 418
Higbee, M., 325
Hilliard, J., 94, 95
Hill, M., 18
Hill, N. R., 163, 371, 383
Hinduja, S., 203
Hipolito-Delgado, C. P., 65, 83, 163, 372
Hodges, S., 29
Ho, E. Y., 90
Höffler, K., 207, 208
Hoffman, R. M., 291
Hohenshil, T. H., 60
Hollander, J. T., 238
Holliman, R. P., 407
Holm, J. M., 19
Holt, K. M., 262
Hoop, J. G., 130
Hormes, J. M., 261
Horn, E. A. D., 80, 379
Horn, R. L., 282
Huber, C. H., 319, 331
Huey, W. C., 286, 287, 300
Hughes, E. C., 44
Hunt, B., 32, 422
Hunt, H., 355
Huss, S. N., 294, 329
Hutchens, N., 380
Hyatt-Burkhart, D., 192
I
Ibtesam, R., 262
Imig, A., 236
Ingersoll, R. E., 32
Interiano-Shiverdecker, C. G., 167, 383
Isaacs, D., 418
Isaacs, M. L., 286, 294, 295
Ivers, N. N., 172, 369
Ivey, A. E., 53, 74, 75
Ivey, M. B., 53, 74, 75
J
Jacob, C. J., 255
Jacobs, E. E., 327
Jadaszewski, S., 78
Jagger, G. E., 181, 201
James, J., 386
Jamison, S., 307
Jefferson, J. F., 338
Jencius, M., 91, 277, 282, 398, 405
Jijon, I., 317
Joe, J. R., 210
Johnson, A. T., 248
Johnson, G. S., 19
Johnson, K. F., 19, 215, 293, 338
Johnson, S. J., 50, 236, 237
Johnson, W. B., 19, 162–163, 236, 237
Johnson, W. K., 433
Joiner, T. E., 291
Jolly, H. K., 247
Jones, K. D., 181, 182
Jordan, A. E., 12
Jordan, J. V., 12
Jordan, K., 15, 397
Jordan, M., 229
Jorgensen, M. F., 370, 379, 399
Jorgenson, L. M., 253
Joyce, N. R., 265
Joyner, D. A., 418
Juhnke, B. A., 300, 416
Juhnke, G., 397
K
Kakhnovets, R., 201
Kane, A. W., 347
Kant, E., 10
Kaplan, D. M., 29, 64, 81, 170, 253, 382
Kaplan, R., 118
Kaplin, W. A., 371
Kasaraneni, H., 321
Kassirer, S. J., 54, 191, 358
Kearney, M., 331
Keim, M. A., 294
Keith-Spiegel, P., 18, 199, 215, 216, 230,
248, 250, 251, 255
Keller, A., 277
Kelly, K., 197
Kelly, K. R., 17
Kennedy, J. A., 135
Kennedy, S., 282
Kenny, M., 300
Kenny, M. C., 300
Kerbs, J. J., 427
Kessler, K. H., 354
Kiekens, G., 201
Kielty, M., 184
Killian, T., 373
Kimball, P. L., 163, 381
Kimemia, M, 299
King, J. H., 190
King, K. A., 300
Kinnier, R. T., 193, 244
Kiracofe, N. M., 89
Kiriakaki, S., 265, 269, 282
Kiselica, M. S., 78, 235, 236, 252, 297
Kitchener, K. S., 12, 233, 244
Knapp, S., 114, 115, 116, 117, 122, 126,
128, 129, 318, 353, 360, 365
Knezevic, B., 83
Knight, S. C., 151
Knox, B., 281
Kocet, M. M., 4, 19, 80
Kolbert, J. B., 300
Königbauer, J., 266
Koocher, G. P., 18, 155, 215, 255
Kopelovich, S. L., 67
Kosenko, K., 262
Kottler, J. A., 177
Kowalski, R. M., 262
Kramer, D. T., 286, 323
Kramer, J. J., 122
Kraus, R., 259
Krennerich, S., 174
Kress, V. E., 102, 125, 187, 189, 190, 291,
379, 386
Krieger Cohen, P. E., 248
Krienert, J. L., 416, 418
Kronbluh, M., 422
Kuo, P., 373
Kurasaki, K. S., 423
Kurpius, S. E. R., 82
Kurt, L. J., 302
L
Labardee, L., 266
Lachs, M. S., 304
Ladany, N., 402
LaFleur, L. B., 280
LaFountain, R. M., 40
Lagan, S., 280
Lam, E. T. C., 167
Lamanna, J., 300
Lambie, G. W., 378, 405, 432
Lancaster, C., 416
Landau, R., 259
Lanier, B. A., 416
Lanzillo, E. C., 262
Large, M. M., 211
Larsen, C. C., 18, 192
Lasser, J., 105
Law, D. D., 416
Lawley, J. S., 149, 278
Lawrence, C., 370
Lawrence, C. M., 201
Lawrence, G., 287, 302
Lawson, D. M., 208, 416
Lawson, G., 36, 42, 51, 52, 175, 239
Lawson, J. L., 265, 269
Lazarus, A. A., 235, 236
Lazovsky, R., 285
Leaffer, M. A., 431
Leahy, M. J., 50
Leatherman, C., 386
Lebow, J. L., 312, 318
Lee, A., 406
Lee, B. A., 369, 371
Lee, C. C., 64–66, 68–69, 303
Lee, D. J., 265, 269
Lee, I., 432
Lee, J., 384
Lee, S., 265
Lee, S. M., 60
Lee, Y., 418
Lee, Y. C., 229
Lehmer, M., 322
Leibert, T., 266, 269
Leibert, T. W., 164
Leichliter, J. S., 110, 129
Leiter, M. P., 173
Lemberger, M. E., 36, 347, 416
Leppma, M., 31, 181, 182

-- 577 of 593 --

Name Index 	555
Leszcz, M., 328, 329, 333
Letourneau, J. L. H., 19
Levenson, J. S., 325
Levers, L. L., 131, 192
Levitov, J. E., 376
Levitt, D. H., 12, 19, 77, 406
Levy, I. P., 36
Levy, J., 155
Lewis, J. A., 65, 76
Li, D., 275, 369
Li, H., 46
Liang, C. T. H., 293
Limberg, D., 422, 430
Lin, C., 265, 269
Lincoln, Y. S., 422
Linehan, M. M., 201
Linton, J. M., 238
Linville, D., 338
Lipschitz, J. M., 259
Litam, S. D. A., 65, 66, 83, 163, 167, 173,
383
Little, J. N., 302
Lloyd-Hazlett, J., 164, 170
Long, S. M., 32
Lonn, M. R., 397
Lorelle, S., 60
Lotito, M., 203
Louisell, D. W., 117
Lowell, V. L., 161
Lowman, R. L., 220
Ludes, F. J., 85
Luepker, E. T., 133, 140
Luke, C., 91
Luke, M., 19, 60
Lukpat, A., 280, 281
Lum, D., 73
Lunceford, B., 263
Lund, E. M., 65, 66
Lundquist, B., 377
Lyons, M. L., 317, 238
M
Macbeth, J. E., 95
MacCluskie, K. C., 133, 139, 140
MacDonald, D., 6
Machorro, V. D., 61
Machuca, R., 232, 245
MacKinnon, D. F., 201
Madigan, S., 262
Magnuson, S., 393
Maier, C. A., 312
Malott, K. M., 102, 130, 373
Manhal-Baugus, M., 265
Manis, A. A., 81, 369, 373
Manning, R., 12
Maramba, G. G., 94
Marc, L. G., 211
Mariani, M., 300
Mark, K. P., 321
Marshall, D. S., 405
Marshall, H., 229
Martz, E., 81, 382
Mascari, J. B., 52, 226
Maslach, C., 173
Maslow, A., 31
Mason, E. C. M., 416
Mather, M., 304
Matise, M., 248
Matsangidou, M., 280
Matthews, J. J, 172
Matusek, J. A., 19
Maxim, K., 110
McAdams, C. R., 164, 199, 207, 299, 355,
377, 379, 380, 405
McAdams, J. M., 355
McCarthy, A. S., 334
McCarthy, J., 61
McCaughan, A. M., 163, 371
McConnell, W. A., 427
McCord, C. E., 259
McCormac, M. E., 33, 178, 203, 300
McCormick, C. T., 116, 122
McCreary, J. R., 116
McEachern, A. G., 262, 295
McFarland, W. P., 82, 302
McFarlin, S. L., 291
McGlothlin, J., 178, 203
McGlothlin, J. M., 200
McGough, K., 291
McGuckin, C., 262
McIntosh, P., 67
McKenna, L., 369
McKibben, W. B., 33, 46, 178, 201, 203, 422
McKinney, B. L., 232
McKinsey, J. A., 116
McNeil, K., 424
McWhirter, B. T., 78
McWhirter, E. H., 34
Meadows, M. E., 50
Meany-Walen, K. K., 49
Meara, N. M., 12, 13, 18
Medina, S. L., 188
Mehlman, E., 174
Mehr, K. E., 402
Melamed, O. C., 65, 66
Mellin, E. A., 31
Melonas, J. M., 226
Méndez-Diaz, N., 277
Merlone, L., 144
Merry, S. N., 280
Messina, J. J., 50
Mickelson, D. J., 287
Midgett, A., 300
Mifsud, A., 69, 89, 231
Mill, J. S., 10
Miller, G. M., 50
Miller, L. D., 416
Miller, L. G., 199
Miller, S. M., 164
Milliken, T., 126, 230, 240, 242, 244
Millner, V. S., 78
Mintert, J., 75
Minton, C. A. B., 200
Minton C. A. B., 200
Mitchell, C. W., 289
Mitchell, K. J., 263
Mitchell, M. D., 406
Mitchell, M. H., 42
Mitchell, R. W., 144, 146
Mittal, M., 66
Miu, A. S., 392
Mnookin, R. H., 287
Moberly, M. D., 118
Mogul, F., 304
Moleski, S. M., 235, 236, 252
Monk, G., 280
Moody, E. E., 236
Moore, M. T., 430
Moorhead, H. J. H., 77
Moreno, C., 66, 265
Morgan, E., 116
Morgen, K., 37, 38
Mori, C., 262
Morotti, A. A., 300
Morrill-Richards, M., 297
Morris, C. A. W., 36, 200, 201
Morris, C. W., 201
Mosher, P. W., 110
Mosley, D. V., 66
Moss, J. M., 29
Moss, L. S., 124
Moyer, M., 291–294
Muehleman, T., 114
Muench, F., 280
Mullen, P. R., 173, 177, 261
Mumery, A., 300
Muratori, M. C., 396
Muro, L., 407
Murray, C. E., 416
Muse-Burke, J. L., 163
Myer, R. A., 83–84
Myers, J. E., 31, 32, 50, 60, 175, 177
N
Nadal, K. L., 72
Nadan, Y., 392
Nagayama-Hall, G. C., 94, 423
Nagpal, S., 371
Namburi, N., 357
Neale-McFall, C., 383
Nealy, E. C., 325
Neighbors, H. W., 192
Nelson, K. W., 391, 402
Nelson, M. D., 33, 201, 291
Nelson, M. L., 406
Neuer Colburn, A. A., 348
Neufeld, P. J., 300
Neukrug, E. S., 112, 123, 126, 162, 215,
220, 240, 242, 244
Newhart, S., 383, 432
Newlin, C. M., 352
Newsome, S., 177
Niles, S. G., 60
Nock, M. K., 201
Norcross, J. C., 271
Nordmarken, N., 191
Nugent, F., 44
Nystrom, A., 386
O
Ochieng, L. A., 61
O’Dougherty, A., 19
O’Dwyer, K., 200
O’Hara, C., 422, 423
Oh, S., 66, 91, 172

-- 578 of 593 --

556 	Name Index
Ojeda, L., 423
Okech, J. E. A., 78
Okoye, K., 382
Öksüz, E. E., 73
Olenik-Shemesh, D., 262, 293
Oliveira, J. T., 392
Oliver, J. K., 236
Oller, M. L., 387
Olson, S., 83, 169
O’Mahony, K., 216
O’Malley, R. L., 262
O’Neill, J. H., 73
Oransky, M., 96, 103, 105
O’Reilly, J. T., 116
Osborne, P. H., 129
Overton, S. L., 188
P
Pabian, Y. L., 210
Packman, W. L., 94
Page, R. C., 50
Paisley, P. O., 50, 422
Pakdaman, S., 399
Palmo, A. J., 55
Paone, T. R., 102, 130
Parham, T. A., 244
Parimbelli, E., 270
Parker, L. K., 377
Parker, M. M., 73
Parker, R. M., 422
Parker-Barnes, L., 73
Parrish, M., 300
Parsons, F., 42
Partlett, D. F., 197
Patchin, J. W., 203, 262
Patel, S. H., 178, 322
Pate, R. H., 293–294
Paterson, R. J., 355
Patry, W. F., 433
Patsiopoulos, A. T., 177
Paulson, B. L., 206
Paulson, L. R., 407
Paz Sandin, M., 423
Pease-Carter, C., 370
Pender, D. A., 126
Pepping, C. A., 325
Perera-Diltz, D., 387
Perkins Nerlich, A., 65
Perritt, H. H., Jr, 340
Peter, J., 110
Peters, H. C., 46
Peterson, C. H., 181, 203
Peterson, D. B., 269
Phillips, B. N., 45
Phillips-Green, M. J., 297
Phillis, N., 287
Piccin, R., 201, 291
Pilkington, N. W., 302
Pillemer, K., 304
Pomerantz, A. M., 187
Pope, K. S., 9, 15, 92, 112–113, 161, 166,
230, 233, 240, 248, 250, 251, 252,
255, 257, 353
Pow, A. M., 174
Prikhidko, A., 255, 378
Primack, B. A., 261
Pringer, S. M., 89
Prober, M., 294
Prosek, E. A., 19, 379, 422
Protivnak, J. T., 379
Pruett, M. K., 322
Przeworski, A., 325
Przybylski, A. K., 262
Purgason, L. L., 19, 163, 372, 387
R
Radatz, D. L., 207, 208
Ramos, 19
Ramsey, C., 73
Ramsey, V., 31
Rapp, C. A., 191, 192
Rapp, M. C., 379
Ratts, M. J., 334
Rave, E. J., 18, 192
Ray, D. C., 385, 416
Reamer, F. G., 229, 317
Reese, R. J., 265
Reeve, D., 73
Reeves, A., 265, 267
Reid, W. H., 179
Reiner, S. M., 29
Reinhardt, R., 149, 278
Remley, T. P., Jr, 17, 24, 39, 60, 117, 119,
181, 215, 218, 219, 225, 291, 299
Renshaw, D. C., 300
Reppucci, N. D., 287
Reynolds, C. R., 186
Ribeiro, J. D., 201
Richards, D., 266
Richards, T. N., 386
Richie, M. H., 371
Richwood, D., 263
Ricks, L., 216, 295
Ritchie, M. H., 329
Rivera, D. P., 72
Roach, L. F., 177
Roark, D. B., 433
Roberts, A. R., 199
Roberts, W. B., 300
Robertson, D. W., 348
Robertson, P., 280
Robertson, S., 280
Robinson, A., 363
Robinson, C. R., 36
Robinson, E., 417
Robinson, G. P., 50
Robinson, M., 78, 280
Robinson, M. E., 82
Robinson Kurpius, S. E., 287, 302
Robinson-Wood, T. L., 72, 73, 75
Rochlen, A. B., 266
Rodriguez-Seijas, C., 192
Roehlke, H., 406
Rogers-Sirin, L., 69
Roig, M., 419
Rollins, D., 110, 369
Rom, S., 266
Rosaline, S., 321
Rosenberg, J. I., 377
Ross, S., 201
Rouse, K. E. T., 80, 379
Rowley, W. J., 6
Roy, K., 161, 325
Rubin, L. J., 19
Rudow, H., 79
Rummell, C. M., 265
Rupert, P. A., 114, 357
Rushing, J. L., 24
Rust, J. P., 379
Rutt, C. C., 178, 201
Ryan, C., 325
S
Sacco-Bene, C., 275, 369
Sackett, C. R., 404, 430
Saia, T., 65, 67
St. Germaine, J., 233
Salazar, C. F., 334
Salerno, J. P., 325
Salisbury, W. A., 244
Sallee, E., 200, 201, 291, 294
Sall, R. K., 253
Salo, M., 284, 295
Saloner, B., 313
Salpietro, L., 380
Sampson, J. P., Jr, 260
Sanabria, S., 174
Sanders, R. K., 238
Sandhu, D. S., 207, 299
Sandusky, B., 392
Santilli, S., 313
Saponara, E., 318
Sapyta, J., 201
Satran, S., 281
Sauerheber, J. D., 387
Saunders, J. L., 219
Savage, T. A., 34
Savitz-Romer, M., 312
Schank, J. A., 236, 245
Schmidt, R. B., 374
Schmidt, S. W., 172
Schneider, P., 265
Schofield, M. J., 60, 177
Schottelkorb, A. A., 172
Schouten, A. P., 181
Schuermann, H., 381
Schultz, D., 300
Schultze, N. G., 265
Schuman, D. L., 321
Schuster, J. E., 64, 71
Schwartz, R. C., 192
Schwartz, V. E., 197, 348
Schweiger, W. K., 382
Schwiebert, V. L., 306
Scott, A. M., 265
Scott, D. A., 280
Scott, W. R., 44
Scott-Railton, T., 356
Sedlakova, J., 281
Seligman, L., 53
Sells, J. N., 78
Senyonyi, R. M., 61
Serafim, M. C., 281
Sexting, 262–263
Sexton, T. L., 416

-- 579 of 593 --

Name Index 	557
Seymour, J. M., 19
Shannonhouse, L., 60, 200
Shaw, E., 321
Shaw, H. E., 265, 269
Shaw, S. F., 265, 269
Shea, M. L., 140, 278
Sheehan, L., 200
Sheffield, R., 300
Shell, E. M., 177
Sheperis, C. J., 183
Sheperis, D. S., 275, 348, 379
Shi, Q., 61
Shillingford, M. A, 299, 300
Shufelt, B., 379
Shulman, G. P., 74
Shuman, D. W., 115, 116, 118
Sikes, A., 295
Silveus, S. A., 392
Simon, R. I., 248
Simons, J. D., 302
Simpson, C., 291
Simpson, L. R., 408, 411
Sinclair, K., Jr, 117
Singh, A. A., 334, 373, 422
Singh, D., 281
Singley, S. J., 297
Sinko, L., 83
Sistad, R. E., 266
Skarbek, Y., 155
Skovholt, T. M., 173, 177, 236, 245
Slaiba, Y., 187
Sleek, P., 187
Slimp, A. O., 243, 250
Slovenko, R., 115, 117
Smarinsky, E. C., 163, 379
Smith-Adcock, S., 163, 164, 370
Smith, D., 229, 240
Smith, D. C., 207
Smith, H. B., 28, 31, 50
Smith, K. A., 423
Smith, L., 72, 73
Smith, L. C., 78
Smith, R. L., 60
Smith, S., 222
Snider, P. D., 403
Snow, W. H., 275, 368
Snyder, D. K., 321
Son, H., 238
Sonne, J. L., 240, 245, 250
Sotero, L., 89
Spargo, A. L., 376
Speight, S. L., 231
Sperry, L., 341
Squyres, E., 173
Srivastava, A., 245
Stadler, H. A., 21, 174
Stanger-Hall, K. F., 293–294
Stargell, N. A., 178, 201, 291
Stasiak, K., 280
Staton, A. R., 184
Steele, J. M., 352, 373
Steele, T., 259
Steen, R. L., 75
Steijn, W. M. P., 110
Stern, E. B., 417
Stern, R. C., 307
Sterner, W. R., 181, 201
Stickl Haugen, J., 214, 292
Stokes, L. S., 181
Stone, C., 286, 287, 294, 295, 341
Storlie, C. A., 376, 387
Stout, C. E., 355
Stripling, R. O., 36
Stroud, A. M., 281
Stroud, C. B., 318
Stutey, D. M., 178, 291
Su, Y., 275, 369
Suck, A. T., 61
Sude, M. E., 270, 348
Sue, D. W., 72
Sue, S., 61, 72
Sullivan, J. M., 293, 294
Sullivan, T., 103
Sun, Y., 261
Super, D., 15
Surette, T., 378
Sutton, J. M., Jr, 405
Swan, K. L., 172
Swank, J. M., 163, 369, 370, 378
Swanson, C. D., 164, 218, 319, 331
Sweeney, T. J., 31, 32, 42, 51
Swenson, L. C., 329, 428
Sydow, N., 113
Szymanski, E. M., 50, 422
T
Tadi, P., 357
Tanigoshi, H., 31
Tarabochia, D. S., 33
Tarvydas, V. M., 19, 50, 89, 131, 155, 174,
239
Taubitz, F. S., 281
Tavaokkoli, S. N., 130
Taylor, J. F., 129
Taylor Rouse, K. E., 379
Tebes, J. K., 396
Tedder-King, A., 181
Teeling, S. S., 387
Teixeira, V. B., 163, 379
Teletherapy, 318
Ten Napel-Schutz, M. C., 169
Terrell, J. J., 180
Tevyaw, T. O., 89
Thacker, N. E., 383
Thakore-Dunlap, U., 61
Thomas, R., 60
Thomas, R. V., 126
Thompson, A., 277
Tigertext, 270
Tillman, K. S., 178, 295
Tinstmann Jones, J. L., 262, 294
Tonsager, M. E., 185
Toporek, R. L., 406
Toren, N., 44
Torous, J., 280
Trachsel, M., 281
Tremayne, K., 418
Trepal, H., 267
Trepte, S, 110
Trice-Black, S., 114, 286, 299
Triplett, N. T., 277
Tromski-Klingshirn, D. M., 393
Truffo, C., 352, 355
Truscott, D., 208
Tubbs, P., 187
Turner, B. J., 201
U
Uhl, S., 259
Ulupinar, D., 57, 338
Um, B., 173, 377
Urkmez, B., 376
Urofsky, R. I., 36
Usdin, G., 117
V
Vaccaro, N., 405
Valarezo, A., 416
Valarezo, M. A., 60
Valkenburg, P., 110
VandeCreek, L., 115–117, 122, 126, 128–
130, 318, 353, 360, 365
Vasquez, M. J. T., 9, 15, 92, 93, 103, 166,
233, 251, 353
Veach, L., 238
Vera, E. M., 377
Vera, G. D., 61
Vermaas, J. D., 338, 347
Vernon, A., 330
Vigano, N., 266
Vilardaga, R., 175
Villares, E., 173
W
Wachter Morris, C. A., 200, 201
Wagers, T. P., 321
Wagner, N. J., 89, 174, 226
Walden, S. L., 18, 20
Walfish, S., 353, 355
Walsh, R., 57
Walsh, W. B., 201
Warren, J., 177, 215
Washington, A. R., 406
Wathen, C. C., 376
Watson, J. C., 183, 422
Watson, Z. E., 18, 64, 81, 186, 192, 244, 307
Watts, R. E., 311, 313, 317, 326, 416, 418
Webb, J. T., 45
Webber, J. M., 52, 226, 416
Wehrman, J. D., 146
Weigold, I. K., 31
Weihofen, H., 117
Weinberg, H., 312
Weiner, M. F., 115, 116, 118
Weinrach, S. G., 57, 103
Weisberg, D. K., 287
Weisz, J. R., 282
Welfare, L. E., 371, 430
Welfel, E. R., 139, 162, 172, 178, 181, 184,
187, 188, 226, 255, 256, 269, 274,
300, 302, 306, 309, 315, 325, 347,
359, 362, 383, 387, 404, 410, 411,
416, 424, 425, 426, 429
Wells, L., 89

-- 580 of 593 --

558 	Name Index
Wendler, D., 355
Werner, S., 259
Werth, J. L., 82, 307, 309
West, J., 91
Westcott, J. B., 45, 359
Wester, K. L., 178, 201, 203, 291, 415, 420,
422
Wheeler, A. M., 20, 82, 85, 93, 94, 97, 226,
407
Wheeler, E. E., 188
Whetten-Goldstein, K., 110
Whisenhunt, J. L., 178, 201, 202, 203
Whiston, S. C., 64, 416
White, J., 261
White, M. G., 260
Whiting, D., 208
Whitman, M. A., 321
Wiegold, I. K., 334
Wigmore, J. H., 115–117
Wilcoxon, S. A., 315, 317, 318, 365
Wilczenski, F. L., 11
Wilkinson, T., 149, 163, 168, 215, 230, 241,
278
Wilkinson, W. K., 424
Williams, C. B., 18, 215, 219
Williams, D., 172
Williams, J., 31
Williams, K. M., 417
Wilson, L., 191
Winer, J. D., 207
Winer, J. P., 178, 207
Winston, M. E., 125
Winston, S. M., 18
Wise, E. H., 80
Wohl, J., 72
Wohlberg, J. W., 256
Wolfe, S. E., 263
Wong, L. C. J., 406
Wong, P. T., 406
Woo, H., 29
Wood, A. W., 422
Wood, C., 422
Woody, R. H., 19, 156, 354, 407
Wooten, H. R., Jr, 50
Wootton, A. R., 110
Wortham, J., 262
Worth, M., 206
Wrenn, G., 63
Wright, V. H., 262
Wyatt, K. L., 405
Wylie, M. S., 188
Wysiekierski, L., 222
Y
Yadegar, V., 90
Yakunina, E. S., 334
Yalom, I. D., 328–329, 333
Yancey, G., 381
Yang, K., 161
Yeo, N. T., 72
Young, A., 49
Young, A. N., 282
Young, K. S., 261
Young, M., 313
Young, M. E., 31, 177
Younggren, J. N., 250
Yuen, M., 60
Yunus, R. M., 305
Z
Zalaquett, C. P., 192
Zazzarino, A. S., 321
Zetterqvist, M., 201
Zhang, Y., 261
Zhou, S., 281
Zhu, J. M., 66
Zibulsky, J., 337
Zirkel, P. A., 118, 341
Ziskin, J., 181
Ziv, S., 259, 280
Zoe Hilton, N., 207, 208
Zuberi, D., 356
Zur, O., 173, 191, 215, 217, 218, 232, 235,
236, 249
Zyromski, B., 36, 291, 299

-- 581 of 593 --

559
SUBJECT INDEX
Note: Page numbers followed by “f’’ refer to figures.
A
AACD (American Association for
Counseling and Development), 45, 51
AAMFT (American Association for
Marriage and Family Therapy), 313,
317, 320, 324
AASCB (American Association of State
Counseling Boards), 38, 49
Abandonment, 94–95, 361
Ableism, 73
Abortion counseling, 4, 287
Abortion Finder, 287
Abuse
of children, 295–299, 301
domestic violence, 318
duty to report, 125, 126
of elders or vulnerable adults, 304–306
from previous counselors, 255
ACA. See American Counseling Association
Academic integrity, 417–420, 419f
ACCA (American College Counseling
Association), 51
Acceptance of emotion, 13
Accountability
in clinical supervision, 402–403, 403f, 407
in consultation, 407–409
increased demand for, 358, 416
Accountant services, 353
Accreditation
counselor training programs, 2, 39–40, 43,
163–164
specialties, 51, 166
ACES (Association for Counselor Education
and Supervision), 64, 396
ACPA (American College Personnel
Association), 51
Actual cause, 197
ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990), 82, 186
Addictions counseling, 238
Administrative (business) records, 136, 141
Administrative supervision, 343–345, 393
Adults. See Elderly adults;
Vulnerable adults
Adventure-based counseling, 232
Advertising of credentials, 40–42
Advocacy
actions, 70
in Code of Ethics, 65
intrusive, 256
in multicultural counseling, 71, 72, 73
recognition of importance of, 32
social justice and, 64
Advocacy Competencies (ACA), 64, 65, 359
Advocacy groups, 83, 256
Affectional orientation, 74
Affordable Care Act, 326
African Americans. See Black Americans
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of
1967, 82
Ageism, 73–74, 82, 309–310
Altruism, 10
AMCD (Association for Multicultural
Counseling and Development), 64
American Association for Counseling and
Development (AACD), 45, 51
American Association for Marriage and
Family Therapy (AAMFT), 313, 317,
320, 324
American Association of State Counseling
Boards (AASCB), 37, 49
American College Counseling Association
(ACCA), 51
American College Personnel Association
(ACPA), 51
American Counseling Association (ACA).
See also Code of Ethics
disaffiliations, 51
divisions, 47, 48f, 51
membership benefits, 46, 355
name changes, 45, 51
state branches, 49
American Mental Health Counselors Asso-
ciation (AMHCA), 47, 51
American Personnel and Guidance Associa-
tion (APGA), 15, 45, 51
American Psychological
Association (APA), 144
recognition of professionals, 42–43, 49
style guide, 418, 420
American School Counselor Association
(ASCA), 47, 51
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(ADA), 82, 186
AMHCA (American Mental Health Counsel-
ors Association), 51
Answering machines, 272
APA. See American Psychological
Association
APGA (American Personnel and Guidance
Association), 15, 45, 51
Appearances at proceedings, 157–158
Artificial intelligence (AI), 161, 229,
280–282
ASCA (American School Counselor Asso-
ciation), 47, 50, 51
ASGW (Association for Specialists in Group
Work), 327, 328, 331, 333
Asians, Asian Americans
Internet access, 282
self-disclosure, 248
time orientation, 84
Aspirational (positive) ethics, 15
Assessment. See Evaluation and assessment;
Testing
The Association for Addiction Professionals
(NAADAC), 38, 238
Association for Counselor Education and
Supervision (ACES), 64, 66, 396
Association for Mental Health
Counseling, 50
Association for Multicultural Counseling and
Development (AMCD), 64
Association for Specialists in Group Work
(ASGW), 327, 328, 331, 333
Attorney–client privilege, 115, 117
Attorney services
for clients, 83
legal proceedings and, 214
in organizations, 23–24
for private practice, 24, 353
professional liability coverage for, 217,
253
At-will doctrine, 340
Autonomy
as diversity issue, 89
in professionalization, 167
respect for (principle), 8, 12, 111
B
Bartering, 242–243
Beneficence, 8, 12
Best Practice Guidelines (ASGW), 327,
328, 331
Best practices, 6
Bias and discrimination
ableism, 73
affectional orientation-based, 74
ageism, 73–74, 82, 309
classism, 73
clients as victims of, 82–83
in Code of Ethics, 82
against counselors accused of wrongdo-
ing, 223
gender bias, 72, 192, 326
implicit, 4
laws prohibiting, 82, 340, 371
in making referrals, 81, 170
racism, 72–73
sexism, 72
spiritual- and religious-based, 74–75
in testing, 186
Biological parents, 316, 323
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color
(BIPOC), 65, 177, 324
Black Lives Matter movement, 65–66
Black Americans
boundary issues, 231–232, 244
diagnosis of, 192
digital divide, 282
self-disclosure, 248
suicide rates, 200
Bogust v. Iverson (1960), 213

-- 582 of 593 --

560 	Subject Index
Boundary issues, 228–257. See also Dual/
multiple relationships
addictions counseling, 238
bartering, 242–243
consultation, 411–412
counselor education programs, 239
crisis and disaster counseling, 239
crossings versus violations, 240–242
diversity issues and, 231–232
ethical decision making and, 249–250
extending boundaries, 233
gifts from clients, 245–247
group counseling, 331
in-home services, 239
legal issues and, 241
military counseling, 237
overview, 228–229
pastoral counseling, 237–238
physical contact, 249–250
professional relationships, 339
questionnaire on, 240–241, 241f
in research studies, 425
rural communities and, 236–237
self-disclosure, 247–250
student-faculty relationships, 283–387
Bracketing, of personal values, 4, 80
Brief counseling models, 361
Bruff v. North Mississippi Health Services,
Inc. (2001), 78
Buckley Amendment (FERPA), 151–152
Bullying, 203, 262, 300
Burnout, in counselors, 173, 174–175
Business (administrative) records, 136, 141
Business licenses, 350–351
Business relationships with clients, 245
C
CACREP. See Council for Accreditation of
Counseling and Related Education
Programs
Canterbury v. Spence (1972), 98
CARF International (Commission on
Accreditation of Rehabilitation
Facilities), 49
Cell phone apps, 280
Center for Credentialing and Education
(CCE), 39, 396
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
203, 204, 210
Certification
competence and, 166
defined, 165
national, 38–39
specialty, 39, 166
by state agency, 36
variations in, 52
Chat (online), 263
ChatGPT, 161, 263, 281
Cheating, in college, 417–418
Child abuse or neglect reporting
clinical judgments in, 297, 299
confidentiality and, 126
diversity issues and, 302
dual-role conflicts and, 301
reluctance to report, 295–296
reporting procedures, 298–299
statutory requirements, 296–297
Child custody issues
counselor challenges in, 290
in family counseling, 322–323
Children. See Minor clients
Children’s Rights Council, 322
Citation of sources, in professional writing,
420, 430
Civil commitment proceedings, 130, 153
Civil law, 5
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 82
Classism, 72
Clergy–communicant privilege, 116
Clerical assistants, and confidentiality,
122–123
Clients
access to records, 113, 138, 147–147
advocacy for, 32
angry or litigious, 216
communicating with, 270–271
confidentiality of (See Confidentiality)
in counselor impairment, 174
in danger from others, 125
as danger to others, 110, 207–211
deceased, 122
dependency of, 87–89
diagnosis effects on, 187
education resources for, 269–270
empowerment of, 34
informed consent (See Informed consent)
involuntary or mandated, 89–90, 333
sexual or romantic relations with, 198,
199, 232, 251–256
suicidal, 126, 199–206, 205f–206f
technology tools for, 279–280
technology use, 260–263
welfare of, 85, 316, 346
Clinical case notes, 134, 135–136, 143–148
Clinical decisions, and legal challenges,
24–25
Clinical supervision, 391–405
accountability in, 402–403, 403f, 407
versus administrative, 393
competence of supervisor, 396–397
confidentiality and, 123–124, 397–398
versus consultation, 409
defined, 391
discussion before starting, 395f
distance supervision, 275–276, 398, 405
diversity issues, 405–406
documentation in, 404
on dual relationships, 251
evaluation and feedback in, 393–394
informed consent for, 394–394
layered, 388, 398
purposes of, 393
rights and responsibilities in, 404–405
supervisory relationships, 398–402
triadic, 397
vicarious liability in, 403–404
written agreements, 395–396
Client welfare
abandonment, 94–96
counseling techniques, 90–92
counselor needs and motivations, 86–88
dependent relationships, 88–89
interruptions and termination, 92–94
mandated clients, 89–90
Code of Ethics (AAMFT), 313, 317, 320,
324
Code of Ethics (ACA), 402–436
bartering, 243
client advocacy, 65
client welfare, 86
clinical supervision, 294, 396, 399, 400,
402
communicable diseases, 210
communication with clients, 271
competence, 162
confidentiality, 113, 121, 123, 124, 125,
126, 207
consultation, 411
continuing education, 167
counselor impairment, 175
counselor role changes, 90
credentials and advertising, 40–42
definition of social justice, 65
diagnosing, 188, 192
discrimination, 82
distance counseling, 263–266
education and training, 371–372, 373,
374, 376, 379, 382, 384, 387
elements in decision making models,
19–21
employees, 341
employers, 344
end-of-life decisions, 81, 307
ethical decisions making, 18–19
evaluations, 177, 178–179
exploring, 17–18
family counseling, 313, 320, 321
fee arrangements, 352
fee collection, 353
gifts from clients, 245–247
group counseling, 328
history of, 15–16
informed consent, 99, 309
interruption of service, 92
involuntary or mandated clients, 89–90
minor clients, 288
moral principles, 12
multicultural competence, 64–65, 77, 172
nonprofessional relationships, 232–233
professionalization and, 44
professional relationships, 347–348
record keeping, 135, 137–139, 140,
141–142, 152
referrals, 170, 346–347
reparative (conversion) therapy, 91
research, 423–426, 429
self-monitoring, 21
sexual dual relationships, 232, 253, 386,
401
social media, 277
subpoenas, 158
suspected ethics violations, 216, 221, 222
synopsis of, 16f
technology issues, 17, 260, 261, 270,
276, 282
termination of service, 93
testing, 184, 186, 275

-- 583 of 593 --

Subject Index 	561
transfer of records, 154, 345
values of counselor, 3, 77, 80–81
virtual counseling
writing and publication, 429, 431–432
Code of Ethics (IAMFC), 313, 324
Code of Fair Testing Practices in Educa-
tion, 183
Cognitive behavioral therapy, 91
Cognitive impairment, 306
Collaboration
between colleagues, 123–124, 337–338
in publication, 431
student-faculty research, 383, 420–421,
420
Colleagues. See also Consultation; Referrals
confidentiality and, 112, 122
impaired, 175
suspected ethics violations in, 219–223, 222f
Collection agencies, 353
Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilita-
tion Facilities (CARF International),
49
Commission on Rehabilitation Counselor
Certification (CRCC), 38, 39
Communicable diseases, and confidentiality,
126, 210–211
Communication
with clients, 270–271
privileged (See Privileged communication)
in professional relationships, 337–338
Community, interdependence with, 13
Compassion fatigue, 174
Competence, 160–177
components of, 160–161
of consultants, 409–410
continuum of, 162
counselor preparation and, 163–164
credentials and, 164–167
erosion of, 173–177
ethical and legal issues, 162, 196
in evaluation and assessment, 178
of faculty, 382
in family counseling, 324
in group counseling, 333–334
maintaining, 167–172
multicultural, 18, 64–71
referrals and, 169–172
of students, 377–382
of supervisors, 396–397
in testing, 181–185
value conflicts and, 81
Complaints
avoiding problems, 225–226
confidentiality exceptions and, 129
of ethical or illegal behavior, 215–219
formal, 217–219
informal, 216
most common types, 162, 198
responding to, 219f
unwarranted, 223
Computer games, 280
Concealment, in research studies, 425
Conferring, defined, 337
Confidentiality, 107–132
client records and, 137, 138–139
client waiver of, 121–122, 129–13
clinical supervision and, 124, 397–398
complaints involving, 198
in consultation, 411
counselor practices and, 112
of deceased clients, 122
defined, 110
diversity issues, 130
ethical standards and, 113–114
exceptions and limits to, 113–114, 121–
129, 131f, 207
in family counseling, 318–319
in group counseling, 330–331
as informed consent issue, 99
of involuntary or mandated clients, 90
of minor clients, 128–129, 285, 288–290,
293–295, 330–331
origins of, 110–111
outside of counselor role, 114
in professional relationships, 345
rationale for, 111
in research studies, 424–425
in school counseling, 293–295
students in training and, 113
studies of, 110
telephone use and, 271–272
unintentional breaches in, 112
Confrontation, in group
counseling, 329
Connelly v. University of Vermont (1965),
380
Conscience clause legislation, 80
Consequential ethics, 10
Consultation, 407–414
accountability in, 407–408
on clinical judgments, 25–26
competence of consultant, 409–410
confidentiality and, 112–113, 122, 295,
411
contracts for, 409
defined, 337, 391–392
on dual relationships, 250
on ethical decisions, 215
freedom of choice in, 412
informed consent and, 411
for maintaining competence, 169
online, 275, 407
peer versus organizational, 407
with physicians, 190
power differential in, 408
relationships in, 411–412
on sexual attraction to clients, 255
on suicidal clients, 204
on suspected unethical behavior, 220
tripartite relationship in, 391
values and diversity in, 412–413
Content bias, in tests, 186
Continuing education, 167–168, 396
Continuity of care, 135, 137
Contracts and written agreements
clinical supervision, 395–396
consultation, 409
for publication, 434
Conversion (reparative) therapy, 91
Convictions, courage of, 8
Coordinated client care, 123–124, 337
Coparent counseling, 322
Co-payments, 361
Copyright law, 183, 432–433
Corporations (business entity), 351
Council for Accreditation of Counseling
and Related Education Programs
(CACREP)
accreditation by, 40, 51
counselor dispositions, 371
family counseling competencies, 325
group counseling competencies, 333
Medicare reimbursement for counselors,
359
program requirements, 2, 35–36, 43, 187,
376
student dismissal standards, 380
university promotion and tenure policies,
432
Counseling. See also specific types
versus consultation, 411–412
defined, 29
distance counseling, 263–270
versus evaluation, 240–242
globalization of, 60–61
history of profession, 42–45
as primary service, 34–35
stigmatization from, 111
techniques used in, 90–92, 373
underlying philosophy, 30–34
Counseling Around the World (Hohenshil et
al.), 60
Counseling Clients Near the End of Life
(Werth), 82
Counseling outcomes
counselor values and, 77
as informed consent issue, 99
Counseling psychology, 42–43
Counseling relationship. See also Postcoun-
seling relationships
client dependence in, 87–89
countertransference in, 88, 324
evaluation and assessment within, 181
as informed consent issue, 100
power differential in, 88
trust in, 85, 252
Counselor–client privilege. See Privileged
communication
Counselor educators. See also Education and
training
competence of, 382
curriculum and ethical responsibilities,
372–377
diversity in, 382–383
dual role conflicts, 375
evaluation by, 375–377
as gatekeepers, 378–382
as mentors, 387
as role models, 382
student-faculty relationships, 383–387
student-faculty research collaboration,
383, 420–421, 430
technology and, 275
Counselor responsibilities, 85–106
abandonment, 94–95, 362
bracketing values, 4, 80
client welfare, 85
counseling technique selection, 90–92

-- 584 of 593 --

562 	Subject Index
Counselor responsibilities (Continued)
dependent relationships, 88–89
dual relationships and, 233–235
in end-of-life decisions, 81–82
interruptions in service, 92
with involuntary or mandated clients, 89–90
needs and motivation awareness, 86–88
termination of service, 92–94
with victims of discrimination, 82–83
Counselors. See also Professional identity
burnout and impairment in, 173–177
competence of (See Competence)
complaints against, 129, 162, 198,
215–218
defined, 56
education (See Education and training)
as employees, 339–345
as employers, 343–345
as expert witnesses, 179–181
job classifications, 54–55
scope of practice challenges, 52–53, 191
as service providers, 358–359
Countertransference, 88, 324
Couples counseling. See Family counseling
Courage of convictions, 6
Court-ordered clients, 89–90, 333
Court-ordered disclosures, 129, 155–156
COVID-19 pandemic
boundary issues, 228–229
client welfare and informed consent, 86
confidentiality and privileged communica-
tion, 110
counseling children and vulnerable adults,
285
counseling families and groups, 312–313
counseling profession, 2
counselor burnout levels, 173–174
counselor competence, assessment, and
diagnosis, 160–161
counselor education, 368–369
crisis counseling, 83–84
digital revolution on technology in coun-
seling, 258–259
end-of-life decision making, 82
intimate partner violence (IPV), 317–318
malpractice, legal and ethical challenges,
196–197
multiculturalism, social justice, advocacy,
and values, 65–67
professional identity of counselors, 30
professional relationships, private practice,
and health care plans, 339
records and subpoenas, 133–134
supervision and consultation, 392
virtual counseling, 263–270
writing, research, and publishing, 416–417
Cox v. Warwick Valley Central School Dis-
trict (2010), 296
CRCC (Commission on Rehabilitation
Counselor Certification), 38, 39
Credentials
competence and, 164–167
ethical standards and, 40–42
as informed consent issue, 100
in supervision, 396
types of, 36–40
Criminal background checks, 370
Criminalization of sex with clients, 254. See
also Sexual or romantic relationships
Criminal law, 5
Crisis and disaster counseling
boundary issues, 237–238
clinical supervision, 396–397
diversity issues, 83
skills needed, 413
Critical Race Theory, 406
Culturally encapsulated counselor, 63
Cultural Test Bias Hypothesis (CTBH), 186
Culture, defined, 71. See also Diversity
issues
Cyberbullying, 203, 261–262
Cynthia B. v. New Rochelle Hospital (1982),
122
D
Death and dying. See End-of-life decisions
Death of client, and confidentiality, 122
Debriefing, of research participants, 427–428
Deception, in research studies, 425
Defamation, 348
Deontology, 10
Dependent relationships, 86, 88–89
Dependent students, defined, 151
Depositions, 157–158
Developmental perspective of mental health,
33
Diagnosis, 187–194
diversity issues, 191–193
effects on clients, 188
health care plans and, 187–188, 359–361
informed consent and, 189
legal issues, 193–194
pathologizing in, 188
physiological issues and, 190
purposes of, 187
qualifications for, 190–191
scope of practice challenges and, 190
stigmatization from, 188
wellness model and, 187, 188
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5), 52
bias in, 191–192
ethical problems in, 192
revision of, 189
third-party reimbursement and, 187
wellness model and, 53, 187
who may use, 53
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5-TR), 53, 161,
187–191
Digital divide, 282
Digital natives, 261
Diligence, 162
Diminished capacity, 105
Disabilities and discrimination, 73
Disaster counseling. See Crisis and disaster
counseling
Discernment, 13
Disclosure. See also Self-disclosure
court-ordered, 129, 155
malpractice suits for, 120
Disclosure statements. See also Informed
consent
contents of, 99, 118–119
Discovery in litigation, 115, 155–156
Discrimination. See Bias and discrimination
Diseases, and confidentiality, 126, 210–211
Dismissal of students, 380–381
Disposal of records, 139, 153–154
Distance supervision, 275–276, 397–398,
405
Distressed counselors, 173
Diversity issues. See also Multicultural
competence; Multicultural counseling
bartering, 243
boundaries, 231, 244–245
burnout prevention, 177
child abuse reporting, 302
client autonomy, 89
clinical supervision, 405–406
confidentiality and privileged communica-
tion, 140
consultation, 412–413
counseling technique selection, 91–92
diagnosis, 191–193
education and training, 371–372, 383, 387
elderly adults, 309
end-of-life decisions, 308
gifts from clients, 247
group counseling, 334–335
health care plans, 365
informed consent, 103
minor clients, 302–304
physical contact, 249
referrals, 172
research design, 422
self-disclosure, 248
technology, 282
termination of service, 96
in testing, 186
Divorce, 290, 322–323
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organiza-
tion (2022), 287
Doctoral degrees, 37, 40
Documentation. See Records and record
keeping
Domestic violence, 318
Downcoding (under-diagnosing), 187
DSM-5. See Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders
Dual/multiple relationships
business or financial relationships,
245–246
complexities of, 229–232
in consultation, 412–413
ethical decision making and, 250–251
ethical standards for, 232–233
mentorships, 385, 387–388
problematic characteristics of, 230–232
in research collaboration, 421
researchers-study participants, 425
risks and benefits, 233–235
sexual or romantic, 198, 199, 232, 251–
256, 386, 401
social relationships, 243–245
student-faculty relationships, 383–384
supervisory relationships, 400–401

-- 585 of 593 --

Subject Index 	563
unavoidable, 231, 236–239
virtual relationships, 232
Dual roles
of clinical supervisors, 401
of counselor educators, 376
evaluation and, 178
privileged communication and, 116
Due process rights, 82, 393
Duty to report, protect, or warn
child abuse or neglect, 296–297
as confidentiality exception, 126–128, 207
elder abuse, 306–307
FERPA and, 152
legal precedent, 209, 403
risk of harm to others, 207–211, 291–293
suicidal clients, 126, 199, 204, 294
Texas exception, 108, 209
E
Early intervention, 33–34
Education and training, 368–389
admissions criteria, 370–372
cheating in, 417–418
comparison of mental health professions,
57, 58f–59f
competence and, 163–164
continuing education, 167–168, 396
curriculum issues, 372–374
dismissal decisions, 380–381
diversity issues, 371–372, 382–383,
387–388
endorsement in, 382
evaluation issues, 375–377
faculty competence, 382
gatekeeping, 378
informed consent for, 369–370
master’s programs, 35–37
mentorships, 385, 387
relationships among students, 388
remediation, 379–380
student-faculty relationships, 383–384
student-faculty research collaboration,
383
student responsibilities, 389
technology in, 275–276, 373
in testing, 181, 182
Education for All Handicapped Children,
186
Education records, 151
Egoism, 10
Electronic signatures, 86, 134
Electronic Signatures in Global and National
Commerce Act (E-Sign Act), 86
Eisel v. Board of Education of Montgomery
County (1991), 213
Elderly adults. See also Vulnerable adults
abuse or neglect of, 304–306
ageism and, 73–74, 309
discrimination against, 73–74
end-of-life decisions, 81–82, 307–309
informed consent for, 306
legally incompetent, 309
E-mail, 270–271, 272–274
Emergency calls, 271
Emotion, in ethical decision making, 13
Emotional disorders. See Mental and emo-
tional disorders
Employer/employee relationships, 339–345
Employment at-will doctrine, 340
Empowerment of clients, 34
End-of-life decisions, 81–82, 307–309
Endorsement, in education, 382
English common law, 22, 115, 340
Environmental factors, in impairment, 173–174
Ethical absolutism, 10
Ethical decision making
boundary issues and, 250
dilemmas in, 8
models for, 8, 18–19
personal, 215
principles and virtues in, 8, 12–14
self-tests of, 21
steps in, 19–20
Ethical relativism, 10–12
Ethical standards, 232–233. See also
Boundary issues; Dual/multiple
relationships
confidentiality and, 113–115
credentials and, 40–42
education and training in, 371
as multicultural standards, 77
for professional/nonprofessional relation-
ships, 232–233
in record keeping, 137–139
Ethics and ethical issues. See also Code of
Ethics (ACA)
codes of ethics, 14–18, 16f, 45
in competence, 162
defined, 5
in employment, 340, 341–344
ethics of care, 11
foundations of, 9
versus laws, 5–6
versus legal perspective, 10
principle ethics, 8, 12–14
in professional orientation, 2
in referrals, 346
slippery slope phenomenon, 9, 21
suspected ethics violations, 219–223, 222f
theories of, 10–12
unethical behavior complaints, 215–219
virtue ethics, 8, 12, 13
Evaluation
in clinical supervision, 393
in education, 375–377
Evaluation and assessment (clinical),
178–186
competence in, 178
versus counseling, 178–179
within counseling relationship, 181
expert witness role and, 179–181
formal, 178–179
informed consent and, 179
of involuntary or mandated clients, 90
purposes of, 178
testing use in, 181–186
Expectations, and dual relationships,
233–235
Experiential learning, 374
Experimental design, 422
Expert witness role, 179–181
F
FACT (National Fair Access Coalition on
Testing), 183
Faculty. See Counselor educators; Education
and training
Family counseling, 311–327
client welfare, 316
codes of ethics, 313
competence in, 234
confidentiality, 127, 148, 318–320
counselor values and, 325–327
divorce and child custody, 322–323
domestic violence, 318
family secrets, 320–322
identified patient, 316
informed consent for, 314–316
legal issues, 314, 316
legal perspective, 314
LGBTGEQIAP+ couples and families,
325
privileged communication in, 318–320
risky techniques, 316–317
systems theory approach, 312
value-laden issues, 325f
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
of 1974 (FERPA), 151–152
Family members, as clients, 232
Favoritism
in employment, 344
in group counseling, 331
Fear of missing out (FoMO), 261
Federally funded programs
health care plans, 359
substance abuse programs, 152–153
Federal Rules of Evidence, 117
Fee arrangements
as diversity issue, 365
as informed consent issue, 99
in private practice, 352–353
Feedback
in clinical supervision, 395
to research participants, 427–428
Feminists, 12, 18
FERPA (Family Educational Rights and Pri-
vacy Act of 1974), 151–152
Fidelity, 8, 13, 112
Fiduciary relationships, 85
Field experiences, 376
Fifth Amendment, 82
Financial abuse, 305
Financial misconduct, 193
Financial relationships with clients, 245
First Amendment, 82
Fishbowl technique, 376
FoMO (fear of missing out), 261
Foreseeability, 198
Formal complaints, 217–219
Formal evaluation, 178–179
Formative feedback, 394
Fourteenth Amendment, 82, 393
Fourth Amendment, 114
Freedom of choice legislation, 55, 356
Friendships with clients, 244
Friends or acquaintances, as clients, 232–233

-- 586 of 593 --

564 	Subject Index
G
Gag clauses, in managed care, 361
Gatekeeping
in clinical supervision, 376, 402
in education, 379
Gate-slipping, in education, 378
Gender bias, 192
Gifts from clients, 245–247
Globalization of counseling, 60–61
Government regulations, 22. See also Laws;
Legal issues
Grandparenting of licenses, 166
Group counseling, 327–335
boundaries, 331–332
client welfare, 329
competence in, 333–334
confidentiality, 126–127, 148, 329–330
diversity issues, 334–335
education and training in, 376
freedom to exit, 333
guidelines and planning for, 327
informed consent for, 327–328
minor clients in, 328, 330–331
privileged communication and, 331
screening clients, 328–329
socialization among members, 332–333
value-laden issues, 334–335
H
Harm to self or others. See Communicable
diseases; Suicide and suicidal clients;
Violence prevention
Health care plans, 355–365. See also Man-
aged care health plans
changing nature of, 365
client privacy and, 139, 360
counselors as service providers, 358–359
denial of services, 361–362
diagnosis and, 187, 360–361
diversity issues, 365
federal, 359
informed consent and, 139, 361
insurance fraud, 194, 363–364
overview, 355–356
privacy issues and, 140
reimbursement by, 55, 139, 187–188, 353,
360–361
session limits and, 89
state insurance laws, 356
types of, 357
Healthcare Providers Service Organization
(HPSO), 198
Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act (HIPAA)
application to schools, 151
client access to records, 113
informed consent requirements, 98, 98f, 99
Privacy Rule, 149–151, 360
psychotherapy notes, 150
transfer of records, 345
violation penalties, 150
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs),
357
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act
Hippocratic Oath, 9
Hispanic Americans. See Latinx
HIV/AIDS, 210–211
HMOs (health maintenance organizations),
357
Homosexuality. See LGBTGEQIAP+
community
Horowitz v. Board of Curators of the Univer-
sity of Missouri (1978), 380
HPSO (Healthcare Providers Service Organi-
zation), 198
Hugging. See Physical contact
Humanistic therapy, 92
I
IACS (International Association of Counsel-
ing Services), 49
IAMFC (International Association of Mar-
riage and Family Counselors), 313,
324
Identified patient, in family counseling,
313, 315
Impaired counselors, 173–177, 176f
Implicit bias, 4
Income tax and reporting, 350, 434
Incompetence, in counselors, 197. See also
Competence
Incompetent adults. See Legally incompetent
clients
Indemnity insurance plans, 357, 361
Index of Race-Related Stress–Brief Version
(IRRS-B), 177
Informal complaints, 216
Informed consent, 96–105
as best practice, 98
client understanding of, 102–103
for clinical supervision, 394
Code of Ethics requirements, 96
confidentiality in, 119
in consultation, 410–411
diagnosis and, 188
disclosure statements, 99–100, 118–119,
for distance counseling, 264
diversity issues, 103–105
dual relationships and, 251–252
for education and training, 369–370
elements of, 96–97
as ethical obligation, 96
for evaluations, 179
for family counseling, 314–315
for group counseling, 327–328
health care plans and, 139, 360
HIPPA requirements, 98, 98f
legal issues to address, 99–101
managed care and, 102
in medicine, 97–99
in mental health, 98
for minors, 102, 286–287
as ongoing process, 103
origins of, 97–99
for research studies, 423–424
testing and, 184
virtual counseling, 264–265
for vulnerable adults, 102, 105, 306, 309
wisdom of securing, 103
In-home services, 239
In-patient facilities, 295
Institutional review boards, 426
Insurance. See Health care plans; Managed
care health plans; Professional liabil-
ity insurance
Insurance fraud, 193–194, 363–364
Integrity, 13
Intentionality, 8
Interdependence with the community, 13
International Association of Counseling Ser-
vices (IACS), 49
International Association of Marriage
and Family Counselors (IAMFC),
313–314, 324
International Registry of Counsellor Educa-
tion Programs (IRCEP), 61
Internet resources
for client education, 270
listservs and discussion groups, 274
for maintaining competence, 169
for multicultural competence, 282
plagiarism and, 418
Interpreters, 102, 130
Interrogatories, 157
Interruptions in service, 92
Intervention strategies, 33–34
Intersectionality, 76–77
Intimate partner violence (IPV), 317–318
Involuntary clients, 89–90
IRCEP (International Registry of Counsellor
Education Programs), 61
J
Jaffee v. Redmond et al. (1996), 111, 117,
118
The Joint Commission, 49
Joint custody, 223, 323
Journal of Counseling and Development,
60, 65
Justice, 8, 12, 21
Justice obsession syndrome, 216
K
Keeton v. Anderson-Wiley, et al. (2011), 80,
378
Keeton v. Augusta State University (2011),
79
Knowledge
as competence component, 160
in multicultural competence, 68–69
in professional practice, 8
L
Latinx
boundary issues, 231, 244
diagnosis of, 192
digital divide, 282
Laws. See also Legal issues
antidiscrimination, 82
civil, 5
on client records, 148–153
conscience clause legislation, 80
criminal, 5
death with dignity laws, 308

-- 587 of 593 --

Subject Index 	565
defined, 5
versus ethics, 5–6
freedom of choice legislation, 55, 356
licensure, 37
origins of, 22
privileged communication statutes, 115
tort, 22
Lawsuits. See also Malpractice
collection of unpaid fees, 227, 354
confidentiality exceptions and, 129–130
LGBTGEQIAP+ client services, 78–80
responding to, 219f
sexual dual relationships, 253–254
Layered supervision, 388, 398
Legal advice. See Attorney services
Legal custody, 322
Legal issues. See also Laws; Lawsuits;
Subpoenas
boundary crossings, 241
clinical decisions and, 24–26
in competence, 162
decision making in, 214
in diagnosing, 193–19
distance counseling, 266
e-mail, 274
employment law, 339–341
versus ethical perspective, 10
examples of, 22–23
in family counseling, 313–314, 315–316
family law and LGBTGEQIAP+ clients, 83
illegal behavior complaints, 215–219
informed consent, 99–100 (See also
Informed consent)
involuntary or mandated clients, 89–90
libel and slander, 348
privileged communication (See Privileged
communication)
professionalization and, 52–56
professional orientation, 2
recognizing, 22–23
record keeping, 139
suspected illegal behavior, 224
Legally incompetent clients
confidentiality and, 128
informed consent from, 102, 105, 309
legal issues, 309
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, gender
expansive, queer, intersex, asexual,
pansexual community. See LGBT-
GEQIAP+ community
Letters of agreement, 433
LGBTGEQIAP+ community, 66, 70, 74, 380
boundary issues, 232
client welfare, 316
couples and families, 325
crisis counseling, 84
discrimination against, 74
family law issues, 83, 168
in family therapy, 321
Hispanics, 192
referring, 81, 170
religious conflict in, 76
school counselors and, 302–303
sexual identity secret, 321
social/political activities, counselors in, 232
value conflicts and denial of service, 78–80
Libel, 348
Licensure
competence and, 166
defined, 164
grandparenting of, 165
portability of, 52
state licenses, 37
testing practices and, 163
variations in, 52, 165–166
Life-threatening diseases, and confidential-
ity, 126, 210–211
Lipari v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1987), 209
Listservs, 274
M
Malpractice, 196–226
actual case examples, 213–214
avoiding claims, 199
defined, 196
elements of proof, 196–198
hypothetical case, 211–213
suicide cases, 206
suits for disclosure, 120–121
as tort law, 22
Managed care health plans
brief counseling requirements, 361
diagnosis and, 187, 188
informed consent and, 102
issues in working with, 359, 416
overview, 357
session limits, 89, 91
utilization review, 93, 357
Mandated clients, 89–90, 333
Mandatory ethics, 15
Marital infidelity, 321
Marriage, same-sex, 83
Marriage counseling. See Family
counseling
Master’s degrees, 35–36, 40, 42–43
Master/servant concept,403+
Medicaid, 356
Medical model, 31
Mental and emotional disorders
diagnosis and treatment of, 53–54,
187–194
poverty link, 72
stigmatization of, 111
Mental health
developmental perspective, 33
wellness versus medical model, 31–33,
32f
Mental Health Access Improvement Act, 359
Mentorships, 385, 387
Mentor test, 21
Military counseling, 55, 237
Minor clients, 285–304
confidentiality and, 128–129, 285, 288–
289, 293–295, 329–330
diversity issues, 302–304
dual/multiple relationships and, 229–230
ethical and legal conflicts, 285
in group counseling, 328, 329–330
informed consent for, 102, 287–288
legal status and rights of, 285–287
noncustodial parents of, 290
parents of, 288–290, 316
release of records, 293
reporting abuse or neglect, 295–299
roles of school counselors, 300–301
at risk for harm to self or others, 291–293
school violence and, 299–300
sex trafficking survivors, 300
technology and, 261–262, 282
Moral principles, 8, 12–14
Morals, defined, 3
Moral traces, 21
Motivation, of counselor, 86–88
Multicultural and Social Justice
Competencies, 64
Multicultural and Social Justice Compe-
tence Principles for Group Workers
(ASGW), 334
Multicultural and Social Justice Competen-
cies, 64
Multicultural competence
in Code of Ethics, 64–65, 172
components of, 67–71
education and training in, 372–373
in ethical decision making, 19
Internet resources for, 282
in mentors, 387
in supervision, 405–406
Multicultural counseling, 63–84. See also
Diversity issues
crisis counseling, 83–84
discrimination avoidance, 71–76
ethical standards and, 77
forms of prejudice in, 71–76
history and evolution, 63–64
intersectionality, 76–77
referrals and, 172
Multicultural Counseling Competencies
and Standards, 63
Multiple clients, and confidentiality,
126–128, 148
N
NAADAC (The Association for Addiction
Professionals), 38, 238
National Board for Certified Counselors
(NBCC), 45, 97, 359
certification by, 38–39
requirements of, 3
service provider initiatives, 359
state license information, 37
National certification, 38–39
National Certified Counselor (NCC), 39
National Fair Access Coalition on Testing
(FACT), 183
National Research Act of 1974, 426
Native Americans, 84
NBCC. See National Board for Certified
Counselors
NBCC International, 39
NCC (National Certified Counselor),
38–39
Needs, of counselor, 86–88
Noncompetition agreements, 355
Nonconsequential ethics, 10
Noncustodial parents, 290, 322

-- 588 of 593 --

566 	Subject Index
Nonmaleficence, 8, 12, 162
Nonprofit corporations, 352
Nonsuicidal self-injury, 201
Nontraditional families, 316
Nonverbal behaviors, 84
O
Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), 83
Office of Civil Rights, 150
Office security systems, 277–278
Older adults. See Elderly adults
Online instruction, counseling graduate
programs, 275
Organizational consultation, defined, 407.
See also Consultation
Over-diagnosing (upcoding), 187
P
Paradoxical directives or interventions, 317
Pacer National Bullying Prevention Center,
203
Parallel process, 399
Parents’ rights
child custody and, 316, 322–323
minor clients and, 288–290, 316
Participatory/relational ethics, 18
Partnerships (business entity), 351
Pastoral counseling, 237–238
Pathologizing of normal behaviors, 222–223,
191
Peer consultation, defined, 407. See also
Consultation
Peer review, 169
People v. Taylor (1980), 130
People with disabilities (PWD), 73, 102, 105
Perez v. City of Chicago (2004), 319
Personal belief system, 3
Personal development, of students, 376–377
Personal growth initiative, 31
Personal values, 4
Petersen v. State (1983), 209
Physical contact
as boundary issue, 198, 249
in group counseling, 329
informed consent and, 99
malpractice and, 198
Physical custody, 322
Physician-assisted suicide, 82, 307
Physician–patient privilege, 116
Physicians, consulting with, 190
Plagiarism, 418–420, 419f
Plaintiff v. Rector and Board of Visitors of
The College of William and Mary
(2005), 349
Pledge of silence, 111
Policeperson role, 219
Political agitation, in
professionalization, 45
Political issues, and professionalization,
52–56
Positive (aspirational) ethics, 15
Postcounseling relationships
friendships, 244
sexual relations, 254–255
Poverty, 72, 73
Power differential
consultation relationships, 409, 412–413
counseling relationship, 88
dual relationships, 233–235
student-faculty relationships, 384
supervisory relationships, 398
PPOs (preferred provider organizations),
357, 358, 361
Practice (licensure) law, 37
Practice management software, 263
A Practitioner’s Guide to Ethical Decision
Making (Forester-Miller, Davis), 18
Preexisting conditions, in impairment, 174
Preferred provider organizations (PPOs),
357, 358, 361
Pregnancy, in minors, 294
Prejudice. See Bias and discrimination
Premature termination, 72
Prescriptions for behavior, 317
Prevention activities, 33
Previous relationships, with clients, 233, 331
Principal investigator, 421
Principle ethics, 8, 12–13
Privacy. See also Confidentiality; Privileged
communication
client waiver of, 121–122
as Constitutional right, 115
defined, 109
health care plans and, 139, 359
as informed consent issue, 99
Privacy Rule (HIPPA), 149–151, 360
Private practice, 348–355
accountant services, 353–354
attorney services, 24, 353
business failures, 355
business licenses, 350–351
business records, 136
fee arrangements, 352–353
form of business, 351–352
income tax and reporting, 350
minor clients and confidentiality in, 295
noncompetition agreements, 355
pro bono services in, 365
professional liability insurance, 365
referrals to own practice, 347, 355
self-disclosure and, 248
suitability for, 348
third-party reimbursement in, 55
transition to, 354–355
Privileged communication, 107–132
asserting, 119
client waiver of, 121
defined, 109, 114
diversity issues, 130
dual roles and, 116
exceptions and limits to, 121, 129–130,
131f
in family counseling, 317–318
in group counseling, 331
malpractice suits and, 120
minor clients and, 293
origins of, 115–117
rationale for, 117–119
record keeping and, 139
statutes regarding, 116, 117–118
subpoenas and, 120
Pro bono services, 365
Professional associations. See also specific
organizations
overview, 46–49, 48f
as professionalization criteria, 45
reasons for forming, 45–46
Professional corporations, 351
Professional development, in students,
376–378
Professional identity, 28–62. See also
Credentials
characteristics of strong, 28, 56–57
comparison of mental health professions,
56–57, 58f–59f
counselor training in, 35–36
current issues in, 50–49
development of, 2, 3
foundation of, 30–34
history of counseling and, 42–44
pride in profession, 60
professionalization and, 44–45
respect for other professionals and, 347
services provided and, 34–35
Professionalism, 6, 225–226
Professionalization
criteria for, 44, 167
legal and political issues in, 52–56
steps and progress toward, 44–45
Professional liability claims, 198
Professional liability insurance
coverages, 217, 253, 266
need for, 26
in private practice, 354
through professional associations, 46
Professional orientation, components of,
2–3. See also specific components
Professional practice model, 7–9, 7f
Professional relationships, 337–348. See also
Consultation
boundary issues, 338
communication and collaboration,
337–338
confidentiality and, 345
employer/employee relationships,
339–345
referrals, 346–347
respect for other professionals, 347–348
Professional Standards for the Training of
Group Workers (ASGW), 327, 333
Professional values, 4, 80–81
Professional writing, 417–420, 419f. See
also Publication
Proximate cause, 197
Psychiatric nurses, 31, 34, 35
Psychiatrists
defined, 56
education and training, 35
medical model approach, 31
primary service of, 34
Psychodynamic therapy, 89, 243
Psychologists
defined, 56
education and training, 35, 42
medical model approach, 31
primary service of, 34
professionalization of, 45

-- 589 of 593 --

Subject Index 	567
Psychotherapy notes, 150
Psychotropic medications, 190
Publication, 429–431
contracts for, 433–434
copyright law, 432–433
credit to contributors, 429–431
income reporting and, 434–435
professional writing and, 417–420, 419f
publish or perish pressure, 428, 429
submitting work for, 431–432
Publication Manual of the American Psycho-
logical Association (APA), 418, 420
Publicity test, 21
PWD (people with disabilities), 73, 102, 105
Q
Qualified privilege, 348
Qualitative research, 422
R
Racial microaggressions, 71–72
Racism, 71–72
RCT (relational cultural theory), 232
Recordings of sessions, 141
Records and record keeping, 133–159. See
also Confidentiality
administrative (business), 140, 141
balancing with counseling services, 135
client access to, 113, 138, 147–148
clinical case notes, 134, 135–136,
143–147
in clinical supervision, 403
confidentiality and safety of, 137,
139–140
defined, 134
of dual relationships, 251
in educational institutions, 151
electronic, 278–279, 279f
federal laws affecting, 148–153
legal requirements, 139
privileged communication and, 140
purposes of, 135–136
recordings, 141
for self-protection, 146, 147f
storage and disposal of, 139, 153–154
suicidal risk assessments, 204
transfer of, 139, 140, 149, 152, 154–155, 345
types of, 134, 140
use in research studies, 426
Records managers, 153
Red flags, 251
Referrals
from attorneys, 179
competence and, 169–172
defined, 337–338
diversity issues, 172
in professional relationships, 346–347
termination of service and, 93, 346–347
value-based, 81, 170
Registration law, 37, 165
Rehabilitation counseling, 38, 39, 43–44
Relational cultural theory (RCT), 232
Relational ethics, 11
Relationships. See Counseling relationship;
Dual/multiple relationships;
Professional relationships
Religion. See Spiritual and religious
considerations
Remediation, in education, 379–380
Reparative (conversion) therapy, 91
Reputations, and professional relationships,
348
Research assistants, 421
Research studies, 421
confidentiality in, 425–426
cooperation with other researchers,
429
deception or concealment in, 425
design of, 422–423
dual relationships in, 421
informed consent for, 424–425
institutional review boards, 426
participants in, 423–426, 427–428
relationship boundaries in, 425
reporting results, 427–429
roles in, 421
student-faculty collaboration, 383, 421
Research supervisors, 429
Research-Informed Adaptable Model for
the Prevention of Suicide in Schools
(RAMPSS), 291
Respect for autonomy, 8, 12, 111
Respect for human relationships, 111
Respect for persons, 12
Respondeat superior (vicarious liability),
122, 403–404
Responsibilities of Users of Standardized
Tests, 183
Reversibility test, 21
Roe v. Wade (1973), 287
Role models, in education, 382
Romantic relationships. See Sexual or
romantic relationships
Rural communities, 236–237
S
Salgo v. Leland Stanford Jr. Univ. Bd. of
Trustees (1957), 97
Same-sex marriage, 83. See also
LGBTGEQIAP+; community
Scapegoating, in group counseling, 329
School counseling
accountability in, 416
certification for, 38
confidentiality in, 293–294
diversity issues, 302–304
dual-role conflicts, 300–301
FERPA requirements, 151
history of, 43
School violence, 299–300
Scope of practice
challenges to, 52–53, 190
complaints involving, 198
Secondary traumatic stress disorder, 174
Self-actualization, 31
Self-awareness
gender bias and, 72
in multicultural competence, 67
of needs and motivations, 86–87
in professional practice, 8
as virtue, 13
Self-care, 177, 397
Self-disclosure
of counseling students, 376, 388
of counselors, 246, 331
Self-growth experiences, 374
Self-injury, 201–202
Self-protection, records for, 146, 147f
Session limits, 89
Sex trafficking survivors, 300
Sexism, 72
Sexting, 262
Sexual attraction
to clients, 255
in supervisory relationships, 401
Sexual harassment, 302
Sexual orientation. See Affectional
orientation; LGBTGEQIAP+
community
Sexual or romantic relationships
with clients, 198, 199, 232, 250
researchers-study participants, 425
student-faculty, 386
supervisor-supervisees, 401
Skills
as competence component, 160
education and training in, 374–376
in multicultural competence, 69
in professional practice, 8
Slander, 348
Sliding scale fees, 352
Slippery slope phenomenon, 9, 21x
SOAP notes, 145
Social constructivism, 19
Social isolation, and social media, 261
Social justice, 64, 375
Social media, 260–263, 277
Social media addiction, 261
Social relationships
among group members, 332–333
with clients, 243–245
Social workers
defined, 56
education and training, 35
medical model approach, 31
primary service of, 34
Socioeconomic status bias, 72–73
Sole custody, 323
Sole proprietorships, 351
Special harm (legal concept), 348
Specialty counseling
accreditation of, 51, 166
certification of, 39, 166
competence and, 166–167
professional identity and, 50
Spiritual and religious considerations
in multicultural counseling, 74–75
in value conflicts, 78
Split custody, 323
Standards for Counseling Supervisors
(ACES), 396
Standards for Qualifications of Test Users
(ACA), 183
State agency certification, 38

-- 590 of 593 --

568 	Subject Index
State licensure, 37
Statutes, 22. See also Laws; Legal issues;
specific issues
Stigmatization
from counseling, 100
from diagnosis, 188
of mentally ill, 110–111
Storage of records, 139, 153–154
Strategic family therapy, 317
Student clients. See Minor clients; School
counseling
Students of counseling. See Education and
training
Subordinates, and confidentiality, 122–123
Subpoenas, 155–159
for appearances at proceedings, 156–157
court orders and, 155
defined, 155
discovery in litigation and, 156
to educational institutions, 151
interrogatories and, 157
record keeping and, 154
responding to, 120, 129, 156
turning over records, 158
validity of, 156–157
Substance abuse counselors, 38
Substance abuse programs, 152–153
Suicide and suicidal clients
bullying and, 203
cultural differences in rates of, 83, 200
documentation and, 204
duty to report or protect, 125, 199, 204,
294
guidelines for managing, 204–206,
205f–206f
risk assessment, 199–200
risk factors, 202
self-injury and, 201–202
sexual dual relationships and, 252
Summative feedback, 394
Supervision. See Administrative supervision;
Clinical supervision
Systems theory approach, 244, 303, 313, 318
T
Tarasoff v. Regents of University of Califor-
nia (1976), 209, 403
Taskforce on Counselor Wellness and
Impairment, 175
Taxes, 350
Teamwork, 57, 124–125, 337
Technology and technology applications,
258–283
in ACA Code of Ethics, 17
advances in, 259–256
client behavior monitoring, 280–280
client communication, 270–271
client education, 270
client use of, 260–263
clinical supervision, 276–277, 397–398,
405
counselor education and, 275, 373–374
documents, guidance to counselors, 267,
268f–269f
diversity issues, 282–283
electronic record keeping, 278–279, 279f
e-mail, 270–271, 272–274
for maintaining competence, 169
office security systems, 277
online consultation, 257
social media, 260–263, 277
in teaching, 275, 373
telephones and voice mail, 271–272, 273f
testing, 275
virtual counseling, 263–270
Telemedicine, 270
Telephone use, 271–272, 273f
Terminally ill clients, 81, 307
Termination of employment, 340
Termination of service, 92–93, 346
Testimony under oath, 158
Testing practices
competence and training in, 182–183
diversity issues, 186
explanations to clients, 184–185
online testing, 275
release of test records, 184
scope of practice challenges and, 52–53
test development, 183
test security and copyright, 183
Text messages
for client communication, 270–271
sexting, 262
Therapeutic touch, 249–250. See also Physi-
cal contact
Therapist–patient sex syndrome, 252
Third-party reimbursement. See also Health
care plans
diagnosis and, 187–188, 360
fee policies and, 352
freedom of choice legislation and, 55
health plan type and, 360–361
privacy issues, 139
Time orientations, 84
Title I (Americans with Disabilities Act), 82
Title law, 37
Title VII (Civil Rights Act), 82
Tort law, 22
Touching. See Physical contact
Training. See Education and training
Transfer of records
client request for, 154
confidentiality of recipients, 150
ethical standards, 138
FERPA requirements, 151
written permission for, 139, 345
Transgender clients. See LGBTGEQIAP+
community
Treatment teams, 57, 124–125, 337
Triadic supervision, 397
Triangulation, 321
Tripartite relationship, in consultation, 391
Trust, in counseling relationship, 85, 252
Turf issues, 190
U
Under-diagnosing (downcoding), 187
Unethical behavior
in colleagues, 219–223, 222f
complaints against counselors, 215–219
Unified Statement on Anti-LGBTGEQIAP+
legislation, 80
Universality test, 21
Unwarranted complaints, 223
Upcoding (over-diagnosing), 187
U.S. Constitution, 22, 82, 114, 340, 393
Utilitarianism, 10
Utility, in confidentiality, 111
Utilization review, 93
V
Value conflicts, 77–80
Values
bracketing, 4, 80
in Code of Ethics, 77, 80–81
defined, 4
in family counseling, 314–315, 315f
in group counseling, 334
personal versus professional, 4, 80–81
role in consultation, 412–413
Veracity, 8, 13
Vicarious liability (respondeat superior),
123, 403–404
Vicarious traumatization, 174
Video technologies, 30
Violence in schools, 299–300
Violence prevention, 126, 207–211
Virtual counseling, 86
advantages of, 264–266
informed consent, 264–265
limitations and boundaries, 266–267
rapidly changing environment, 267–270
telehealth platforms, 263
Virtual learning, 369, 382
Virtual relationships, 232
Virtue ethics, 8, 11, 13
Vocational rehabilitation counseling, 38, 39,
43–44
Voice mail, 272
Vulnerable adults, 304–309. See also Elderly
adults
abuse or neglect of, 304–307
confidentiality and, 125, 126, 128–129
informed consent for, 102, 105, 306, 309
legal issues, 309
W
Walden v. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2010), 78
Walk and talk therapy, 232
Ward v. Wilbanks (2010), 78, 372, 378, 380
Washington v. Glucksberg (1997), 307
Wellness, of counselors, 175, 177
Wellness model, 31–33, 2f, 187, 188
Westbook v. Penley (2007), 116
White privilege, 67
Wickline v. State of California (1986), 362
Women
feminist ethics, 11, 18
gender bias, 72, 192
Working poor, 355
Writing, professional, 417–420, 420f. See
also Publication

-- 591 of 593 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 592 of 593 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 593 of 593 --

