Okay. So any thoughts from these case studies identifying, um, legal requirements? Um, case study one. Why did you guys think this is the 74 year old Caucasian American with two adult sons? In his home. I'll just read it with his small pension and social Security check. Both ends are unemployed, not interested in seeking employment and spend their time drinking. Spare time drinking. Bill has been beaten several times and is currently recovering. He hasn't reported the beatings anyone because he's, uh, feared a more severe beating. And for sharing a story so slightly I when I told him about it. What are the requirements here you think? Or this individual. Um, well, we talked about our group was, um, talking to Bill about that and making a report to DPS within six months. Um, and then, uh, talking about potentially if he feels comfortable going home because he mentions, uh, I'm a goner. So, like, who's our friend? You know, I should stay at a hotel. Uh, good, good. So the report is the requirement, and then safety planning for you. What happens next? Okay. All right. The next one is the 12 year old African American female, um, telling her counselors about bladder infections. She's become withdrawn and her grades are declining. Her parents are divorced, and now she's living with her mother's new boyfriend, who, um, is a drug addict and a phone who says and recently about looking at child pornography and is taking care of daddy. Uh. The child. I want to talk about with this one. Yeah. You guys are my foot, right? You guys need to other groups? Yeah. I was it was very interesting when we asked you about, um, reports of police. Yeah. This is, uh, my. Not a very complicated situation. You want to say? Uh, yeah. Um, but you said. No, that is really not that. Um, open the investigation. Anything that CPS needs to do that, which is, um, which is very difficult not to do this and actually let them go. And, um, also, we will talk about how we can keep this, uh, so that soon as we can protect. So not to call because this kind of step father could be actually waiting for in the waiting room because he has a, um. Right. Yeah. He's the caregiver. Yeah. They her here. And, um, that's another situation because, uh, but I remember when we did some of the, um, uh, training that was kind of situation about, uh, and um, and it was we we can be also, uh, overprotective sometimes. Who are the counselors because we can see situations bigger than, um. And is that all of the time? The balance is definitely. There is a lot of suspicion. Yeah. Going on. Yeah. And, um. Yes, of course, uh, um, uh, medical issues with the blood. Uh, yeah. And also the mom is working with she is this person is. Yeah. All this with this, uh, the more time with his job is definitely, uh, to do everything to keep the child this, like, longer. I feel we will speak with the CPS and, uh, maybe to call them, um, you know, the maybe just actually call the mom, and she would simply go off and maybe sulk about if she didn't go with a different voice, or maybe grandma or somebody else. And I'm sure the investigation will be. Yes. Yeah, yeah. You guys did a good job of identifying the need to consult with the mom and get the mom on board if possible, and assess of that. If she's in a place where she can take some action and to report, is that requirement? Okay. Anything else? The second, third one is, um, actually talking about counseling. It's more of a just an example of how, um, what can happen. Um, and then the last one is a seven year old. With also kind of suspected, uh, sexual abuse potentially. Wow. Any other thoughts from your discussion? Yeah. To have it for purpose. Oh, I33. Uh huh, yeah, I know, I know, I counsel you wonder if ever heard this. Yeah. It's not really orders. How do you then. Obliged if we have enough information to report that. You mean if you overhear it from someone else? If we're there and we hear it, we're like standing. Yeah. You're not in the role of a counselor. I think you can always. You can report. My understanding is not required when it's not, you know, in you're about to say, well, I think you're right. I think that's especially with the child. Thank you. Thank you. That's my understanding. I've asked that before. It is something that is, I think the it would be good to call and, you know, if you're worried about it, but, uh, you know, the mandatory part of it outside of your role is a little bit, um, right area. But yeah, I think we can we can always take that step and say, I saw this. This was my role in this situation. I'm not a you have to explain that you weren't in the role of being a counselor, but that you still felt, you know, that you needed to report it. Yeah. Yes. You're talking about that. That wasn't one of the areas, but a situation where there's an elder who had any child. And when they got. Into the fact that they operate in working. Um, but they're not necessarily like what they're often hearing for them. And her hearing is starting to, you know, um, be a potential giver, but their child has it, like, sounds like you're not necessarily the caregiver at some point. Like, does that fall into a situation where it's like, well, you're live with them, you know, parent you can see that you're parenting here and, you know, offering it. But yeah, being required to care for their. Life, you know, something like that. I would probably talk to them about this. You know, look, you're thinking about this. I just provide some special education. You know, I want to clear. This table up here and provide it for them with that. Um. But, you know. I always try to facilitate their interactions before, like, it's another party, you know, it's on the board or them, but, yeah, at some point. Yeah, that would be. Yeah. I forget what the actual, you know. Okay. Where does the law say he could look specifically at the law. It's always good to get legal advice if there is a question there, you know. But I have some of the ask is linked here. And so with a legal guardian, you know, what does that mean. Adult with a developmental disability. Um, and then here's the ask about living in a family's home, receiving services from an agency. You know, so it may be they're kind of on the cusp of some of those, I'm guessing. But yeah, if you have specific questions, you know, talking to a lawyer, but maybe first warning and providing some psychoeducation about what it means to care for an adult provider and getting support there. And, um, so that they're not isolated. They get what they need so that they can do that. Well, if you're concerned about them, do you want to be an elder? There's adult protective services. Yeah. Okay. We're going to talk briefly kind of about ethical standards in family and group therapy. But we will stop. Uh. Um, a little before nine. I want to give you guys an hour to do the practice exam. So. And I'll give you, like, a little break if you need to go bathroom or something. Um, okay. So in groups and family therapy, of course, confidentiality is a little different because we can't guarantee that all of everyone will keep information confidential. So generally, again, privileges waived if, uh, in group um if there's a third party registering counseling. Um, there are various ethical standards. So along with the ACA code of ethics, there's also marriage and Family Therapy Association, fashion, Family therapy, Code of Ethics, and National Association of Marriage and Family Counselors. Um and informed consent also gets complicated. So who gives consent? Um, um, on behalf of the family is a question. Uh, so you have to address these things when you start thinking about if you're doing family work. Um, a child's consent isn't usually required, but it's good practice to get everyone's consent to the process. Um, are there any reluctant participants? What do you do if someone doesn't want to be a part of counseling? So always need to be kind of thought through and identified, addressed and then informed consent. Yes. Michael. Um, so kind of going back to confidentiality and, um, the difference between like a family versus a group setting. Yes. I'm wondering if there's been a difference as far as broaching that with the group versus the family. Just with the group. Yeah. Um, potentially all of them are individuals who are strangers to each other in the family. They all know each other. Yeah. So I'm just curious if there be a difference in, like, approaching confidentiality as far as, like. Yeah. Oh, my aunt's a talker. She's going to tell us every, you know, everything. Yeah. What do you think the differences are like. What comes to mind with, uh, different considerations. So for a family, like you said, there are they're in a family, so they're living together. And a lot of times. Um, confidentiality might be less of a concern, I would think, in some ways, because they're always together. I mean, um, I guess the concern would be like, if you want to create boundaries around only talking about some certain topics at counseling, sometimes that's not really confidentiality, but that is sometimes done like hot topics. Wait, we can talk about those. Okay. Um, within family counseling, we'll get into this, but it's more about keeping secrets from each other often, rather. You know, do you? If a parent's like if, if you find out something from, uh, one of the parents is that disclosed to the other parent, that kind of thing. That's right. That's more the sticky point. But the groups, you want to get them on board, not to share each other's information outside of the group. Right. Yeah. But we'll get into that a little bit with like how to deal with that because their counselors have a different opinion on that. Um, yeah. So again, the informed consent process is often about, you know, giving, uh, getting consent from everyone, getting them on board, telling them what's going to happen. And, you know, some counselors require that all family members are present to discuss doing that kind of thing. So if anything, if you have some specific structural guidelines, um, there's some more questions. So addressing reality that there could be a change as a result of counseling, um, and that kind of giving them, you know, understanding what they might be getting into and talking about expectations or goals because it's a different kind of, um, different than individual counseling because any the structure should be identified and agreed upon by everybody. Um. Family counseling is priority to the good of the family. So unless it's otherwise stipulated, the cases like the the family is the client. Um. So talking again as a family to encourage members to question how pricing relates to their needs and goals as well as to the family. What is the goal of our family? Helping them create family goals and what they hope for? All right, so family secrets this is. How to do things open here. Right. So this is oh. Um. Um. I see I used to be able to play. With you. Okay. Okay. And. We. Uh. Uh. So this is all right. That's. All right. It's, um. And in couples counseling, sometimes you get one side of the story or you get one a secret, especially. And I guess a complete consensus on what counselor should do. There are several theories that suggest a no secret policy. So, like Portman's, uh, some of the other ones you might get trained on. But they're book states. And I think this is smart, that if you believe that no secret should be allowed, you do need to have that as part of your disclosure statement. Um, so that anyone coming to counseling would know that that is the policy and that that would need to be disclosed. So, um, yeah. So what do you guys think? What are what kind of policies might you. And I know you're still learning about this, and you still have both group and family therapy to take. So couples and family, um, to kind of work this out. But what are your thoughts now? You. How would you handle. What about your policy? About family secrets? Yes. Really? I mean, the top of my head right now, I feel like I hear the secret code. It's a couple coming in together. I give them individual counseling, then put. Okay, I don't need to tell, but I came in as a unit trying to do something for the unit. I can't do that effectively. Like. Yeah. Do we start breaking up the individual therapy? When? Uh huh. Uh huh. Good. Anybody disagree? Uh, yeah. I don't say that because I get the feeling I have that exactly to say about the therapeutic alliance. Because if you're working with a couple and you know the secret, that means you hiding the secrets from another partner, which is enough therapeutic alliance anymore. Because that's just not that I could say. Um, uh, relationship is good. Um, that's why they they they said there's no secrets at all, because you can't work like this way. I really like that. I think because that's what we need. Because what is how we can work for a healthy relationship. It's secrets between them. Because our old goal, I think, is their business, actually, to make this family a health as possible. And that here's the secrets. Keeping some of them is very unhealthy, which is why we need to help to bring it up. And they say, you you taking the, um, partner out and talk about this. And that is the part that you that, uh, have the option to so by himself or the therapist will tell. Um, yeah. So again you're in alignment here. Yeah. So I think I'm also going to say that I feel like allowing secrets to speak a lot more opportunity for ethical issues and like having a clear policy about it. Uh. You have a real clear goal from the beginning with the kidnaping. Yeah, and there tends to be more of Mafia structure and family there because there's so many people. I this saying, but most of my code of ethics is beneficence, because I probably would exceeded it if I did to. I am here working with people, but you're supposed to benefit the relationship? I think so we need to come up with the pros. My benefit is one of the people bias, but probably not apply beneficence in some cases to the other community. And so I think it's good code that way that people see that together. Yeah, that's a good point. So keeping them together would help you facilitate that. My comment on the counterpoint is that if you don't hear the person feedback, getting the reference to that, but putting your client. Like if for example, in this scenario, if she's, uh, if you're wanting to if she wanted, if she's wanted to see you. Right. And her husband can't come by denying her services, is that not doing harm? I think in disclosure, you would would talk about what you're comfortable or you are you need to see would you want to do that right. Mhm. Yeah. There could be an argument for. For other I mean that again there's not complete consensus yet. Yes. You know I think is a good argument for like doing some type of talk about like an individual coming out that might open up the gate. What's your core is that we're going to reveal this next. We have no secret policy. Uh huh. Um, as opposed to thinking, okay, how do we prepare it beforehand? It's like, you know, I think that there is something to having a voice to where secrets are acceptable for a period of time with the knowledge of those who, um, or maybe someone, uh, spouse engaged in and needed some help in terms of how do I share this in the, um, harmful way. So you're saying that as a immediate might call, kind of a thing like an immediate disclosure, but helping the the family or the individual get to a place of disclosure? Um, yeah. Sometimes it is helpful to have individual counselors and a family counselor with different roles, too. Um, yeah, I was gonna say kind of a peer said those things are something I was thinking about as if you are seeing it in particularly family. And one parent comes to you and wants to have this private session with you based on something that's going on in the family. What's your ethical obligation to refer out or say yes on that session when you have no secrets? Like where? Where does that come from? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Good. Question with no answer. Question. I'm sorry I missed one. I don't know what it was about. Like it's okay. Wondering. Yeah. No, I was wondering, you know, I'm not looking for like, a direct answer. Pondering. Yeah. I think that wrestling is important if you're going to do marriage and family work to get specific training and to have some clear policies on these things, because otherwise it gets sticky and then you're not sure you know what to get with. You can point back to a policy. Here's a planning question if you feel comfortable, what would you do in that situation? Tell me the situation. Family member right. So that's family therapy. Yes. And somewhere in what individuals I would say, uh, member of the family comes to you and says, hey, I want to have a private session with you about something that's going on in the family. Uh huh. How would you approach that? What would you say to that person? Yeah. So it would depend on the way that the sessions have been planned. Right. If if we say from the get go, we aren't going to do individual sessions and, um, then I would say that's against what family therapy is and that it doesn't align with my gut, my method or whatever it is, you know, or if it if I if there's disclosure based on, you know, everything they say. And if you could also tell them we can meet individually, but then we'll need to bring whatever it is to the. The group. But yeah, I like boundaries and structure. So if I was doing family therapy I'd say this is for family therapy. But I can refer you to an individual therapist. Yeah. So. So in short, it's it's really. It depends. Yeah. Yeah. Actually. Like in a family or couple situation, one person is going to. Okay. So if you're feeling insurance you have to have an identified plan. Most insurances don't pay for couples. If in a situation where one one person is a failed client for any purposes, is it not ethical to ever have a session? But they're not there. Yet. That's another great point. Yeah. So structuring family sessions is really important so that everyone understand, you know what the point and yes for having a targeted or identified client base. This is family care. Like these are the rules that we have to abide by. And then like here, like, uh, conceptually the family is the clients, not, you know, what may be going, but I don't. Know. Yeah. I'm just trying to think what trend around that like of having multiple people, but that doesn't mean. So you have people from the same family. You can go twice. Yeah. Yeah. Sometimes you can bill a family session like insurance. So pay more for family sessions even though you're billing it under an individual. Some assurances from when I was, you know, when I've been in, um, when I was in building insurance. So. Yeah. Okay. Very late in topic. So, you know, working with families is very intimate. And so, um, there's often a temptation to align with one family member. You know, I hear this a lot in internships. It's like, oh, I really am struggling because I align more with the wife or the husband, you know, and I it's really hard for me to stay neutral. And that's important to process. Right. Because it's it's a reality. And so to just recognize your biases and so that you can process those. Um, and you know, I think things like helping the couple again be the be the client together. So helping them establish their values, helping them establish who they want to be, the focus on them as a couple, always bring that back, just like you saw with the the mom, you know, kind of taking the focus off of the child that happens in that family, too, where there's the temptation to, like, not keep the family as the focus, but keeping your focus for the purposes and. Theoretical perspective help a lot, helping identify goals. Um, yeah. So like I've said, it is quite different than the foundations of individual counseling. And so, uh, developing competence with um, takes, you know, takes some effort. So joining different associations and tailoring your educational continuing education credits and things like that, getting certifications if you're wanting to do, um, marriage and family couple and family work, uh, is really important. There is even a specialization out there now. And cut programs for, um, family and couples counseling. Um, another big ethical concern with family and couples counseling is domestic violence. So, um, this is a complex thing that always be, uh, um, aware of the difficulties of working with couples when there is abuse occurring, it's usually not recommended that they come together. So then you do want to do individual counseling. Typically the book points to possible like there's some research about telehealth working potentially for domestic violence and always assessing for children in the home because of reporting requirements, if there's, um, domestic violence. And so establishing safety plans with the victim is really important. And I would say if somebody has an anger problem, you want to establish safety plan. Visits are more common and shared in family work. So um, there's usually high. Yeah, just high levels of distress because I think of like child custody litigation and things like that. So, um, having a good lawyer that you can consult with. And yeah, sometimes couples come in, are hoping for, like a favorable letter from you or something like that for child custody. So being clear at the outset if that's something you don't offer. Yes. Can you offer that I agree, yeah, I guess, but I don't know. Yeah. Themselves up there like that. Right. Right. Yeah. Um group counseling. So to engage in that kind of service at a minimum of group work is preparation and supervised experience. So you get both of those through this program. And again, I do think it's one of the unique things that counselors offer. And the students love it. I know you guys will get stressed about it because we group and implement it. And you're usually usually in your spring semester during internship. And, uh, yeah, it's it's a really fun way. A different skill set, though, to do group counseling and want to make sure you get informed consent that you do sometimes like, um, screening and selection to make sure that it's an appropriate, uh, that, you know, the group is what it's supposed to be. So if you have a targeted audience, everyone to apply for fulfills those requirements of being in the group. Yeah. Um, so it's generally the ideal group is that they're all there for like a similar topic. Yeah, there's psycho educational groups are then there and there's process groups and um, yeah. So typically there is. A. You have criteria for being a member of the group and the guidelines and rules for what the group structure looks like. But I think it's really fun to do group work because you get to see people's personality with other people, and it just brings out relational dynamics and stuff in a different way. I mean, certainly that happens in families, but with groups it's, you know, usually time limited and you know, you're there interacting with people they don't know previously. And so that's the leader who emerges. You know, you sometimes get more questions. Yeah. And this is still like within the hour window as far as like a normal council session. They can go a little longer. Yeah. Hour and a half. We have students doing all kinds of things right now. Some of them do, um, like a weekend thing with children that involves like a four hour window of groups and, like, activities come to play. So there's some flexibility. Uh, of course you want to identify what exceptions there will be to confidentiality and getting permission from parents of your children. I don't think, um, schools have to do that, but you should be getting out of practice. Um, yeah. And then leaving a group with that? Yeah. You would want to address that. If a member desires to leave the group and encourage them to discuss the decision, ideally with the group, especially if it's a longer term group, it's not just a psychopath, but I think it's also about using group counseling. Are they often come up. So, um, that's something to talk about. Often at the beginning before you get into the group is how we're going to express our values. And, um. Um, yeah, they, you might experience, you know, opinions and values that are different than your own and how to deal with that. So setting some ground rules around that. Okay, so this is a case study. Um, so this is an example. So Judith, a counselor to high school and um, has many clients. She's seen experiencing difficulties because their parents have recently been divorced. She's decided to create a group for adolescents whose parents are divorced. Keeping in mind that there's no guarantee that group members will keep secret. What do you think? What kind of ground rules? We'll just talk about this as a group. Um, yeah. What would be important to screen? For what? And what kind of rules might be important if you had, um, you were going to see children who? Parents whose parents were getting divorced so recently. Divorce and a school when there are some sites that go into schools and many groups even. Yes. You know how many kids, uh, um, you didn't know that people keep secret statements about expectations. Okay, let me say here, stay here. Uh, I think yeah, yeah. And a school, especially right when they're gonna run out and be around the other peers. Um. You can. You'd want to be aware of. Yeah. I have to set the ground rules of the confidentiality and what you're allowed to say. What is close of expecting that somebody's teenager looks okay? Uh huh. In case they say, you know, when getting a feeling for, you know, um, um, this for some of them, they might need to have that part so they don't get shot. Uh huh. Oh, okay. Yeah. Actually, in a public meeting. You think about their experience of symptoms and. Uh, yeah, they're talking about their family, which can be a sensitive thing if there's other kids there. Yeah. And I think, uh, already a lot of schools. So what? Um, the kids, um, sharing information about the situation with the parents. Parents? Friends with a. Yeah. And that's everything that's going on. That small communication stuff, I think is most important to say that is definitely, um, so with that, no mom or dad, because some of the teenagers or if I can talk with their friends, I can speak with them, um, um, because they, they they they don't get that. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Yes. Yeah. My friend. Um, yeah. And after that. Oh. Oh. Like telling them. Yeah. That's about to happen. Yeah. I, you know, sometimes they might be better, but, um, there are some things they shouldn't be, and. Yeah. Um. Oh. I read a little bit here. And I know that you remember that. And that is coming up right here. Yeah. Anyway, I wanted to give you a few things. Um, or do that one. How do you manage that? Like if they're actively disposing of their stuff. Yeah. Yeah. It comes up. Yeah. That's a good question. Oh yeah. That, that that was that was that question was I knew that. Okay. I thought you wanted to respond okay okay. Yeah. No. Yeah I think you want to be in control in this situation. Right. You want to say, oh, that sounds really here, you know, and also not, um, your 1:00 in group. I think you might go, but. Yeah. Don't let one thing to take over the whole group that that person safe. I have to download. I think it's for effective for that person. Investigators. Um, you can actually have some of the sessions. Yeah, some of the session about it. Because everybody told me when I was about to die and maybe to bring it up that little bit more. Information and can, um, I'm just important. So, yeah, you can take a basic income. Yeah. About you and then other things. Um, I think for the group setting, especially with the teenagers. Important, um, discrimination, like, uh, like anything about social status, anything about the race? Yeah. And yeah, because that's a lot of stuff. Yeah. You know, respecting people. Yeah. I love so screening all the things about us, but I would probably make a point of having a way for members of the group to communicate with me anonymously. So, like, having, like, a little drop box, like the things that they wanted me to say but didn't feel comfortable saying in the room. I just kind of put that in there because, you know, despite, you know, a poor and having a general shared topic to discuss about certain things or especially in high school, you know, public status, as you mentioned, they're just not comfortable saying in front of people. Yeah. So we're still getting that opportunity to say, you know, I want to say this thing and maybe seeking individual counseling as. Yeah, it's a big responsibility, isn't it? Here, tell me exactly what you like. Yeah. That's right. You have a great. Yeah, well, you can afford it. And maybe even allowing them to be a part of that. Um, I don't know how you keep working in, uh, categories and, um, you know. Like, I mean, handle in multiplayer when. You see that? But you got to navigate that. Yeah. How do you repair. On the document? I don't know. But yeah, I do. Have to. Share with that why. We have. For that. Yeah. So that's been in the group class. That's the team that's at my place. Okay, so yes, informed consent is paramount. So a lot of things you guys have talked about the purpose of the group, potential risks. Um, what can and can't be provided within the group setting? Division of responsibilities if there's leaders and participants, um, freedom to leave the group. Uh, consultation if there's a crisis that arises individually. So, um, and freedom, um, pressure from the group to to do certain things. So those are all things. Okay. So do you guys want, like, a five minute stretch break before we talk about. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Come back at 9:00. Am. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. I was wondering if I could have a minor extension on this week for, um, I or my youngest. Tonight is, um, a state tournament in Spokane. Okay, so there'll be much typing on the drive. Yes. But I was just wondering if I could maybe, uh, go. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Just when you to me to provide. Okay. I can answer. Okay. Um, I mean, everything in this event. Um, for references and internal data. I was like, yeah. Yeah. Because on first glance, it's like. It looks like the 28. And it was really glad that you talked about beneficence, because that was the one that I was like, this sounds wonderful. Um, and yeah, also, your haircut is great. Thank you. I know, I know, I know that I would like you right away. Huh? It's such a drastic change. Yeah. I didn't mean for it to be a drastic change. I was like, oh, yeah, I think it's great for spring. Okay. Um, okay. Oh, yeah. I think there's two references I have. Yeah. Yeah. And you want to get information together? I think that's right. Yeah. I think it was just like an assembly. Yeah. Okay. And I mean. You know, you can imagine that. Um, so I just me on the first one. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So we have this link goes where it says yeah. Yeah. Um. Right. Yeah. But the the second thing is identify other bits. That would be exciting. Yeah. And then, um, you know, I read something about current. To history. Yeah. Okay. And. The history piece. Why are we looking at how it's shaped the counseling field? Uh, yeah. Evidence of your theory about anything. Like, you know, you're seeing something. You know. What I mean? Yeah. I mean, now you see justice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. The next one is just the UFC has. Attempted to build a bridge within the church. Yes. I don't know the references. Yeah, but, you know, maybe if you include, like, they just say. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. And I feel. Like. I just feel like, you know. So many of us. All of us have. So. Much in terms of like us. Yeah. Yeah. So. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, uh, subsidized housing. Yeah. I'm like, okay. So we can. Go. And then, you know, because I. Wasn't able to recycle. But they. Don't get there. I. Don't. Know how to get. There. So hopefully we'll be ready. To go. Yeah. I like that. Yeah. All right. Have you talked to some? Of the. Things that many people do. Better. Yeah. That was. Yeah. I think about. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, I. Am already having a hard. Time. Yeah. Um. So they all say the. Same thing. Yeah. So how do you see those? I'm just having him. And I have to. Go after the. Other. Person. So. That they have. All of it. This. Is a. Whole. Lot better. This is how you okay? Know. Said. I was. Doing it. So I want to give you guys time here. And so. Let me show you. So what we're going to do is I'm going to have you guys, I have these I have actually three case studies listed in discovery. And, um, you're going to choose one of them to work with by yourself for ten minutes or so. 10 to 15 minutes, maybe you may. It's not like a full time to write everything, but it's a time. And after that quick outline, which is really all you need, and then we're going to find a partner. You're going to find a partner who's chosen the same case study as you and compare notes. So what did they identify that you haven't um, and get their ideas. And then you're going to find a partner with a different case study. So you can hear what they did for their case study and share yours. And then we're going to, uh, switch again. So that's why we need a little bit of time so we can get through all four of these. Um, and what you're going to do is look at the case studies and identify ethical issues and mandated actions, um, legal issues and mandated actions, and then identify short term and long term goals. I don't think you'll get to the summarizing it that you can do that. You know, we have time in the past, but basically you're identifying any ethical issues, any legal issues, and then the steps that you're going to take. Um, and. So those are the pieces ethical issues, legal issues, mandated actions within those. And then yeah how you want to describe those in the short term a long time for tick. Okay. Yeah. Any any questions about that before. So you know yeah okay. So for this you want to remember the role of consultation and supervision. So I always say I would consult okay. Um that's an important piece right. Like we have to remember that we're not isolated. Um connect. Consider the benefits of connecting the client with resources. Like I always think about. I would research appropriate resources, that kind of thing. So you don't have to have every specific, like I would call this agency or whatever, but you would say, you can say I would, you know, I would research appropriate referrals, if that makes sense. So you would take that step, um, remembering the importance of informed consent that may come up. Um, remember that addressing dual relationships as this um, uh, often involves discussion and informed consent. So if there's any dual relationships in the scenario. So if you happen if the scenario says, uh, you know, we our kids go to school together, you want to address that, you know, that you would talk about that or if it says something like, we used to be neighbors, like you would want to remember to address that. But that's one of the ethical issues, right? So not just reporting to CPS but identifying ethical things you talked about like boundary like what's your comfort. Like, um, getting informed consent. Getting supervision. Those are all ethical and ethical things you want to consider. Uh, remember age of consent. That's. Uh, for treatment, which is what, 13 for sex, which is 16 medical services similar um confidential. The importance of using clinical judgment but looking for opportunities to involve parents. So balance. So you want to show like if it's a child you know how are you. You're considering that they are not just being isolated kind of their parents. And so would you involve them? Um, yeah. How about you are there is it considering considerations in mind, like beneficence or justice or autonomy? You know, you can use that when you know. Yeah. Um, yeah. Consider referrals and, you know, important in Washington. So really, you know, I would think about like what are the ethical things, things like boundaries, things like supervision, things like, um, you know, um, other, uh, things you talked about ethically having promoting autonomy and then legally, are there concerns about a supporter, um, activities like that that I might have to place. So and then what would be what would be the sex? So any questions about that? Okay. So much. Yeah. So you have to like, um, if you want there to be one bullet point here. Um, is I want I want a written narrative. You can have some bullet points, but yeah, I want to. Yeah. So this is similar to that we have in, uh. Yeah. Yeah, it can be short, but also like here's a scenario. What if an ethical legal considerations what are the different. Yeah. So the in the in discovery there are three I have a. Baby here. So if you yeah. If you open up a practice final in discovery which I thought I had up. But I'm not saying here it's there. Again. It's right. I just practice and then I sit down with him. That. I would see was put up somewhere. Is that right? So work on your own case. So there are there are three cases, three vignettes here. One. Two, three. You can choose the one you want. And, um, we'll go until 920 and just work on identifying what are the ethical concerns, whatever legal concerns. Uh, and what are the steps I would take? So this one has you. I don't think the test says this, but has you break it down between short term and long term. I think that just helps you conceptualize, like what are immediate things I need to do. And long term, I would want to make sure that I consider these things and refer to these agents and stuff. Okay. Right. No. But. But.