I like, I love. You so. Much. I. Feel like. I was like, you know, I figured that, you know, what I was like I said, yeah. I would. Like, we did that. I would like to get our attention. I know, I feel like, oh, we're trying to say yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. All right. We'll go ahead and get started. I started the Panopto, but this is my, my my guys. If I share the my PowerPoint, it doesn't make it doesn't let me make it full screen for him. But can you see it okay if I do that. Think we're great. Yeah. You guys in the back. Yeah. It's going out. All right, all right. How's everyone doing? Any updates? Anything to say? I know this is a busy season, especially for those of you getting started. Uh, are getting internship secure and and semester stuff coming up. So in this class, you have a lot of points. So even though we only have two more classes after this because you have your paper do this weekend and then there are um, then next, the next two classes both have exams. So um, yes, we have uh, we're going to talk about this is kind of our bed bath. We're going to go through technology children and families and then group. Um, and then at the end, I think at the end of the class, we'll do the practice unless we want to do it before we do that final section and group, we might do that. But, um, just so that you get a good sense of what the practice, the exam for next week will be like in that next week. And to me, that's the the written exam where it's closed, nervous. And people always get nervous about it. But it's um, so what we do some practice in class today so you can get a better understanding of that. And it's. Yeah, it's not a I think you guys will have time. It's a lot of the stuff we've been practicing. Uh, but you just said, uh. Yeah, we test about it. And I want to say that I think I mentioned that the Christmas 40 question, and I realize it was 80. I do apologize for that. So I love that. Um, it's because I changed it and I forgot that I changed it. So sorry. It's one there. One point for questions that. Agree with you. It was so much. Easier for you guys did great engineering. Um, yeah, I know it's you know, there's so many details with I think so with the new textbook we added some. Regression for pretty sure. Yeah. Um, so yeah. So you have one more those on the final four chat or the final eight chapters at the end. So, um, very last post, which isn't until the last day of the semester. So we meet in two weeks and then we don't meet until the middle of April, although the group. Yeah, it will be 40 or it's more it's also the same. It's 80. So yeah, I guess that's why you get the full two hours. So that that's that's right. Yeah. So um okay. And then just a quick touch base about practicum. Um, if you have accepted a position with your, with a supervisor, make sure that you complete the professional practice agreement. Um, I'm, I know a lot of you have never gotten that many participants, so as soon as you know who your supervisor is, that, like, formalizes it for them. And if you do want to make sure to do that. Let's see if you can put it in the bill. Yes, but in fact, you need to find it in the same place for the site placement. And then if it's already a site that has within our system, you just put in the supervision date and then you do have a professional practice agreement. I mean, you just those are the two forms they have to get. It's a little bit more if you're adding a supervisor for site. And yeah, make sure you get your liability insurance by the center of the layout. Any questions about any of this stuff? Okay. Yes. Kelly. I think I just want to clarify. Um, so for the summer semester, the in-person classes and, uh, 4th of July. Yeah, our practicum continues until beginning of August, along with that one section that would be aligned with one of our. Yeah. So the practicum. So practicum class is that online. Oh um is that online function. And it essentially is like just like a group supervision plus consultation group. And um you do present some cases in there from your site. And but the first few weeks it's just talking about the site and talking about some, um, supervision matters and things like that. So you have that throughout clinical training that you'll have a week. We all have the same, um, supervisors throughout our firm, which has ever been contracted through the year. Sometimes there's a change and then sometimes there can be a change of time. But I do need to keep you guys at the same time. So I don't know if it's nice to change schedules, but sometimes that doesn't work in my day shift. So yeah, you you can switch with people, but we do ask you to stay in those sections just because it's complicated. Um, if you if you need to switch, just talk to somebody. And so that was something I know I sent those out and we try to do it early so that it's not last minute that you're trying to find someone to switch with. And this way you can see like, who could I switch with before registration? Um, so the online thing isn't anything solid other than I'm just asking you guys to work with each other to make sure you everything find a spot that works, and that the in-person classes read so that the at the beginning of July. Yeah, we just have a month here. You have more of that online. Yeah. So the answer practicum class and and and uh, you know your expectation of the site extends to that first week of August. And some sites want you to play even third. Right. But for us we just activated. Yeah. So we're going to have to fight this to be healthy. Plus the super powers. Yeah. So I think you have three. Yeah. Three other classes. If there's anything that happens, you know, I. And those are the lecture. Thank you so much for that. So three in-person classes and then. And then. Yeah. And then it drops down. This is your heavy semester because it's your last semester of having four classes. If you're on the two year track, the one to have a good time of virtual, uh, uh, being with the instructor, you have somebody? Yeah. What if if at that time of the day we are in the internship site, would that be considered as our time? Yes, you can have that. You can have class time the hour and a half, uh, um, supervision. So even if it's a different schedule or whatever, then. We probably have to do a heads up for the supervisor thing. Yeah. So if you're schedule to be at your site that day, you'll want to have a supervision fire protection plan. I believe that you'll have a client that. Okay. The ethics paper, um, is here. It's in the syllabus, too. But I just want to make sure that you guys saw this because there are three main sections. And just make sure that you are you're addressing each of the subsection sections. So like, um, one of them is to identify other mental health codes that consider the principal. Sometimes people forget that. Um, yeah. Just consider these pieces in each of these sections one and just kind of question clarification, like whether, um, we're identifying other mental health, that's just another because that's just anything besides ACA. Yeah. For example, if I found that code like I found one in Malaysia for counseling workers. Yeah, that would work okay. Yes, I'm going to the history section where he was like, it needs to be relevant. Yeah, I have to get all of those or just some of those or just what do you have? Which one is that? That in the middle where it says, look for evidence. Have one theory, counselor. Identity number one. Number one. Uh, number one. Yeah. Just in the middle of that. Yep. Right there. Oh, okay. I see consider the history of this. The principal in the field. So, yeah. No, the parentheses are just, like, giving you some direction of where to go. Okay. Yeah. So you don't need to this. All right. Yeah. Yes, I have a question. What was hard about ACA standards? Yeah. So is that like a top one? Yeah, that's a good question, Mike. Um, so. The standard is, um, knowledge and legal considerations and the some of the substandard IRBs. So it's just the H. Right? Um. So if you go to section A. Yeah. So A1 is plant where they're A1 A2 a is primary responsibility. So you'll want to address uh. Set. To set points and um three standard. Set of three standard points. That makes sense. So if you do a point way of welfare you also want to address specifically records and canceling plans. And then you could choose another one you could do avoiding harm and then make one with respect to those. So just two of the seven points within the standard. So three standards. And explain how the principle of research is reflected in each of those standards. And then um, two set points in each standard. Question about that? Yes. That's just like our own observation of how to prevent it. Or do we have to, like, uh, use journal articles about how to prevent it? Yeah. This one doesn't have references. So if you'll notice like this one has a reference. Um, and this one. Does not. Yeah. Two biblical references. So if it doesn't say that. If it doesn't say it, these references. Yeah. I mean yeah, I mean the reference is kind of the code. Yeah. I guess you should include that in your references. Sorry, I have a question today. Uh, yeah. With regard to like, what does current council say about this principle? What I covered when I was doing some research is that there weren't many, like I think there were not many, a lot of many articles that said specifically alluding to like, oh, this is how we got to here. Yeah, that I feel like is appropriate. But yeah, I think that's great. I think it doesn't have to necessarily say the word, but you're applying the principle to what you're saying. Okay. Um. Okay. Um. Yeah. How are you? You know, where are we expected to go? At that point, we're probably. So. Yeah, I used to. I mean, AK is now much more open to you using, I think. Is it your your thought, your idea of how to prepare if you want to keep it? I hope you can. I guess I can apply this by or in my work. I like to think, you know, important. Can you see him? Yes. Code. Do you have a time frame? Of with our research article. Yeah, that's a good question. I mean, the last five years to ten years is best. But. And the things like, um, virtue within Christian church tradition could be hundreds of thousands of years old. And that's okay. You know, it's not. So if it's a seminal work or if it's historical work or something like that, then it can be appropriately old. But if you're referencing, you know, um, this paper is less about the, uh, it's not a research paper on like, oh, what's the most current research on, um, you know, impact therapy or something like that? It's more about kind of historical and larger themes within the field so that. Yeah. I think we got we got. Anything. Right? Yeah. Um, I'm assuming the 68 pages in the title. Right. Right. You wanted to know. Abstract. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Uh, you know, it was it. Was the reason I was using the kids in the rubric very carefully. Oh, well, I love it. You know. For ten years, I didn't even know that we could afford it. I didn't know what to use. Yeah. That's good. So, uh, I'll update this. Yeah. No. Abstract. I looked at this, but I didn't read it. So I think, um, you know, I would have gotten the question, so that's great. Um, I think that. Um, okay. Um. Um. Um. Yeah. All righty. So we're going to start with character virtues and talking about beneficence. Um, what then relates to the virtue of hope and suggests, uh, ways to develop hope? Ah, vocational mentoring and practicing Sabbath and worship as hope. Um, hope is something that is also a concept. And now you hear you see that in the literature talking about how to help, um, people establish goals as a way to facilitate hope. It includes agency. So, um, you know, helping people feel like they have power to make changes in their lives. Goal directed energy, pathways and hope is a virtue in, um, many faith traditions. Um, expectation and trusting God. Um, pursuing Christ's kingdom as I desire in Christianity includes patience and expectation. Romans refers to the God of hope filling his people with joy and peace. I've been in the Old Testament a lot and noticed, um, I've read Lamentations and Habakkuk recently, and they both talk a lot about hope is well meant to promise that we will up. But, um, you know, lament. Lamentations is all about lament. Have you guys talked about that in your theology for a little bit? Maybe not. So, um, yeah. Yeah, I would love to hear about that. Uh, you know, I might be a little late. And so this is so lamentation. Care is. So if, you know, um, Jeremiah is a prophet and he writes the book of Jeremiah, and it's all about prophecies, but it's also about the Babylonians taking over Israel and him being pulled into that captivity and kind of desire about that. And then Lamentations is all about the sorrow and, um, pouring out his honest, you know, uh, sadness and anger and everything out to God. And, um, then he right in kind of the middle of the book, he says, yeah, I call this mine. And therefore I have hope because of the world's great love, we are not consumed. His compassions never fail. They are new every morning. Great is by faith. So the Lord is my portion of religion. So you see this theme of like, um, in Scripture about sadness. And then and yet I have hope in the Lord. And that's true in Habakkuk two. Interestingly, um, Habakkuk is also very similarly, uh, a. Um, the prophet who is lamenting. Um, and if you read it really interesting like it is definitely displaying like his his frustrations and, um, disappointments with God. And then, uh, yeah. This is what God actually says to him. So I thought, this is interesting. God says, for the revelation awaits an appointed time. It speaks of the end, and it will not be fast, though it linger. Wait, for it certainly will come and will not to life. So he's saying, wait, have hope. And so we see this theme in a lot of. Like the theological writings. And also, um, it's something I think in counseling that we are hoping to help people facilitate. Like, what do you what's going to help facilitate hope? And then how do you walk that out? You know, that's where the faith being faithful in believing that things are going to get better or come to a different conclusion, maybe a that, um. Uh, and then hope is connected then to that principle of beneficence, working for good, promoting health and well-being in society. Any thoughts about that? We have another chapter that virtue hope, work in that research. Whether that's ethical principles that benefit. Us. I think that's going to be taken into account. Mhm. But I come from a family. So when you have problems the immediate F12 is pretty good. Where like 6 to 8 you know kind of like on the other side. You know I'm just giving you pain. Yeah. Uh because if it's good for me and so I can use my daily affairs. Now, if I didn't have anything like that. These are not a new experience. And that was the case. Why am I really trying to keep it to. And to really focus on making sure that makes sense? Yeah. I think that's a really good point. I think you don't want to be a Pollyanna, or I think a client can really be 2 to 3 people if their cancer is not authentic. And of being kind to put on something, isn't it. You don't mind potentially or. Yeah. Thoughts of some minor faith or something like that. And so I think that's a really important consideration how to do that. Well while keeping hope in mind. Like I think having at least as much as you can from the client, like helping the client decide what the hope is that my goals should be. And then with the client, you know, I think often we start to feel like, well, um, if you suspect, if I, you know. I, I think that usually they have an idea and then. Yeah. I think clients give me a farewell. Any other thoughts? Yes. Me too. Um, so with, uh, with that perspective. I, um, I, um, it's tribulation. Period. And so I feel like, uh, at any point where it's a struggle but needing to aim to do that. Um, no. Absolutely. Not. Are you okay? Yeah, I too, I think, but. Yeah. I think. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. So many stories. Hope the clients are seeing the hope. Or even just your presence. You know that you're just praying and you're believing, and then I. Think that is really powerful. Yeah. Um. And then. How do you. Kind of turn that over? Uh. Uh, I mean, it's not a bad way to worship. Uh, yeah. Yeah. Okay. I'll let you in. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Thank you. That's amazing. Yeah. But, um. Yeah. Yeah, people. And I think that's a good. No, no. Uh, Marlena, I'm not sure that you. Um, I put the different perspectives of the whole, um, um, of abuse of theology classes. I would be like, yes, a picture is. I hope it be just the same. You said about like that, um, surface and under surface. Yes. We under water and under water. The hope is for me, it actually is replayed that you have a hole when you're above the water. That's when you still have that hole. As soon as you've lost this hope, you go. And that means if you're not exist, kind of like hope. I think this is sort of deep in the humanity because this is actually there were no words. I didn't know how to say this. This is not the word. This is kind of action to pull us out from where we are. But like any situation or any struggles that this word can take, that's all. But when you love to lose that, that's it. I think you come in. That's where you are. God says so. You know each and every thing for you. That's how I feel about this work. So that's like a critical thing. Yes. For you. Yeah, yeah. Thank you. I was going to um. Yeah. Referencing ah, the online class, um, one of the articles that I read, um, and wrote about was on, um, Christian Trauma. And there was, it was referencing the lament and lament is not and, and, um, it's something so we're acknowledging the, the difficult things and sitting in that space. But it was saying that lament is that there's a direction to it, like it's pointing us towards something and bringing that pain that in with Jesus. Uh, as not just someone who can empathize and, uh, sit with us in solidarity in our human suffering or as we are with counselors, but that we I don't think it used the word hope, but the idea of hope in that Jesus does that. But also he points us to, uh, a picture of we can work through this. And he essentially, I think it was saying he picks this up, uh, he says with us, finds us in the rubble, and then puts us back together after taking us out of that rebel. So it's like, yes, there is that element of he's present. We're present with someone who is going through suffering. But. We're also making them out and they make a whole piece. Mhm. Um, yeah. That's well-articulated. Well-Articulated like that. Hope includes um a belief in a way out or a direction. Yeah. Pointing someone in the right out. And there's, it's different than optimism. Well it's like oh you know what's happening here. But hope there is a particular direction. Um, yeah. Not that it's going to be easy or, you know, just complaining about things that it's going in the right place and actually think it's not a path that, you know, to sit down straight from here, but you're sitting in for a session with them and I think can help them learn the whole plan. And you can have that. But I still like that. Put it in the paper in the same country card. And this witness that you have, that one or the other, um, he's referencing, uh, a lot. It's just that I think the time is not wasted to speak with him in whatever way. Mhm. Um, sometimes the waiting is impossible. Yeah. And it's an important. Thank you guys. Okay. So yeah, I thought let's spend a minute just reflecting on that. Think of take one of these questions and reflect with a partner, um, about, uh, things that are helpful in, um, this path specifically of being in grad school. What has what are you satisfied with in this last year now? But it's given my two semesters. Um, I haven't even met. Um, yeah. Hope for a continued path in this work. What is what are some signs that are hopeful for you? And I'll give you two minutes just to. Yeah. It's not a I know it's a deep question, but just maybe one thing you hear from each other. If someone has something to say about this, something helpful. But my name is so. Um, intensive talking with you. Okay. What? What sets your personality? I think you're right. I. Think. I knew that it would work. You. Know, I'll move on to the next. Yeah. Uh, I can go through that. No, no, I mean, I was you. Oh, I certainly can answer this question, but it. No for the discussion that we're good at. Yeah. It's like I feel. Like. You know. The first thing you know, I was, you know, I didn't feel that anybody. Yeah. I. I it was really fun. To say, hey, grad school, I guess I. I, I don't know. Yeah, I think that I guess that simple. I guess. You know. It's a this is what I was going to develop. I want to develop over time. There's no growth. I just want to have a new. Okay. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. Okay, well, keep going, but feel free to continue my conversation with us at, um, at dinner, and you can I didn't. We're going to go into technology and counseling. And this is an area that we are getting more and more information every year. I feel like there's like a new state requirement for technology training or a this year for supervisors that have to have a training. Um, which I think Washington State is pretty well, I think all your supervisors have some kind of a training. They just have to acknowledge it on the phone. So if I send that propose your practice agreement to your supervisor, that's usually why. Because they've noticed that they don't have technology training. But I just had to convince them that they do or or they need to do the free Washington thing. Um, you know, so yes. So yes, we do address this in our ACA cards. And so, uh, this is something we want, I want you to reference in your paper because it is a growing thing and it's require it's one of those requirements from. That you have some touch points on. Um, and so, you know, overall, the direction is to attempt to understand the evolving nature of technology in the profession, um, and how we can how the resources can be better used to serve clients and just to be in that, like aware of them, aware of their limitations, aware of any, you know, potential, um, either like confidentiality challenges or, uh, you know, like ethical challenges in using them. Um, so you need to have some, uh, some knowledge of those things and continue to develop as technology develops. Um, okay. So what do you think are some risks and benefits? Um, for sure. So this is something that has, as you know, has really grown in our field. Like when I started, we had no virtual sessions even before Covid, it was very limited. And now most of you will have at least some of your sessions virtually. What do you guys see either in the church or just when you reflect on this thought about, um, what are risks and benefits? Yes. I mean, for benefits, we convenience on the clients part. Yeah, yeah. Huge benefit. Um, so they don't have to drive. They don't have to. They can pop on and talk to you and that it's a lot fewer hours per day. Yeah. Yes. Technology is a function for one reason. The technology doesn't function. When that happens, you'll see it happen in practice. Back pain I've had it. I've seen, you know, you know, like this is the sessions in here, I see it, you know, whatever, you know, so, um, sessions and uh, or. Yeah, the internet goes out or there's an update for teams, right? When you're trying to get more every day. Yeah, definitely. Like body language. Um, like, you know, you see. Are you the reason? Um. Something in. There. Like, you know, there's a lot of these. Yeah. You're right. Yeah. That's a good. So that's a risk that you're not getting. Yeah. I think along the border for the rest of the community here. Maybe people if we want to get information. I don't know if I'm getting the full picture. Maybe you could do better in person or group or whatever. And people not wanting to, like, you know, moving in. This is what I'll do. But yeah, I feel like it almost fits into this. Maybe some people would do better than not get used to that about you saying, yeah, maybe they need to be a person where they benefit more from not wanting to do it. Like, I don't know, why bother. Yeah, yeah yeah yeah I think yeah yeah yeah. And or maybe it can. Be done for you. Right? Uh, I think we're good. Thank you. Um, a lot of people invited, uh, you can go for, like, right, if you can. And also if you even have, like, a private placement, like I said, where you have lower price, that might be an area. Yeah, yeah. So do you remember you bring something on the spectrum? Uh, I don't know, it's just a trade off. But, like, I think sometimes if you have to travel or you to, uh, attend a person session like this. So. Let's face that. If you're just working here and it's, you know, it might be something that you don't necessarily have to offer here. So I think it's supported by professional attack. So I think. You have to those buffers are for me just like I was working on whatever you need. And you know, not only that, but, you know, we have uh, similar to and this is kind of like a play on, uh, you know, I get more insight into clients and work. Yeah. Uh, I also think that, you know, I can. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You're right. You sometimes there's a lot of insight in seeing where someone with their who they can show you. Obviously, my partner might. Be a fool. That's going to have to talk about, um, I work with teenagers and that was very difficult because dealt with, um, it would say when you actually go into personally, you are ready for that and you actually work on that when you're doing that. Uh, online for the teenagers, so much instructions and a very difficult itself to pull out or do something for both adults. Yeah. Be super destructive. And for them this time when it's actually beneficial for them, for some for like work or for for a school situation, they feel very distracted and they still not with me and very, very difficult to bring them up. Um, that was I don't know if some, I think some specific, uh, uh, children and teenagers, it's really about supporting the client and the young kids, you know. Yes. Thank you for getting me. You guys are saying so many more things. And with this question came in here. Yeah, right. Um, yeah. Accessibility. So. Good. Yeah. That's great. So for clients that with disabilities, sometimes it's application challenges. Um, yeah. It's definitely opened up the ability to access. Yeah. Uh, Kelly. And so when, um, you're like I was talking of like, oh, my God, how often like, um, a like a work meeting. You have something up, but you're working on something. How about you imagine working with a client who's actually double? Yeah, yeah. I'm like. Oh, I know you get, like, if you start doing this screen flashing, you know, they're doing other things. They're not with me. I was afraid. I was going to double down on that. And like you have access. Not only are you more accessible if you're in the community, but you've access to a larger number of providers, um, even providers maybe in other states or, uh, um, to give you a better location. That is, the other, uh, population that can benefit is like expats or people that are living internationally. And they maybe there's no a counselor that can speak their language or something, or it's such a small community that they would like someone outside of their community to sell that to you. Um, I think you guys mentioned a lot of these things. There's a few other, um, risks and benefits. Um, cost savings is a benefits. Um, also just increasing training and supervision. I mean, even with our virtual practicum class, those classes used to be in-person, but you guys are so busy that when it's switched online during Covid, it seems that that it was really a benefit to have, especially because it's only an hour and a half that you wouldn't have to travel all the way here for that hour and a half. And so yeah, we try to emphasize keep your cameras on, don't do other things. You don't have access right now, at least twice a week so that we can keep it a a good space for growth and conversation. And I think it is. But we do have to, you know, balance those pieces. How do we not do three things at once? Um, for um, uh, yes. How things should always have informed consent. Um, and do you know, research to make sure that it's covered by insurance and, um, uh, they're one of the codes that say that your clients need to understand that they have a choice not to engage in virtual counseling. So even if that is, uh, you know, you find a different counselor, like, they have to have that option, um, that it needs to be an option, not a requirement that they do that. Um, yeah. Just make sure that you're following laws and that you're aware of your physical location. I think, again, people are getting better and better at that. And there's even virtual backgrounds and things. But just be aware of what your background looks like, including virtual counseling. There are trainings like this. The NBCC offers a certification and distance testing so you can, if that's going to be especially the primary way that you're going to be operating. Um, consider doing that. And like I said, there is no telehealth training. For supervisors challenges that social media and technology have introduced that we might see in counseling. So this is more like what are some challenges that maybe we're seeing in, um, people that are directly related to their relationship with the internet and all that comes with that. Yeah. I mean, the principle of confidentiality issue. Um, we have to create a whole new, not necessarily tech industry, but a whole new section of tech that's HIPAA compliant. Uh huh. That we have to use, we can't use. You know, Facebook, I said it, you know, reminder for when I have set up a session with the client. Yeah. Yeah, you have to. You have to comply, I think. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. We want them to be like. Hey, hon, uh, apparently like to be able to speak to you. Yes, yes. Okay, well, this is good information. Always get advice and. Yeah. Yeah. So they might be bringing that to you like I've been asking I. Yeah. And I can give them advice. Getting bad advice. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I think I know that we are doing that. A lot of people that I use during my years. Yeah. Right. It's very tempting. And, like, having the ability to actually. So outside of what if you get counseling for that information as well? I mean, thinking about paying and then having to, like, deal with that. Um, and so I think that mental health, uh, that you do have to obey your body. Mhm. And, and I think that. Yeah I love that. Mhm. Yeah. Good. Yeah. Their ability to, to self-diagnose and match um and are quite successful is one of the things that they bring up with them. Was that experience on social media. You think. Oh they may not be like probation. So they're sort of the scrolling lady after the tragedy or whatever. But then and information is not accurate and therefore it's just too much. Amen. Yeah. Without any like, you know, movement forward. Yeah. Ruminating. Yeah, yeah, yeah. We have a massive amount of information in your brain. I think later I would say among the people you have then the other piece of information that, um, it's just like they're being inundated with it. You're just like, out of all of it. Yeah. Um, and then I also think about, you know, the fact that I'm a therapist and, you know, uh, that people listen just like you actually know who you are. Right. Um, are you just getting a little glimpse of the patient in front of you and, you know, like, relationship with out there and and. Yeah, and, like, doing that and being not there. You're. Good. Yes. That's. Sophia, one thing that I've seen online is like I'm in my 40s. So in teaching unhealthy practices, they have somebody not online. So just, you know. Yeah. Pretty. That's pretty. Interesting. Yeah. You know, at the same time without me, you know, because there are these things that take off and, um, I that, uh, yeah, really are a big part of people's world. But you may or may not be aware. Um, that's a good time when you get open about, uh, I was diagnosed by myself and I said, oh, do you want to talk about this? Let's let him talk about it. And he didn't actually spend the whole session about what is that? It's not as if it's it's all about, uh, yeah. It's good. Cool. Yeah. So, yeah, here are some other things that, um, social media and digital technology have kind of presented. Um, that didn't used to be kind of part of our, uh, verbs. Tip about I can have lots of different things, um, from headaches to different addictions and, um, uh, yeah, online relationship like making and that's. Yeah, good and bad. But there are lots of things there. Um, yeah. The unhealthy behaviors. Uh, um, pro-ana websites. That's like specifically for anorexia. Um, okay. So what should you do if we've talked about this? A little bit. If your client asks you to print them. Um. Yeah. Have we already talked about that? Yeah. Yeah, I think we've talked about that. I don't know that we need to get a lot of content, but there is a video there that shows, you know, a client asking, oh, can I get your, um, you know, can we. You should be my friend on Facebook. Can I find you? And the counselor politely declines that. Right. This is a boundary violation. Yes. I have a question. If you ask me, in the United Kingdom, if you have social media and when you become in life, where should you like? You be like, you know. I think like, I think it's super private on me. Like, how would you handle that? Yeah. Cancers do different things. Sometimes they have a public profile and a private profile. Um, if you have a public profile, you just have to be really aware of that and, uh, recognize that it's, you know, if you're becoming more, uh, public figure for counseling, that that is going to be something people reference. So, yes, you should be aware of what you are posting and generally, you know, have private accounts, um, that you're. Yeah, not showing to everyone unless it's really just a platform that you're willing to have people see that is not very personal. Um, there are I'm going to get to this. We have a social media tips for counselors. This is the next thing we'll look at. And that kind of addresses that. But first look quick there is maybe we will watch this video. You think this sexting is against the law and Washington State um I think I, we, um nope. Here it is, our CW. So, uh, for a person under 18, there are various laws around sending sexual. Images. So you should be aware of those. And. Um, I found this clip handy for video. I think it was. And. Have. So what are your thoughts about your thoughts about? These are another thing to be aware of and figure out with, you know, your kids and, uh, kids under 18, of course, 13 year olds have confidentiality in Washington. So you'd have to think about peace out, you know, balancing okay. If they have if they are in danger, who are the right people to tell? Um, might be the parents. That might be, um, uh, child Protective Services, depending on kind of what is, you know, what exactly is happening. Yeah. For sure. And then have to have another, uh, case in my mind. What is the girl in the black family? And that they are really careful to get real with this kind of because. And she doesn't want her parents to be held in custody at any time because it might be, uh, a threat to her if you go to safety and how to navigate in this case. Yeah, that's an important consideration. So the child would be at risk for, um, something within, like a, uh, physical abuse or danger within the family, then you wouldn't want to disclose to the parent. Yeah, but you still would need to report if it fell within the laws. Uh, I think it was even some more recent laws. I, I would read them carefully, um, but, uh, figure out it's probably a CPS Auburn or some kind of an investigation to protect the child. Or a report that may or may not, depending on what happens. But your you and your client should be aware that there is that lab in Washington. Okay for social media tips. Um, so this is from the ACA. And, uh, you know, as Rachel was saying, you know, making sure your professional media accounts are separate from personal accounts, keeping your account private. Um, understand the various platforms and their purposes. Not sharing confidential information, of course, on social media, not diagnosing people on social media posts even if they're public figures. So, you know, unfortunately, sometimes counselors can get into this role where I can diagnose what you diagnose. Political figures. Um, you wouldn't say in your life, that's it online. A lot of these are just really practical. Uh, but yes, your statements have more weight since you're, um, if if you're in practice and, um, the accurate about how you portray yourself, the education, your licensure, your foundation, um, don't show up on a client's social media picture or profile without permission. Um. You should have a social media policy, um, that covers like risks, especially to, especially, um, to confidentiality and the benefits of interacting with counselors on social media. So, yes, I'm wondering how this applies as far as ethically to advertising your private practice. Yeah. Social media. So that would be a public, uh, you know, platform if you're advertising your, um, practice. I know the counselors have that. They'll even have, you know, a Facebook page for their practice. Um, and that's completely fine. You know, it's it's more and more a, um. Yeah, it's there for the purpose of the organization and, you know, even posting then articles and stuff related to that, it's not. But they're talking here about keeping your, your public and your private platforms separate. Yeah. Yes, absolutely. So you can have a conversation. But, um, for counselors who would work with you on, like, um, roles, um, like author and public speaker, maybe they have to be aware of that on site. Mhm. Um, and people in that of influencer realm. Yeah. At some point or at like people recently, they have to stop seeing clients because it is too much like they're like having you'll complicate things going on, you know, like anybody comes to see them. No, I already bought a book from them or. Yeah. What is it? Is that like a rare enough case that that's how I mean, sometimes those people. So keep a small practice. But it does get harder. Um, if they are. Well, now, you know, it depends on how maybe how well-known they are. But out a lot of, um, if they're a clinician and that they're what they want to continue doing. Most people want to keep practicing that. Yeah. And you're out of time. But if you're making money off people, that right. Yeah, that that feels like a weird ethical error. Yeah. And I get it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think it does get sticky. Yeah I don't, I don't know, I'm not in that, but um, but yeah I think the more well-known you are, there are just more things that you have to navigate and consider. So I don't have a. Yeah. So it's a good question though. And for. Going email and phone. Um, the thing I want to say here is, of course, you know, make sure your email messages encourage and display formality and professionalism, but beware, they can always be retrieved. So anything that is written, things can be misunderstood or changed or forwarded. So we may email communication typically and also um often agencies have um larger systems now to organize notes and things like that. And in some of them most people have access. So you need to figure out when you're getting it going for training. And so that's, um, who has access to my notes and things like that. That's good to know. If it's your stuff, your clients might, uh, wonder that just for you to be aware of how the system works, because there are some parts of systems that are accessible to more people and other parts that are more limited. Hopefully it's all in HIPAA compliant, I assume. Is that just to be aware of those things, um, we're talking to clients, which are you verify their identity. Um. Talks about records, storing records, keeping them secure. Okay. Um, I think we want to move on to children, since you want to make sure I see the break at 730. Any questions about technology? All right, children, the ACA offers a few ethical standards specifically related to them. I do like to point this out that, um, you know, we are you know, we often think about the, the necessity of, like, separating and keeping children's records secure, especially for teenagers. But also remember that we're asked to work to establish collaborative relationships as much as possible with parents and guardians. Um, I think this is a quite an example of what can happen sometimes, um, when we're working with children, uh, the, um. The parents are also, you know, part of our. What? Know. And. No. What do you think the council are struggling with here? Thanks. Uh, yeah. This not his planned. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. So this. That happens a lot, right? Like, she's not the client and yet, like, she's an important part. Yeah. And she's. Yeah. He's caring for her like. Oh, wow. That's a lot. Yeah. And. Now. Oh. Yeah. So just as a, you know, what did you think? What did you do? Well, what would you have done differently. You think you know that was fair. Yeah. I think you would have heard about Johnny. Yeah. It's tricky with this. Right. Um, sometimes the parents, he this parent was open to seeing someone, but that's not always the case here. So sometimes the only person they want to talk to you is you. And that can be really tricky with kids, but working to establish that relationship and keeping it focused on the child is really that point. Yeah. Um, we've emphasized this, but of course, again, age of consent in Washington is 13 years or older. Um, parental authorization for the person who is under eight, under 13 is required. And they can consent to inpatient as well. But providers usually need to notify parents if they're growing impatient. And typically, as long as one parent consents, you're fine seeing the child. But it's always good to establish again. Collaborative relationships are bringing both parents and one adult possible. I can get both parents. Um, there is this, um, this is actually a psychiatrist or psychologist, uh, law. But it says in Washington that for clients between 1318, the psychologist will clarify any limits to confidentiality between the minor and their legal guardians at the outset of services. And I think that's just good practice overall to remind them to get releases from the, um, client or whatever information they're willing to share or that you think would be helpful. Uh, but the psychologist will act in the minors best interest in deciding whether to disclose confidential information to the Guardian. So that's where it get a little tricky. That usually mean things like harm to self, harm to others. Um, maybe an eating disorder, things that you're worried about, sexting things. But there's some discretion applied there. But the parents can be utilized as part of your safety plan. Um. How would you respond to a parent who wants transparency about the content of their child's sessions, your book address this because you guys anything stand out, you guys about that section or just generally, um, about parents wanting to know about the sessions? Is there anything wrong with, uh, uh, yeah, there are benefits and risks and that. Think page 289. Thing. Yeah, I think it's the, uh. What the the benefits of the the parents and the. Yeah, the big benefits. Because until the child is in, uh, I is, say, living for the parents, they're still dependent. Uh, financially or morally, anything. And, uh, if you work just with the child, they can always come back home. And again in the same environment. We think definitely, if you have collaborative work with both parents or one of them, that will be much better relationship together with the child and the parent. And I always, I want to say always beneficial. Uh, of course, if it's not, um, um, you also you can yell at the principal. Yeah. So you see a lot of benefits and find a ways to go back. Yeah. And that's good to talk about with the client. I think you need to give permission, but some clients really want their parents to be involved. Um, 13 1415 know that. Yeah. Because that's how others are like. Yes. 211 you know, or some are like just for scheduling, like nothing else. But you do have to get their permission ahead in Washington from 13 on, but sometimes they don't mind. You have more of that happen and sometimes parents don't want to be involved. So yeah, I'm curious, in the case that you are seeing someone who's about age 14, but the reason they're seeing you is because of problems at home. Mhm. How would you go about addressing that with the parents if the problems that once you are from the parents or, you know, risk averse situations at home. Yeah. And and by disclosing to them the parents are students which of course you know. So how do you go I like to call like what does that look like if the child's at risk, it's the CPS. A lot of times those, um, clients, the teens don't want you to disclose or it might not be appropriate to disclose to the parents. So if the if there's a lot of problems at home, typically they're coming to a counselor for partially to confidentiality principles. Now if there are as you're working with them, ways to help mend that relationship or improve it, maybe there would be some opportunities to bring them in and meet with them and share them. But because as a as, um, telling them you said that they still, um, especially when they're younger on the lower end of that age range, they still have a lot of power. The minor. Yeah. So, you know, access the CBT restricted. So that means that client if you're not willing to negotiate but. Mhm. Mhm. There's there's a third option. If you're so you're saying there's you might lose the client if you're not willing to uh if the parents want to what say for example to abusive relationship at home. The parents know that their kid is seeing you. They want to know what you're talking about here. You know, whatever. Uh, how do you go about that without using the client, necessarily? Um, and that's a big question to ask. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. No, it's I do think the book does a good job of talking about educating the parents about the benefits of counseling and educating them about why maybe there is there are limits on confidentiality, like limits on what you can disclose to them that, um, parents permission. I mean, there's even basic developmental education about helping the child to, um, have a space to, um, talk about, you know, things in their life and, um, that you're, you know, uh, you are on their, um, uh, your for the client and trying to help them, you know, trying to remind them that they, you're there for their benefit and that in the circumstance I would disclose to you, you know, so reminding them a lot about the purposes of counseling and when you would disclose. Mhm. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. Um, determining danger. We've talked about this in other classes, but, um, considering consulting and considering their age and all of those things. Make sure you document any disclosures, uh, that you need to break confidentiality. Um, and then age of consent again for sex. I did go over this before, but, uh, just as a reminder that, um, you have to be aware, if your minor client discloses they're in a sexual relationship, you should ask them how old their partner is, because, uh, if unless they're 16 or over, um, then anyone under 16, it could potentially be statutory rape if the, if their partner is four years older than them, if they're 14, 15, three years older or more photography, 13 or 2 years and older as well. So. So if you were seeing a 13 year old who was was in a relationship with a 16 year old, that would be a problem. You might. You see. What? You know. I think they got a good price. Yeah. Yeah. So you have to be aware of that. That that would be something to. Um, report. Yeah. So asking those questions and helping, uh, clients to recognize that it's not. Okay. Um, consent for pregnancy related care. Anyone, um, of any age, can consent for refuse pregnancy related services in Washington. Um, and then I put a whole bunch of things about reporting child abuse, neglect. And you guys took that training. Um, and here are some more resources for you. Um, if you ever need to call CPS. Um, for vulnerable adults. This is here are kind of the stipulations of who is a vulnerable adult in Washington. So a person 60 years of age or older who lacks the functional, physical and mental ability to care for himself. Um, any adult with a developmental disability, any adult with a legal caregiver. Uh, any adult living in a long term care facility. An adult living in their own family's home, receiving services from an agency. Um, and so any of those, those are considered vulnerable adults. And just like children were required to report any incidences of abuse to anyone. Um, so the definition of elder abuse is knowing intended or closed causes harm, serious risk of harm to a person physically, mentally, emotionally or financially. So sometimes we get, uh, you might find out that, um, and if you an adult is being, um, taken advantage of by family financially, that would also be something to replace. Any questions about elder abuse? Yes, I think it is 65 or older, regardless of physical capability or mental. Just you're over the age. Five. So according to place. Yeah. Okay. Um, did you have 65? No. Sorry, I was right. So 65. It also says specifies lack of mental ability. So they're really with it mentally. Yeah. That might not they might not be determined. And you can always call CPS or adult Protective Services Aids. Um, if you're concerned that they may determine this, this adult is still able to care for themselves at 60. Yeah. Yeah. I may be wrong, but I believe you're saying 65% crisis virtual 65 and over. Is. Is it? Uh, it might be just in class to, uh, check it. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Physical, emotional, sexual exploitation or all types of elder abuse, neglect, abandonment, um, even self neglect potentially. Something to report. Um, so remember that as a mandatory report, you have to do it. Make a report. You have reason to believe it. And then they do the investigation. So we're we're asked to do the report. And then they do, you know, determine whether or not that is something that needs to be followed up on. Okay. So we do have this case study on children and vulnerable adults. Um, maybe we'll just take the next eight minutes or so to look at that 70 minutes, um, for you guys to talk about it. So these aren't anything you have to do any. This is the practice, but just gives you an opportunity to look at, um, um, some cases, the short little pieces. They are on discovery. They're also here. Um, just take maybe 1 or 2 of them and talk through them and say, you know what? What is it that, uh, we would, um. Yeah. What are the legal issues? What are the ethical issues? But are there any required, um, steps that we would need to take that would be kind of the most important thing to talk about. And then you can talk about, you know, what we should take of it kind of beyond that, um, minimal action requirement. But, um, yeah, just to kind of get some examples of maybe what you might see what would require at what point, but it require um, of. So this is both to children and to older individuals. You can get in groups. Just spend the next few minutes um, the staff at 734. So you'll be ten minutes to this and then we'll break. Their code. Um, yeah, I don't know. One. You? Yes. Yes. I'm fine. That's a new build done without the need to get none. Of. This right here. And? I will tell you, you're the only one. Yeah. Yeah. I told you I. Would. Have been. Like. One of the. So. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. I would like I said, I would say no but yeah. Yeah. It's. Like. Yeah. How about other things. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah. And you say yes. It was like. No no no it's. Okay. So what is it. What do you say. What you never hear. It. Yes. I know this. Because. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. I think. So. Yeah. That's right. So that's what. I like him, that is. Right. Yes. Which is also. Said that we can all. Right. So. That's not all we have to say. How do you feel? Don't you think? So. Yeah, yeah. So what the [INAUDIBLE] do I know? Read and write. Oh. Really? Yeah. I mean, you can. Yeah. And. You know what? I don't have. Time for details. It's the. Uh. Yeah. Yeah. But, uh. You know, just about. Meeting. You. Yeah. It's like. Uh, with the people. Okay. Yeah. Okay. This was interesting. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Seems like you have another guy like that. Yeah, yeah. Wait, wait. Wait. I don't think. I can go. Oh, I retired. Yeah, but there is this patient. This is suspicious. Yeah. We understand. That. But other. Than. That. Uh. Uh, you know, I probably let him know I'm late. It's not my senior year, so I wish I was. What is that? Oh. My God. We're talking to yourself. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Oh, you know what? I'm. Talking. About. So? So you. Don't need to tell everybody. Oh, yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Well, I think that we might, you know, change our wording a child, and then we are. You know what, Jesse? I don't know, but I feel like. It's because that's. How I feel. Yeah. Yeah. What's that? You don't have to. Ask, you know. You can go and you can say. Well, so I do, you know what I mean? Yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah. So you can get somebody that would help you. Yeah. I have a lot. Of time for it. Oh, yes. Yeah. Uh, you know, basically every resource. I'm going to do whatever I like. Well, yeah. You. Know. What? I mean? Yeah. I think I. Was. Ready? To go. Have a good time, mother. That's right. I don't know if it's a. Good thing. I mean, sometimes I wish I could be like, okay, like that. Like when you think. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Oh, that's all right. You guys can wait for dinner. You can keep talking about your cases if you want to go get something to eat. And we'll come back here at eight. Uh, at six. Okay. I'm the man, right? Yeah, yeah. Me too.