So. Yeah. Because I really like another thing. And I think this is like you. Know that I like to call and tell you. You. Know, I, I, I don't know, but I think you. Can always come back. To me. Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah. Just walk into the street. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. And then. And don't say. The aroma I think you'll see that it is very, very familiar. Yeah I know yeah yeah, yeah. So are you. Yeah. That's here a couple of months ago because. You don't do as well. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Just thinking about. When the economy. Is in its. Own. Right. Yeah. Yeah I think so. Yeah. So yeah. You know. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah I know right. So I don't know what. Yeah yeah yeah I bet you cannot. Figure out. If you're going to be wired right. No no no that's a lot. Of what? I know, you know. I don't. I don't think. I should. Yeah. Hey, uh. Uh. Uh, you. Thank you. For your time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Last year in the early. And you can walk around, you know. Yeah, yeah. All right. I'm gonna get started right on time tonight. So one minute, but because we're going to try to get through two chapters before the Queen's an ambitious. I know I could do it 46 like, I don't know, forget them all. Yeah. Oh, I love that. Oh, really. Goal. And then everything just go oh you were doing it. Is that God? Then I said. Okay. So, yeah, we're gonna kind of, like, breeze through these slides. These two chapters, I feel like they're kind of connected to. So, um, a lot of the same themes. But before we get started, the. See, um, so we're going to talk about the upcoming assignment briefly because I realize next time we meet, which is in three weeks, that's the week it's due. So I want to just briefly go over that in case anyone super ambitious in wanting to get an early. Um, and then we're going to, like I say, tough on those two chapters eight and nine. And, um, then we'll do the quiz the second half of class. I'm going to give you guys a close to two hours, depending on when we break. It'll be, you know, at least an hour and 45 minutes or something. Usually people are done and then it's only 40 questions. So once you're done, you can go. And um, so if that's any encouragement, hopefully. But you're welcome to take the full time to and it's open book. I got a couple of questions about can you use your e-book? And you certainly can just I'm just going to ask you not to use like the search tool, either Google or in the book, just because you can't do that if you have the right this assignment for the whole thing. Um, okay. The other thing is, I want to remind you guys we are having doctor asked me to remind everyone, um, to complete their background check that's required for for those of you doing internship. So you probably got this email. I got several people saying this looks really suspicious. This is something I'm supposed to, like, responsive. And I realize it looks like that it does look a little suspicious because I got some people forwarded to me. But if you notice, it's from Cannonball, which is that you gave us permission to, like, send that and then you also have to give them permission. So it's kind of a teaching and it is from northwest to university. So, um, just make sure that it's from that email. And if you haven't done that, make sure you complete it. And your, um, internship. So I'm also having a fake process for a background check. But this is just for the university to use. And then just reminder, I put this up here again. Um, but, uh, once you have, you know, secured a site and I want to say, like, if someone offers you, if I say I do, please respond to them. Don't like, leave them lingering for too long. If you're trying to decide between a couple of sites, you know, give them like, can I have a day or two? But don't just leave it out there, make a decision. And um, then you go into the ELC and do these steps. So it's you need to make sure that you get to these two pieces like supervision date and professional practice agreement, so that those have to be done, um, in order to start internship. And our goal is that you guys are all placed by mid March, but you least have an offer. So just a reminder. Yes. Uh, I thought you were talking about this, but I think if I. Could. But if we haven't done that yet, I think you'd be fine. You don't have to go about that. But I have, uh. Okay. I'll let her know if that's your experience. Like, um, if they might need to send you a new link or something. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I would, um. Yeah. I want to make sure I remember. So either send, like, maybe email her or email Emily and me or something like that just to really, like, remember to. Uh, make sure that happens if you're if the link is not working. Yeah. Anything else? Yeah. Um. Is it. It says, um, 3rd August is 26. Or is that 27? Um. Semester goes. I'm sorry. Yes. So I think I this is. So the first day of spring semester is four 2726. And go to the August of 2027. Thank you. Yes. Thanks. Okay. Two minutes after. So. Yeah. Thank you. So, though, for a year and that summer, just to give you a little bit of a cushion in case you do internship continuation, some of you ordered continuation. So that's why I say it. Just make it for for the end of summer semester. You might be done next April. Most of you will, but that, uh, professional practice agreement is the thing that we need for it to be like, you're good to go, and please let me know. I am starting to hear from sites if they have places still available. Like I will hear from supervisors, like, um, you know, um, we still have a spot available. Send me somebody or I'd really like, you know, another intern, so let me know. So if you are having trouble, like, right, reach out to me to so that I can help connect you. Any questions about that program? Yeah. Yes. Um. Yeah. When do we need to start looking at insurance? Yeah. Once I get that PPA signed, I send you an email, and I say, I give you that, like, what you need to do next. And one of those is to get insurance. And you need to have it by the first of the start of practicum. So the 27th of April. That is right. Right. That is a Monday to Sunday. Okay. That's the last Monday in April. Yes. Um. We will. We need to descend. Um. Um, ten hours completed. Um, so. Yeah, yeah, there'll be an assignment in practicum. It's due by the end of practicum, and so there'll be a place to upload it in your assignments. Then there is a place to store documents in the ELC if you guys have navigated that. So you could store it there if you want. Answer. Yes. Michael. Sorry. No. Um, but there's no way to turn it early, right? Yeah, but you can store it there and then you, you know, just in practicum classes, I guess. I think you're great. I want to continue to be able to browse, but we have, you know, um, we are not allowed to speak on it. Okay. And then I heard some other stuff. Yeah. I don't think I know that, um, I'm sure you're right to plan for it. Yeah. So you can't count the hours because you're not the way our program is set up there. You're not in a class. And so you're not considered an intern at the university. And. But if there's a way for your supervisor to still supervise you, and, um, and you want and you're willing, like, if that's part of your contract to keep working through the breaks, you can't count the hours in any way towards the class, but it's up to the site if they, you know, we'll continue to have you work during this time. Yeah. For supervision please. Yeah. Thank you for working free and not getting hours. I know it's not the best time for anything else. Thank you. For those of you who are not doing internship for always moving us touch base about that is okay. Um, this is the paper that's coming up. This is like your big paper for this, this class. Um, and what you're going to do is choose one of the six ethical principles we've been talking about. It's not due for almost a month now. Um, yeah. And 19. So next, it's due on the 14th. And so, um, and then you're going to kind of dig deep into it and you are going to look at it in, uh, three different ways. So you want to look at the look at the syllabus for a deeper explanation. But basically you're going to look at it and through the eyes of like counseling theory and cleaning, how it relates, um, to counseling. And most important, and then specifically through the ACA code of ethics. And so, um, three standards and two points from the ACA Code of Ethics that are identified and something from section H. So that's the technology we're trying to get more uh, K prep really wants us to focus more on technology like ethics around technology. So consider um, yeah. How justice might come into technology can be uh, and then um, and then the question so the, the integration piece for this class is to look at Christian virtue and connect it with, uh, one of the principles which we've been kind of talking about in class. So, um, yeah, that's the paper. And you can kind of be thinking about your own practice in this too. Yeah. So what do you say the three standards are to some points? And, uh, so maybe from section H, is that us like citing the sections or is that it has tried to include it. Like how do you want us to have that. Sure. Yeah. So you explain for like how autonomy is reflected in those standards. Okay. Gotcha. So you give like examples like you know the point. Yeah. Is autonomy and okay. Yeah. And see how those are how they're connected. Because those are just kind of supposed to be the fragrance of the whole ACA code of ethics. So it's just doing some of those that connection and doing some research around what these things look like. What does that mean for me as a clinician? How do I exhibit these in my work with clients? Okay. All right. So we're gonna do chapter eight. So this is, um. Some of this material might be on your quiz. Malpractice and resolving legal and ethical challenges. So this involves, of course, professional misconduct that has, um, that points to either either professional misconduct or unreasonable, um, lack of skill. So, uh, this is how that's what a practice could be. And then in order for that client to prevail in a malpractice lawsuit, you have to prove that the client, you know, that the, uh, there was some kind of, um, malfeasance or, you know, miss missing in these areas. So counselor had a duty to the client to use, um, care, um, and failed to perform the required duty of care. The client was injured in some way. There was a reasonably close, close, um, connection between conduct and resulting injury. Um, or the client suffered actual loss or damage. So again, some of this is like legal language that they actually have to prove that they were hurt based on the care they did not or did receive. Um, most commonly. Uh, there's kind of two big areas. The most common is, um, sexual relationships. So, uh, they're often sued because there is a clear boundary crossing, which is what we're going to talk about in the second part of class. But one of the biggest payouts to individuals was, um, in who is counselors engaging in and crossing this boundary and having some kind of a relationship, a sexual relationship with their client. So Washington was pretty strict on this. They're even more restrictive than the ACA code of ethics. So any clients, um, or former clients, you're not allowed to have an intimate relationship with. So you have to realize that and, um, always take steps to protect yourself and protect the client. Um, we're going to talk again a little bit more about that in the boundary section. The next leading cause. It revolves around situations with clients who attempt or complete suicide. So, um, those that is, according to your text, they say, yes, um, in those lawsuits, is it mostly the family or the actual client? Let's say that I would guess the family, but, um, I'm not exactly 100% sure this is a this is from your text, so I'm guessing there are. They have some citations around that. Um, I also wanted to show you guys this. So they every few years they come up with this liability exposure report. And the ACA. Um, does this, uh, with community mental health care providers. And this one just came out, um. Uh, I think so. 2024. This is just I think this is the most recent one. I think they say like 2025, 2024, 2025. But this at the beginning, we won't go through this whole thing. They kind of have a summary, uh, um, you know, where the trends are. And so this was just kind of interesting because I saw in the 2019 report, there was like they actually noted like, oh, no, telehealth, um, claims were are noted. But now there has been a big increase in that. And there have been a number of claims, um, outside of the traditional office space. So using virtual technology. So there have been claims from virtual counseling as well as in-person counseling. Um. Claims asserting violations of the counseling relationship, which is kind of, you know, that kind of connects with what we were saying before, like boundaries crossing often, um, remains the top allegation. A notable change is allegations in evaluation, assessment and interpretation. So that was interesting that there's more um, focus on, um, you know, maybe misdiagnosis or something like that or mis evaluation. Um. Yeah. And then again, um, sexual misconduct, failure to maintain professional standards and breach of confidentiality frequently led to licensing for techniques or complaints. Um, one kind of encouraging thing is that in the majority of license protection matters, it closed with no action taken by the board. So representing a successful defense of the insured counselor. So keep your insurance. It's kind of interesting to kind of watch where these trends go. But, uh, there have been you know, that is something to always keep. Um, yeah. Just stay aware of. That was here the recommendation. So they also there was this article that came out a couple of years ago about recommendations for how to protect yourself. Um, because that is such a big claim that I think when there's personal hurt, you know, or an intimate relationship that happens, there's these guidelines for protecting yourself. Um, so I just thought it was a good summary of this article. Um, yeah. So documentation again, a lot of the things we're talking about, but getting supervision documentation, managing transference and counter transference or managing how you're feeling with the client is telling you. Um, and we'll talk a little bit more about kind of how to respond if a client is attracted to you in chapter nine, but any. Um, yeah. Any reflections so far about the things we're talking about here? Yeah. So on the previous slide, um, um, a lot of that, uh, relationship between planning authorities have to be also like this or like this one. Yeah. That one. Um, so is that a good all these elements or just, you know, I think it's one. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, 80. Yeah. Are there. I mean, I'm assuming there's a limit and there's different tiers of malpractice insurance, like. Yeah, it's going to pay out. And if the claim goes above that, you're liable. Yeah. It's a little confusing when you're filling out that paperwork and they ask you how many clients you're seeing. And, you know, they try to kind of determine and give you a guess of kind of not guess. But they suggest like, hey, you should take this match. But yeah, there are different levels that you can get to some degree. It's um, yeah, I think at the student level it's they just get the student insurance. Yeah. So there's like there's limits to it. You're on the hook if whatever, if there is a claim that that goes above and beyond the maximum. Yeah. If you read the fine print because they always say like this would not cover blah, blah, blah. Or if you want this to cover this, you check this box, you know, like all those, those kind of fun forms we fill out. So yeah. Okay. Okay, so if a client threatens you in session, it's different than if you like, receive a seat, receive a complaint. So this is it. You just get an informal or angry client who's upset with you. And of course, you should try to de-escalate them, right? You should talk. Try to talk them down. Um, be careful not to like, either defend yourself or admit wrongdoing. Right. You want to kind of balance those things and use your, uh, you know, good communication skills to try to de-escalate and, and, uh, relate to them and say, okay, you know, I hear what you're saying, but you do want to be careful if they start going in that direction not to admit wrong or, um. Or. Uh. Yeah. Say something that you wouldn't want repeated these days. You know, people can be recording even if they're upset. All that kind of thing. So you just want to be careful. If you receive a formal ethics complaint, you should respond fully in writing. Do what they say, and always consult with an attorney. I would say that you should go first and consult with an attorney first. Um, and submit as much documentation. So this is where documentation can come in really handy if they are claiming something that didn't happen. You can write your defense in that way. That is helpful for the ethics committee to look at and, um, contact your professional liability insurance. So those are the things you want to do. And at this point, it's probably not recommended to directly talk to the client if this is like a formal thing, because that could be added to a case, I think at that point. So. All right. And then the other big, you know, saying that. And I know you guys are talking about this in crisis too, is, um, suicide prevention and prevention. And this is kind of from that standpoint of, okay, but if I was to get sued because, uh, someone um, was, uh, either committed or attempted suicide, um, and of course, as you guys, we've talked about this, that confidentiality requirements are waived when disclosure is necessary to keep the client safe. And so our first responsibility is to do the things are learning about assessing, you know, whether or not you need to report this and what steps to take. Um, and of course, this is a really stressful part of our job to evaluate and manage the suicide risk if you have a client has has those concerns. Um. Yeah. So you're always kind of balancing these things like, yes. How do I keep this client safe and also, um, protective. And you're also protective. Like, what protective factors do they have in place to keep themselves safe? And from a legal perspective, you wanting to document everything that you have done to show that you're both assessing and and keeping them safe? Um, so we can be held liable for both overreacting and under reacting. So again, this is why this can be so tricky. Um, of course, have traditionally been reluctant to hold responsible in most cases. But again, we want to be able to show that you are documenting and, um, doing good risk assessments in this area. Yes. Think in the example of the ground level overreacting. Because clients can sue for anything. And so if you disclose and break confidentiality and they can prove that they were not at risk, then potentially they could, you know, they could threaten to sue for that. So we deem that they're at a high risk there for confidentiality duty to, uh, war. Right. And they feel that they weren't suited for that. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So you want to document that? Yes. They were at risk or. Yes, I consulted and I had agreement that they were at risk and I needed to make a plan or client stated that. Some clay. Sometimes players do say that, um, but they require, uh, clients who are who are at risk for suicide to submit an evaluation, kind of conditionally on seeing them. That's something that you're mentioning that I haven't seen, but I do think that's an idea. If that's something that you're seeing, high risk clients, maybe there's someone that you work with that particularly does those risk assessments. So you can work with others to provide that as an expertise initially. Hey, you always want to follow the procedures. This is something we ask in the professional practice agreements that there is safety training, and this should be part of that. Like you want to ask for your sites, you know, what are the procedures? What do I do if I have a client who is at risk for suicide? What? Because every site kind of has a different protocol. So that is something you want to make sure that you're, um. You understand? Have you guys talked about non suicidal self-injury in crisis clients. Yeah. Okay. What are some of the big. I think this is a slide coming up. But what are some big things that you have learned about risk factors in first suicide. It was the difference between non-injury self-harm and somebody that would be concerned about. Pretty satisfying. Yeah. Uh, yeah. This means that other big risk factors here. Usually like a specific plan or some idea of a plan. Yeah. Yes. Large time sometimes can be the same for both. Uh, the only difference is if you customer directly or the doctor said I would kill myself, which is not just what I heard myself. Is it really slow motion or the lack of motion? Yeah. Mm. Yeah. So asking them if they're planning on doing that, they, you know, that is a really good way to, you know, at some point way to look for risk factors like means and a specific plan. Um, yeah. But that ability to state those things, um, can indicate and also what you can document to, to prove that they are safe and unsafe. So here are some questions. Um, and the other big thing and I thought about this too, was if there has been a history either in their own life or people around them, if they have seen others take their own life or if they have a history of it, then there is a higher likelihood. So documenting those kind of things. I think, um, the self-injury thing is, is really tricky because it can be that they are an adult societal. Right. And that's an important determination. So kind of to your point, like what might be an overreaction is that could potentially be, you know, if they were if they were injuring themselves, but it wasn't in a lethal way and they were saying, no, this is either, you know, the researcher saying this is, uh, non injurious of harm in some way. And maybe there was an overreaction from the clinician. Uh, so here are some guidelines. Um. To assess suicidal behavior. We have. Another thing is history of alcohol and drug abuse. Giving things away. Kind of a thing. Like if you're noticing market change in your client and they start giving things away and having a very hopeless outlook, that can be a sign that you need to dig in a little bit and ask questions. And never don't take a verbal warning seriously. Right. If somebody says they're they want to die and they have a plan, then you want to take that seriously, push pushing into that. Uh, so risk for harming others. We've talked about this quite a bit too, but, uh, this is another time that, of course, we have to break confidentiality, as we talked about in the terrorism case, others, um, and some possibilities between, um, the least restrictive actions, meaning like, uh, getting a promise from your client that they won't do it to the most restrictive would be an involuntary commitment. Like there might be some things in between, like we talked about them notifying family members. Um, voluntary hospitalization is a really great option. Um, notifying the police, calling the client periodically. So these can all be part of a safety plan. Yeah. So as I've been looking at the pilot plans and suicide pact and what you do in this situation, in this crisis. Uh, yeah. There's a lot of tools to risk assess suicide, but not a lot for violent clients. Um, is there anything that you can tell us as far as, like, assessment, as far as what? How risk, how much at risk they are actually hurting someone? Yeah, that's a good point that we probably do more effort on the suicide risk. And that's probably because we see it a lot more. But it's kind of similar. Are there means, are they saying they're going to are there is there a history there. Do they are they you know, um alcohol and drugs is another risk factor. History of violent crime. I also both like against them but also they have been the perpetrator. Um, certainly like psychosis and things like that always need to be assessed and um, and probably empathy for others, which that gets into the, um, you know, ability to, to feel for others. So questions on that. Yeah. Yeah. Sounds like a lot of same steps, a lot of things that, uh. Yeah. Are you ever in the shooting and then bullying at school. They can go to kill. But this one is more about inside the problems. Where is more about some people that are others end up shooting? Yeah. Because this is more about mostly about a dating or some kind of, uh, um, violence at home when the child was younger or anything like that, which is, uh, you can also see that is implied to do something. Yeah. But please, also I agree with Michael is not a lot of, um, um, literature to say that. How can I set up people who are who wants to, you know, harm others? Um, there's probably a growing evidence like, uh, with school shootings and things like that, like analyzing what happened, you know, what is what could we have done to prevent this? Especially over in. In, in care school where there's often science, you know, looking back. Okay. Let's take just a few minutes to look at these cases. And, um, what? Both of these have some level of risk, but I want you to portray so they if you read them one, it has, uh. Well, I won't go into it because I want to give you guys time to just look at these. They're they're pretty short. They're each like a paragraph. Monica is, I think, uh, student who is displaying risk of self harm. And I think havia is displaying anger and like, worry about hurting others. And so, um, work with your partner for a few minutes, and I want you to do a little bit of practice back and forth a bit. I want the character to end up playing a low level of risk so that you can have some practice with, okay, this looks like it. It has a high level of risk and, um, practice kind of how you would, uh, what you would do to. But what questions you would ask to determine. Okay. Is this a high level of risk or is this a lower level of risk? And so for these cases we're going to just practice the lower level of risk. So you just get a little bit of practice asking some questions. And so we'll do this for about ten minutes. So it's not a lot of time but just to to um get a little bit of practice. So one of you can take you Monica, and one of you can be heavier, and then the other person can be the clinician in both of those cases. Does that make sense? Um. Okay. It's on page 202 and 207. I can pull it up again here to ensure. I have the lever and. Here it is. Yeah. So, Monica. Yeah. This right here. Uh huh. Up right here. All right. So are we just picking one so I can keep it to Mark and I pick the other case? Yeah, exactly. One of you picks one, and one of you have got to be the client. Yeah. If you have time. Okay. Let's see what you can do in ten minutes. I got it, I got it. Okay. I want to be here. Maybe I'll do 50 that so you can get a chance being the Queen and the counselor. I agree. So give me. The. Money. Is it? Well, I years 207. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. All time. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. I mean I. Have. I have no. I think oh yeah. Uh. All right. Yes that's right. Uh, the 39 year anniversary of our, uh. Oh, yeah. Yeah. We'll ask the questions there. Um, we've already had a few years. All right. You know, like one of the counselors. So we'll see you all here. I am horrible, you know, that awful Billy boy that was a teenager? I think that's true. Yeah, the bias fire's. Billy. Okay. I want to be with you. Yeah. Yeah. So from both in, what was it like? Might be a lower risk. Yeah. Because we don't have time to go into the others. And I think it's a good thing a practice with it can be helpful to have a lot of times clients excessively extreme and then. Yeah. Yeah. Not exactly. No. You really have. Yeah. Well built applied to the. Bill. Here we go. All right. You know I just got. Yeah. You've got to go. Yeah. And. You get to get into the headspace of bill rebuild. I am interested in counseling sessions. I know what you said to jump to the counselor, and they walked out. I was thinking back, all right. Well, yeah. You're the guy, right? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Uh. You obviously had a good. Start eating. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, I know, like. You know, I. That a lot of. More about that. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah I really. I really. Do. Yeah, I do not. For you. I mean I, I, I. Thought you know some of you know I mean yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. So I'm feeling. Hopeless. And we're going to work on. Can't really. Yeah, yeah. I can, I can I wonder if I would on this. Difficult. Right. I mean, I don't know if you. To. Give it away. Yes. Yes. Yes. I do, and that's what you get. When you. Look back. At the time. Okay. Day. What are you doing? Here. You know. Really? What is it that you know? You know that you. Think I'm afraid. Of. Like. For many of them, I guess. Because when already it. And I was like, okay. Yeah. Uh, I just like you. Thank you. Yeah. All right. Monica. Thanks. Ashley. I think I might need an ankle. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I have no idea. Yeah, yeah, yeah, he's got the experience. There we go. Right. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. We started. Yeah I know, I know, I didn't really get your. Oh, yeah. Oh! No! Oh, yeah. Oh my God. Okay. Um. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So. Yeah. So, Monica, it's about. Uh. Where we start? Right. I think, you know, you say, please don't tell me what to do. Uh, yeah, I think that I just I don't know what. You're talking. About. So I come in. Here. And I think that, uh, you usually have an early in the morning. I usually before I wake up here, um, I just, I think it's it's kind of, you know, something, and I just. Like. Oh, my. God. You know. I mean, is this I know that. I don't. Have any time to do. Some. Other things, you know. Yeah. I know. That. I know this, and it's. Alright, let's come back together. I guess obviously at. That point. You guys, just the minute to wrap up your composition. Sorry, I don't have that loud voice. Okay. So any thoughts reflections about that activity, having that, um, fit with, with the client who might say something that is really, uh, nerve wracking and then also maybe in the end have a lower risk. Than. Not. Yeah. Um. Uh, well, I also think that the first part of it definitely one of the executive level of the county, but, uh, you know, I think if I still went, it would be inappropriate, even if I started to read and I used the mood rating scale that went through the gentleman I picked up on that review stuff. So even though John was playing, uh, the studio cutting, uh. Kind of move lower and like, okay, well, you're in the picture frame that you're not actually think about, cuz I really feel like I don't know why people don't out of it. Okay. That's that's. Good. Yeah, that's good insight. But it doesn't have to be for them to start to take action on that. Yeah, I think those skills are helpful too, especially if you have to if you've done any kind of go ahead I. It also came with, I don't know about the first, it was a thing. So we we just said, um, talk about um, for the second session. That will be to, um, preventing forums like, for example, if uh, you will have a this it's think it's about five years old like more and you more pleasing and to see what you will do I mean this same like a suicide um protection for him. Like I've got a friend or I will put this, I put this number or just, for example, I probably will, uh, hide all of the stuff that I can cut the preventing, uh, to do it in just to work with that, that she can remember to give anything to, afraid that if something will happen, that she knows what she does and. Yeah. Oh, it was just, um, um, it is um, but about it. So, um, because you can save them, like, um, like come here. The counselor determined that Bill was not going to do anything, uh, with, uh, principal, um, but still looking for a mystery about, like, what do you think? So. So we just went on to display area of like, okay, he's going to break officially because he's going to have a hearing, but he's not. Actually, why are you doing this? And then go to like hopefully to warn, you know, how to play it. Then you going to do that. Like how will that work. It's like how here we'll get a bill here. But you think I was doing work that you don't really. Yeah. Oh yeah I know. Yeah. This is breaking confidentiality. Yeah. Like you can I can not affect the other. It's it's still pretty good. Yeah. And he's a teen actor and parent, so that could be part of a safety plan for family members. I think you've heard. Thank you all for being aware of. Yeah, we've had some of those times. Right. What was the importance of that given you determined. You need to tell the parents. Yeah. What? You told them. What you told them? Good. Yes. And. Yeah, probably just like, you know, based on the conversation that this is not all that good. Yeah. Your assessment and your action. Yeah. And what triggers. Yeah. The triggers that came up. So you have to, like, give evidence for the direction you go. Yeah, yeah. Go ahead. Yeah. So anyway, when it comes to the TV and. If you look at all the other things, I think I do something that you should always put it. Into our thinking that even though. In the case. Depending on how severe, how you know, if there's a direct threat you are, if you need to let him know that if there is an offhand comment that you have. No, no. Yeah. I was not serious about it. Know? I mean, it's part of life. But to be conservative, you know, in my heart, you know, it might be on that side that some counselors would do one thing. And then, like you, if you do the right thing, like. That. If you're saying that, you know, doing the right thing, uh, they're aware of where the controversy is also. Typically it's similar to a suicide assessment, like you would need to bring somebody in to do a good job to get that person hospitalized because you can't go. But you can, you know, ask the parents to take them to a hospital, which is probably the easiest action or for somebody. But typically, you know, warning that the principal not putting it on himself, I can actually find. Let me to get home. So when the forest would be like that option, as they're coming in to assess, to determine if they need to be behind that some it's somebody else. It's the um, they have specific, um, mental health. What are they called have mental health people that come in and do those assessments. If you make a report that might help. Yeah. The first responders. Yeah. What is it about the situation like this where you that you're blaming a threat? I guess a pretty storm when it is something that could potentially be to build a wall or like a fire or even personally like. Is there more to consider in the way of warning, um, just because of the, like, concern that is a high priority place of security? Yeah, the location of the schools. Uh, we have protocols around that. And so, yeah, obviously whoever is in charge of that. Yeah. So. Yeah. Um, but it can be also part of the description. So is that like, you know, obviously trying to the parents go to the hospital, all those things before getting one person involved. And then it looks like if you can't have your tribe, you can't reach the principal. After that, you're like, I can't go with you, so I have to tell someone. And so then it's a whole other things. Yeah. And he's like, you know, are never in this situation. So you do a high intensity kind of thing. And it's one of the reasons we don't want you telling me about your child or unable to ask for, you know, a supervisor that you can take that like. Yeah, yeah. You don't want to be alone, you know? Yeah. Good questions. Be good. The interesting to look at what research has come up uh, recently on school shootings like that. Okay. So the, the Christian, the character virtue that we're talking about today is not Maleficent and, uh, or the lesser professional actor character, which you that was and connects with. This is temperance. And she talks about the importance of reflective practice and suggests examine and, um, the prayer of examining which we're going to look at and potentially fasting. So having, um, space in your life when you have, um, really stressful job or situations to be able to reflect and sit back and, and um. Think about, you know, how do I conduct myself and not provide not cause harm to others is part of our to help grow that ability. And. So again, nonetheless, it's easy to do no harm. So this is avoid hurting clients, um, awareness of our own health like we talked about last time. Self-regulation, humility. Temperance is about self-control in the same state as some of those same, uh, things that require self-regulation. Um, so having routines in your life encourage times of reflection and examination and monitoring. You know, I think carving out those times for yourself are really important just for self care and for them to be able to not just go, go, go, go. I think sometimes I know that I do this like I just go so quickly. I haven't, you know, and I haven't had the time to just sit back and reflect. And you can miss things and you go too quickly. So this, uh, prayer of examine is from Saint Ignatius, and I think, um, this is it has these five steps of asking God for, like, giving thanks for viewing your day, facing your shortcomings, and looking towards the day to come. And I just wanted to offer this, um, link Fuller studio has little videos for each of those steps. So this takes this will take you through the whole thing. Um, but they also are broken up here. So I thought maybe we would do one just to. Show you that example. But sometimes it's helpful. There's so many, you know, through apps or through these, you know, people that have developed, um, opportunities for mindfulness prayer or pausing and introducing that. So for our own self-regulation. But also thank you for the care of our clients because, again, slow down long enough to think about those things that keep popping up in our heads. You know that. Oh, maybe I missed something here. Like listening to those intuitions requires, I think, a little bit of slowing down. That's why we do supervision. That's why, you know, we encourage self care. Um, so anyway, you'll do the giving things one so you get a taste of it. We'll review it. Three. You. Do. So. Yeah. Okay. Interesting. They have it at that last scene for so long, right? I don't know why, but I noticed myself, like, noticing more things. I don't know if any of you guys noticed anything like that. What are some things that you guys did to create today? Yeah. Got away from the busyness or the campaign to be willing to say. No idea that. I was like, oh. Nevermind. It's just, uh, I think I hit your, um. And sometimes it is that you need to do this stuff. Uh. Yeah. So using your technology. So. Yeah. Yeah, I, I got to walk everyday for about 30 minutes. I feel like. I'm just going down, like I don't have any idea. What I'm. Right. Every Saturday. I would think of that same. Day. And for them, that's the evening time. Um, I and my dad probably did some liquids or at the most, some fruit. I don't ever want to say that all, but it's a kind of, um, uh, reflection and becoming, and you don't. And whether you have the body of conscious, you don't fall into that kind of heavy education. We remind, remind and remember that it's that you that we have become silver energy and turn inward. Um. Be careful. That's a big. One. So it helps you to conserve energy and do something. Yeah. Um, actually, I notice that you are more productive than you think. This is a hundred year relief. Uh, there's a lot of fascinating explanation. I actually paid attention to that one. It will be. The only. One who can conquer the hunger. Probably have at least raised a quotient of determination and intensity to fight against. You can come into practice. I think. I think at the beginning. I knew it, absolutely. Yeah, right. Yeah. It was a treat, right? Yeah. My favorite temptation for things that I can do that I'm. Happy to know I put in the book. Here are some things that I like. So this is like creating collages of things that you do for effort and engagement. Um, I think that can be helpful ways to remind yourself to like, okay, you need to get out and do things. Yeah. These are some things I enjoyed. Um, this is the case, uh, to be reminded, and you will evaluate it on professional and personal boundaries. So, um, yeah, maintaining those with supervisors and peers and clients and also that motivation to grow and learn. So showing that you want to learn. And I see this so much. I mean all of you guys because you're here to learn. Right. And so when you start seeing clients like you're the brains just are like okay, how can I. How can you not have access to all this material research in a way that I've never. That is an area of psychology. Exceeds expectations. Okay, so that's chapter eight. Well you quickly do nine and there isn't too much here. We've already started talking about some of it. But uh and then we'll break at 730. So boundaries these are things that also have to do with taking care of ourselves and others that, uh, that have that our ACA code talks a lot about. And, um, they protect ourselves and the protector clients. Um, yeah. And add structure to the relationship. And a lot of you guys do such a great job in your disclosure forms like this is a different kind of relationship. This is a calcium relationship that's different than other relationships. Um, there's boundaries involved. Dual relationships occur when we take on one or more roles simultaneously or sequentially with the client. So that happens sometimes, but we need to be aware of it when it happens and avoid it when we can. Um, so this can be combining roles like being a teacher and a counselor or uh, you know, you know, in the most extreme case, you know, that's, you know, being a friend or relative or lover, like with a client would obviously not be appropriate. Um, so, yeah, combining roles that need to be separate. And so anytime you start feeling like, oh, this could be a boundary or a boundary violation, you need to be in supervision talking about it. Again, they're not always avoidable and they're not always. Perfect even sometimes they can be beneficial. So let's think about that. Um, first of all though, the potential risks of boundary crossing are what maybe I'll go with, what are some of the ways. So if it's a boundary violation. So I think the first one is like the car that you like. Yeah, I know that means you. Automatically when? I can hear they're coming to you for specific expertise. Yeah. So, uh. We up? Up here? Yeah, the objectivity can be compromised if we are in a different relationship with them. Yeah. So some of the, um, uh, risks. So. Yeah. Objectivity. Um. How are differential in compatibility an expectation? Uh, yes. Maybe ethically for, um, having multiple roles or dual relationship. Would that be a valid reason to for us? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. If you, um, yeah, if you know the client or if you, um, ask, is that a valid reason for, um. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. You mean okay? Yeah. No. Can you think of any reasons where there might be benefit to. You having to. Problems with my client? Yeah. In the a little bit in the population. Up in. Yeah, that's a good example. Unavoidable? Sometimes. There aren't other places there are for. Yeah. Kelly. But for conservative voters, that may be tougher. Or that two gentlemen. So with a bit of a referendum. Yeah. Yeah. Good. Luck. Yeah. See, the other day. And they choose the councilor based on their relationship with the like. Yeah. This is interesting to me. Really? Yes. Yeah. I feel that. But that's a good example of a potential benefit. Uh. Um. Think someone who either can relate or be in the community. Yeah. Yeah. Um, some of the behavioral observations and. Others because it affects the good. Yeah. So being able to sometimes if you have a dual role, like a teacher or something like that, that is an opportunity. I would say the book is one example of one type of counseling that often there's kind of a level of experience that clients like, yeah, I said it with like maybe the higher level of council. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. The one I was thinking of is substance abuse. The opposite. Uh, having somebody that has to be tested. And close will ask you that. Like you an alternate. Mhm. And so sometimes those kind of things. Yeah. My gosh. So I have a question. Um no that one. So about divorce. Yeah. What counts as a dual. Like if I go to the same church that so so happens a client does. Yeah. I do. What do I have to go over to see them? Like, hey, that's Bill in the third pew. Yeah. Is that, like, how much connection does I need to be to be a dual role? That's a good question. Let's let's talk about that. Yeah. Yeah. So it's another benefit. And let's look at these kind of videos because you know I think the church question is a good one because that's something I could think of that you know because your church you know, do you have other roles with that. Like some clients, some clinicians feel more comfortable counseling people in their own church than others? Um, but yeah, how far, how far removed do you need to be? You know, it's kind of one of those like. And it depends. So again, invite greater authenticity and concern. The hierarchical nature you mentioned that can be um, diminished and then enhancing therapeutic alliance if there's things that there are connections. Um, so let's put uh, a couple of these little, um, these videos, I always forget where I'm supposed to get. This. But I need to go with you and. Nine, two. And, um. That's going to come up. Here's an example of it. And here's one. Little. We're not going to touch that horn. But what would you guys say if you were that? If you had that situation, would you invite a have a accepted invitation for dinner? Yeah. Um. Yeah. You can do this for another celebrity. Oops. So what do you guys think? Was that a appropriate self-disclosure in a way that's boundaries, right? He's disclosing. So. What would you say? Yeah, I know surface doesn't get in there because it didn't feel he just he just did. Psychoeducation. Yeah. He hasn't disclosed yet. Oh. Okay. Okay. I know too many things. Okay. So now. Here. So that was an appropriate subject because. We explained. Okay. Go ahead. Okay. Like that first week that I get paid and then, you know, brought up to 43 and help with my film being I would assume. Yeah. And then bring it back to say that that's not the idea of connecting on that level. Yeah. We're going to make sure that, you know, if you didn't take it out. Yeah. I'm thinking like, you did a good job of like, making it a reality that we can automatically understand, but then say what? We're it's not really clear on the fact that the sponsor. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. How? It can be tricky to know, you know, because there's sometimes like, oh, you need, like, you know, like, let me help you, you know, because I thought that's what we do or something like that. Yeah. Don't need more than that. Okay. Um, a good test to figure out how to do. Well. Uh, okay. And then. So one more thing. Yeah. Um, I think I was thinking about, um, the counselors is more looking for non prospective for disease or something more about development. And um, but he just said two things is a little bit more to me in my years about the disease and. No no. Yeah she is I don't know if you can use that way. And um, I don't know. Yeah. Maybe you would say it differently. Yeah. I think that's, um. Yeah. Because, um, that after the doctor comes is. What is it? No, no. What is not. Yeah. Um. Yeah. Yeah. I'm using those word this example. We're not going to watch it, but he's um bargaining which is allowed. You can. So in the end he says, oh, can I come do work on your house? And she says, no, appropriately. Um, you can't come to my house. But he was willing in this, um, clip to purchase. He he sells shrimp. I think it is. And so he she was willing to do some bartering for services. So that's just something to think about. So here are some common exceptions. Bartering business relationships. Sometimes accepting gifts from clients. Self-disclosure. Touching. Hugging. These are common, um, things that you might feel that twinge in. You're like, oh, this feels like a little a boundary crossing. But, you know, there is some allowance for those things in our, um, in our work. And here are some things we've kind of worked with for rural communities, um, military families specifically passed off as an even though some, some churches offer pastoral counseling. And that's certainly a dual role, um, addictions counseling, crisis and disaster counseling. You're often going through a disaster yourself. Um, cancer education programs where you're in the world. Um, if a dual relationship can't be avoided, you want to make sure to get informed, consent and seek consultation and, uh, monitor yourself and engage in, you know, ongoing discussion. I went from a client who was. A teacher at my children's school, if not a teacher that we had. But, you know, we always have that conversation like, oh, you know, we continue to have this event or something like that. And that was in a smaller community where we couldn't do a lot of a reading of that kind of thing. But, you know, just so that that was always kind of a check in. If we bumped into each other outside the community, outside of the office, um, also staying within our boundaries of expertise or, uh, staying within the realm of the boundaries of our field. So standard A Wendy talks about utilizing resources that the client has in their community, and so recognizing when it shouldn't be expert facility little and referring or talking about, um, how can your families help you have your church help you? How can you, you know, religious community or, um, groups that you're a part of so that you are collaborating, going to a specialist if needed? Okay. So I would like you to look at and this is almost the end of our time. Just take a couple of minutes. I'll give you two minutes. So look at activities. Nine one on page 241. Maybe we can even do it together. Yeah, let's do it together. It's pretty, pretty quick here. Um, so what do you guys think? Barter with a client for goods or services. And I've already talked about some of these. Would you say never. Rarely. Sometimes. Usually. Always. Sometimes. Yeah. Hey, what about inviting a client to a party or a social event? Like he's a graduated or whatever. They have working parties this weekend. Come on over. Um, counseling to a friend in crisis. What would that look like? So. Yep. So come here. Uh huh. Yeah. Hmm? Yeah. First responder I like that. That's thinking, like, we don't want to say, oh, I can't talk to you. I'm a physician now. And, you know, if it's an ongoing relationship to be a professional, we need counseling. What about accepting gifts to ever accept a gift from a client? Michael says now. Let him say [INAUDIBLE] never let you suffer. I don't want you to give me strength again. I mean, it actually depends. Uh, I think he's giving. You the. He's giving your, um, a paper or drumming for something or something. And also, uh, like, also giving. He gave you the flowers and, uh, that's acceptable. It's a something needs to be, um, uh, some age and gender. It's kind of weird. Um hmm. It shouldn't be. Um, the other sexual relationship will be avoided. Because if the flowers will give them something that will be in your relationship. Yeah, it was the purpose that they get, uh, like when you speak and communicate. I mean, that's, uh, it's from the. Yeah. So from the, for example, um, um, um, the, um, the cultural issues as well, for example, um, the if you just, uh, decline to get on with some of the culture that will be inappropriate for very young people. Um, this is just just disrespectful. And, uh, that's every situation is so different about Stephanie and and the code of ethics is not really explained the right way because it's so difficult to explain. And it's got to be super simple, right? Yeah. Uh, yeah. And then, uh, my point is, right after Ruby, you went to work, and apparently there are some people who are. Giving them access to information, um, you know, like when. What do you mean? I've seen her friend. Yeah, yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah, yeah. Thank you. Hello. So, like, I did my, um. You know, I always have had with. Teachers in some. Way. Yeah. I mean, so we can get that. Right. Well, I it might be a couple things up in, um. Yes. So that's also mentioned that that was a great point. I talked to like, you know, thinking about what can I actually afford. Yeah. So if they gave you, like, a gift, decided like a lot of money, then it's like, okay, maybe I need to take this feel or I, you know, super wealthy. Yeah. Like, not or not, but the same time, I, I love good food. I think. And you guys kind of pointed out some of the dangers of it, but also the, the, the purpose for the client, you know, is there's something that's important for them to to say thank you. Is that part of their culture I, they terminated to do something or is that. Yeah. Is their romantic interest in they, are they trying to pay for their services in that way or is there going to be a valid. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think it's always good stuff. But. Um, okay. So yeah, a little more risk with the higher one. Invitation to a special event? Probably not. Um, yeah. We occasionally hire a client to babysit me. You. Know? Yeah. What about number nine? Give your son number two. Yeah. What do you guys think about out yourself? I service a variety of things. Like even in your disclosures, some of you were like, yeah, I put my phone number, but it would be only during these hours. What? I do remember your personal cell phone or like. Yeah. Personal stuff. Oh, okay. Yeah. Michael said. Now, yes, there are some private counselors. That's the only um, yeah, yeah. Sometimes people are alone. I don't think you say yeah for this purpose. Right, right. No utensils for answering all your calls. Okay. Right, right. Yeah. And consider having two families if you have, you know. Okay. What about becoming friends with a client after termination? There's actually a third party, huh? Yeah. This is someone like you, but not in Washington. Never, never. You love me? Yeah. It's right here. Yes, yes. Uh, I have proof, and I don't actually have proof. Oh, yeah. It's not on the quayside. Yeah. I just don't remember it offhand. I think it is. I don't. Yeah. So again, the only explicitly mentioned dual relationship that's prohibited is a sexual relationship. Um, I already mentioned that Washington was even different. Uh, even stronger. But, uh, because of the power differential, because, um, reported client symptoms are similar to victims of rape, incest, incest going. Um, the book points to feelings from clients of being trapped, guilty, isolated in public because, again, because of that power relationship, it's just been, uh, shown over and over again. It's not a good idea. Um, if your client discloses abuse from a previous counselor, uh, you have to respect your client's wishes. Um, whether or not to report, um, you need your client's engagement to kind of move forward. Um, but it is a common problem. You can see some of the statistics here. But, uh, it's not uncommon for counselors to have, uh, you know, incidences of inappropriate client sexual behavior. Um, and you need to keep going, like having supervision, disclosing that, documenting that, and considering referring. If that's not able to be resolved in counseling, um, trainees are more likely than clinicians to respond and effectively, and supervisors might be uncomfortable. So find a supervisor this and comfortable to talk about it. Um, yeah. Then I think, uh, referring your client is a is is a professional and appropriate thing to do if, um, it's interfering with your abilities. Yes. Exactly. How do you feel about, you know, I don't know, but, uh, before you walk into it. Um, what would that be like if someone were to offer you? That's not even. The word. Yeah. Yeah, that's a good point. I it's a good question, I don't know. I think it would need to be, uh, if potentially, uh, if, uh, another clinician reported that, then it could impact the. Uh, you know, your the license could be looked at with a, with a clinician. Yeah, there's a video to in on um, in here about, uh, in chapter eight, actually. Um, where at where they were a client and a counselor hug and then say, oh, I'll see you tonight for dinner. And another counselor observes it. And so, you know, what do you do if you observe one of your colleagues? Because then it's not like protected information, right? You're observing. And so, um, confronting the um, um, can, uh, just and people are going to get to it. But confronting the counsel, like confronting your colleague would be your first step, right, to confront a colleague before you report them. So that might be a good thing to. To watch and an example of that. Do you guys think these are like is it helpful to see some examples of people. Up. You know. So what do you think of her, um, willingness to confront this colleague? That takes a lot of bravery, right? Yeah. So this is one of the things that we are called to, um, kind of just to protect our field, right? So she goes on and says, yeah, you're right. I need to go ahead and cancel dinner and talk about this in supervision. Um, but yeah. So, yeah, you would, um. Yeah. You want to resolve it informally with a counselor. You know, if you need to go on, there are, um, a policy for filing a report on suspected ethical violations. So they have a whole process. And this is probably a good website for you guys to be aware of. Um, they have, uh. So if you need to, like, file a complaint, you just go through the links. Right. You can. Um, they also have consultation services so you can get consultation. But if you have those questions, kind of like if you wonder if you need to report, you know, tablets or something. It's good to, um, to get some consultation. Call them to get some. Okay. And then, um, these are just some tips about what to do if a client expresses feelings towards you. Again, it's similar seeking supervision, reinforcing the boundaries and try to understand where it's coming from, because sometimes it's actually really important to their case that you would understand. Like, yes, you'll have feelings about their feelings, right? You'll have counter transference. But if you can use that to help conceptualize, oh, is this where they go in their life every time they're close to somebody, you know, helping them? Um, it can give you a lot of insight. Treatment plan. Decide to refer out or not and take care of yourself. And then, of course, if you're in jeopardy of harm, this is okay to refer. So, um. Yeah. And then these are some things if you're attracted to a client. So acknowledging the feelings that they're not unethical in themselves but acting on them would be consulting and getting supervision and then potentially with signing out. So any questions or thoughts about that. This is just continuing to be intentional about boundaries is kind of the overall theme here. Yeah I have to say about that. Um, it seems like it is permission where you're at work or at your office interacting with clients, but in a situation where you're out and about in public and then hire appropriate you. Yeah. Um, whether or not you're by yourself or with other people. Do you? I guess for us, we can do that here and start setting boundaries on their own. Is it better to handle it in a with a way of personal humility, threats, that information? Yeah. I'm usually like my client or, you know, if they're very comfortable here, like, hey, look, if this I can prepare you, you know, like you kind of go with it and if not, then, you know, say like, you know, then you just think, okay, you know what? If you want to say anything, but it's up to them. And so I always have that conversation, especially if I think we might come into contact with each other, like, how do you want me to handle that with you? And, um, you know, we'll talk about it in session. Time. Yeah. Some people are really comfortable with like, you know, even know who the counselors and are at all. So it's kind of a you have to be careful. You probably want to err on the side of, you know, not saying who you are first, but then you that. You know, I just have an observation that I think is really great. Okay. We're going to have a counseling session in a restroom. There's no mercy. You know, I think you know all the things at the top. Right. And there are some, like, even in there sometimes if you're working in a school or if you're working in some environments, those little things are a little bit, you know, but what certainly in this example, how many copies of it that you're putting out, all those things do not feel quite right. Okay. All right. Well, let's do, um, let's get back at eight. You can come back earlier. The test will open at eight. But if you guys want to take your your breaks. 815. You're welcome to. I think you'll have plenty of time. Um, and I could even say a little later if we need to, but if you want 30 minutes, take your 30 minutes. The test, um, is accessible through discovery, and it will open at eight. So you can come in here when you're ready and get started. And. Yeah, I guess that would be awesome. And you will need your computers because it's on discovery. And so I want you to feel like you have someone who just come to my office. It is probably a weird question. This is something that you guardian internships and I mentioned super crazy. I just would like to see her. Yeah, yeah, she goes everywhere. Yeah. Oh, Cheerios. Okay. Cheerio. Yeah. Uh, yeah. Individually, you get, like, you're you're in luck, you know that, uh, that, um, I mean, there's, you know, just like, whenever you're looking over your shoulder that. It's. Okay. I might have to be wrong anyway. So what if. What if I just sit like this? And. You know, I mean, there's a chair there. Are you in this area? What am I doing? Just like if there. Was no eyes on her. Michael. Uh. What? Do you do know who they just started last year? And I think I did, yeah. Yeah. It's what you think is Impractical Jokers. Like, you know what? Is going on in your. Life, you know? Yeah. Yeah. I know, um. So. Yeah, I mean, yeah, I know. I know, I know. I know, I know nothing about me like that. You or anything. Yeah. No. Yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah I mean yeah, I don't know. I mean I know, I know. You're not. Listening to This. Yeah. Yeah. And. It was only if they get a little. Not for me. I know, I know, I remember, you know, I would have been in a better place than I thought I was. Like, oh, my God, you know, I was. I was like, what? I don't know, I, you know, I was like, oh yeah, yeah, I did hear, but you know. I think it was a good. Like I. Really do like so much, you know, uh, I did it over Europe, I did. You know, I was like, you know what? You. Know? Yeah. Hey hey hey. Hey. Hey, man, I know you know, but I know. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. I know, I know I will. Oh. Yeah. Think. Maybe some people are really. So they get. You out of life. But. What the [INAUDIBLE] should I do? You know, I really think you should know. We have to take a break and, like, you know, like. We all to make you feel like. You. Know any other woman? Um, we do know her. She wrote it down. So I'm fairly certain that you like. Which do you mean? Yeah, I know. I know, yeah. But I don't really know how to make it. Better. I was here just to make sure you. Were saying that. So I would say it was definitely, uh. You. Know, you and I. And I have and I know, I know. I. Know. So that's just what I heard. Well, I know, I know. Oh, really? Yeah. Well, yeah. Where do you live? I, um. Yeah. Oh, really? Thank you for your. Service. Oh my goodness. Oh my God. Oh my God. Oh, yeah. Oh yeah. Oh you know. And I love that. Yeah. Um. You know. Like that. People are trying to find you. I pray that you get their. Approval. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Anyway, I can do. It. You can listen to all. Right. Yeah, yeah. Thank you. I mean. I. Really hope that. You know that. You do? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, I you know, I really get, you know, you know. Very late night. I mean, it was really, really cool. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I used to run the show. You. Know, I mean, I, I. Really hope you know. Oh, I mean, you. Know, I. Mean. You know, I like my hair. Anymore. You know, I you know, I don't want to hear that. You're not here. I I I I I, I don't. I feel. Like, you know, I know what you like. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Thank you. Thank. You thank you. Thank. You. Thank you. Oh, my. God. Okay, I got you, I got you, I. Got you, I. Got you. Why you have like I don't know how. You know. I. Feel like. You know what I feel like I have. No. Idea. Even though I don't. Even have, like. I think, you know, if you are, you got. To see. You know, you don't even know. You know you. Really like every day. So I mean, I know. That you. Think. You know. Oh. I know you, you know you. You. You know.