Anyway, um, this handy little booklet by NBCC even has I found, uh. Which, y'all, this is another organization you should know about. National Board for Certified Counselors. It's another kind of certification. If you go to National, uh, they have this this booklet. It's really helpful that just describes plant life and, uh, responsibilities. And, um, has some definitions about our field and what professional counseling is. Uh, and then talks about plant. Right. So selecting a professional counselor who meets your needs, um, receiving information about your counselors qualifications, including things like you're going to write in your disclosure statement, your, your, um, qualifications and such, but a copy of the Code of ethics, uh, the written explanation of services. So it just it right. It has all these down, um, things like terminating the relationship is within their rights, obtaining copies of their records, understanding that any diagnoses you might provide or any assessment, um, goals, establishing goals. So sometimes this can be really helpful to go over with codes just to kind of educate with them about the counseling process. So along with your informed consent, this is kind of a nice little booklet. And it's also helpful to kind of consider while you're making your informed consent, um, asking questions that confidentiality I mean, some clients are honestly like, okay, I know counseling if I've seen it in that TV, never whatever. But they don't always know. Um, yeah. This also outlines what to do if they're dissatisfied, their responsibilities. So it does talk here about, um, showing up for appointments, working towards goals like getting their by and that this is an investment and it requires something of them right. Paying their bills, participating. Uh, I like this one too. Um, avoiding placing your counsel in an ethical dilemma. Like requesting to be involved in social interactions or bartering. You know, these things that are really challenging, you know, like, oh, please. Um, they've got to understand that it's a professional relationship and it's different than a friendship or a personal connection. Um, and then let's just go to cell phone and these are just some links to the NBCC and signature letter, um, which is an honor society for counselors. We had a couple questions about starting back here. I think it has to actually be student initiated that that's another conversation. Okay. Any questions about that? Okay. Uh, there's, uh, so, um, just again, kind of your awareness of yourself is really important in the field, um, because your personal reactions will come into play. Right? This is called counter transfer. So if you guys come across my chances of counter transference, that clients will remind us of people or trigger things in ourselves, and that's, uh, that's a really important thing. Okay. With this video example, is that like me? But too many things open close and other with all one them. And. It added this impact of Covid to every chapter and it just. Oh yeah this is nice. It's talking about a presidential. Okay? Okay. Really? The. Okay. So how was her personal lead? How was the personal meeting? You see her? I you know, I think about those kind of things that really does come up, especially. I get hear from now when you're like, I just need to get my everything I see, you know, you be quiet. It's really done. But if I get an idea, if it's about that, about us, it's going to be this kind of feel. Even. Especially if they want to hurt me. Right? But. But the ethical thing is, you're ready to go, like, let's make a plan for that. So I want to create another goal. Maybe. And maybe that will be revealed. But way. You have to like you're really upset when it's really healthy just to terminations like that. Yeah. Um, yeah. Okay. So a couple more things on that. Yeah. Just recognizing that self-care is so important that you you have to take care of yourself as a person. Um, and, uh, but there can be some, you know, like Reckitt has these like, be aware of, uh, these kind of signs. And I do think this is helpful. Like, if you, um, if you find yourself falling into some of these patterns that we all have, we will at some point, like, uh, desire to tell all your clients just what to do or a desire to take away all the pain or to have all the answers and be perfect. Um, I need to be recognize the tendency to assume too much responsibility, like taking it all on. I think a lot of times, you know, you guys are highly motivated, smart, like graduate student. And when you can do when you do have a lot of power over like your grades and stuff, sometimes that can transfer into your clinical work like it's all on. You can make it happen. So just just be aware of those kind of things. Um, again, that's for self-care, but also complete with your client. Like if you're not helping, get them to a place where they can be independent or rely on the resources in their community or in their family. Um, yeah. So any thoughts about this in whatever struggles I think of these things of the project? Sure. You know, I have to. Have you have to initiate a termination with somebody. And it was like they didn't want to go anything to me. By. Yeah, I um, especially I think, you know, I moved a lot into that always for I think and a lot of times people are writing, they think they are um, but even so, like, uh, there have been clients that have achieved their goals and I think it would be good for them, even if they come back in a while to step out. Um, I think in particular client, you know, she worked, she just kind of keep coming up with new goals and you welcome you both in. Okay. I think you've got the source. Like, at least now let's see how you do with that. So some I'm cutting back. Okay. Let's talk a little bit. Um, so that's been kind of my experience. But yeah, I've definitely felt that like, oh, they're benefiting, they're relying on me and I can kind of feel something in my ego probably that. Yeah. Um, I think on the other end, like fear of doing harm can also like be crippling to things that are just on your mind all the time. Um, if you're really worried about. Yeah, the first time that you have clients that are having suicidal ideation and things like that, that can be really considered. Right. And so, um, being like, aware that you're doing the steps, meeting and then meeting it at the office is a really important skill set to build. And it is somehow kind of mess, like, hey, I'm closing the door on the day and I'm going to go home and do it, you know, with my family or, you know, go do something that has nothing to do with work or whatever it is. Um, okay. I know you said it's gone over. Transference and counter transference. Um. Yeah. Why would you think? Why are these dangerous? Why is Tanner transferring dangerous in a therapeutic relationship? Some of these things are coming into play. I think my father and I think it's been a pretty dangerous. Mhm. Yeah. Kind of to work during the day because it's so focused. And then you want to turn to your needs more than the client. Um. Good. Yeah. Yeah. So do you think you might say something maybe that you're not about right? Uh, yeah. Right. Who are you? But, um. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Good. Yeah. It's one of the things that, like. It's important when you're doing a case studies and things like that, especially when you're thinking deeply about a client. You just consider those things, talk about them in supervision and say, oh, this client is bringing up a lot for me. And being able to talk with someone about that is really healthy because it actually that it's part of, you know, what, we believe in every process where they actually figure that out. So just take time to do that to talk to each other. You guys, we have a close cohort, which is great. And I talk to supervisors. Um. Yeah. Yeah. And here are some more check ins. Um. Over protection, rejecting a client, needing constant reinforcement. Romantic feelings. Certainly would be something to confide. Always be aware of. Um, but. Yeah, but having, you know, one on one relationships with clients is pretty, is a personal thing. And it can, um. And it impacts you as a person. So just be aware of that. Here are some examples. Uh. Uh, so some kind of red flag, maybe things like prolonging number of counseling sessions we talked about. Um. And posing like, that's one of the things the ACA warned about. Like imposing what you think the client should do, like almost being more of a parent than a counselor. Um. Techniques or strategies that would be that aren't, um, that aren't really aimed at the client, but more counselor. Even things like tolerating boredom or apathy over time can be can be read, play. Just take care of yourself in the field. We need to make sure that, um, we're taking care of ourselves. Um, mandated client pay. Um. Yeah. So this is one of the we tend to talk about this actually a little bit later, too, but just that you have to be transparent and offer clear guidelines about whatever the reason for the mandated, um, reason it like whatever or whatever why they're mandated. And, uh, you also have to give, um, disclosure about, uh, that it's that you might have to give a disclosure to court. Um, and one of the things the book recommends, which is good advice, is considering kind of doing counseling and evaluation as two separate processes that could involve two different clinicians, even. Um, so one would be reporting on counseling, attendance and progress towards reaching goals. And um, that's different for from evaluating my client clients for issues such as fitness for parenting, ability to work after an injury and self hydration or other, um, progress towards eligibility. So kind of trying to think about other ways to separate these efforts, um, so that you're not trying to have two hats. But. Hey. Um, we talked about this actually in theories quite a bit, but that treatment plans need to be done with clients, and that technique should be grounded in research. So if you are doing experience experimental techniques or things that are, um, not fully backed by research, you should disclose that to your clients and techniques require, um, you. Then you might want to at least get verbal written consent. Things like the MDR opt in, the prior written consent, things that have mixed results like some, um, trauma, uh, interventions like can produce flooding for clients, like if you expose do it through exposure therapy. If you do that too quickly, that can trigger reactions. And it's important to when you get the exposure therapy, for example, to inform them, you know, you might have dreams about this, like thinking it when we get it, when you go home and that you have or and if they're not ready to consider that right, they're not ready. Uh, this is a tough track. Um, yeah. Okay. All right, so now we're getting into the written consent. How many of you guys have brought your written consent or drafts of them? Okay, great. So we're going to take some time to look at those. Um, so this is a legal and ethical obligation, and it respects, uh, demonstrate the respect for the client's autonomy like we talked about, um, is required. And it's also part of forming that therapeutic relationship. Yeah. Let's watch this is a video here. Example of just thinking about how to go over informed consent with clients. Um. I think the one is about. Um. Other people that are. Uh. Maybe. But. Okay, so what did you guys think about how she kind of directed the session back to let's talk about informed consent and all that? Yeah. I thought it was interesting that she started with that. Like, what brings you in instead of starting with Jennifer? Yeah. That's okay with you. That's true. Yeah, I think that's that's probably good. Yeah. For she actually. Yeah. What are you doing? Okay. So you're good. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. You know, you think, you know, like, if I look, I could have had the whole reason for that. She went back to her content and then, like, I don't know if, you know, like, what we don't care about. Yeah. Like in the. Thanks. I'm a little annoyed. So, like, you know. All right. So I think that just like my concern with like, oh my, you do like, I don't care about migration like in here. I just want to make sure that, you know, I don't know how much she wasn't expecting to you. If she knew that, if they needed somebody. Yeah. That like that kind of feeling and that, you know, what do you typically start looking for? Are you actually where that's what you said. Yeah. So for a long time I felt like an intake. And so yeah I served in my family. Mhm. And then I can take this as a form of. Healing and training that kind of a thing and that. But in many places that will argument that for you and then you inherit a client is already like you've already got to take one action. Um, so they might have already talked a little bit about. How to kind of see that and say, yeah, I do. I feel like it's very nice to have structure, especially the first session. And then they know what to expect and then like you're going to. Yeah, if that goes with them. You know I think it's very. Good. Um, I'm curious about um, is it possible to do so. This is a little bit different way. Um, for example, if you started that, you feel that the client is very stressed and very ungrateful is you can say, okay, um, and she said, I read everything assignment. Um, can you say that? Okay, we could start the session, but we need to come back in the ten minutes and the end of the session, and we have to deal with this like that's important. Is it possible to do that? Right? Yeah, yeah. Be more direct about like. And what do you have to expect me to come here and do this part? Because it's not to do with this, um, building relationship and to relax. So. And just trust. Yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah. That reportedly is so it's. Actually that kind of. So, uh, counselor was like that, you know, a lot of information really quickly, maybe just to get through it. But part of me felt like he could slow it down and make sure she understood of it. Like not looking at us like, that's something I have to get done, like legal or whatever. But because it's been part of the relationship and like, you don't have to do that. So she did that in the ramble from uh uh huh. Should have been what might that look like just for? You've been speaking about school. I mean, oh, you know, under the section. Have you on the table? If he has a very specific and just dinner wasn't so. Yeah. Like they were not permitted. Yeah. I felt like I feel like I'm a specific person every single, every day. I think and would also be like healthy breath. Um, like, this isn't quite like what are and what you like. I'm all for panicking, but. Yeah, for counseling sessions. And so, like, this is a different thing. And partly like I know I've experienced that in the session where I can hear it. And then also I hope that things like this. Because I think you're right. And that's why he declined to have the experience of being fired. But the yeah I wonder some especially Will Covington again like I was thinking about we talked to you about this. You know they want to get me. And so sometimes that is something that I have to say that welcome to the American. Oh, God, they're very similar. But this is maybe we'll go ahead and break down the session, but. I promise you're not going to dedicate more than that. And that was set up so that they kind of have an idea that, like, if you're not going to use the whole time, it's not like you have to talk about this promise to have this amount of time. Yeah. Um, but again, I'll just say that this first session is different. Yeah. Yeah, I like that. But then that I know where I, you know, I think up to that, I can see how many, you know, like you're trying to push up against a very dynamic advantage that I think you with. What are the risks if you don't know about these things? You get to. Get sick. Yeah. Yeah. You can consider your chances of ending up in for ethical dilemmas, especially with, like, the confidentiality. Yeah. I love the examples in the book. Yeah. Yeah. There's a good example like Abraham as an example like that. Right. We have to disclose that we learned about abuse or something. And you're quite upset. And that can still have a side effect. But at least they're aware. And you can even remind them like when they're considering disclosing something like something simple like that. Remember we talked about it. Yeah. Leverage the opportunity to. Here. You know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, well, I just like the example that the book gave about, um, accountability in public health and that you have to sort of separately. Yeah. And then one of the, the husband wrote to the counselor that you're happy to hear, and he didn't want to. Do that. You know, the fact that he informed his friend, both of them, that would help. And yeah, that's a really good example. And I think we have a lot in there that we're going to talk about that. I think that's great. And because there's some differences between solutions on how they do marriage and public counseling and what they're like, but overall, like they try and let's say that the client is a couple couples who work that complex and, um, furnishes well and separately information confidential has to be disclosed early on in getting exposed to at least probably better policies. Yeah. Yeah. That's an added thing you can add to your disclosures. If you have a if you have policies like that, you were probably smart. Okay. And then diversity considerations with informed consent. So if you are working with children or um, working bilingually, like having translation tools for clients whose first language is English these days, it's so easy isn't it, with Google Translate and things like that. I mean, I was amazed in Ecuador I could just hold up my phone and it would translate of directions or menus. I mean, it's so different, but, um. Yeah. Just be aware of culture and diversity considerations and that it's an ongoing process. So like Kelly brought up, you know if you work with couples it might be something more specific that you need to talk about. Um, if you are adding a new intervention or, um, you know, something you're getting training in that's probably good to disclose. You know, I'm going through PMT, you know, and I want to see if I think this could be really helpful. But I want to disclose that I think, you know, and training under supervision all those things. Okay. I think we kind of did this. The case of Abraham is the one that I talked about. But I do think it's important to, um, just keep practicing this. But maybe we'll do that within our, uh, looking at the I think you guys have created. So your text identifies these areas that could lead to legal problems. I don't think this is exhaustive, but, um, you know, be careful about these things guaranteeing an outcome or guaranteeing privacy with our expectations or, um, agreeing to fee arrangement that we're different than, um, from what was intended, um, risk misrepresenting credentials. So that's where you want to say, you know, if you're an associate license, but that in terms of, uh, like just being honest with, um, your credentials. Um, yeah. Like, I think the one about possible stigma. That's interesting, like, especially with a diagnosis. So. I often will tell a client like, okay, you know, this is your diagnoses. If I know your insurance, they will be aware of your diagnosis. And I think that's becoming less of a thing. But, you know, um, the nature of counseling and then these are the things that I want you guys to make sure you're informed consent include and also note the hyper requirements on page 98. Um, it's basically all about obtaining records and, um, and limitations of confidentiality and things. So just make sure that you look at that and I'm going to give you guys some time to look at these things. Um, the list of what the informed consent should include. And this is from your book. And then get in groups and compare either your own what you've made that would be ideal with this list. Like have somebody check it out and maybe talk through it a little bit and then and then do that for each other. Right. So if there's two of you or there's three of you, you know, share what you have. If you don't have that done. Um, there are some examples from last week's, uh, on last week's discovery page on, um, informed consent. And most of them are missing things. So you can look at those and also say, okay, this one doesn't talk about the role of technology and that's not required or, um, implications of diagnosis and how that's going to be used. And it doesn't talk about fees, whatever it is. So um, I just want to give you guys some time to look at this because I know there's a lot of, like, kind of nitty gritty things about this, like lots of little details so that you can work together and hopefully come up with some strong, informed consent and understand that. Well. And um, yeah. Any questions about that? And then if you get done with that. Oh yeah. Go ahead, answer the question about that. But down to just discussing a wide variety of page numbers. Um, is there any sort of guidelines to the err on the side of adding in much information as possible or at some point in order to, um. Yeah, I think you can be like the one in the zone is pretty long and I think, um, no point in everything. I tend to try to make things concise, figure that people are more likely to read it, but no, it's really personal. Um, maybe you, um, you know. Personally, I am trying to know if you're looking, you know, how some people would know that. Then they might ask you questions like, oh, you want to know, you know, whatever it is. So yeah. Yeah. Like, um, kind of question policy lines, what formatting is. And so is up to us as far as like how we want to like subheadings or stuff like that as I go. Yes, yes. Okay. I, I think it's always nice when, um, like, for me, it's nice if you follow these just to download them quickly, see if they. Um, but no, there's nothing I. Can. Do. I just kind of. I would. Like, what is it? To, um. Are you ready to get to that? Right. That's kind of where we're going to go. Here goes. The party here. Oh, wow. Yeah. Yeah. So you need time to do that. If you finish, what I was going to say is traffic is doing kind of. What? That's fine. And supported, like introducing and reply to each other, like, um, just that I think that that we have you guys, you can have to kind of keep the power, the focus space in like 20 minutes and see how you doing, like maybe seven, 15 times a year that like I said, some really. Good. You know, like, oh, I don't know. What does this mean? Yeah. What's that? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, by the way. Yeah. That's right. That's a good idea. And maybe like fresh. Yeah. That's like that's just the other thing. Um, so I just I was like, yeah I see okay. That's good. How do you spell patience. Not know that. You know surprise. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. There is, uh. Information about duration and voice. Assignments that I, I do have to listen. Um, yeah, I did, you did? Yes. I'm working on it right now that I have. And it's not there though, so I'm going to tell you about that. I guess it did not go to say that. I know I need a hospital. Yeah, I yeah, yeah. Yeah yeah yeah I have. I have okay, I and I think this is like oh man. Like I know all the technology in that place. Um yeah. Yeah, yeah. I think you're right. That's in a nutshell. That's what that is. Yeah. Uh, I have to admit, I haven't noticed. That, uh, area of the galaxy. Yeah. Oh, this is Christopher. He's going to have a whole city devoted to you. Yeah. And then I'm going to send him to a doctor. We have a bag of birdseed left. Um, here's a little, uh, would. You like to see, uh, evil implications of diagnosis and the use of testing? Oh. I have, I have that, like, I like. Uh, testing is like, you don't have to go to that. Yeah, but the impression. Is that you would never be able to see it. I mean, I think that that's consistent. Yeah. You know, if you have. Yeah. Okay. We should be there now. As we. Who are not you? I, I think it's a very good one. That's what I looked at. Yeah, yeah, I had a link down below. That's, uh, like a group of these bees and. They do? They smell. Oh, that's for sure. No problem. Yeah. You're going to be Richie Rich, but, uh, just keep going. It just keeps going. Keep it up these days. Yeah, like I'm just going to your direct deposit. Yeah. Right now, they never countdown the whole thing. Just keep your access, your fingers. All right? Uh, confidentiality, anything like that. You know, that's something that. I have, you know. I do have that I did. I have better reporting about that. Yeah. You know. Well, the I mean, it is the same thing. I mean, you got the heads. I know why you say that. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Um, I think that, you know, uh. Very healthy. Right. To. Work? Yes. Um, which. Is a different area. Yes. So we're number nine. Yeah. Just as the regular paper things have happened. Is that just kind of like what this medication, like, purposely had, like a medical history or something like that? Is that what that's the actively participate party as I was, I was kind of to address. I'm just trying to figure out what what what. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Oh. Okay. Gotcha. Gotcha. Yes. Yeah. I mean, even I just feel like any. Type of guy. Okay. Oh my God. Yeah. Yeah, I know that. More about that. I just said, let's say, you know, since when did you have. To deal. With that? Yeah. Well, I know that freshman. Year I you. Know, we said like you said, I, um. Yeah, it's kind of like. Okay. And then the last one, the right to use recommended services form of addiction. Oh, that's that's right, that's right. Oh, that's a good one. It was the hippies coming out. Wow. Yeah. You're right. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Right. Right. I didn't know. Yeah, yeah I do. Oh, right. Because I didn't have any. So I just make some decisions. So. Yeah. Yeah. I mean I think it because. As you know, the United States has quite. A few overextension. Yeah. It's almost like I said to myself, gold bars in here. And so this is bad. Yeah. Shipwrecks. More beneficial to. Some of the inherent. So what are. You. Doing? I thought I wasn't. Going to say that. Yeah. Yeah I think. That's one thing. Yeah. Um. I mean, yeah, you know, I mean, if you want to read, like, three pages of us as often as giving us. You know, I. Okay, well, my general budget is one of two things have to be true. Yes. Uh. They have. More than a. Coach. Just take a gander. It starts that way. Okay. And I just hate to talk that way. But I. Will. Really. Help! You with that? I mean, this is like. All right. Yeah, but I mean, you're wrong. I love you guys. I just. Yeah. Yeah. Do I know that? Yeah. Yeah. You have to. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, I don't know. He said he was, you know. I mean, I know. I know. So you said you were, like, very loud. I mean, also hearing a lot of words. Yeah, I know. I know that's that's if I come across. Okay. That's all I have. Yeah. You've been like. Yeah. For like. Two hours. Oh, yeah. I just love that. I like to play, right? I mean, I can also write sometimes I have like a list is on here. Yeah. It doesn't have colors. On my notes. It looks like, you know, like I feel. Really good about. It. You know. What I mean. Thank. You guys so. Much? Yeah. I will definitely be alive. Uh, here on Facebook. Instagram. Or whatever. This other thing that's. Kind of like writing. Down market and things like that. I love the fact that you made it. Yeah. I feel like we have to be aware and like. Like. Oh, okay. Uh, I think all right. On that one. But I like it. Yeah, it's a nice picture. Um, like, I want to think about it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So. Yeah. Oh, that's. What my supervisor like. Oh, I see. I just said supervisor like my supervisor. You know, I was like, yeah, he has a license from life. He's seen some stuff. Yeah, it's been around the block. That's what you. See. But yeah, that's what they like. You can obtain as he's like. That's. Why you want to know what he says? Yeah. Okay. I think he has or I think I did think so. Yeah. I mean, makes sense. Yeah. I don't really know. What you're. Looking. At. I want to ask you. Yeah. Yeah. You. Yeah. That is dangerous. Yeah. I don't know. I don't think it doesn't mention my great mathematical definition of what I did. Yeah, I don't look at that as a number. Sometimes it's. Just events like others. Yeah. And, um, like. There are keyboards right now, you know. Um, but. I love for general emergencies, just in case, you know. Yeah. If you did, though, I think. Yeah, I think so. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, I also. Know. That. There are some other things. Like there are other things that. There's like a, you know, like I know they said that we had a more robust. I know it was a hit or something like it was that it was just like higher standards. But it's like, well, you. Know, like I just. I like I feel. Like. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's funny. Because, like, I just kind of the resident, like. No, no, no, you can't tell. Other people. I think that's a testament to your writing. I mean, I did not. Think I mean, oh, I it's a, it's, you know. So I just thought about it. I was thinking, I wish I could do that. And. Oh yeah, I did as I write. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Um, I'll take that. I'll take that. And. Yeah, that's what I have to write on paper because I will. I still edit, but but. Yeah, I just did it. I think. Yeah. That's not so bad. I don't, I don't I don't think so. Um. Yeah. I mean. I I I probably don't. Realize it like, it's not something like that, but. Yeah, I mean. Yeah, yeah I know, I. Know, I know. I watch all of them. Two, three months now. Oh, really? Yeah. I've never seen that. So. Pretty sure. I don't know that. Oh, yeah. I was afraid that. You know. No. I mean, they may take inspiration from stuff like. That. So the book is slightly different. I'm pretty sure. You take inspiration. Right. So what? Yeah. Yeah. If you see any. The thing that was affected. Yeah, yeah yeah yeah, yeah. Just a coincidence. Yeah. When I look at what they say, this is supposed to be like this on purpose. Yeah, yeah. You only get this to be funny. I. Know, but it's kind. Of. Like. You know, how do you have. Someone that. Makes it hard on you. Well, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. All right. Well, you know, if that was a risk of what, uh, you are on is the only word that you haven't picked up on a the I got. Well, I figured it out. I don't know, like. I actually was writing it under a different I, I was like, wait, is actually I like how. Can you digitize this? We're trying to pray. It does a fairly good job. Yeah. Surprisingly. I don't know what it is. That's. You know. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Right. So yeah. So I think that's probably where. I feel like I. Don't know anything. Wow. You, uh. Just oh I did. Yeah, I read, like I think so, yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah. And like. Oh, yeah. So why is the same for her. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah I'm curious. Didn't realize this. Yeah. But I thought this was going to. Be something I picked up I, you know I, you know I was thinking about that because I bet that way. Yeah. What's up with you? And I have no idea. I was just like, that's what I just always have. It's weird. Japanese card, but yet my last name is. Well, yeah. And. So. I mean, it was like. It means, like, you know, my, I mean, it hasn't been nice or whatever, you know, it's either. Let me tell. You the I. Know the whole thing. I mean, I will, you know, I. Yeah yeah, yeah. I know I did, but I don't know that I'm doing. Something good. I just don't like that you are playing a lot of half time, right? Well, I don't care. Yeah, yeah, yeah, because they will. You think? Whatever I think, you know, I never I don't think that's. What is right side to side. Or side. Right. And then the guys that's part of the you know stuff like that. So you know, I, I would uh, I would uh, I think. That's nice. Oh yeah. Oh it's, you know, going to be at the executive session. Uh, yeah. Okay. I did not go. Any thing that came out of those discussions is interesting. Basically, if that's what you have in was that. Yeah, it was really interesting, John. It's a really different approach as to how you do that, where I was really conversational as a job all and I found myself really liking the documents, being a legal document and then having the conversation and work. And yeah, that's what I'm hoping for for each others. And so you can see how they did that. They did more than any other surprises. Okay. All right. So. But I hope that I know there's a lot of kind of nitty gritty in that and what this through. So we'll just go through a couple more slides and then we'll break. Um, for dinner. I'll do the integration herself. Um, and then this afternoon into the evening. Oh, I think there should be visitors at eight, so I'm a little bit late. You got a bracelet working on that? Um, we're going to do, um. Yeah, an activity in the app. After we go through chapter five. Two. After after dinner. Whatever meal I have is waiting for my dinner. Okay, so I tell you that every week we'll talk about one of the virtues. And, um, and looking at how Watson relates that to a Christian virtue. And hopefully these this part of the, uh, class kind of helps with that paper that is coming up. Um, so the professional ethics of fidelity, which we've talked about, is that idea of keeping promises. And so that's related to what we're saying, right, that we want to be, um, transparent and, uh, offer clear communication about privacy and confidentiality, which we're getting into next, um, after dinner. Um, so Watson relates this to the theological virtue of faith. Which is interesting. Right. To have, uh, think um, is, uh, how am I how can how might this be related? It's a theological virtue of faith with keeping promises. Yeah. And you have said that before. So that was just. Okay. This takes place on the. Uh, healing takes place of faith. Okay. Mm hmm. Yeah, I like that. There is space and there is traffic detail because traffic to that. Is that what you think? Uh, Aquinas wrote that, um, faith involves believing someone and believing something. So that belief in God's trust. Um, have you ever had someone believe in you when you couldn't see it? No. Ever. It's children. That hope for any child that. I know, I know, for me, I certainly have to go through years. People could see things before I could do it, but before I could see it. And I typically why am I right? Can help give a vision. And there's a lot of that involved in counseling, right? You can start hoping things for seeing things in you, believing in your client. And so that ability to, uh, trust, uh, like establish trust in a relationship and through doing what you say you're going to do is a part of that. Um, okay. Watson also talks about faith and trust being connected, and that we live out faith for building trust in relationships with clients and colleagues. Um, lots of studies show about the importance of trust as an essential ingredient in relationship health. Um, fidelity has that same rule as fiduciary that we're talking about for the benefit of others. And it involves fulfilling responsibility of trust in the customer relationship and honoring those trust. So that's why we spend so much time talking about what does this relationship involve? What am I going to do for you? You know, what are the responsibilities that I'm kind of expecting of you to be in or to be, um, part of this process to communicate openly? Uh. These are some things, some nice verses about how God sees us and can maybe give us some, um, example of, you know, how to hope for and, you know, create a safe place with our client. Um she also talks about so again talks about how do we cultivate, how do we grow this in our south. Like how do we grow faith? How do we grow this virtue? Uh, um, developing, growing our ability to have faith. And she says that, uh, for the mental health professional student, developing habits of prayers is essential, that during the rigors of graduate school and academic. Why and why it's that having, um, quiet time, having prayer, having that connection with God is really helpful in quieting ourselves. And then involvement in Christian community also can realign and affirm that for, um, Christian connection. Um, and then she says, we have heard the principle of fidelity, not because we have to, but because it has become an essential part of our personal and professional character, guiding our attitudes, activities and actions. Activities are still said. I see that all the time. Um. Okay. So we're talking about, um, again, promises and responsibilities. So with the assignment commitments and keeping promises and keeping fulfilling one's responsibilities of trust and professional relationships. So we've been kind of talking about this already, but what kind of promises and responsibilities coming might come to mind that are important for. And we. Really promising. Yes. To do. Do you know her? Yeah. Just the philosophical. Aim. Did you know? And so difficult to listen to listen. Yeah. Yeah. This might seem backwards, but I think it would be good from that. I mean, not. Just because they're coming to America. I mean, if you like, what you get in is what you give them. And so I think, like the public, I'm going to work harder on you and you're going to work on yourself. Okay. Well, thanks for keeping the onus on the client there. Yeah. You promised to keep her. Name? But they always speak in confidence. Yes, you trust them and let them know you can this them unconditional. I have never had. Of such just the promise to report it later. Promise me something happens. But. Yeah, but. Yeah. Some of the time it's for them, you know. Are you getting. People build through helping them, inspire them. There's no way you can. Hey. I had a, um. Oh, and then counseling dispositions and behavior. So one of the things, um, I wanted to point out when a week or so is acknowledge uh, and adhere to site policy. So that's kind of related to informed consent and keeping promises and things like that. We also have promises to, uh, the site that we're working with. Okay. So one other quick that I didn't I meant to mention this at some point was that I had this conversation. Uh, I met an older gentleman this week who is retired, and he was a physician. Yeah, he was a physician. And he said, um, that, uh, tell me about I forget. Yeah. What do you think is your career or what? You can. Oh, I just was so privileged to work, I could because I had the opportunity to get to know and love people I never thought I would or never, um, never maybe would have had the opportunity to without being I. And I think I feel like that accomplishment, right, because of all the cultural differences, is that if you really care for people that, you know, you might not come back and that you're. Just kind of connected with some. I remember saying, okay, uh, let's take a dinner break and come back eight. And.