26
C H A P T E R 	3
Developing Rapport
Rapport is the feeling of harmony and confidence that should exist
between patient and clinician. As one of the goals of a good interview,
good rapport has practical consequences. This point is especially relevant
if you will be treating this patient in the future. The trust and confidence
you begin to develop even in the opening minutes of the first session can
greatly enhance your ability to manage a course of therapy. In fact, how
well you convey your interest is the factor most likely to keep your patient
in treatment.
But good rapport is also vital for obtaining information. During the
evaluation phase of your relationship, positive rapport will help motivate
your patient to talk spontaneously and to reveal important personal data.
The foundation for rapport is usually ready-made. Most patients
come looking for help and expect that they will get it from a clinician. You
can build on this expectation with your words and body language, which
should express real interest in the patient. Of course, anyone could inad-
vertently say something that’s upsetting, but there is little you are likely to
say or do that can’t be retrieved if you remain caring and sensitive to what
your patient is experiencing.
THE BASIS OF RAPPORT
Right from the start, most patients will expect to like you. But real rapport
between two individuals doesn’t usually spring up overnight. It develops
gradually, with long acquaintance and the cooperation of both parties.
Still, you can use certain behaviors to speed its growth.
Your demeanor is key. Remember that professionalism doesn’t
demand stiff formality. In fact, you should take care to avoid the image of

-- 1 of 54 --

Developing Rapport 	27
the stone-faced therapist that was once popular in movies, cartoons, and
fiction. If you appear relaxed, interested, and sympathetic, your patient
is more likely to feel safe and comfortable. Carefully monitor your facial
expression: Don’t frown, grimace, or show other signs of negativity that
could be interpreted as disapproval. Although you should avoid fixed
stares, which can make you appear cold and critical, be sure to make fre-
quent eye contact— even if you are taking notes. Of course, you don’t want
to appear insincere, but appropriate smiles and nods will demonstrate
that you are attentive and sympathetic.
Just at first, however, I’d be a bit sparing in the use of praise. Praise
used as a reinforcer can powerfully shape behavior, but early in any rela-
tionship, you don’t know enough to be sure what behavior you will be
reinforcing. For instance, you wouldn’t want to praise apparent openness
if your patient hasn’t told you the whole truth.
The patient’s own demeanor will probably shape your interaction
more than any other factor. Body language— drooping shoulders, restless
feet, tears, a clenched fist—often clearly indicates how your patient feels.
Observe tone of voice for other clues to feelings. Suppose you have asked
your patient, Mr. Kimble, how he and his wife get along, and he responds,
“Just fine.” If his tone is warm and light, the couple probably has relatively
few interpersonal problems. If his “Just fine” is delivered through clenched
teeth, in a dull monotone, or with a sigh, Mr. Kimble may be harboring
feelings of hopelessness or anger that he can’t put into words just yet.
Because you have arranged the furniture so that there’s no barrier
between you and your patient, you can easily and naturally adjust even
to minor shifts in affect, promoting rapport. If your patient is depressed,
you will probably feel like drawing a little closer to show your concern.
You can follow that natural inclination. If you sense hostility, you may feel
like withdrawing physically, even if only a few inches. Doing so will help
relax the tension by giving each of you more elbow room. Similarly, you
may laugh when your patient makes a joke, or display a worried frown of
concern and support during a panic attack. By the time you have inter-
viewed your first dozen patients, you will do these things automatically in
response to the cues each patient unconsciously gives.
At the same time, you should carefully maintain a certain neutrality
toward what you are told. If your patient criticizes relatives, you would be
unlikely to defend them. But joining in the criticism risks offending some-
one whose feelings may be ambivalent. A safe response is an empathic
comment that doesn’t take sides.
PATIENT: My mother is a real bitch! She keeps trying to interfere
between me and my husband.
INTERVIEWER: (Leans slightly forward.) That must be a real problem
for you.

-- 2 of 54 --

28 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
This interviewer’s attitude—sympathetic, nonjudgmental, and respectful of
patient and relatives alike—is likely to foster a good working relationship.
ASSESS YOUR OWN FEELINGS
How you feel about the patient can have important consequences. If your
feelings are positive—here is the sort of person you might choose as a
friend, for example—you will probably come across as warm and caring.
Your attitude may serve as an encouragement to reveal additional sensi-
tive information.
Heavily influenced by your own background and upbringing, your
feelings could in turn affect your ability to make an accurate evaluation.
Throughout the interview, you need to be aware of the nature and the
sources of your feelings, especially when something about the patient dis-
tresses you. It could be as simple as personal hygiene, coarse language,
or the expression of ethnic prejudice. Or does this person remind you of
difficulties you had with one of your own relatives? In any case, you must
carefully monitor how you respond. If you frown or otherwise appear
uncomfortable, your patient may sense your disapproval and frustrate
your efforts to gather accurate information.
Your goal is to express empathy, which means that on some level you
can feel as your patient feels—that you can put yourself in the patient’s
place. Having empathy means understanding the motivation driving a
patient’s behavior, even if it still doesn’t seem like the right thing to do.
Showing your empathy sparks confidence in the process and encourages
the patient to give you the diagnostic information you need. (Surveys show
that mental health clinicians score much higher than do other health care
professionals in the ability to adopt another person’s perspective.) You
will probably convey your empathic feelings best if you keep in mind this
thought: “What would it be like to stand in the shoes of this patient talk-
ing with me now?”
This job might seem daunting when your patient shows a lot of anger,
anxiety, or even psychosis. Throughout your professional life, you will
have to work with all sorts of people. Some of them will seem less agree-
able than others, but you will find that nearly every patient will have
characteristics to which you can relate. If you cannot respond positively
to the content of what you are being told, perhaps you can sympathize
with some of the feelings behind it. For example, a moderately antisocial
patient was speaking about his former therapist:
PATIENT: I had no use for that guy. Once or twice I even thought
about blowing him away!
INTERVIEWER: Sounds as if you were feeling really angry.

-- 3 of 54 --

Developing Rapport 	29
Trying to deal directly with the content of this patient’s comment would
have forced a choice between agreeing with or confronting a potentially
violent patient. By keying into the patient’s anger, this interviewer said
something that both parties could feel comfortable with.
All professionals have feelings, attitudes, and experiences that can
affect the image they project; we must all be constantly alert to prevent
these personal issues from impairing our effectiveness with patients. Con-
sider the effect of so ordinary an event as divorce:
One clinician found that she was so upset during the time she was
separating from her husband that she could not effectively manage a
patient who was having similar problems.
Another therapist, after a bruising telephone call from his ex-
wife, postponed his next interview while he cooled off enough to
focus on the patient’s problems.
Many beginning interviewers have learned that they can alleviate pres-
sure if they introduce themselves to patients as students. But regardless
of your stage of training or practice, your temperament and experience
will determine how you deal with your personal Achilles’ heel. Whatever
it is, your effectiveness with patients will increase if you remain aware of
your own limitations.
CONSIDER YOUR MANNER OF SPEAKING
For good rapport, the patient must know that you understand. It is
tempting to approach this directly by saying, “I know how you must feel
about . . . ” Unhappily, this statement can ring hollow. By the time they
reach your office, many patients have heard it all too often from people
who don’t really understand at all, or who may understand perfectly but
do nothing to help. Some patients with severe problems, real or perceived,
feel that nobody could possibly appreciate what they are going through.
You will probably be better off using some other response to suggest your
compassion and interest:
“You must have felt terribly unhappy.”
“I’ve never been in that position, so I can only imagine how you felt.”
“That was a terrible experience. I can see that it upset you a great
deal.”
Sometimes you may find that you need to overemphasize your feel-
ings a little. This suggestion might sound deceitful, but I don’t mean it
that way. Actors, for example, know that their recorded voices tend to

-- 4 of 54 --

30 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
flatten out and that they must overact to get across the feelings they in
tend to portray. In similar fashion, you may need to amplify your own
emotional output to impress upon some patients how deeply you sympa-
thize with them. You can accomplish this with your facial expressions,
or with your voice by varying its volume, pitch, and emphasis. Even brief
exclamations can do the job. An “Oh, wow!” that is suitably timed and
intoned may convey understanding and compassion more effectively than
a more elegant speech of condolence. Such emblems of your emotional
involvement, which beginning interviewers often forget to use, can be
vital to your patient and contribute to building rapport.
However, it’s far too easy to go overboard. Consider the patient who
comes to you with a story of betrayal by a lover, or of injury in a military
or civilian calamity. Of course, you will want to show your support, but if
you express your own shock or horror too starkly, you risk reinforcing the
traumatic effects you’re there to dismantle. Sure, go ahead and express
sympathy—you can even provide the support of a proffered tissue—but be
careful not to portray your patient as a victim.
Now let’s consider the use of humor in your interactions with patients.
Humor can be a great facilitator of communication: It helps people to
relax and to feel that they are among friends. But as a clinician, take care
to judge your use of humor carefully. With any recent acquaintance, it
is easy to misjudge and say something in jest that can be taken amiss;
mental health patients are especially vulnerable to this sort of slip. Even
a patient you know well could misinterpret an ill- considered remark. As
always, put yourself in the patient’s place: Consider how you’d feel if you
thought your clinician was laughing at you.
In general, it is safe to laugh with, but of course never at, the patient.
That means that you should generally let the patient start it. During your
first few sessions, any use of humor should be gentle, and only when it
is clear that the patient is in a frame of mind to appreciate it. Beware of
making jokes, which might be misinterpreted as hostile or demeaning.
Whenever the patient jests, be sure to consider whether this is a subcon-
scious attempt to sidetrack both of you from a discussion of important
material. A usually safe response is to smile and meet the patient’s gaze.
Experienced interviewers report that they sometimes seemingly
undergo a personality change as they move from one patient to the next.
They may adopt a formal tone with one, then settle into a folksy per-
sona with the next. One interviewer persistently, and quite unconsciously,
dropped his g’s when talking with a patient from a rural background who
spoke that way. Within limits these behaviors are probably acceptable,
though you should be careful not to overdo them to the point of mimicry.
Regardless of your level of experience, at some point, with some
patient, you will make an error. In the greater scheme of things, it will
probably be of rather minor significance—you ask the same question

-- 5 of 54 --

Developing Rapport 	31
twice; you forget the occupation of your patient’s spouse; or you are sud-
denly aware that your mind has drifted and you can’t recall the question
your patient has just asked (or that you have!)—but both of you know that
you’ve erred. You should take immediate steps to put it right. “Uh-oh,
senior moment,” I might say with a rueful smile. If you aren’t so fortu-
nate as to have age as an excuse, you should admit that you focused for a
moment on something else, and do whatever is necessary to correct your
error (for example, ask the patient to restate the question). Almost always,
the conversation will move safely forward. The important thing is to let
the patient know you’ve taken responsibility for the mistake and that it
matters to you.
TALK THE PATIENT’S LANGUAGE
Take pains to speak in terms your patient can understand. Listen to your
patient’s language and use it, as long as you feel comfortable doing so.
Because teenagers and young adults often distrust older people, they may
respond more positively if you use language that is current for their gen-
eration. But be sure that your “cool” expression is still “in,” or you risk
being considered merely “square.” (There is another point of view on this
issue. Some adolescent patients may resent it enormously and become
even more distrustful if you try to adopt their speech patterns.) How you
speak to any patient should be guided by the need for clarity and rapport,
so monitor your patient’s reactions and adjust your manner of speaking
accordingly.
Certain terms may upset some patients. These loaded words carry a
message of illness, failure, or poor character, and you should generally
avoid them. Here is a brief sample: abortion, bad, brain damage, cancer,
crazy, defective, fantasy, frigidity, hysterical, impotence, neurotic, obscene, per-
version, victim. You will encounter many more during your interviewing
career. Be ready with neutral synonyms for such words, or, even better,
pick up on terms your patient already has used.
Avoid psychological jargon. Even simple terms like psychosis may
be misunderstood, and your patient could think that you seem insensi-
tive toward someone with less education than you. Also ensure that you
understand your patient’s own use of language; don’t assume it is the
same as yours. For example, to you “an occasional drink” may mean once
a month, but to your patient it could mean “intermittently throughout the
day.” Does your teenage patient drink Coke or snort coke? In the language
of the street, “I was really paranoid” doesn’t mean that the speaker felt
psychotically persecuted, but merely frightened.
Your poorly educated patient may recognize “polite” terms for sexual
or excretory functions, but the relationship you develop may be better if

-- 6 of 54 --

32 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
you use plain language. I confess to holding conflicting thoughts about
using the argot of the street. On the one hand (as some studies have
shown), by using everyday terms, you might increase the amount of infor-
mation you get. On the other hand, the same tactic could risk offending
people on whom you depend for accurate information. In the final analy-
sis, you’ll have to base your decision on your own comfort level and your
assessment of the individual patient.
If your patient is foreign-born or was reared in another part of your
own country, you may have trouble understanding one another. Don’t
let your manner imply that it is the patient who “talks funny.” Rather,
acknowledge that you have different accents and that at times you may
have to ask one another for repetition. For a patient who hesitates or
seems unsure of how to proceed, you can remove some of the pressure
with the reassurance that “It’s fine to take this at your own pace, so I can
really understand what you’re experiencing.” On the flip side, to be sure
you do understand, you may want to translate into simpler language the
sometimes florid terms that patients use to express themselves—perhaps
to obfuscate, perhaps because they think a clinician wants to hear psycho-
logical terms.
PATIENT: I’ve always had a phobia about cats—I’ve got four of ’em.
INTERVIEWER: So you’re a real cat fancier!
Later on, perhaps, when you’ve gotten to know one another better, you
can supply an accurate definition.
MAINTAIN BOUNDARIES
How clinicians should relate to their patients has been a moving target
over the years. The traditional image of an authoritarian lawgiver who
decides for the patient has been generally supplanted by that of a less
formal collaborator who explores problems and their solutions with the
patient. I strongly prefer the latter style. To me it feels more comfortable
(it is less arrogant), and it encourages the patient to participate in treat-
ment decisions. In effect, it puts two minds to work, rather than loading
all the responsibility onto the clinician. When patients discuss and con-
tribute to their own management plans, they are more likely to comply
with treatment and less likely to complain about bumps in the road to
improvement.
Yet even clinicians who encourage friendly collaboration need to
maintain boundaries. When I practiced in California, it was customary to
call patients by their first names. For adolescents this seemed just fine. But

-- 7 of 54 --

Developing Rapport 	33
I heard even old men and women addressed in this overly familiar man-
ner by mental health professionals young enough to be their grandchil-
dren. This attitude tends to infantilize patients who, if they are hospital
inpatients, have already lost considerable autonomy. It also increases the
professional person’s tendency to become parentalistic—that is, to make
health care decisions that patients should be making for themselves.
However, before I make too big a deal of this, let me note that times
have changed and that many therapists have maintained successful prac-
tices while they and their patients address one another in familiar terms. I
still reject the idea of first names for hospitalized patients, and I continue
to call my adult patients by last name and title (Miss, Ms., Mrs., Mr., or Dr.
Green). This practice maximizes personal dignity and reinforces a sense
of adulthood, even at a time when there may be loss of autonomy. It also
encourages patients to keep a certain emotional distance by using my title
and last name. This distance may sometimes help head off inappropriate
attempts at amorous and other nonprofessional relationships.
If a patient appears offended when I don’t agree to a first-name basis,
I respond that it is my habit always to use last names and titles, and that
it would be hard for me to change. (If you are still a student, your excuse
might be that this is what your institution requires of trainees, if that’s the
case.) Rarely, I have encountered patients who doggedly insist that I use
their first names. If I judge that sticking to my habit could harm our rela-
tionship, I will use two names—first and second or first and last—plus title.
For example, when calling such a patient from the waiting room, I will
announce, “Mrs. Joanne Cremier,” and say it with a big, friendly smile. So
far, this compromise has always proven satisfactory. However, other clini-
cians (and their patients) may feel differently, so there should probably be
no hard and fast rule about using names.
In general, it’s a good idea not to reveal too much about yourself to
your patients. This is especially true during the initial interview, when you
really don’t know one another very well.
A beginning psychiatry resident confided to his new patient that he
was a reserve peace officer. He later learned to his chagrin that the
patient had both a severe personality disorder and an abiding hatred
of the police.
If you are having difficulty getting information, you might be able to
encourage greater cooperation by identifying something that you and the
patient share. For example, you might remark that, just like the patient,
you enjoy sailboating or were born in Indiana. Your status as fellow sailors
or Hoosiers might nudge you a bit closer to the rapport you seek. This
technique should be used sparingly— seldom more than once with a given

-- 8 of 54 --

34 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
patient—lest you begin to sound too familiar. You should also be careful
not to let any resulting small talk distract you for long from the real pur-
pose of your interview.
Why do patients ask personal questions? Some stem from simple
curiosity; others may cloak concern about interviewers’ professional back-
grounds or ability to help. To provide reassurance about training and
competence is one reason why clinicians in practice display a wall full of
diplomas, licenses, and other certificates. Trainees have the benefit of
neither certificate nor wall. Still, to whatever degree possible, you should
verbally provide this information when it is requested. Don’t hesitate to
invoke the names and positions of your supervisors if this is needed to
reassure an especially anxious patient.
Some requests for personal information may be prompted by a largely
unconscious desire to achieve a sense of equality between interviewer and
patient. Others may be an attempt to avoid discussing sensitive material,
and these should be handled firmly but with tact:
PATIENT: How old are you, anyway?
INTERVIEWER: Why do you want to know?
PATIENT: You seem so young to be doing this kind of work.
INTERVIEWER: Well, thank you for the compliment, but I don’t think
my age is especially relevant to our discussion; let’s focus on you.
Now, to get back to the question I asked . . .
In some circumstances, personal information may seem relevant to
your interview. If you decide that this is the case, you can usually reveal
something of yourself:
PATIENT: Were you raised in this city?
INTERVIEWER: What makes you ask that?
PATIENT: My mother told me to be sure to get a therapist who grew
up here. She says no one else could really understand what it was
like, growing up in a ghetto and all.
INTERVIEWER: I see. Actually, I didn’t grow up here, but this is where
I took most of my training. I’ve lived in town for nearly 8 years,
so I think I have a pretty good idea of what some of your experi-
ences must have been. But I have the feeling you’ll be able to tell
me a whole lot more.
Because I believe it helps build rapport, I tend to answer innocuous ques-
tions frankly, so long as it seems unlikely to complicate the relationship
later.

-- 9 of 54 --

Developing Rapport 	35
SHOW YOUR EXPERTISE
You can pave yet another pathway to rapport by informing the patient
that you know something about the presenting symptoms and what they
could mean. This assessment will naturally come at the end of the initial
interview, when you’ve obtained enough information to know what you’re
talking about. Then you’ll probably say something like this:
“Your condition is actually pretty common— one of the most frequent
problems patients bring to mental health clinicians. I’ve seen several
similar cases just in the last few months. We have several good treat-
ment approaches available, so we can look for a good outcome in
your case.”
Even if you are facing a rare condition, you can reassure the patient
that you know where to turn for guidance:
“We can work through this problem together.”
If you’re a student, you probably won’t have had much in the way of per-
sonal experience with your patient’s condition— or any other. But you are
connected with a training program that employs experienced teachers
who have encountered many patients with similar conditions.
I would offer a few warnings about showing expertise. First, a natural
consequence of empathy is respect, which implies that you should take
pains to avoid sounding authoritarian. Sounding authoritative is fine, if
it’s accurate, but sounding authoritarian smacks of the old, parentalistic
clinical style that seems disrespectful in the 21st century. It never did
work all that well, anyway. Second, in your zeal to put your patient at ease,
don’t succumb to a patient’s too-early request for information or advice.
Part of being expert is waiting until you have the facts to justify offering
support. Jumping in too soon with a diagnosis or with suggestions for
treatment sometimes ends in embarrassment and backpedaling down the
line. Finally, try to wear your erudition lightly. Preface your opinions with
“I think” or “In my experience”—the patient will honor them just as well,
and you’ll avoid the need to live up to an aura of infallibility that no one
can sustain.
Inevitably, you will encounter an occasional patient you just cannot
work with. Sometimes this will be due to your own feelings— about unre-
pentant criminal behavior, perhaps, or about someone who reminds you
too strongly of your own former spouse. At other times you’ll be tipped
off by something the patient says, such as a statement of preference for “a
Christian therapist” or some other therapeutic orientation that just plain
doesn’t fit with what you have to offer.

-- 10 of 54 --

36 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Such patients will probably be few, but you have a duty to face them
honestly. Of course, to be sure your first impressions are correct, you
should complete the evaluation before deciding. Then you might say
something like this:
“Quite frankly, I’m not sure I’m the right person to deal with your
problem.”
You’d go on to explain why you’ve come to this conclusion (leaving
out the unflattering bits), then recommend where the patient might go
next:
“Yours is the sort of problem that I haven’t had much experience with.
However, I know someone in this same building who has made a
study of people with your kind of difficulty. If you’d like, I can write
a note that describes my findings in your case.”

-- 11 of 54 --

37
C H A P T E R 	4
Managing the Early
Patient Interview
A few minutes into a typical initial interview session, the patient should
be relaxed and giving you the information you need; much of your task
right now will be simply to keep your patient talking. Most patients feel
highly motivated to talk, and you will usually need only to choose the
device that will best encourage them to do so. (If this isn’t the case with
your interview, you can review the material in Chapters 16 and 17 for
help.)
To keep speech flowing freely, intrude as little as possible. Anything
you say— questions, comments, even clearing your throat— can prove dis-
tracting. As long as you are finding out why your patient came for treat-
ment, you should keep out of the way. In practical terms, you will usually
just listen for only the first couple of minutes or so. Then the flow of
information will slow down or take a wrong turn, and you will have to
intervene. Your choice of interventions can help determine the overall
success of your interview.
NONVERBAL ENCOURAGEMENTS
Your most frequent challenge may be dealing with silence. Beginners
often find silence hard to tolerate. They feel that every hole in the con-
versation, no matter how small, must be filled up with words. It is true
that pauses greater than 10 or 15 seconds can make an interviewer seem

-- 12 of 54 --

38 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
cold, and this discourages some patients. Briefer pauses often mean only
that your patient is trying to organize some thoughts for further discus-
sion. Don’t let anxiety cause you to derail a train of thought that has only
paused to gather steam.
You must learn to walk the line between allowing brief pauses to let
your patient think and long gaps that make you seem unfeeling or unin-
terested. A glance should tell you whether the narrative is still underway.
Watch for the patient to draw another breath or to show other signs of
activity, such as the moistening of lips.
You can encourage further speech by using nonverbal cues of your
own. Be careful not to break eye contact; a smile or nod will say, “You’re
doing fine; just keep on going at your own pace.” Another technique expe-
rienced interviewers sometimes use almost without thinking is to lean a
little closer to show interest in what the patient is saying. Nonverbal cues
of this sort are simple and often highly useful encouragements. Without
interrupting, they clearly signal that you are attentive and interested; they
are part of a universal body language that asks the patient to continue.
But don’t overemphasize any of these gestures: A clinician who nods too
vigorously or smiles too broadly may distract the patient, who may then
wonder what these antics mean.
VERBAL ENCOURAGEMENTS
Body language helps, but you will also have to do some talking. Your
choice of words is important: You want to facilitate, not distract. There-
fore, speak as briefly as you can while still conveying your meaning.
A syllable or two is usually all it takes. “Yes” or “Mm-hmm” clearly
indicates that the material is registering with you. Without being direc-
tive, brief interjections and phrases ask the patient to keep on talking. Use
them frequently, perhaps interspersing them randomly with nonverbal
encouragements. One such encouragement every minute or two should
help keep your patient talking.
There are several other verbal techniques you can use to request addi-
tional information. These are more intrusive than those just mentioned,
so you should use them sparingly. I will illustrate each—some of them have
been termed reflective listening—with a brief example.
• Repeat your patient’s own last word or two with a rising inflection
in your voice to make a question of it.
PATIENT: I was so upset that for hours I seemed to be hearing
voices. (Pauses.)
INTERVIEWER: “Voices”?

-- 13 of 54 --

Managing the Early Patient Interview 	39
PATIENT: In my head. I thought I heard the voice of my mother
calling my name.
• Elaborate on a word the patient used earlier. This technique allows
you to reach back to an idea that was not the last thought spoken.
PATIENT: I know I overreacted, but I was feeling desperate. I
couldn’t sleep or eat, and I screamed at my kids.
INTERVIEWER: You said you felt desperate. (Pauses.)
PATIENT: Yes, I even considered suicide.
• Directly request more information.
“Tell me more about that.”
“How do you mean?”
• Re-request information when the patient seems to have misinter-
preted your original question.
INTERVIEWER: What kind of work do you do?
PATIENT: It’s at the foundry on Elm Street.
INTERVIEWER: And what kind of work do you do there?
• Offer brief summaries. These will often begin with “So you feel
that . . . ” or “Do you mean that . . . ” Summaries not only help with transi-
tions; they also offer concrete evidence that the patient has been under-
stood.
INTERVIEWER: So for about 6 months now you’ve been feeling
depressed and anxious.
PATIENT: That’s right. Lately I’ve even started to think terrible
thoughts—thoughts about killing myself.
Sometimes you’ll get information you don’t really want. It isn’t that
descriptions of recent vacations, children’s witticisms, and arguments
with lovers are uninteresting, but they can take up time you could better
spend pursuing other issues. Although you might be able to discourage
this sort of verbal wild-goose chase by simply not reinforcing it, it is often
better to be direct with your patient:
“That’s interesting, and maybe we can get back to it later, but right
now I’d like to know about . . . ”
Or perhaps to be even more direct:
“No, let’s keep our focus on information that can help me help you.”

-- 14 of 54 --

40 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
OFFERING REASSURANCE
Reassurance is anything you do to increase a patient’s sense of confidence
or well-being. Because it shows that you like or are interested in the other
person, it can also foster rapport. Used sparingly during the initial inter-
view, supportive statements say, “I’m on your side. We’ll get this job done.”
Any interview can be therapeutic. Studies have shown that the mere
act of sharing problems with another human being (even, in some cases,
with a computer!) can help a person take a new view of old issues or put
ideas together in novel ways. But with a new patient, you can’t just jump in
and start giving advice, making interpretations, or otherwise “doing ther-
apy.” Rather, the purpose of the initial interview is to obtain the informa-
tion you need to plan treatment. On the other hand, you shouldn’t pass
up an opportunity to provide reassurance, as long as it doesn’t interfere
with the main goal of your interview. You might even raise the confidence
of some patients enough that they will reveal especially sensitive material
you would not otherwise have obtained.
Body language (smiles and nods) can be reassuring, but mostly you
will reassure with speech. To be truly reassuring, what you say must be
based in fact. You wouldn’t get far saying, “You have a good head for
finances,” to a patient who in 45 years hasn’t saved a nickel toward retire-
ment. And choose your words carefully. Avoid clichés and other stereo-
typed expressions, which will make you sound as if you are responding
only by rote, not from the heart.
In short, supportive reassurance must be factual, sincere, and spe-
cific to the situation. Here are two examples:
PATIENT: I did manage to get two promotions last year.
INTERVIEWER: So you’ve really done well with that job!
PATIENT: When he came at me with a knife, I jumped right through a
second- story window onto a garage roof. It made me feel dumb.
I thought I’d just saved him the work of cutting me to ribbons.
INTERVIEWER: It may have saved your life! Perhaps it was the only
thing you could have done.
Avoid false generalizations that come too early in the interview or
are based on too little factual information. “I’m sure it will all work out,”
or “Those fears seem groundless,” will probably ring hollow to most
patients, especially those with paranoia or severe depression; they know
things won’t turn out well! Even someone who is less severely ill might
begin to question your knowledge if you leap in quickly with bland reas-
surances that cover too much ground to be believable.

-- 15 of 54 --

Managing the Early Patient Interview 	41
Occasionally a patient will express concern based on a misconception
about mental or physical phenomena. Then you can use your expertise to
set the record straight without interfering with the history taking.
PATIENT: I’d never even been to California before, but I suddenly
thought, “I’ve been on this same San Francisco street before.” I
wondered if I was losing my mind.
INTERVIEWER: That feeling is called déjà vu. It’s very common, and
doesn’t mean anything at all is wrong. Now tell me what hap-
pened next.
Notice, however, that this interviewer did make the mistake of providing
unconditional reassurance. Although déjà vu is nearly always a benign
phenomenon, it is sometimes associated with neurological conditions
such as temporal lobe epilepsy. But without more substantiating evidence,
to suggest that there could be any pathological significance would also be
a serious mistake. Here is a reasonable compromise: “It doesn’t usually
signify that anything is wrong.”
Be careful to avoid offhand comments that may prove disquieting.
One patient described a sexual encounter with her cousin, then said that
she didn’t know whether that would be considered molestation. “It sure
sounds like molestation to me,” responded the young interviewer. This
response had the potential for raising anxieties that the patient was not
ready to deal with. (“How do you regard it?” would have been a safer
response.)
Mostly, your efforts at reassurance and encouragement will meet
with success. Nevertheless, any of these techniques can sometimes back-
fire. A patient with persecutory delusions might interpret even a friendly
nod or smile as mockery. If you lean toward someone who is feeling angry,
you might be rewarded not with more information, but with hostility or
deepening silence. Judging when a patient will not be receptive can be
tricky. Your best bet is to start slowly. Be friendly and pleasant, but not
aggressively so.
Watch for cues. If you are being too aggressively forward, your patient
may exhibit some of these behaviors:
Loss of eye contact
Frozen expression
Decreased speech output
Nervous shifting of position
If you spot any of these telltale signs, quickly change to a more reserved
manner.

-- 16 of 54 --

42
C H A P T E R 	5
History of the Present Illness
Once you feel that there are no additional major problem areas to dis-
cover, close the period of free speech and move smoothly into the history
of the present illness. (However, throughout the balance of your history
taking, listen carefully for other clues that could suggest the need for
further exploration.)
Now you will explore more thoroughly the problems that have brought
the patient into treatment—the “meat” of the initial interview, including
a description of symptoms, their timing, and possible stressors for each
of the problems you’ve identified. To aid this process, you might consider
the areas of clinical interest that you identified during free speech. These
areas have been first mentioned in Chapter 2; because they include mate-
rial from the MSE, they will not be considered fully until Chapter 13.
Although some patients have no diagnosable disorder, it is a conven-
tion to label as “illness” whatever brings anyone in for evaluation. In this
broad sense, then, marital disagreements and other problems of living—
even the desire to understand oneself better—may constitute a present
“illness” that no one, least of all the patient, would recognize as disease.
But all of these issues do have precipitants, symptoms, course, and other
features that will allow you to suggest an effective plan of action.
THE PRESENT EPISODE
Although you will eventually want to learn about any and all episodes,
first focus on the current episode of illness. Your patient will be most
concerned about it, and its details will be freshest in the minds of all your
informants. Of course, you’ll need to know what symptoms you can expect
to find in an episode of illness. For that, refer to textbooks and other

-- 17 of 54 --

History of the Present Illness 	43
resources that cover this material (I’ve written one or two of these myself).
Appendix D in this book presents a semistructured interview that covers
the symptoms typically found in mental health patients. And Appendix B
gives some very basic information about a few of the more common men-
tal disorders clinicians commonly encounter. If your early interviewing
experiences are anything like mine (see the very beginning of the Intro-
duction to this book), you’ll benefit by returning to your patient to ask the
questions you’ve forgotten the first—or second—time around.
DESCRIBING SYMPTOMS
Learn as much as you can about each symptom your patient reports.
(Remember that a symptom is any subjective sensation the patient reports.
It doesn’t even have to be unpleasant; pain, hallucinations, and anxiety
are all symptoms, but so could be the ecstasy or feeling of strength in
mania.) Clarify any descriptive terms that are used: For example, what
does nervous mean to the patient?
Characterize each symptom as fully as you can. Is it always present,
or does it come and go (is it episodic)? If episodic, as is the case with anxi-
ety attacks and many depressions, how often does it occur? How intense
is it? Is it always the same, or does it vary? Remember that symptoms can
wax and wane with time or with changes in the environment. Has the
patient noticed any factors (such as activity or time of day) that seem to
be associated with the symptom? Has the intensity or frequency of the
symptom been increasing, staying the same, or decreasing? When your
patient has the symptom, how long does it last? In what context does it
occur? (Only at night? Only when alone? Or at any time at all?)
How does the patient describe the symptom? Pain can feel cutting,
burning, crushing, sharp, or dull. You can describe auditory hallucina-
tions by their content (noises, mumbles, isolated words, complete sen-
tences), location (inside the patient’s head, in the air, out in the hall), and
intensity (ranging from loud screams to faraway whispers). Other sorts
of hallucinations— of vision, touch, smell, or taste—can be described simi-
larly. I’ll have more to say about this in Chapter 12.
VEGETATIVE SYMPTOMS
Many patients with serious problems such as anxiety attacks, depres-
sion, and psychosis have experienced vegetative symptoms. This old term
refers to body functions that are concerned with maintaining health and
vigor. Vegetative symptoms include problems with sleep, appetite, weight
change, energy level, and sexual interest.

-- 18 of 54 --

44 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Not every patient will spontaneously report these symptoms, but they
are found in so many of the more serious mental disorders that they serve
as a useful diagnostic indicator. You should ask about them routinely.
Look especially for evidence of change from previous normal functioning.
You may find one or more of the following responses:
• Sleep. Your patient may complain of either excessive sleepiness
(hypersomnia) or inability to sleep (insomnia). If the latter, find out what
portion of the normal sleep period is affected— early (initial insomnia),
middle (interval insomnia), or late (terminal insomnia). Terminal insom-
nia is usually associated with more severe mental problems, such as major
depression with melancholia. Much more common is initial insomnia,
which sometimes affects normal adults when they are having problems of
living. Interval insomnia, in the form of awakening with nightmares, may
be found in patients who drink alcohol heavily or who have posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). Here is how you might inquire about problems
with sleep:
INTERVIEWER: Have you had any problems with your sleeping?
PATIENT: Yeah, it’s been murder.
INTERVIEWER: What sort of trouble have you had?
PATIENT: What do you mean?
INTERVIEWER: Well, what part of the night do you not sleep well?
PATIENT: Oh. Mostly, it’s trouble getting to sleep.
INTERVIEWER: Do you ever wake up early in the morning, before
it’s time to get up, and then you can’t get back to sleep?
PATIENT: Yeah, that too. I do that a lot.
INTERVIEWER: How long do you usually sleep?
PATIENT: Lately, I guess . . . probably only 4 or 5 hours.
INTERVIEWER: And do you feel rested when you wake up?
PATIENT: Yeah, rested like I’ve been hauling bricks all night!
INTERVIEWER: How much of a change is this for you?
• Appetite and weight. These, too, may increase or decrease during
an episode of illness. You should also learn how significant the change
has been (how much weight has the patient gained or lost, and over what
period of time?) Also ask whether this weight change was intentional.
Some patients will tell you that they haven’t weighed themselves recently;
asking whether clothing has become too loose or too tight may help you
judge.

-- 19 of 54 --

History of the Present Illness 	45
• Energy level. Does the patient complain of feeling constantly tired?
Is this a change from what’s usual for this person? Has it interfered in
some way with performance at work or school, or with getting jobs done
around the house? You may also hear complaints of change in other body
functions, such as bowel habits. For example, some severely depressed
patients experience constipation.
• Diurnal variation of mood. This phrase refers to the tendency of
some patients to feel better during a certain part of the day. Patients with
severe depression often feel worse upon arising and better as the day goes
on. By bedtime they may feel nearly normal. Those who are less depressed
are more likely to report feeling better early in the day, but depressed,
sluggish, and weary by nightfall.
• Sexual interest and performance. Sexual functioning usually depends
strongly upon the individual’s sense of well-being. Therefore, loss of inter-
est in sex is often an early casualty of mental distress. Also learn how
these aspects of the patient’s sex life have changed: frequency, ability,
and enjoyment. The direction of change could be either up or down,
depending on the specific mental health problem. Number and choice
of partners can also be affected if judgment is impaired. A more detailed
description of sexual symptoms and patterns will be given in Chapter 9.
CONSEQUENCES OF ILLNESS
Mental disorder can interfere with the entire range of human interac-
tion. For several reasons, it is important to learn how your patient’s illness
has affected functioning and relationships across all areas of functioning,
including social, educational/occupational, and family life.
1. It may provide your most reliable index of severity. So far, most
of the history you have heard is highly subjective: You depend on your
patient’s ability to sort out facts from opinions. Partly because it can be
verified by talking with informants, the fact that a patient has not gone
to work for a week may be subject to less distortion than, say, how much
vodka this same person has consumed.
2. The definition of many disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5)—the current iteration
of the chief diagnostic manual used in the United States and abroad—
depends heavily on social consequences: What have been the effects on
the patient? On others? Substance use disorders and antisocial personal-
ity disorder are examples of conditions that can entail legal, financial,

-- 20 of 54 --

46 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
health, and interpersonal problems. However, the criteria for most disor-
ders require that you know the how symptoms affect functioning.
3. You may learn that relatives blame the patient for being fired,
getting divorced, or separating from family members. Yet these and vari-
ous other ruptured human relationships are really effects of the person’s
mental disorder. This view may prove useful to patient and relatives alike:
Teaching family and friends about the consequences of illness can help
get your patient off the hook.
To learn what social problems your patient’s illness has caused, start
with an open-ended question— one that doesn’t limit the information you
might obtain. If your patient asks what your question means, respond
with some examples of the sort of facts that would interest you.
INTERVIEWER: What sort of difficulties has this problem caused you?
PATIENT: What do you mean, “difficulties”?
INTERVIEWER: For example, it would help to know whether your prob-
lem has changed the way you get along with your family and
friends, how you do on the job, your hobbies—that sort of thing.
Be sure to obtain details about any positive answers. Areas to explore
include the following:
• Marital/couple. Patients who are even moderately ill commonly
experience discord in their marriages and other love relationships. All
too often, mental disorder can lead to divorce or breakup.
• Interpersonal. Has your patient felt estranged from relatives or
shunned by friends? Can you tell whether this is only a perceived prob-
lem, or has behavior been problematic long enough that others really do
avoid the patient? Ask:
“Did anything you did cause problems for you or your friends or
family?”
• Legal. Have there been legal difficulties? These are especially likely
when the history is complicated by alcohol or other substance use. Ask:
“Have you ever had any police or legal difficulties?”
“Have you ever been arrested? How many times? What for?”
“Have you been in jail? For a total of how long?”
“Have you ever been committed to an institution or placed under
the control of a conservator, guardian, or fiduciary?”

-- 21 of 54 --

History of the Present Illness 	47
When such legal steps occur during a siege of mental disorder, they
suggest serious illness. Be sure to obtain details: events leading up to the
legal action; duration; name and responsibilities of the legally responsible
person; and the effect the action has had upon the course of the disorder.
• Occupational/educational. As a result of emotional problems, has
the patient ever missed work, quit a job, or been fired? How often has
this happened? Difficulties with job performance are sometimes noted by
supervisors or co-workers even before family members take much notice
of the patient’s difficulties. For younger patients, ask analogous questions
concerning school attendance and performance.
• Disability payments. Have benefits been awarded from the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Social Security Administration, a state
compensation board, or private insurance? For what disorder? What per-
cent is the disability rating? What is the dollar amount? How long will the
payments last?
• Interests. Has the patient’s interest in hobbies, reading, or watching
TV changed? Has interest in sex either increased or decreased? What
about sexual performance? Have there been complaints of impotence,
painful intercourse, or inability to have climax? There’s more about this
in Chapter 9.
• Symptoms. How much discomfort do the symptoms cause? What
fears does your patient have about the meanings of the symptoms? Do
they seem to imply death or permanent disability? Insanity? This informa-
tion will also help you evaluate depth of insight and soundness of judg-
ment, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 12.
ONSET AND SEQUENCE OF SYMPTOMS
In addition to a complete and accurate description of the symptoms, you
should establish their timing and sequence. First, when did these prob-
lems begin? Some patients may report this quite precisely: “I started
drinking again last New Year’s Eve,” or “I woke up feeling depressed a
week ago Thursday.” But more often the answer will be less exact, either
because the patient is vague or because the episode began so gradually
that neither the patient nor you can pinpoint the onset.
Try to encourage precision about the onset of especially noticeable
symptoms. (Sometimes details are especially important, as in the case of
a first panic attack or a horrific event precipitating PTSD.) Patients can
often remember the first time they experienced such important problems
as death wishes or loss of interest in sex. You might be able to relate onset
to noteworthy dates or events.

-- 22 of 54 --

48 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
INTERVIEWER: Had you started to feel depressed by the Fourth of July
last year?
PATIENT: No, I don’t think so.
INTERVIEWER: What about in the fall, around the time of your birth-
day?
No matter how much you prompt, some patients simply can’t give
a date or even an approximation: “I only know it’s been a long time. A
very long time.” Pressing for a more precise answer will probably only
frustrate both of you. Try focusing instead on something the patient may
have thought about many times:
“When did you last feel well?”
If even this effort fails, at least try to learn which of your patient’s several
problems started first. It is often important for diagnosis and treatment to
know, for example, whether an episode of depression or a bout of drink-
ing began earlier. So ask:
“Which did you notice first, the drinking or the depression?”
“How long did it take before the other problem developed?”
If symptoms fluctuate, ask:
“Do they come and go together?”
STRESSORS
Of course, having mental symptoms is enormously stressful itself, but
here let’s consider stress in a different sense. A stressor is any condition or
event that seems to cause, precipitate, or worsen a patient’s mental health
problems. Sometimes they are referred to as precipitants.
“My husband ran off with his secretary.”
“I flunked out of school.”
“My cat died.”
The variety of possible stressors is vast, and what one person might
find mildly stressful could seem catastrophic to someone else. For years
(until the publication of DSM-5), the diagnostic manuals listed nine
groups of potential psychosocial and environmental problems, comprising

-- 23 of 54 --

History of the Present Illness 	49
many individual stressors. In Table 5.1, I have paraphrased many of these
stressors; they should have occurred within the year prior to your evalua-
tion. When you are listing them as part of your diagnostic evaluation (see
Chapter 18), be as specific as possible.
Patients often mention stressors during free speech, or even when
stating the chief complaint. If they don’t, you will have to ask. A good time
to do so is right after you have pinned down the approximate onset of the
episode of illness. If you find a stressor, try to learn how it affected the
course of your patient’s difficulty. Ask:
“Was anything happening then that might have started your symp-
toms?”
“How did it affect you?”
If your patient can think of no possible stressor, you should run through
a list of possibilities, pausing briefly to allow thinking time:
“Could there have been anything that happened at home? At work?
With friends? Any legal problems? Sickness? Problems with the kids?
With your spouse?”
TABLE 5.1. Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
These stressors may have been caused by a mental disorder, or they may be
independent events.
Access to health care services: inadequate insurance or health care services; lack of
transportation to health care services
Economic: marked poverty; inadequate finances or welfare support
Educational: academic problems; arguments with classmates or teachers; illiteracy;
inadequate school environment
Housing: homelessness; inadequate housing; dangerous neighborhood; arguments
with landlord or neighbors
Legal system/crime: arrest; incarceration; litigation; being the victim of crime
Occupational: stressful work conditions or schedule; job change or dissatisfaction;
arguments with supervisor or co-workers; retirement; unemployment; threatened
job loss
Social environment: death or loss of friend; difficulty with acculturation;
discrimination; living alone; social isolation
Support group: death or illness of relative; family disruption by divorce or
separation; parent’s remarriage; physical or sexual abuse; discord with relative
Other: arguments with nonfamily caregivers (counselor, social workers, physician);
unavailable social service agencies; exposure to disasters, war, or other hostilities

-- 24 of 54 --

50 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
For some episodes of illness you’ll find no stressors at all, but to a
patient almost anything can seem a possible cause of emotional disorder.
Therefore, events reported as stressors may include births, deaths, mar-
riages, divorces, job loss, a broken love affair, health problems, and vir-
tually any other emotional trauma you can think of, as well as many life
experiences that might seem routine.
Of course, your patient’s identification of something as a stressor
doesn’t mean that it actually caused the disorder to happen. Often two
events simply occur by coincidence, but we humans tend to blame any
problem on whatever happened before it. For example, if you carefully
checked the time course of Mrs. Albertson’s depression, you might find
that she had some symptoms—perhaps insomnia and some crying spells—
even before her husband left her.
Another patient’s “stressor” may seem an unlikely cause of illness,
as in the case of the woman whose overwhelming depression started,
she said, when she learned her niece was pregnant. Whether or not the
stressor seems related to the disorder, note it down. You can evaluate it
later in the light of everything else you learn about your patient.
Even though you might find nothing that could have precipitated
the episode of mental illness, try to answer this question: Why has your
patient appeared for evaluation now? In some cases, it will not have been
the patient’s choice, but someone else who perceived the need for help in
the purchase of a gun, withdrawal from family life, or acute intoxication.
If the answer isn’t so obvious, the best approach is to ask:
“This problem has been bothering you for a long time. What made
you seek help now?”
When the patient has come voluntarily for evaluation, you are likely
to hear about the urging of concerned relatives, fear of losing a valued
job, or the patient’s own anxiety about worsening symptoms.
PREVIOUS EPISODES
Knowing about previous episodes of the same or a similar mental condi-
tion can help you determine diagnosis and prognosis. By this time you
may already have heard details about any prior episodes. If not, ask:
“When was the first time you felt like this?”
“Did you first seek treatment then or later?”
“Why did you delay?”
“What was the diagnosis?” (There may have been more than one.)

-- 25 of 54 --

History of the Present Illness 	51
Since that first episode, has there ever been complete recovery, or
has the patient continued to have some residual symptoms or an apparent
change of personality? This issue of complete recovery can be critically
important. For example, it can help differentiate schizophrenia (from
which most patients never totally recover) from a mood disorder with
psychosis (which usually resolves completely).
How has your patient reacted to previous symptoms or prior epi-
sodes of illness? Some patients may have simply ignored them; others may
have tried to escape by quitting work, running away from home, attempt-
ing suicide, or abusing alcohol or other drugs. People who experience
auditory hallucinations sometimes play the radio loudly to drown out
the sound. A few will have talked with a friend or a religious counselor.
Whatever the coping behavior, this information may help you evaluate
the severity of the present episode by comparing it with earlier episodes.
It could also help you predict how your patient would behave if the illness
continued untreated.
PREVIOUS TREATMENT
Has your patient received treatment before? If so, to guide your plans for
future therapy, you’ll want to obtain details about what was offered and
what was tried.
If the patient had psychotherapy, what was its nature? Cognitive-
behavioral therapy is popular nowadays, but there are many other pos-
sibilities. Was the therapy individual, group, or couple? Try to learn the
name— certainly the profession— of the previous therapist. How long did
treatment last? Why did it stop?
Were drugs prescribed? If so, which ones and at what doses? Were
there any side effects to drug therapy? If your patient doesn’t know the
names of previous medications, a physical description of the tablets or
capsules might give you or a pharmacist consultant some clues. A list of
side effects might also help you with drug identification. Find out whether
injectable medications were ever used, especially the long- acting inject-
able antipsychotics such as fluphenazine (Prolixin), haloperidol (Haldol),
risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), and paliperidone (Invega).
Also try to evaluate how well the patient complied with treatment.
If you ask a straight question about this, pride or guilt may cause some
patients to have trouble answering the question candidly. Try instead:
“Were you usually able to follow your therapist’s directions?”
If the answer to that question is “No,” ask:

-- 26 of 54 --

52 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
“What sort of trouble did you have?”
What have been the effects of previous treatment—has anything
helped? If so, try to get an opinion as to which treatment helped most
(talking with a therapist? behavior therapy? electroconvulsive therapy?
medications?). You could be surprised. Even though an antipsychotic
might be the current medication, your patient might answer that lithium
helped most, and request it again.
Was the patient ever hospitalized? If so, how many times? Where,
and for how long? If time is short and your patient is both knowledgeable
and cooperative, you might instead ask for a written summary of previous
hospitalizations and treatment to be given to you at your next interview.

-- 27 of 54 --

53
C H A P T E R 	6
Getting the Facts
about the Present Illness
Of all portions of the initial mental health interview, the history of
the present illness is probably the most important. (It is also frequently
neglected.) Here is where you will develop most of the information and
test the hypotheses that provide the basis for your diagnosis. This process
requires obtaining highly valid information; that is, it should reflect as
closely as possible the true facts of your patient’s history. You can take
several steps to increase the validity of the information you record in your
history of the present illness.
BE CLEAR ABOUT THE GOALS OF YOUR INTERVIEW
Ideally, your patient will understand your expectations for accuracy from
the very beginning. Still, in the middle of the interview, your apparently
truthful patient may seem to be holding back on you. Something in the
patient’s manner may tell you—a hesitation of speech or an unwillingness
to look you in the eye. Of course, your first task should be to try to under-
stand any such behavior; we’ll cover in detail the reasons for patient resis-
tance in Chapter 16. For minor evasions and omissions, it may be enough
simply to restate the goal of your interview:
“I know some of these topics are hard to talk about, but to help you
most, I need every scrap of information I can get.”
If you are a student, you will have less authority to require coopera-
tion, so you might try something like this:

-- 28 of 54 --

54 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
“I’m sorry to be causing you distress with this line of questioning, but
you’ve really been helping me with my studies. I know it’s painful to
talk about, but maybe getting in touch with some of these memories
and feelings could even help you understand your problems.”
It can be especially hard to obtain good- quality facts from teenagers.
Some teens worry a lot about what you might tell their parents; others
may mistrust anyone more than 5 years older than they are. Whatever the
cause, some teenagers have trouble telling the truth. It sometimes helps to
repeat your reassurances about confidentiality. I say something like this:
“As you’d expect, after we’re finished I will have to talk with your par-
ents. But anything I might tell them I will first discuss with you. And
as long as I think you’re safe, if you tell me anything that you don’t
want me to repeat, I’ll respect that confidence.”
Some jurisdictions allow you to counsel or treat teenagers for cer-
tain problems such as venereal disease and birth control, even without
informing their parents, in the hopes of encouraging young people to
consult appropriate caregivers about important health conditions. In
such a case, you might work with your patient to determine the best
way of informing the parent, but you shouldn’t take it upon yourself to
volunteer this information. If a teenager is brought in by a parent, then
you would usually consult the parent— after informing your patient what
you plan to say.
Information that isn’t valid can be confusing, especially in the initial
interview, so some clinicians begin interviews with teenagers by indicat-
ing that they prefer silence to misinformation. Here’s how they might put
it:
“A lot of the questions I am going to ask you are personal. Some of
them may be pretty embarrassing or even frightening. But if I’m to
help you, it’s important that I not get confused by something that isn’t
the truth. So if you can’t bear to discuss what I’m asking about, please
don’t make up an answer. Just say that you don’t want to talk about
that now, and we’ll go on to something else. OK?”
TRACK YOUR DISTRACTIONS
Hardly any interviewer proceeds smoothly and logically, covering one
topic completely before moving on to another. In fact, experienced inter-
viewers expect to be distracted occasionally by—well, the unexpected.

-- 29 of 54 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	55
When new material interrupts the flow of your interview, you can either
pursue it immediately or, if you feel the original topic is more important,
make a note to come back to it later. If you choose the latter course, you
should acknowledge that your patient has said something important, and
promise that you will return to it shortly.
PATIENT: Yesterday I felt so disgusted with myself that I got out my
suitcase, just to see how it felt in my hand.
INTERVIEWER: You must have been feeling pretty bad, to think about
leaving home. I’ll ask you more about those thoughts in a few
minutes, after we’ve finished talking about your drinking.
In clinical interviewing, you must constantly reconcile two oppos-
ing principles: harvesting all the necessary information while avoiding
the bog of excessive detail. For example, you’d certainly want to know
about the family uproar that occurred last month when your patient
was becoming severely depressed, but not at the expense of uncovering
enough symptoms of depression to make a solid diagnosis. Resolving this
dilemma often means putting off until later questions that, however much
you’d like their answers, must take a back seat to other, more burning
issues. It’s an ideal time to make some notes for future reference.
USE OPEN-ENDED QUESTIONS
Above all else, you want information that is valid. Studies have shown that
patients give the most valid information when they are allowed to answer
freely, in their own words, and as completely as they wish. For that, you
need an open-ended question— one that cannot be answered “yes” or “no”
or with a specific piece of information (such as someone’s age, a loca-
tion, a physical attribute). Whenever possible, phrase your question in an
open-ended way that allows the widest possible scope of response. Here
are some examples:
Instead of “Did you have insomnia when you were most depressed?”
try “How was your sleep then?” (Your patient might have been sleeping
too much, rather than too little.)
Instead of “How many times have you been hospitalized?” try “Tell
me about your previous hospitalizations.” (The details could reveal sui-
cide attempts or bouts of drinking.)
Instead of “Did you lose your appetite?” try “To what extent did your
appetite change?” (The phrase “to what extent” can change nearly any
closed- ended question into one that is more open-ended.)

-- 30 of 54 --

56 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
TALK THE PATIENT’S LANGUAGE
Even the most experienced interviewers must guard against using techni-
cal words that patients might not understand.
“Has your libido remained healthy?” asked one professor of psychia-
try (!) during ward rounds. The patient, a burly high school dropout,
looked perplexed.
If you use an unfamiliar word and are asked to define it, you won’t
lose anything but a little time. However, some patients are reluctant to
admit their ignorance, and so say nothing. Others sometimes think they
understand when they don’t. If they answer the question they thought you
asked, the information you get might not be accurate.
You will improve validity if you pitch your questions at a level the
patient can understand. Even then, you may find that your patient has a
different understanding of a word whose meaning you thought was pretty
well standardized. For example, some people will hear anxious and think
“eager”; others may say paranoid to mean “fearful.”
At the same time, be careful not to talk down to your patient.
An interviewer asked one patient, a man with a master’s degree in
psychology, “How’s your thinker?” The patient at first did not under-
stand. When the clinician’s meaning was finally explained, the
patient felt so insulted that he left the room without finishing the
interview.
Although most patients will not react so extremely, remember to approach
all adults (and children, for that matter) with full regard for their intel-
ligence and feelings.
In polite society, everyone uses circumlocutions at one time or
another. For example, “sleeping with” is commonly used to mean “having
sexual relations with”—any actual sleep is an afterthought. You should
try to preserve amenities, of course, but your first obligation should be
to communicate accurately. Asking whether your patient had “sex before
getting married” is discreet but inaccurate; nearly everybody has, even if
it’s only masturbation. If you really need to know about a history of sexual
intercourse, ask that question in so many words. In Chapter 9 we’ll take
up some methods to help you approach the sensitive subjects of sex, sui-
cide, and substance use.
You should work hard to be sure that you understand what your
patient is trying to say. For example, what does “I was off the wall” mean?
To find out, you could do one of two things:

-- 31 of 54 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	57
1. State your understanding of the expression: “You mean you felt
very upset?”
2. Simply ask what was meant: “I don’t understand how your state-
ment relates to what we were talking about.”
Ensuring good communication requires your constant vigilance. It is all
too easy to assume that you know what your patient means, when in fact
the two of you are speaking in different idioms.
In the same vein, be careful not to judge other people’s behavior by
your own. A common example is duration of sleep. You might suppose that
your patient, who sleeps only 6 hours each night, suffers from insomnia,
but for some people that’s plenty (Thomas Edison slept only 4). Keep in
mind that humans have an almost endless variety of preferences and habits,
and guard against the temptation to impose your standards on others.
CHOOSE THE RIGHT PROBING QUESTIONS
When you want to know about something, just ask. A simple request for
information will often produce what you need for a minimum effort. Your
patient might appreciate your directness; if you use an open-ended ques-
tion, you’ll probably get the details.
When it comes time to delve more deeply into your patient’s present-
ing problems, choose your probing questions with two principles in mind:
1. Select probes that will resolve unanswered questions. It’s more
efficient to concentrate your efforts on areas you haven’t already
covered.
2. If your questions show your familiarity with the illness, you will
be perceived as knowledgeable. The resulting rapport and trust
should lead to increased sharing of information.
At this point in your interview, you are interested in the facts, so
questions that begin with “Why . . . ” are often better avoided. This is
especially true if the questions refer to the patient’s opinions or to other
people’s behavior. Besides, “Why . . . ” questions can prove frustrating to
a patient who lacks insight, and this frustration can inhibit the formation
of rapport.
“Why do you think you’re having these symptoms now?”
“Why did your boss say that?”
“Why did your son leave home?”

-- 32 of 54 --

58 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Each of these questions invites speculation rather than facts. Later you
may want to hear about possible interpretations, but at first you should
try to avoid the opinions and concentrate on the data that will allow you
to form your own conclusions. Try asking instead for more details or for
some typical examples. (Fair warning: Later, I’ll break my own rule and
mention a couple of specific situations where you might use “Why . . . ”
questions to good effect.)
Getting a good history depends in part on knowing what questions
will help you better understand the facts about your patient’s symptoms
or problems. Each symptom has its unique set of details that must be
explored, but for a full, rich exploration of any behavior or event, certain
items of information are always necessary. They include accurate details
about these aspects of your patient’s symptoms:
Type
Severity
Frequency
Duration
Context in which they occur
Because you will now be looking for specific details, you will be using
more closed- ended questions—those that can be answered in a few words
and don’t invite further comment from your patient. Even when pursuing
details, you should still sprinkle in some open-ended questions, which
will stimulate your patient to relate additional material that you may not
have thought to ask about. In the following example, the clinician uses a
mixture of closed- and open-ended questions to explore a patient’s anxi-
ety attacks:
INTERVIEWER: When did you first notice these episodes of anxiety?
[Closed-ended]
PATIENT: I guess it must have been about 2 months ago—I had just
started my new job with the county.
INTERVIEWER: Would you describe an episode for me? [Open-ended]
PATIENT: It’s pretty much the same every time. For no reason I start
to feel nervous, and then I’m afraid I won’t be able to breathe.
It’s awfully scary.
INTERVIEWER: How often have they occurred? [Closed-ended]
PATIENT: It’s been getting more frequent. I’m not sure I can say.
INTERVIEWER: Well, has it been several times a day, once a day, once
a week? [Closed-ended, multiple- choice]

-- 33 of 54 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	59
PATIENT: About once or twice a day now, I’d say.
INTERVIEWER: What do you do about it? [Open-ended]
PATIENT: Usually I just sit down. I’m usually too shaky to stand, any-
way. After about 15 minutes, it starts to go away.
INTERVIEWER: What sort of help have you sought before? [Open-
ended]
Some rules of interviewing seem obvious, but they should be men-
tioned for the sake of completeness.
• Don’t phrase questions in the negative. (“You haven’t been drinking
heavily, have you?”) The effect is to telegraph an expected answer, which
in this case would be “Heck, no.”
• Don’t ask double (or, worse, multiple) questions. (“Have you had trou-
ble with your sleep or appetite?”) Double questions may seem efficient,
but they are often confusing. Without your realizing it, the patient may
respond to one part of the question while ignoring another.
• Avoid obvious pejorative questions. (“Has your drinking ever caused
a serious lapse of judgment?”) Here, for no gain, you risk raising your
patient’s defenses. Better accepted might be a simple question about any
problems the patient may have had from drinking.
• Avoid leading questions. (“Did your wife’s leaving you cause you to
start drinking?”) A leading question is one that (often broadly) hints at
the answer expected. Judges on TV crime shows overrule leading ques-
tions, and so should you. They represent the opposite of your quest for
honest, open-ended inquiry. Instead try, “What was going on in your life
before you started drinking?”
• Encourage precision. Where appropriate, ask for dates, times, and
numbers. And ask your patient to define any use of vague words such as
seldom, sort of, occasionally, sometimes, many, and most. (By the way, try to
make your own language as precise as possible.)
• Keep questions brief. Long questions with much explanatory detail
can confuse the patient; they also occupy time you could be using to
obtain information.
• Watch for new leads. Even when you are hot on the trail of vital infor-
mation, be alert for hints of other directions to explore later.
PATIENT: . . . That’s about the story of my first suicide attempt. It
really upset my mother, so bad she had a nervous breakdown.
Now did you want to hear about the other attempt?
INTERVIEWER: (Noting on pad, “Mother’s breakdown.”) Yes, please.

-- 34 of 54 --

60 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
CONFRONTATIONS
Of course, confrontation does not mean showing anger, much less com-
ing to blows. In the context of a mental health interview, it simply means
pointing out something that requires clarification. It could be an incon-
sistency between two points of the history, or between the story and how
the patient appears to feel about it. The purpose of the confrontation is
to help you and the patient communicate better.
INTERVIEWER: I’ve noticed that whenever I ask about your father, you
glance away. Did you realize that?
PATIENT: No, I didn’t.
INTERVIEWER: What do you suppose it means?
In the usual initial interview, you should try to avoid any confronta-
tion that’s more than the mild sort I’ve just illustrated. In the first visit or
two, you don’t know one another well at all; your patient could feel tricked
or trapped by a relative stranger who points out inconsistencies. That
could lead in turn to decreased cooperation with the history taking or, in
extreme cases, to a breakdown in communications. But if you seem to be
getting contradictory information on an important point, try to enhance
validity by asking for clarification.
When you do ask, be gentle. The experience of being interrogated
is an unpleasant one; it makes the subject feel attacked and defensive. If
instead you coat your confrontation in warm empathy, it is less likely to be
rejected. If the patient sees you as interested and concerned, the confron-
tation should lead to an increase in self- exploration.
You can also make the confrontation seem less like a challenge by
choosing your phrases carefully. You might express puzzlement and ask
for help:
“Here’s something I don’t understand. You just said that your husband
drove you to the hospital, but I thought that earlier you told me he
had run off with his secretary.”
Notice the “I thought.” It implies that you, the interviewer, might have
been mistaken. The overall effect of the confrontation just quoted is to
make you and the patient collaborators in the search for truth. In another
example, to a patient who has made what seems to you an illogical (per-
haps delusional) connection, you might simply probe, “I don’t think I
quite follow that.”
Suppose you observe that your patient’s appearance and thought con-
tent do not jibe. A confrontation asks for clarification:

-- 35 of 54 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	61
“What you told me about your mother-in-law is sad, but you seem to be
smiling. There must be something else to this story.”
Whatever the issue, try to restrict your confrontations to one or two
essential issues. Otherwise, you do put rapport with your new patient at
risk. To be sure that you reserve this treatment for only the most impor-
tant issues, it might be better to save any confrontation until near the end
of the interview. Your relationship should be stronger by then (the risk
will be lessened), and you will have already obtained most of your infor-
mation (you’ll have less to lose). Any risk you do take will be in the service
of resolving an important issue.

-- 36 of 54 --

62
C H A P T E R 	7
Interviewing about Feelings
Dates, events, and other facts provide only the bare bones of your
patient’s problems; they must be fleshed out with feelings and reactions
to give the problems substance. Whatever the nature of the presenting
problems— even in patients with psychosis—feelings about the illness, and
indeed about the interview itself, will probably rank among the most
important data you obtain during the entire interview. Yet studies have
shown that of all the topics that must be covered in an initial mental
health interview, the one most often ignored by beginning interviewers
is feelings.
NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE FEELINGS
People can experience an impressive range of feelings. In listing a few
of them (Table 7.1), I have tried to be comprehensive. Some are major
moods or affects; others are variants or combinations. All are represented
by commonly used words. Although in nearly every case a noun form
exists, I have listed adjectives (with some synonyms and related words),
because that is how people express these ideas in reference to themselves.
For example, we are more likely to say, “I feel [am] anxious” than “I have
anxiety.”
In most cases I have paired feelings with their opposites. (Note that
the negative feelings considerably outnumber the positive ones.) I have
omitted most of the obvious antonyms (un- and in- words) and have omit-
ted some words that are too vague to be useful as descriptors, such as
bad, good, nervous, and uncomfortable. Because I wanted to include only
those terms that are used to describe how people feel, in some cases I

-- 37 of 54 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	63
TABLE 7.1. Negative and Positive Feelings
Negative feelings 	Positive feelings
Afraid, fearful, apprehensive 	Confident
Angry
Anxious 	Contented, calm, peaceful
Apathetic, indifferent, aloof, detached 	Eager, enthusiastic, interested, enchanted
Ashamed, humiliated 	Proud
Confused, perplexed, puzzled 	Certain, sure
Disappointed 	Fulfilled
Disgusted 	Delighted
Dissatisfied 	Satisfied
Embarrassed
Envious, jealous
Foolish 	Wise
Frustrated 	Encouraged
Guilty
Hateful 	Affectionate, loving
Helpless, dependent 	Independent
Hopeless, trapped 	Hopeful
Horrified
Impatient 	Patient
Indignant 	Pleased
Inferior 	Important, superior
Lonely 	Sociable
Pessimistic 	Optimistic
Regretful
Rejected 	Accepted
Resentful
Sad, gloomy, depressed 	Cheerful, happy, euphoric
Shy, timid 	Confident
Surprised, astonished, amazed 	Prepared
Suspicious 	Trusting
Tense 	Relaxed
Uncertain 	Determined
Ungrateful 	Appreciative, grateful
Unsympathetic, callous 	Sympathetic, compassionate
Useless, worthless 	Useful, worthy
Vulnerable 	Secure
Wary 	Trusting
Worried 	Carefree
Note. Some terms, such as wary and trusting, could be considered positive or negative,
depending on context. I’ve tried to compose this list according to the more prevalent mean-
ing.

-- 38 of 54 --

64 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
have listed no antonym. Thus innocent isn’t given as an antonym for guilty,
because people don’t usually state that they feel innocent—“I am inno-
cent” proclaims conviction, not emotion.
Of course, you can obtain information about feelings from most nor-
mally expressive people just by careful watching and listening. But some
patients are reluctant to share their feelings; even when they are willing to
talk, they bury their emotions deeply. Then you will have to go prospect-
ing to uncover feelings.
ELICITING FEELINGS
Many patients—perhaps most—will express their feelings adequately if you
just ask. Patients don’t seem to mind this method. In fact, studies show
that this direct approach is preferred by most patients and informants, as
long as the interviewer has a warm and caring manner and is attentive,
courteous, and responsive to cues.
Successful examiners effectively use two techniques that are espe-
cially good at eliciting emotions. These are the already-mentioned direct
requests and open-ended questions.
Direct Requests for Feelings
Watch for the opportunity to ask about the feelings associated with any
of the facts you have been discussing. Simply asking is probably the most
effective method of eliciting emotions, but be careful to use the word feel-
ings or a synonym. If you slip and say, for example, “What do you think?”
you risk harvesting instead a lot of factual and cognitive material, espe-
cially if your patient is highly educated or otherwise tends to intellectual-
ize. Here are a couple of examples of useful requests for feelings:
“How did you feel when you found out that you would have to move?”
“What was your state of mind when you were served with that sub-
poena?”
Patients are used to answering questions and will usually give you
information about nearly any emotional state that you seem interested
enough to ask about.
Open-Ended Questions
Without specifically asking how the patient feels, open-ended questions
encourage the free expression of emotions. This method works because

-- 39 of 54 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	65
its relative freedom encourages patients to speak at length. The more
people talk, the more likely they are to reveal emotion-laden information.
This technique, which is really just an extension of free speech,
works in part by suggesting that you care about how the patient perceives
the situation as a whole. On the other hand, closed- ended, short-answer
questions may suggest that you have already decided what is significant,
reducing your patient’s motivation to tell the entire story. Furthermore,
it seems obvious that the less time you spend asking questions, the more
time your patient will have to reveal feelings.
Open-ended questions can also help patients who have trouble sort-
ing out or accepting emotions that conflict with one another. To describe
conflicting emotions, we often use the term ambivalence; most people find
it hard to express ambivalent feelings in just a few words. But a compara-
tively long run of uninterrupted talk may provide the time necessary for
the patient to think about and express such feelings. Here’s an example of
an open-ended question that revealed decidedly mixed feelings:
INTERVIEWER: A few minutes ago, you said that your wife was talking
about divorce. Could you tell me more about that?
PATIENT: It’s been an awful time for me . . . I know that . . . well, I’ve
always felt that if you’ve failed in your marriage, you’ve failed in
life. At least, that’s what my mother always said.
INTERVIEWER: (Nods encouragement.)
PATIENT: But when I think about it . . . you know, there’s so much
trouble we’ve had getting along, almost since . . . well, since the
kids were born. Maybe we haven’t really had much of a marriage
at all. Maybe there are some things worse than divorce.
OTHER TECHNIQUES
Several situations can make it hard to elicit emotions from patients. Here
are a few of them:
• From childhood, some people— especially males—are discouraged
from revealing their feelings or displaying emotions. When they are
grown up, this “macho” view of appropriate behavior can lead them to
deny their feelings. The most obvious example is when the childhood
admonition “Boys don’t cry” becomes “Men should show that they don’t
care.” The same fate can befall women, too.
• Some patients don’t recognize their own feelings or have difficulty
connecting their feelings to their experiences. Perhaps this, too, develops

-- 40 of 54 --

66 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
from childhood experiences. In extreme cases, people grow up unable to
recognize or describe how they feel—a condition called alexithymia.
• Still others may be reluctant to express themselves, especially to
someone they don’t know well, because it makes them feel vulnerable.
“Show a hard exterior, and no one can hurt you” is how they might put
it. In contrast to those with alexithymia, these people know how they feel
and could put their emotions into words, but the need for self-protection
wins out.
To elicit feelings in these situations may require you to use one of the
techniques mentioned just below.
Expressions of Concern or Sympathy
Controlled studies have shown that any expression of concern or sympathy
by a clinician may encourage a patient to share feelings. This is especially
likely to work if your patient has already begun to share some feelings.
The sympathetic expression you use can be either verbal or behavioral,
such as facial expressions or other body language.
PATIENT: I’ve worked for that company for 15 years, but when a super-
visory position opens up, the boss passes me over for his own
nephew. It really burns me!
INTERVIEWER: (Frowns sympathetically.) It makes me feel unhappy just
hearing about it! I think that anyone in that situation would feel
hurt and angry.
PATIENT: I was beyond that—I was totally blown away. I wanted to
flush myself out of existence! I still feel that way, sometimes.
Reflection of Feelings
Reflection of feelings means explicitly stating the emotion you think the
patient might have felt in a given situation.
PATIENT: My daughter has always been a little wild, but last night she
didn’t come home until nearly daybreak.
INTERVIEWER: I’ll bet you were nearly frantic.
Of course, this technique runs the risk that your interpretation could be
wrong. But if it is, and your patient says so, you have at least accomplished
your goal of promoting a discussion of feelings.

-- 41 of 54 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	67
Picking Up on Emotional Cues
Picking up on emotional cues means being constantly alert for indica-
tions of high emotional concern. Often these will be nonverbal cues: a
slight frown, moistening of the eyes, or any other idiom of body language.
Your response might be verbal:
“I thought you looked a little sad when you were talking about your
mother. What were you feeling?”
You might also indicate your interest and support with some quiet
action of your own, such as passing a box of facial tissues to someone who
has begun to cry.
Interpretation
With interpretation, you draw parallels between the emotional content of
current and past situations.
PATIENT: My husband never listens to my opinion on things.
INTERVIEWER: From what you told me before, it sounds like the way
your father treated you when you were a teenager.
The technique of interpretation can be tricky to use. The patient
must be receptive to explanations for behavior; ideally, the patient should
be the one who suggests the connection. If not, offer the interpretation
tentatively: It may be briskly rejected. Generally, I’d tend to stay away
from interpretations during the initial interview; they are a device best
used in later therapy by experienced clinicians.
Studies show that each of the techniques above can encourage a
reticent patient or informant to offer up more emotions and to exam-
ine them at greater depth. However, none of them will discourage a nor-
mally expressive person from revealing emotions. They also require less
in the way of detailed, extensive probing than do techniques that are less
responsive to the needs of patients.
“Name the Feeling”
Just ask about the emotion you think your patient might be having:
“Are you feeling depressed?”
“Have you felt guilt [or regret] about [whatever situation you’ve been
discussing]?”

-- 42 of 54 --

68 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Because it is closed- ended, reserve this technique for those situations where
you have already tried to elicit feelings with more open-ended questions.
Analogy
Finally, for the patient who absolutely cannot identify the feelings that
accompany a given situation, you could ask about times when similar feel-
ings might have been experienced.
“Did you feel anything like this when your mother died?”
“Did you feel this way that time your boss used you as a bad example
in front of the entire staff?”
FOLLOWING UP FOR DETAILS
Once you have uncovered some feelings, increase the depth of the inter-
view by asking for more. Probe to elicit examples and to evaluate details.
INTERVIEWER: I’d like to hear some more about those rage attacks.
When do you feel that way?
PATIENT: For one thing, it’s whenever we go to visit my father-in-law.
INTERVIEWER: Have you had some previous unpleasant experiences
with him?
PATIENT: I’ll say! He almost ruined my marriage with some of his sly
cracks.
INTERVIEWER: I’d like to hear an example of how you felt then.
Be sure to ask follow-up probing questions whenever your patient
gives you the opportunity. Beginners sometimes uncover evidence of sig-
nificant events or pathology, only to ignore it in the subsequent dialogue.
Here is an unfortunate example:
INTERVIEWER: Were you ever approached for sex in any way when you
were a child?
PATIENT: Well, yes, I was.
INTERVIEWER: (Writes down “Yes.”) Where are you employed now?
Perhaps this interviewer felt uncomfortable at pressing ahead for the
details, but the patient was left to deal with the frustration of pent-up
information. Positive information should be followed up until you have
learned who, what, when, where, why, and how.

-- 43 of 54 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	69
DEFENSE MECHANISMS
When following up, you should also learn what your patient does to cope
with feelings. These strategies for dealing with emotions and behaviors
are called defense mechanisms. They may seem almost endless in their
number and variety; consult standard texts for a more exhaustive listing.
Following are some of the more common ones. Rather than just stating
definitions, I will try to clarify what the terms mean with examples of
defense mechanisms that might be used by an aspiring politician who
feels anxiety and anger about losing a city council election.
Potentially Harmful Defense Mechanisms
In the potentially harmful group, I’ve included those defense mechanisms
that generally allow a person to avoid confronting the effects of feelings
or emotions. When stressed, most of us will occasionally be tempted to
use one of these to shore up our egos.
Acting out. [The politician smashes the camera of a news photogra-
pher who is trying to take a picture.]
Denial. “The recount will show that I actually won.”
Devaluation. “It’s a lousy job anyway—the hours are murder, and you
get nothing but complaints from the taxpayers.”
Displacement. [The politician goes home and kicks the cat.]
Dissociation. [The politician awakens one morning in strange sur-
roundings, unable to recall any events of the past 3 days.]
Fantasy. “Next year I’ll run for Congress—and win!”
Intellectualization. “I view this experience only as an example of
‘democracy in action.’ ”
Projection. [Unconscious thought: “I’d like to kill him.”] “He’s plotting
to kill me.”
Reaction formation. [Thought: “He’s a miserable low-life.”] “I’m proud
to support the honorable council member.”
Repression. [The politician “forgets” to attend a banquet in honor of
the victor.]
Somatization. [The politician develops persistent chest pain of unex-
plained origin.] “ . . . so I couldn’t have served anyway.”
Splitting. “Some politicians are good, some bad; my opponent’s one
of the bad ones.”

-- 44 of 54 --

70 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Effective Defense Mechanisms
Better-integrated adults rely principally on some of the more mature
defense mechanisms.
Altruism. “I’ll support him; he has better qualifications than I do.”
Anticipation. [Before voting begins:] “Of course, I could lose. But I’ve
got other irons in the fire.”
Humor. “In the campaign I said he was honorable; he said I was a jerk.
Perhaps we were both wrong.”
Sublimation. “I’ll write a book about the campaign.”
Suppression. “I’ll put it to the back of my mind, and concentrate on
the business at hand.” [Note the difference— conscious intent—from
repression, above.]
HANDLING EXCESSIVELY EMOTIONAL PATIENTS
Although you will usually want to encourage the expression of emotions,
some patients are so emotional that it impedes their communication with
other people, including therapists. People can experience excessive emo-
tionality for a variety of reasons.
• They may be people who are angry, sometimes without knowing
why.
• Others, such as those with some personality disorders, have
learned that high-volume emotions help them get their way. Drama
becomes a way of life.
• Even some people who don’t have such severe underlying psycho-
pathology may use high emotional output to control their families
or friends.
• Some people have been reared in families where feelings are
expressed loudly and often. By their imitation of others, this behav-
ior becomes habitual.
• Anxiety causes some to behave this way.
• A few cannot stand the loneliness of silence.
• Perhaps your patient, recalling experiences with other clinicians,
fears that you won’t be interested or that there won’t be enough
time to tell the whole story.
Whatever the cause, excessive emotionality can focus too much of
your attention on feelings, leaving insufficient time for gathering facts.
In such a situation, try to adopt a brisk, controlling manner in which you

-- 45 of 54 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	71
firmly direct the course of the interview. Several techniques can help you
accomplish this objective.
1. Acknowledge the emotion. You may be able to turn down the heat
by just putting a label on the emotion. Then the patient, seeing that you
recognize the feeling, will no longer need to attract your attention to it.
PATIENT: (Shouting) She’s not going to jerk me around that way,
not ever again!
INTERVIEWER: You really feel angry. Frustrated and angry.
PATIENT: (More quietly) Well, sure. Who wouldn’t be? Wait’ll you
hear what she did last week.
This technique shows that you understand and accept how your
patient feels, so it is probably the best one to use. Try it first.
2. Talk quietly. If your patient shouts, try lowering your own voice.
Most people have trouble maintaining high-volume output when you are
speaking so softly that you can barely be heard.
3. Explain again what information you are trying to get:
“What I really want at this point is to learn about your family his-
tory. Perhaps later we can talk some more about your husband’s
girlfriend.”
4. Redirect any of the patient’s questions or comments that change
the topic.
INTERVIEWER: Now I’d like to hear about your son. You said that
he was living with his mother?
PATIENT: That’s right, and she hasn’t let me even talk to him on
the phone for the past 3 months. Don’t you think I should get
a court order?
INTERVIEWER: We might be able to talk about that later. Right
now, I really need to know about your relationship with your
son. Have you been close?
5. Switch to a closed- ended style. This style will indicate what sort of
specific answer you would like to hear, as well as discourage further com-
ment by the patient.
INTERVIEWER: Could you tell me about your first marriage?
PATIENT: It was a disaster! I’ve never forgiven that man! He was a
complete brute! One time I cried for a month without stop-
ping. Why, I couldn’t even—

-- 46 of 54 --

72 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
INTERVIEWER: (Interrupts, recognizing that open-ended questions aren’t
useful.) Was he a drinker?
PATIENT: Oh gosh, yes, he drank like a camel. He—
INTERVIEWER: (Interrupts.) How long did the marriage last?
PATIENT: Until I was 26, about 4 years. He was never—
INTERVIEWER: Was the divorce your idea, or his?
This interviewer was prepared to go on interrupting until the patient
learned to stick to the main topic.
6. If you are still having trouble, check to be sure that the patient
understands what you want. Here is how you might phrase this confronta-
tion:
“We seem to be having some trouble here with our communica-
tion. Have I made it clear what I need to know?”
Like other helpful confrontations, this one was expressed so as not to lay
the blame entirely on the patient.
The aim of all these techniques is to reduce the patient’s scope for
excessive verbal and behavioral output. They should help you obtain the
diagnostic information you need without sacrificing rapport. Occasion-
ally, however, even these techniques are insufficient. If an outpouring of
tears or other feelings prevents you from obtaining the information you
need from a hospitalized patient, you may have to break off the interview
long enough for the patient to get a better grip. Say something like this:
“I can see you’re too upset to continue today. Let’s take a rest for now.
I’ll stop back and see you again in the morning, when you’ve had
some sleep.”

-- 47 of 54 --

73
C H A P T E R 	8
Personal and Social History
Health care professionals don’t treat illnesses; they treat people. You
therefore need to know the context in which your patient’s complaints
have occurred. This requires learning all you can about family back-
ground and other aspects of biography. The process not only will help
you get to know your patient, but may reveal material that illuminates
and extends your knowledge of the cause and context of mental disorder.
Some of it may have a direct bearing on the cause of an illness or on its
treatment. Your patient has spent a lifetime accumulating these experi-
ences, so there is almost no limit to the amount and variety of available
information. What you learn will be determined by the purpose of your
interview and the time you can devote to it.
While you are gathering biographical information, maintain a
healthy skepticism about its validity. Human memory is fallible, especially
when the human has an intense personal interest in what is being remem-
bered. Accurate recall is more likely for major historical events such as
births, deaths, and marriages, and for recent events that constitute the
history of the present illness.
On the other hand, some material is especially subject to distortion:
early childhood events, interpersonal disputes, everything reported sec-
ondhand, and any other item that requires interpretation. You should
be constantly evaluating the validity of all interview data against your
own internal standards (“Does this story seem likely? Does it even seem
possible?”). Whenever possible, you should check accuracy with external
sources, such as previous medical records and interviews with relatives
and friends (see Chapter 15).
By the way, I fully realize that you’re not going to collect all of these
data in a single interview; augmentation later is a clinical fact of life.
In this and subsequent chapters, I will use italics to point out some
possible interpretations of the material as we discuss it.

-- 48 of 54 --

74 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE
Family of Origin
A logical starting place is with your patient’s birth. In what city/state/
country did it occur? Was the patient an only child? If there were brothers
and sisters, how many were there of each? What was your patient’s posi-
tion in the sibship (first, second, middle, youngest, or only child)? How
well did your patient get along with siblings? Was one sibling favored over
the others? Older children in a sibship tend to receive more attention when they
are young, whereas middle children may be relatively neglected; youngest children
may be babied or spoiled. Genetic disorders that are obvious at birth or shortly
afterwards (such as Down’s syndrome) tend to occur late in a sibship.
If your patient was one of twins, were they identical (one-egg) or fra-
ternal (two-egg) twins? Identical twins have inherited the same genetic mate-
rial; fraternal twins are no more genetically alike than nontwin siblings. Some
mental disorders, including schizophrenia and bipolar disorders, are much more
likely if your patient is the identical twin of someone who has such a disorder.
Did your patient feel wanted as a child? How close was the relation-
ship with the parents? Did this change with adolescence? Was the patient
reared by both parents? If not, was this due to death? Divorce? Military
service? Prison? Absence of a parent (especially the father) has been associated
with antisocial personality disorder. In some studies, early death of a parent cor-
relates with adult-onset depression.
Occasionally a patient will tell you, “I never knew my father.” You
should gently try to learn whether the parents were ever married. (Using
“Is it possible that . . . ” can soften this question considerably.) Even in our
more accepting era, being born “out of wedlock” is a lifelong source of discomfort
and embarrassment for some people.
Whatever the exact nature of your patient’s family of origin, you
should try to learn something about how the parents (or surrogates)
related to one another. Did they communicate well with one another?
Show affection? Did they quarrel often? Fight? Did one physically abuse
the other? How did their relationship affect the emotional climate in the
home while your patient was growing up? People often model their adult
relationships on what they observed as the “norm” during childhood. On the other
hand, some people go to extremes to be different from a parent whose behavior was
perceived as undesirable or unattractive.
If your patient was adopted, at what age did this take place? Can you
learn anything about the biological parents or about the circumstances
leading to adoption? Was the adoption intrafamilial (that is, the adoptive
parents were blood relatives of the patient) or extrafamilial? Many adopted
people, especially adolescents and young adults, feel incomplete because they don’t
know their biological parents. This can result in a quest for roots that drives some

-- 49 of 54 --

Personal and Social History 	75
adoptees to extraordinary lengths to discover (and in some cases meet) the birth
parents who gave them up.
Growing Up
What was the age of each parent when your patient was born? Were the
parents mature enough to provide responsible care? Did both work regu-
larly outside the home? What were their jobs? Were they good providers?
Did they have enough time left over to spend with children? What sort
of disciplinary techniques were used? Were these harsh, firm, relaxed, or
inconsistent?
If either parent was absent from home for an extended period of
time, find out why. (Illness? A job far from home? Jail? Was your patient
a “military brat”?) Did the family live in one place, or were there frequent
moves? Did the family ever really put down roots somewhere?
Were there other losses, such as the death of a sibling, grandparent,
or other close relative?
Find out about hobbies, clubs, and other extracurricular interests.
Was your patient sociable? A loner? Many people with schizophrenia have
been isolated or loners for most of their lives.
Try to obtain a general picture of the childhood environment and
your patient’s place in it. Here are some questions that might help you
with this broad task:
“Could you tell me something about your childhood?”
“What was life like for you then?”
“How did you get along with your sibling(s)?”
“Who were your childhood friends?”
“Did you feel different from other kids?”
“How did you spend your free time?”
“Did you belong to organizations such as the Scouts or the Y?”
“Did you participate in organized sports?”
“Where did your family go on vacations?”
“Did your family have pets?”
“What chores or other responsibilities did you have?”
“What summer or after- school jobs did you have?”
“What did you want to be when you grew up?”
“With whom did you identify?”
“Was sex discussed in the home?”

-- 50 of 54 --

76 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
“What were your parents’ attitudes toward sex?”
“When did you first become interested in having a romantic relation-
ship?”
Asking about Abuse
Many patients were physically abused as children— an experience that can
significantly affect adult life and personality. This information can be
difficult to obtain; sometimes these patients do not themselves realize
the extent to which they were abused as children. You should nonetheless
make an effort to learn whether your patient’s childhood involved such
experiences. You can lead into these sensitive topics gradually:
“How well do you feel your parents provided for you?”
“What methods of discipline did your parents use?”
“Did you ever feel that you were mistreated as a child?”
Positive replies to questions about abuse must be pursued thoroughly,
if carefully. You will need to develop the following areas of information:
How often did this abuse occur?
Who administered it? Did both parents participate?
If one of them tried to shield the child, who was it?
What form did the abuse take? (Beatings? If so, what with?)
How often did it occur?
What was the provocation, if any?
At the time, did the patient feel that this abuse was deserved? What
about now?
What effect did these experiences have on the patient as a child?
As an adult, how does the patient feel about these experiences now?
You’ll need to ask about sexual abuse, too; we’ll cover that issue in
Chapter 9.
Childhood Health
For adult patients, early developmental milestones (such as the ages at
which a child learns to sit, stand, walk, speak words, and speak sentences)
are usually not worth pursuing. Most of what your patient knows about

-- 51 of 54 --

Personal and Social History 	77
milestones has probably been passed along as family mythology, which is
highly subject to distortion. (Who remembers being breast-fed or toilet-
trained?) But if you suspect intellectual disability or other developmental
difficulties (such as a specific learning disorder), these milestones may be
important enough to pursue with an informant.
Try to learn something about overall childhood health. Were there
hospitalizations, operations, frequent visits to doctors, or long absences
from school for health reasons? How did the family deal with illness?
(Overprotection? Rejection?) If your patient was a sickly child, did the
parents and other relatives “reward” illness behavior with a great deal
of attention? Overprotection or rewards for illness may precede what DSM-5
now calls somatic symptom and related disorders (the DSM-IV somatoform dis-
orders).
What was your patient’s temperament and activity level, especially
around ages 5–10? Was this child quiet and withdrawn, or outgoing and
friendly? Temperament characteristics appear in the first few months of life and
tend to persist throughout childhood, even into the adult years. They may corre-
late with adult mental disorders.
Does your patient report any of these relatively common childhood
problems?
Bedwetting
Tics
Stuttering
Obesity
Nightmares
Phobias
If so, what treatment (if any) was attempted? Did it help? How did these
problems affect relations with siblings or schoolmates? Any of these condi-
tions suggests that the patient was under stress as a child. Due to its increasing
frequency, obesity may in recent years have become somewhat more accepted, but
it still suggests a potential source of childhood hazing.
Were there any concerns about masturbation? At what age did
puberty begin? If your patient is female, was she prepared for the onset
of menses? If so, who told her? At what age did they begin? Was she
concerned or teased about breast development? Teens of either sex can be
exquisitely sensitive about being noticed. Developmental delay (or acceleration)
may have caused your patient some degree of embarrassment.
When did dating begin? What feelings were associated with this?
Again, sexual history will be covered in Chapter 9.

-- 52 of 54 --

78 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Education
How well did your patient do academically, and what was the last grade
completed? Did your patient like school? If there were academic prob-
lems, what subjects caused the most trouble? Were there any specific
problems with reading (dyslexia)? With other subjects? Were there behav-
ior problems in school? Truancy? What were the consequences? (Sent to
principal? Paddling? Suspension or expulsion?)
Did your patient repeat grades or have difficulty concentrating on
schoolwork? Short attention span and low school performance suggest attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Some of these patients (boys, especially) were mark-
edly hyperactive as children, and may even have learned to walk early.
Did your patient ever miss school for long periods of time? If so, why?
Was there any history of school refusal? How old was your patient when it
occurred? School refusal (once erroneously called “school phobia”) is fairly com-
mon in young children and does not necessarily predict later pathology.
If your patient quit before graduating from high school, what was
the reason? What did your patient do then? Work? Join the military? You
should also learn whether a GED was attempted or attained. (These ini-
tials can stand for General Equivalency Degree [or Diploma] or General
Educational Development.)
Finally, at what age did your patient make the transition from a life of
dependency on parents or others to one of self- sufficiency?
LIFE AS AN ADULT
Work History
Employment history can help you judge both your patient’s underlying
potential and the effect of recent illness on performance. This informa-
tion is also relatively objective: Work history seems to be distorted less
than more personal, perhaps more embarrassing portions of the social
history. You should therefore spend some time inquiring into the details
of your patient’s job history.
What is your patient’s current occupation? Is it stimulating, satisfy-
ing? How does it match earlier ambitions? How long has your patient
worked for the current employer? If the patient was ever unemployed,
why and for how long? If the patient has been employed only briefly, how
many jobs have there been in the last 5 years? Has each job change been
for a better one? How much time is spent working? Investigate any gap,
change of direction, or lack of promotion.
If your patient was ever fired from a job, what were the circumstances?
If the patient is unemployed now, why? When did your patient last work

-- 53 of 54 --

Personal and Social History 	79
regularly? If the patient is unemployed, what is the current means of sup-
port? Patients with antisocial personality disorder have often held multiple jobs
of brief duration. No job at all, or none for many years, is commonplace among
patients with chronic schizophrenia.
While you are at it, find out about adult leisure activities. Does your
patient have any hobbies? Belong to any clubs or other organizations?
Have there been efforts at continuing education as an adult? What about
talents? To learn more, you can ask:
“What do you think you’re good at?”
Military History
Has your patient served in the armed forces? (Ask this question of both
male and female patients.) If the answer is “Yes,” ask:
“What branch?”
“Was this a volunteer enlistment, or were you drafted?”
“How long did you serve?”
“What was your job in the military?”
“What was the highest rank you attained?”
“Did you have any disciplinary problems?” (These include courts-
martial, Articles 15, captain’s masts, and lower-grade disciplinary
hearings.)
“What kind of discharge did you receive?” (Honorable? General? Dis-
honorable? Medical?)
“Did you see combat? If so, for how long? What was your role?”
“Were you ever wounded?”
“Do you have a service- connected disability?” (This could be due
either to wounds or to a non- combat-related accident or illness.)
“Were you a prisoner of war?”
“Do you tend to relive your experiences or have bad dreams or anni-
versary reactions?”
Symptoms that persist or recur after combat (or any severe service- related
trauma) can indicate PTSD. This condition has been reported in 10% or more
of Vietnam- era combat veterans, and it is turning up in large numbers among
returnees from Iraq and Afghanistan. It may also occur after civilian calamities,
such as car wrecks and natural disasters.

-- 54 of 54 --

