77
Four types of anxiety disorders are discussed in this chapter: (1) panic disorder, typi-
fied by recurrent attacks that involve the rapid onset of multiple physical symptoms
(e.g., shortness of breath and racing heart), as well as fear of future attacks; (2) ago-
raphobia, characterized by avoidance of situations in which anxiety or panic symp-
toms might occur, especially when escape may be difficult; (3) social anxiety disor-
der (previously termed “social phobia”), which involves intense anxiety or avoidance
of interpersonal and/or performance situations fueled by fear of negative evaluation
by others; and (4) specific phobias, characterized by excessive fear toward a particu-
lar object or situation (e.g., animals), certain natural environments (e.g., heights), and
closed spaces.
The anxiety disorders overlap considerably with one another, both in terms of
their typical symptoms and the models of etiology to explain their development.
Thus, rather than review all of the data for each disorder separately, we highlight
those aspects of panic disorder and phobias that are shared, then consider the evi-
dence specific to a given disorder. We outline each disorder’s common symptoms
and related clinical features, natural course and treatment outcome findings, epide-
miological data, and the high rates of comorbidity for panic and phobic disorders.
C H A P T E R 4
Panic Disorder,
Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias
Bethany A. Teachman
Marvin R. Goldfried
Elise M. Clerkin
Alexandra L. Silverman
Go to the heart of danger . . . for there you will find safety.
—Old Chinese proverb
You must do the things you think you cannot do.
—Eleanor Roosevelt

-- 1 of 74 --

78 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Finally, we review general and specific models of etiology, emphasizing the many
shared biological and psychological vulnerability factors across the anxiety difficul-
ties. Throughout the chapter, we raise potential clinical implications that follow from
the psychopathology literature and consider some of the many exciting challenges
that arise in helping patients reduce their disabling anxiety symptoms.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES
The anxiety disorders, including panic disorder, social anxiety, and the various pho-
bias, share a number of features, such as avoidance behaviors and excessive fear rela-
tive to what others would experience in a given situation. These common features
(as we discuss below) have led many researchers to suggest that a dimensional per-
spective may more appropriately characterize the range of anxiety problems rather
than the current classification system that emphasizes specific categories. Relatedly,
certain transdiagnostic models (e.g., Nolen-Hoeksema & Watkins, 2011) integrate dis-
tal (e.g., childhood sexual abuse) and proximal (e.g., rumination) risk factors, as well
as moderators (e.g., social stress), to help explain why a given risk factor may lead
to multiple different disorders (this concept is known as “multifinality”). Further-
more, these models can help to explain why one individual with a given risk fac-
tor may develop one set of symptoms, another individual with the same risk factor
may develop a different set of symptoms, and a third individual may not have any
significant mental health symptoms (this concept is known as “divergent trajecto-
ries”). Thus, we consider symptom dimensions that are common across panic, social
anxiety, and phobic disorders, as well as the unique ways these difficulties play out
across specific disorders. This focus on both common and disorder-specific features
is important from a treatment perspective because seeing patients with multiple
rather than isolated anxiety difficulties is the norm (see Brown, Campbell, Lehman,
Grisham, & Mancill, 2001).
Subjective distress that is excessive given the objective danger in the environ-
ment is present across anxiety difficulties, on a continuum from diffuse worry and
future-oriented anxious apprehension (often present in agoraphobia), to more spe-
cific targeted fears (seen in specific phobia and social anxiety disorder), to immi-
nent threat and panic (characteristic of panic disorder). Related to the experience of
emotion (e.g., fear, anxiety, distress), there are also impairments in the regulation of
emotions (Cisler, Olatunji, Feldner, & Forsyth, 2010). For instance, anxious individ-
uals typically strive to make their world feel “safe.” These maladaptive strategies
to reduce the sense of danger and vulnerability often result in extensive efforts to
avoid or escape from the feared situations or feelings, which adds considerably to the
impairment in occupational, academic, and social functioning typical of panic, social
anxiety, and phobic disorders. Similarly, anxious individuals often rely too heavily
on cues or signals in their environment that help to reduce their distress at entering
feared situations (see Rachman, 1994). For instance, a person with agoraphobia may
only go out to the mall if their spouse accompanies them; a person with panic disor-
der may insist on always carrying their medication or water bottle when leaving the
house; a person with social anxiety disorder may only attend a party after consum-
ing three beers. Finally, although much previous research has focused on negative

-- 2 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	79
emotions and emotion regulation, to better understand the experience of those with
pathological anxiety, there is an increasing focus on impairments in positive emotions
and emotion regulation (e.g., Eisner, Johnson, & Carver, 2009; Kashdan et al., 2013).
This is reflected in the individual with social anxiety who does not emotionally ben-
efit from savoring the memory of their date and even fears being evaluated positively
by their date, or the person with panic disorder who actively dampens positive emo-
tions when they arise.
Anxious individuals also tend to process information in distorted ways that
are thought to increase their beliefs about the world being a dangerous, uncontrol-
lable place and the individual being vulnerable to threat (see MacLeod & Mathews,
2012). Examples include spider-fearful individuals orienting their attention quickly
to pictures of spiders (e.g., Mogg & Bradley, 2006); individuals who are afraid of dogs
being more likely than nonphobic individuals to use ferocity features in classifying
dogs (Landau, 1980); people with panic disorder misinterpreting benign changes in
bodily sensations as catastrophic signs of illness (e.g., interpreting a slightly racing
heart as indicative of an impending heart attack; Teachman, Smith-Janik, & Saporito,
2007); or people with social anxiety disorder judging themselves more harshly on a
social performance (e.g., giving a speech) than do outside observers (e.g., Norton &
Hope, 2001). Furthermore, there is compelling evidence that threat-oriented cogni-
tions occur both at relatively explicit (controlled, deliberative) and automatic (outside
one’s conscious control) levels (Teachman, Clerkin, Cunningham, Dreyer-Oren, &
Werntz, 2019). Additionally, there is some indication that individuals with phobic
symptoms may actually see their environment as more threatening at a perceptual
level, in addition to judging it as more dangerous (e.g., Teachman, Stefanucci, Cler-
kin, Cody, & Proffitt, 2008).
Just as thinking patterns often become highly geared toward managing per-
ceived threats when individuals become anxious, so too can physiological respond-
ing. There is considerable variability in the physiological changes that occur across
the anxiety disorders, but some degree of the “fight-or-flight” reaction (initially
described by Cannon, 1929) is common to both panic and phobic reactions. The fight-
or-flight system involves dramatic surges of autonomic arousal that motivate individ-
uals either to escape or avoid a situation or defend themselves. A freezing response
may also occur in some individuals. During the heightened activation of the sym-
pathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system, a series of physical reactions that
occur very rapidly help to prepare the body for action. These include increased heart
rate, rapid breathing, inhibition of digestive processes, constriction of blood vessels
in some parts of the body with dilation of blood vessels for muscles, pupil dilation,
endorphin release, and acceleration of reflexes (see Gray & McNaughton, 1996; Gun-
nar & Quevedo, 2007). This response prompts the individual for immediate action
and is adaptive when a real danger exists in the environment, but it essentially (mal)
functions as a false alarm when no objective danger exists, as occurs in panic and
phobias (see Barlow, 2002).
Thus, across a variety of emotional response systems (e.g., subjective distress,
behavior, physiology, cognitive processing; Eysenck, 2014; Lang, 1985), we see com-
mon signs and consequences of anxious arousal associated with both panic disor-
der and phobias, pointing to their shared phenomenological presentation. These
common features (combined with frequent difficulties in determining the clinical

-- 3 of 74 --

80 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
threshold for a given disorder, as well as the high level of comorbidity across them)
have led to many questions about the adequacy of a categorical classification system
for these disorders (see review in Barlow, 2002, Chapter 9). Simply put, questions
have arisen as to whether the current system effectively “carves nature at its joints.”
However, the heuristic value of categories (e.g., for communication about diagnoses)
and advantages conferred by the specificity of categorical criteria for research and
clinical decision making make it unlikely that the categories will be fully abandoned
any time soon (see Brown & Barlow, 2009).
Taking into consideration the overlap across anxiety disorders also recognizes
that the typical symptoms unique to each disorder represent important variation in
the way anxiety pathology manifests across individuals, depending on their particu-
lar vulnerability factors and learning experiences. We turn to these specific symp-
toms next.
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Panic disorder is defined by recurrent and unexpected panic attacks, which are fol-
lowed by at least 1 month of fear about future panic attacks, concern about the con-
sequences of the attacks (e.g., worries about “going crazy”), or changes in behavior
related to the attacks (e.g., avoidance or introduction of extensive safety cues). The
term “panic attack” is used frequently by the general public, but it has a specific
set of criteria in the context of anxiety pathology: The attack must involve a dis-
tinct period of intense discomfort and/or fear that rises to a peak within minutes.
It must involve at least four of the following symptoms: “palpitations, pounding
heart, or accelerated heart rate; sweating; trembling or shaking; sensations of short-
ness of breath or smothering; feeling of choking; chest pain or discomfort; nausea
or abdominal distress; feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint; chills or heat
sensations; paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations); derealization (feelings
of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from oneself); fear of losing con-
trol or going crazy; fear of dying” (list from American Psychiatric Association, 2013,
p. 208). Attacks that involve fewer than four symptoms are termed “limited symp-
tom” attacks.
Importantly, panic attacks can occur within the context of many anxiety prob-
lems. As one example, a person with social anxiety disorder may experience a panic
attack before having to give a speech; however, in these cases the fear focuses on the
negative evaluation by others and expected social embarrassment. In panic disorder,
the attacks themselves become a problem, as indicated by the fear of future attacks
and altered behavior in response to the attacks. For this reason, panic disorder is
often described as a “fear of fear” (Goldstein & Chambless, 1978). It is notable that fre-
quent panic attacks are not actually required for the diagnosis, provided that impair-
ment or fear of future attacks is evident. Furthermore, the occurrence of panic attacks
alone is not sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of panic disorder. In fact, roughly 11% of
adults in the United States experience a panic attack during a given 12-month period,
which is clearly much higher than the prevalence rate of actual panic disorder (e.g.,
American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Thus, tracking and reducing how often
panic attacks occur are useful in treatment but not the sole goal of treatment; rather,
helping people reduce their fear of future attacks and diminish associated avoidance

-- 4 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	81
is paramount. Along these lines, simply asking patients to monitor the percentage
of time they are worried about becoming anxious can provide the therapist—and
the patient—with a useful index of change. This marker is meaningful because, at
the outset of treatment, the lives of these patients are often very much about their
anxiety; indeed, in most of their waking hours, they are preoccupied with concern
about becoming anxious.
Panic attacks may be entirely unexpected, in that they seem to come on “out of
the blue” (when a person cannot identify a trigger), especially during early stages
of the disorder. It has been our clinical experience that more often than not, such
uncued attacks occur in situations in which the person is unaware of the precipitat-
ing factors (e.g., a fleeting thought and emotion). Alternatively, they may be expected,
in that an attack is more likely to occur following certain triggers (e.g., when in a
crowded place), or when the attack regularly occurs after exposure to a particular
situation. Situational events may involve a place, such as a restaurant, but they may
also be a physical state or symptom (e.g., when experiencing arousal following caf-
feine intake), or an emotional circumstance (e.g., during conflict with significant oth-
ers). Not surprisingly, people often start to avoid situations or feelings that tend to
trigger their panic attacks. When this becomes extreme and impairing in its own
right, the person may qualify for diagnoses of both panic disorder and agoraphobia.
Currently in the field, we consider agoraphobia as an independent disorder,
even though it often co-occurs with panic disorder. A person with agoraphobia expe-
riences unusually high anxiety about situations or places that they perceive would
be hard to escape from, or in which they would not be able to find help if they have
a panic attack or similar symptoms. We think of such experiences as a “disorder”
when they last for a while (months), and cause a person enough stress that they find
themself going out of their way to avoid those situations and places. Common situ-
ations that trigger agoraphobic avoidance include various modes of transportation
(e.g., car, bus), going outside of the home alone, or standing in crowds or lines. Avoid-
ance of internal sensations (known as “interoceptive cues”) that make a person fear-
ful is also common. These include sensations associated with dizziness, shortness
of breath, or hyperventilation (Schmidt & Trakowski, 2004), as well as sensations
associated with normal arousal in response to exercise, sex, eating heavy meals, or
strong emotional reactions.
Given the considerable avoidance behaviors and fear of bringing on panic symp-
toms that characterize panic disorder and/or agoraphobia, it is not surprising that
significant impairment is associated with these disorders. The morbidity associated
with panic disorder and agoraphobia cuts across many domains of biopsychosocial
functioning. For instance, in terms of relationship functioning, couples may have
stopped having sexual intercourse because of the patient’s fears about experiencing
intense physical sensations. In addition, difficulties with driving and related travel
fears often lead to considerable dependence on loved ones. Work impairment is also
common (Alonso et al., 2004) as the triggers associated with panic become more
ubiquitous. In severe cases of agoraphobia, the person may literally be homebound,
which clearly limits work opportunities. Individuals with panic disorder and/or ago-
raphobia are also at an elevated risk for experiencing a range of other anxiety, mood,
impulse-control, and substance use disorders (Kessler et al., 2006). Additionally,
sleep dysregulation is common and may be tied in part to the frequent occurrence of

-- 5 of 74 --

82 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
nocturnal panic attacks (Craske et al., 2002). Patients who experience nocturnal panic
attacks, which occur when a person wakes from sleep in a state of panic, show simi-
lar panic symptom severity and general impairment to that of panic patients who do
not experience nocturnal panic. However, patients with nocturnal panic attacks tend
to show lower levels of agoraphobic avoidance, possibly because they have more fear-
ful associations with sleep than with external situational factors.
One of the most serious clinical features connected to panic disorder is the
increased risk for suicide attempts (see Schmidt, Woolaway-Bickel, & Bates, 2001). In
an early meta-analysis (Harris & Barraclough, 1997), panic disorder was associated
with a 10-fold increase in suicide risk, relative to expected rates in the population.
Moreover, although there is some support for the “depression mediation hypoth-
esis” (i.e., that panic disorder is indirectly linked to suicide via its relationship with
heightened depression; Schmidt et al., 2001), there is little doubt that clinicians need
to be alert to the increased risk in this population. This is especially true given that
comorbidity is the norm rather than the exception (Kessler et al., 2006). It is possible
that elevated rates of suicide risk among individuals with panic disorder may be tied
to beliefs that anxiety sensations are dangerous, potentially indicating a cognitive
disaster such as going crazy or losing control of one’s mind. Referred to as “anxiety
sensitivity cognitive concerns,” researchers theorize that these beliefs may amplify
the distress brought on by the sensations associated with mental illness, such as dif-
ficulty sleeping or concentrating (Capron, Norr, Macatee, & Schmidt, 2013). In turn,
after the “amplified” distress reaches a potently high level, suicidal ideation and
attempts may occur.
Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder is characterized by marked and persistent fear of social inter-
actions or performance situations in which scrutiny by others is possible (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). Individuals with social anxiety disorder consistently
experience anxiety when confronted with social and/or performance situations, and
this disproportionate anxiety typically lasts for at least 6 months to qualify for a
diagnosis. Given the common tendency by socially anxious individuals to overes-
timate threat in social situations, individuals suffering from social anxiety disorder
need not recognize that their fears are unreasonable or excessive. Typically, indi-
viduals with social anxiety disorder avoid feared social or performance situations.
Less frequently, social situations are not avoided but are endured with considerable
dread. Significant anticipatory anxiety is also common.
Although early theorists believed that social anxiety is caused by deficits in
social skills (see Trower, Bryant, & Argyle, 1978), empirical findings are inconsistent
regarding the extent to which individuals with social anxiety disorder actually have
social skills deficits (e.g., Stopa & Clark, 1993). What is clear is that compared with
healthy control participants, people with social anxiety disorder are typically more
critical of their social performances, even after accounting for actual differences in
social abilities (e.g., Rapee & Lim, 1992).
Recent research has focused on understanding moderators and mediators link-
ing social anxiety with biased self-evaluations. For instance, there is evidence that
among socially anxious individuals, a tendency to engage in postevent processing

-- 6 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	83
(i.e., to ruminatively dwell on previous social interactions) is associated with more
negative judgments about one’s social performance (Brozovich & Heimberg, 2011).
Other research points to the importance of experiential avoidance (i.e., attempts to
control or avoid one’s internal emotions and thoughts; Kashdan et al., 2014) for under-
standing why social anxiety symptoms may lead to less positive self-evaluations
across time (Sarfan, Cody, & Clerkin, 2019). Moreover, research from Wallace and
Alden (1997) indicates that individuals with social anxiety disorder often believe
that they will be unable to make desired impressions on others, or that they will fail
to live up to others’ expectations. This fear is tied to one of the defining symptoms
at the heart of cognitive models of social anxiety disorder—extreme fears of nega-
tive evaluation (e.g., Clark & Wells, 1995). Interestingly, there is also evidence that
individuals with social anxiety disorder fear positive evaluation (Weeks, Heimberg,
& Rodebaugh, 2008).
Many theorists contend that the distinction between social anxiety disorder and
the more commonly experienced forms of shyness is a matter of degree rather than
kind, with symptoms of social anxiety ranging along a continuum from mild and
transient social unease to shyness to social anxiety disorder (see Heimberg & Becker,
2002). Thus, while social anxiety disorder and shyness have many similarities, symp-
toms of social anxiety disorder are more extreme across a variety of domains, and
the vast majority of people (~88%) who report that they are shy would not meet diag-
nostic criteria for social anxiety disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
The issue of diagnosis becomes further complicated when one considers the
relationship between social anxiety disorder and avoidant personality disorder.
Given the striking similarities and high rates of comorbidity between these two dis-
orders (as they were defined in DSM-IV, which mainly guided this research), some
theorists believe that there is not a “distinct symptomatic delineation” between them
(see Reich, 2001, p. 157), and avoidant personality disorder is sometimes conceptual-
ized as an extreme form of social anxiety disorder. Interestingly, there also does not
appear to be strong evidence for the notion that there are meaningful subtypes of
social anxiety disorder with distinct symptom profiles (for reviews, see Heimberg,
Holt, Schneier, Spitzer, & Liebowitz, 1993; Rapee, 1995).
The subjective anxiety experienced by individuals with social anxiety disorder
is often extremely impairing and distressing, as are the physical sensations typically
tied to social anxiety, such as heart racing, sweating, gastrointestinal discomfort,
blushing, and so forth. Avoidance is also particularly problematic. For instance, a
student who fears appearing inarticulate or stupid may avoid raising a question dur-
ing class; a teenager who fears being rejected may never risk asking someone on a
date; a middle-aged man who fears that others will notice his hands shaking or voice
trembling may avoid giving presentations at work. In some cases, this avoidance
behavior can even lead to employment or financial difficulties (e.g., when individu-
als pass up promotions at work because the new position would involve increased
social interactions). Moreover, experiential avoidance appears to be critically impor-
tant in differentiating between adults with social anxiety disorder and healthy con-
trol participants (Kashdan et al., 2013).
Alcohol problems within the context of social anxiety are also quite high. Epi-
demiological research indicates that social anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder
commonly co-occur (Grant et al., 2004; Schneier et al., 2010), possibly because some

-- 7 of 74 --

84 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
individuals with social anxiety disorder drink to minimize anxiety when interacting
socially. Indeed, there is evidence that coping motives (i.e., drinking to reduce nega-
tive affect) mediate the relationship between social anxiety symptoms and drinking
problems, particularly for emerging adults (Clerkin, Werntz, Magee, Lindgren, &
Teachman, 2014). The presence of social anxiety disorder may also increase the prob-
ability of suicide ideation and attempts (Cougle, Keough, Riccardi, & Sachs-Ericsson,
2009), and individuals with social anxiety disorder have lower well-being ratings
compared to individuals without a mental illness (Wersebe et al., 2018).
Specific Phobia
Specific phobias are defined by disproportionate and persistent fear toward a partic-
ular object or situation that typically lasts at least 6 months to qualify for a diagnosis
(see American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Unlike less intense, subclinical fears,
a specific phobia must almost always evoke an extreme and immediate fear reac-
tion. Furthermore, the phobic target must be avoided or endured with severe distress
and result in some impairment in functioning. Similar to social anxiety disorder,
individuals with a specific phobia need not recognize their fear is unreasonable or
excessive because of the tendency by many phobic individuals to have exaggerated
perceptions of the danger in phobic situations. Note that we focus in this chapter on
panic and phobias among adults, but given the relatively high prevalence of phobias
in children, the interested reader is encouraged to see excellent summaries of fear
and phobias in children and adolescents (e.g., Ollendick, White, & White, 2018).
The overlap in criteria and feared situations for panic disorder, agoraphobia,
social anxiety disorder, and specific phobias can make their differential diagnosis a
challenge. More generally, determining whether a fear target constitutes a specific
phobia or another anxiety problem is sometimes difficult. For example, a fear of dirt
can reflect either obsessive– compulsive disorder for a person with contamination
obsessions or be part of a specific phobia. Similarly, fear of a particular situation
may be tied to a traumatic event in the context of posttraumatic stress disorder or
reflect a more circumscribed specific phobia. Distinguishing among these possibili-
ties involves a functional analysis that includes a careful assessment of the triggers
and feared consequences associated with encountering the feared object or situation.
In theory, a phobia can be directed toward almost any target, and identifying
some of the more esoteric phobias, often by their Greek or Latin names, can be an
entertaining party game (e.g., “apeirophobia,” a fear of infinity). However, in clini-
cal practice, a smaller set of phobias tends to be represented, and these have been
organized into subtypes in recent DSM versions (i.e., animal, natural environment,
blood–injection–injury, situational, and other). Although these types have some heu-
ristic value for research and communication purposes, the utility of using subtype
specifiers as part of the diagnostic label has been questioned (see Antony & Barlow,
2002).
As with panic disorder and the other phobias reviewed in this chapter, spe-
cific phobias are associated with a strong physiological response, characterized by
increased heart rate and skin conductance. In fact, a panic attack is a common reac-
tion for persons with specific phobias upon encountering their feared object/situ-
ation (Antony, 1994). Although increased arousal is common across various types

-- 8 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	85
of specific phobias, blood–injection–injury phobia has a unique, additional compo-
nent to its physiological profile that includes a tendency to faint. Another interesting
characteristic of certain specific phobias, such as spider, snake, and blood–injury–
injection fears, is that patients often feel a strong disgust reaction to their feared
object (see review in Cisler, Olatunji, & Lohr, 2009). One theory (which requires more
empirical validation), known as the “disease avoidance model,” is that disgust serves
an adaptive function, in that it promotes avoidance, which helps to prevent the
transmission of disease (Davey, 1992). Supporting this theory, meta-analytic work
suggests that although disgust proneness is elevated for a range of anxiety disor-
ders, the effect is especially pronounced for individuals whose anxiety symptoms
are linked to contagion fears (Olatunji, Armstrong, & Elwood, 2017). Thus, applying
transdiagnostic frameworks may be helpful to understand conditions under which
disgust proneness leads to one set of symptoms (e.g., spider phobia) versus another
(e.g., health anxiety). For instance, someone with a tendency toward disgust prone-
ness may be more likely to develop spider phobia if their environment emphasizes
concerns tied to small animals and disease. Furthermore, the avoidance of disgust
elicitors to prevent disease may function similarly to the avoidance in panic disorder
of bodily sensations to prevent physical illness; both cases involve an oversensitive
“false alarm” system that exaggerates the presence of danger.
Finally, for individuals with specific phobias, avoidance is problematic because
it can result in limited functioning in social, recreational, and work situations (see
Rowa, McCabe, & Antony, 2006), and persons with blood–injection–injury fears often
do not adhere to recommended medical regimens (Mollema, Snoek, Ader, Heine, &
van der Ploeg, 2001). However, the impairment associated with specific phobias has
more often been described as moderate rather than severe (e.g., Becker et al., 2007),
in part because it is often possible to avoid encountering one’s feared situation/object
effectively because of the circumscribed nature of the fear. For instance, organizing
one’s life to avoid seeing a snake is far easier than trying to avoid all social perfor-
mance situations or triggers of bodily sensations (as might be desired in social anxi-
ety or panic disorder, respectively). Thus, it is not unusual for people to meet all of
the diagnostic criteria for a specific phobia except for the impairment in functioning
requirement (e.g., Romano, Tremblay, Vitaro, Zoccolillo, & Pagani, 2001).
Clinical Implications
The typical symptoms associated with anxiety disorders can be manifested in one
or more responses systems: behavioral, physiological, expressive emotion, and/or
cognitive. We deal with some of the clinical implications associated with each of
these domains, considering the behavioral (e.g., avoidance of therapy), physiological
(e.g., difficulty tolerating physiological reactions), expressive emotion (e.g., dysregu-
lation of multiple emotions), and cognitive (e.g., beliefs about not feeling in control,
selective processing of threatening information) features of anxiety. One consid-
erable challenge in assessing and treating anxiety difficulties is that these differ-
ent response systems are often not closely aligned and may not change in tandem
(see seminal work by Lang, Cuthbert, & Bradley [1998] and recent perspective by
Taschereau-Dumouchel, Kawato, & Lau [2020], a process termed “desynchrony”
or “uncoupling”). Thus, it is important to consider multiple outcome markers to

-- 9 of 74 --

86 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
determine the success of therapy because there is no one true measure of fear or
anxiety. Analogously, evaluating other markers of impairment in functioning, such
as quality of relationships and work life, is critical.
Avoidance of Therapy Itself
Reducing the avoidance of cues associated with panic and phobic targets is typically
a key focus in therapy, but avoidance symptoms also have other important treatment
implications. In particular, individuals who use avoidance as a coping strategy, albeit
a maladaptive one, to reduce their anxiety in the short term also may sometimes
desire to avoid treatment and therapy homework, especially if exposure to fear cues
is involved in therapy. This may be particularly true in a group treatment context, in
which it can be slightly more challenging to permit total flexibility for each individ-
ual to set the pace for their exposures. Thus, building a strong therapeutic alliance
is essential to help patients become willing to face their fears, and enhancing moti-
vation for treatment may be needed to reduce patients’ ambivalence about making
changes in their lives, or even about being in treatment (motivational interviewing
approaches can be very helpful in this regard; see Miller & Rollnick, 2012). This, of
course, would be in conjunction with careful monitoring of patients’ avoidance, as
well as successful exposure practice between sessions.
Physiological Reactions
A salient characteristic of anxiety disorders is the increased activation of the sym-
pathetic nervous system. Thus, in addition to the subjective feeling of anxiety and
the associated behavioral manifestations, there are physiological symptoms such as
rapid breathing, increased heart rate, and sweating. These reactions are involuntary
and contribute to the feeling of not being in control—a point we return to later. At
times, patients are encouraged to tolerate these physiological sensations to learn that
they are not actually dangerous, so that the sensations become less frightening; at
other times, patients may want to reduce the arousal.
As a means of helping patients reduce their physiological reaction, it can be
helpful in some cases to teach them how to use relaxation as a coping skill. This can
be accomplished by various methods, most of which involve learning to differenti-
ate between feelings of tension and relaxation, and to use the tension as a signal for
reducing their arousal. Using external cues to remind patients to apply the relaxation
response can be helpful. Thus, anxious patients can learn to use recurrent situational
cues as reminders to relax, such as putting the key in the ignition of the car or sitting
down in front of one’s computer. Another example is a patient who tended to have
panic attacks at restaurants and was able to use the placement of the napkin on her
lap as a cue to relax. She was successful in reducing the physiological arousal that
was the precursor to panic, and soon she jokingly referred to this as “the magic nap-
kin.” Alternatively, patients may be taught to observe their physiological reactions
without judging them or attempting to change them, a common approach in more
acceptance-based (often called “third wave”) therapies, including mindfulness and
acceptance and commitment therapy (e.g., Eifert & Forsyth, 2005).

-- 10 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	87
Dysregulation of Multiple Emotions
In some respects, the term “anxiety disorders” is somewhat limiting. While it is cer-
tainly true that fear, panic, and anxiety are central emotional states in these disor-
ders, they are not the only forms of affect that become dysregulated or that may
require therapeutic attention. For instance, as noted earlier, patients with certain spe-
cific phobias often feel a strong disgust reaction to their feared object (see Olatunji
& McKay, 2009; Woody & Teachman, 2000). Yet the extent to which it is important
to reduce disgust (as well as fear) in treatment remains an open empirical question.
While there is some evidence that disgust related to spiders is reduced following
successful exposure therapy (e.g., de Jong, Andrea, & Muris, 1997), there is also some
indication that disgust may be slower than fear to decline during exposure (e.g., Ola-
tunji, Forsyth, & Cherian, 2007).
Social anxiety disorder is often characterized by feelings of shame and embar-
rassment, and it is not uncommon for people to feel intense sadness in response to
their anxiety disorder symptoms. Along these lines, it is helpful to consider pos-
sible interactions between different emotional presentations and traditional gender
expectations (e.g., women expressing sadness about their inability to manage their
anxiety, and men expressing anger when they feel threatened), though more research
is needed to determine the empirical support for these possible gender differences in
the treatment context.
Finally, in panic disorder, it is not unusual to see anger as a central aspect of
the presentation (Moscovitch, McCabe, Antony, Rocca, & Swinson, 2008), though the
tie between anger and depression in these cases needs to be considered. In the case
of a panic patient with whom we were unable to simulate panic sensations during
the session by means of hyperventilation, we inadvertently triggered a panic attack
when he discussed his relationship with his brother. After the panic symptoms had
subsided, he reluctantly acknowledged that he was indeed angry at his brother.
However, he was raised with a strict religious background and was told at a young
age that being angry meant “the devil was in him.” Given that he was fearful of feel-
ing or expressing anger, he was first encouraged to acknowledge that he was “frus-
trated” with his brother, after which he agreed that he was “upset.” With further
encouragement, he allowed that perhaps he was “annoyed,” and finally that he was
“angry.” Thus, gradual exposure to his concerns about anger became an integral part
of the treatment of his panic disorder, as did work on increasing his assertiveness
with his brother.
Not Feeling “in Control”
The belief that the world is somehow unpredictable and uncontrollable is central to
many anxiety difficulties (Barlow, 2002). Furthermore, one of the clinical hallmarks
of panic disorder is that the patients feel “out of control” when panic symptoms arise.
In this regard, it is important to frame the therapy intervention as a means by which
patients can learn to manage their anxiety, so that they no longer feel they are at the
mercy of anxiety symptoms and do not find them as threatening. Along these lines,
in treatment, we aim to reduce the unhelpful belief that the patient is totally “out

-- 11 of 74 --

88 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
of control” and cannot cope when anxious (e.g., by teaching patients that control is
really on a continuum, despite the popular but misleading terminology of being “in”
vs. “out” of control). At the same time, we normalize the experience of anxiety and
seek to reduce the belief that all anxiety needs to be controlled. Using a coping skills
approach to treatment, it is often helpful to tell patients that our goal is not to elimi-
nate all anxiety symptoms, but to help them learn to manage their anxiety by becom-
ing less frightened of anxiety symptoms and their reaction to these symptoms. By
understanding that they can tolerate some anxiety and still function, patients actu-
ally tend to become less anxious and feel less need to always control their internal
(e.g., anxiety symptoms) and external (e.g., rigid behavior) environments.
Limitations of the DSM
It is also important for clinicians to go beyond global diagnostic categories, such as
“social anxiety disorder,” to adequately assess and treat patients’ presenting prob-
lems. Specific, idiographic targets of intervention need to be identified (e.g., delineat-
ing public speaking concerns or dating fears is more informative than “social anxi-
ety disorder”). Identification of symptoms alone is insufficient, however. A broad
biopsychosocial evaluation and case formulation is critical to learn the patient’s
strengths and weaknesses, and the challenging realities within which some of our
patients live.
While improvements in the DSM have clearly been made since it was first pub-
lished in 1952, it continues to have its shortcomings—particularly for the practicing
clinician. The changes have not only helped to bring the classification system more
closely in line with the disorders’ phenomenology but they also present some chal-
lenges in differential diagnosis. For instance, the fact that panic attacks can occur
across multiple anxiety problems beyond panic disorder can make it difficult to dif-
ferentiate whether panic attacks occur in the context of panic disorder, social anxi-
ety disorder, or specific phobia. Imagine a person who regularly has panic attacks
while driving; it is possible this person has panic disorder because he fears the con-
sequences of the attack (e.g., that he might faint while driving and cause an accident).
Alternatively, it is plausible that this person has a specific driving phobia and has
panic attacks tied to his general fears about driving and having an accident. To dis-
tinguish among these options, it is helpful to assess whether the attacks also occur
in other situations (e.g., when he is not driving), as well as the specific fear triggers
and perceived consequences tied to the attacks. Thought experiments in which a
patient tries to isolate a given symptom can be helpful in this regard. Consider a
woman who has panic attacks when asked to speak in public, and the challenge of
determining whether panic disorder and/or social anxiety disorder diagnoses are
warranted. Asking the patient how extensively she would still fear public speaking
if she could take a magic pill and know that she would not have a panic attack while
giving a speech to her coworkers can be useful to determine whether the fears are
tied to panic attacks per se, or to fears of negative evaluation. Alternatively, asking
how much she would still fear public speaking if there were a risk of having a panic
attack but she could take a magic pill, causing her coworkers to think she did a great
job, can help to rule in or out fears about the consequences of panic. Thus, focus of the
fear is important (fear of fainting, bodily sensations, etc., vs. fear of being ridiculed,

-- 12 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	89
appearing stupid, etc.). Not surprisingly, making these fine distinctions in practice
can be challenging, especially given that it is quite possible for the patient in this
example to have both panic disorder and social anxiety disorder.
Another clinical issue stems from the fact that the social anxiety category is
quite heterogeneous, including anxiety in interpersonal interactions, anxiety in
public speaking situations, fear of using public bathrooms, and anxiety experienced
when signing one’s name in public. Moreover, patients who are socially anxious may
vary in their social skills, such that behavioral skills training may be appropriate for
some but not others (see Rapee & Spence, 2004). Researchers have also found that
many gay men who appear to be “socially anxious” are responding appropriately to
realistic fears of rejection (Pachankis & Goldfried, 2006); hence, their anxiety may not
necessarily be considered unwarranted or maladaptive.
Impairment in Functioning: Love and Work
Given the disruption to relationships caused by avoidance behavior that is character-
istic of panic disorder and phobias, and the consequent dependence on loved ones,
it is not unusual for families to need some help renegotiating their roles when a
patient starts making progress in treatment and is able to function more indepen-
dently. While this is usually an exciting step, it is not always easy for family members
to change long-standing patterns of who are the “strong” or “helper” members of
the household. Thus, even with significant progress in achieving anxiety symptom
reduction, it is important to evaluate how these life changes influence other aspects
of a person’s functioning, including possible impairment in interpersonal relation-
ships and work.
We should also emphasize that family members can either assist or interfere
with therapeutic progress. For example, researchers found that spousal assistance in
the treatment of agoraphobia helped to facilitate the reduction of avoidance behavior
(Barlow, O’Brien, & Last, 1984). Serving as a therapeutic aide, the partner of the per-
son with agoraphobia can encourage graduated exposure to feared situations. Some-
times, however, such “assistance” can undercut the therapist’s best efforts. One of
us (M. R. G.) worked with a woman suffering from panic disorder and agoraphobia,
whose husband not only encouraged her to cope with panic by holding her breath
but also discouraged her from traveling! The best efforts of the therapist, unfortu-
nately, were no match for this very dominating husband.
COURSE
The conclusions one draws about the typical course and outcomes for persons with
anxiety disorders depend in large part on one’s focus. Evidence tied to the natu-
ral course of these disorders leads to a pessimistic view about their chronic nature,
whereas evidence that highlights the tremendous strides in treating these disorders
presents a more optimistic picture. At the same time, there is considerable variabil-
ity in outcomes across disorders, even using similar treatment approaches (e.g., as
described later, medication is far more helpful for panic disorder than it is for spe-
cific phobias, whereas exposure-based therapies have impressive outcomes for both

-- 13 of 74 --

90 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
specific phobias and panic disorder, with more moderate success rates for treating
social anxiety disorder).
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
The frequency of panic attacks may wax and wane over time quite dramatically
(e.g., a person may have daily attacks for a couple weeks, then far more irregularly
spaced attacks over a period of months), though these fluctuations do not seem to
occur randomly. The presence of life stressors appears to be a predictor of both the
initial onset of panic and its intensity over time (see Klauke, Deckert, Reif, Pauli,
& Domschke, 2010). Interestingly, stressors that are tied to either interpersonal dif-
ficulties or physical well-being (e.g., scary experiences with drugs) are particularly
potent risk factors.
Although the course of panic disorder and agoraphobia may show considerable
fluctuations over time, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the disorders are
chronic and disabling. For instance, Nay, Brown, and Roberson-Nay (2013) found that
remission rates for panic disorder with and without agoraphobia were 67 and 75%,
respectively, at a 3-year follow-up evaluation, with females at a stronger risk for both
incidence (odds ratio [OR] = 2.31) and relapse (OR = 2.05) in comparison to males.
Unfortunately, even among patients who attain remission, relapse is not unusual
(see Batelaan et al., 2010; Bruce et al., 2005). In a naturalistic 5-year follow-up study
of clinic outpatients with panic disorder, 38% were labeled as being in remission,
44% experienced mild panic symptoms and phobic avoidance, and 19% had relapsed
or were unchanged (Carpiniello et al., 2002). Thus, while many people in this study
showed some improvement, residual symptoms were the norm, and relapse was not
unusual.
Coinciding with this somewhat discouraging data are the impressive data on
treatment outcome, particularly for cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and pharma-
cotherapy. For instance, a meta-analysis for treatment outcomes for panic disorder
(with or without agoraphobia) indicated that CBT combined with pharmacological
treatment, CBT alone, and pharmacological treatment alone all showed clear efficacy
relative to a variety of control conditions (Bandelow, Seidler-Brandler, Becker, Wede-
kind, & Rüther, 2007).
CBT can take many forms but typically includes a combination of psychoedu-
cation, exposure therapy, cognitive restructuring, relaxation or slow deep breath-
ing, and relapse prevention (see the widely used manual by Barlow & Craske, 2006).
Initially, patients are given psychoeducation about the nature of anxiety and panic,
and the “fear-of-fear” cycle (the idea that reacting in catastrophic ways to benign
physical sensations makes those sensations more intense and fuels panic attacks).
Exposures focus on reducing avoidance behaviors in response to both internal and
external panic cues. The exposure assignments typically involve both reentering
feared situations (e.g., crowds), while learning to tolerate the anxiety without trying
to escape or avoid, and interoceptive exposure exercises, in which patients repeat-
edly expose themselves to their feared bodily sensations to learn that they can cope
with these feelings, and that their anxiety lessens as the feared consequences do not
occur. During cognitive restructuring, patients are taught to identify and reevalu-
ate their maladaptive beliefs about the consequences of anxiety and their (in)ability

-- 14 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	91
to tolerate bodily sensations. Also, in some panic treatment protocols, patients are
taught diaphragmatic breathing and/or progressive muscle relaxation as methods of
coping with stress and anxiety.
The typical length of a CBT panic control treatment protocol, as used in random-
ized clinical trials, is 10–15 weekly sessions; however, there is evidence that in some
instances, positive outcomes can be achieved in much shorter time periods (e.g., five
sessions: Otto et al., 2012; two intensive days: Deacon & Abramowitz, 2006). Efficacy
has also been found for the administration of computer-based CBT (Andrews, Cui-
jpers, Craske, McEvoy, & Titov, 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009). Both individual and group
treatments have demonstrated efficacy and are reasonable choices, though outcomes
may be slightly enhanced with individual therapy (see review in Craske & Barlow,
2008). Exposure-based therapy for agoraphobia also appears to work well in a group
format (Marchand, Roberge, Primiano, & Germain, 2009). In addition to the initial
positive outcomes immediately posttreatment (e.g., 65.6% response rate based on the
Panic Disorder Severity Scale among patents completing CBT in Aaronson et al.,
2008), the available data suggest long-lasting benefits following CBT (e.g., based on
1-year follow-up data; see review by Sánchez-Meca, Rosa-Alcázar, Marín-Martínez,
& Gómez-Conesa, 2010), though residual symptoms are certainly not unusual. Fur-
thermore, CBT appears to be a helpful treatment for patients who have not responded
to a prior medication treatment (Rodrigues et al., 2011). For more information on
empirically supported therapies for panic disorder, see the American Psychological
Association Division 12’s website on Research-Supported Psychological Treatments
(www.div12.org/diagnosis/panic-disorder) or the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence’s (NICE) guidelines website (nice.org.uk/guidance/cg113).
There is also good evidence for the efficacy of medication to manage panic
disorder (see summary of pharmacotherapy evidence and guidelines; American
Psychiatric Association, 2009). Four classes of medication have demonstrated effi-
cacy: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and benzodiazepines.
Although they are relatively comparable in their efficacy, their side effect profiles,
risk of dependence, and quality of evidence bases vary considerably. Typically, SSRIs
and SNRIs are recommended as a first-line medication treatment because they do
not lead to the serious cardiovascular and anticholinergic side effects linked with
TCAs, or the high rate of addiction that occurs with benzodiazepines. In fact, there
is considerable evidence for long-term negative outcomes with chronic use of high-
potency benzodiazepines (see Farach et al., 2012). Thus, benzodiazepine use may
be most helpful as part of a short-term addition to one of the other antidepressants
to help control symptoms while the antidepressant has a chance to take effect (Sus-
man & Klee, 2005). Even then, the challenge of tolerating the symptoms that often
accompany the subsequent discontinuation of benzodiazepines needs to be weighed
against the value of the rapid symptom relief they can provide. Fortunately, results
for the many trials with SSRIs and SNRIs indicate that there are effective, less addic-
tive medication options available (e.g., Pollack, Mangano, Entsuah, Tzanis, & Simon
[2007] found a 70% response rate based on the Panic Disorder Severity Scale among
patents completing a venlafaxine ER trial), but discontinuation of these medications
requires considerable care (and tapering is often recommended) to help manage pos-
sible return of symptoms (see American Psychiatric Association, 2009).

-- 15 of 74 --

92 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
More patients receive medication than CBT as a treatment for panic disorder
and agoraphobia, in part because treatment is often sought in primary care settings
(where medication is the norm), and in part because CBT is not yet offered in many
health care settings despite its established efficacy (see Craske & Barlow, 2008). Any
discussion of treatment– outcome for panic disorder and agoraphobia must also con-
sider the typical short- and long-term response of patients receiving a combination
of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy given how frequently this occurs. There
are still open questions about when outcomes may be enhanced by combining or
sequencing medication and CBT. However, it is clear that combining the treatments
is often not necessary and can even be detrimental, despite the seemingly intuitive
appeal of using two efficacious approaches (e.g., there is some evidence that medi-
cation, and its subsequent withdrawal, can interfere with the long-term benefits of
CBT; Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 2000; though see Bandelow et al., 2007). The
evidence does not seem to suggest that adding CBT to a medication treatment has
the same negative impact. For example, adding even single components of CBT to the
medication management offered for patients with panic disorder in a primary care
setting led to improved outcomes posttreatment and 1 year later (Craske et al., 2005).
The choice to use CBT, medication, or their combination thus depends on the
patient’s wishes, past treatment history, and so on. However, it is important to high-
light that treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia is one of the field’s success
stories in terms of positive outcomes in mental health care. As described earlier, not
all classes of medications are equal when long-term outcomes are taken into con-
sideration, and caution should be used when combining treatments, as this may
be unnecessary and unhelpful in the long run. At the same time, it is nice to have
multiple efficacious options from which to choose when offering treatment. This
is especially valuable given that not all patients respond to their first treatment, so
sequencing treatments for people who do not respond to an initial CBT or medica-
tion trial may be a useful way to think about enhancing outcomes with multiple
treatment modalities rather than simply combining treatments right away. The issue
of using single or combined treatments is also important from a cost-cutting per-
spective given the tremendous financial burden posed by care for anxiety disorders
(e.g., Baxter, Vos, Scott, Ferrari, & Whiteford, 2014). Notably, there is some indication
that CBT may be more cost-effective than medication, based on total disability costs,
work days missed, health care use, and so on (Heuzenroeder et al., 2004).
While CBT and medication approaches are the primary evidence-based options
for treating panic disorder and agoraphobia, there is also some evidence that panic-
focused, psychodynamic, twice-weekly, 12-week psychotherapy may also be help-
ful for treating panic disorder (Beutel et al., 2013; Milrod et al., 2016), though CBT
remains a more consistently effective treatment (e.g., Chambless et al., 2017). The
psychodynamic panic treatment focuses on confronting the emotional significance
attached to panic symptoms, based on the idea that patients are avoidant in part
because of difficulty separating from central attachment figures. Also significant
is that this intervention explores the role that anger plays in panic attacks, a critical
issue, as we noted earlier. It is important to gather further evidence about the efficacy
of this approach and its active components. Finally, it is notable that this therapy is
still panic-focused and time-limited, and should not be confused with more general
supportive psychotherapies that have not been found to be as efficacious as standard
panic treatments (Sánchez-Meca et al., 2010).

-- 16 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	93
Therefore, there is both good news and bad news when one examines the course
and treatment– outcome for panic disorder and agoraphobia. Studies of the longitu-
dinal course and relatively high relapse rates over time point to the need to develop
better long-term management strategies for the disorders, while the impressive CBT
and medication efficacy data suggest high treatment response rates. In reconcil-
ing these different pictures, a number of factors need to be considered. First, out-
comes vary for persons with substantial comorbidity relative to those with relatively
“cleaner” presentations of panic disorder. For instance, co-occurring depression is
associated with a worse course of illness (e.g., Bruce et al., 2005; Nay et al., 2013), and
there is mixed evidence regarding the impact of co-occurring personality disorders
(Ansell et al., 2011; Ozkan & Altindag, 2005). Second, many people are simply not
receiving treatment, or they are receiving substandard care, which may help explain
the discrepant results for the negative, naturalistic course relative to the more posi-
tive outcomes for the CBT and medication trials. Finally, panic disorder is under-
treated in both primary care (Stein et al., 2011) and mental health care settings (Bruce
et al., 2003), with few people receiving CBT or evidence-based medication types and
doses (see Wolitzky-Taylor, Zimmerman, Arch, Guzman, & Lagomasino, 2015). Thus,
while panic disorder and agoraphobia can be treated quite effectively, the field has a
long way to go to make this ideal a reality.
Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder tends to be a fairly chronic disorder with relatively low rates
of recovery and high rates of recurrence when left untreated. Estimates for the natu-
ralistic course of social anxiety disorder vary widely depending on methodological
differences across studies. For instance, retrospective cross-sectional studies indi-
cate that social anxiety disorder persists anywhere between 19 and 30 years in com-
munity samples (Kessler, Stein, & Berglund, 1998), with naturalistic recovery rates
ranging from 20 to 40% (e.g., see Ruscio et al., 2008). In a prospective study, Bruce
and colleagues (2005) found that individuals with social anxiety disorder had only
a 37% chance of achieving “recovery” over the course of 12 years (defined as being
virtually asymptomatic for at least 2 months). Of those patients with social anxiety
disorder who did recover, there was a 39% chance of a recurrence. Taken together,
research suggests that social anxiety disorder is an insidious, often unremitting dis-
order when untreated.
Fortunately, there are a variety of successful psychological interventions avail-
able for treating social anxiety disorder, including individual and group CBT.
Research generally suggests that combining both cognitive and exposure techniques
is recommended (Hofmann & Otto, 2017). Indeed, treatment typically consists of
both cognitive restructuring to evaluate beliefs that fuel social anxiety concerns,
such as fears of negative evaluation, and exposure exercises to help patients learn to
tolerate anxiety and feel more comfortable interacting socially. For instance, cogni-
tive restructuring may target the belief that one will be humiliated by performing
“inadequately.” Meanwhile, exposures generally focus on encouraging patients to
gradually confront and remain in socially threatening situations. This is achieved
through the creation of individually tailored fear hierarchies that begin with mildly
anxiety-provoking situations and end with the situations that are most feared. When
developing hierarchies, it is important to remember that avoidance associated with

-- 17 of 74 --

94 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
social anxiety disorder can take many forms, including not fully engaging with a
given situation (e.g., through excessive use of alcohol) or refusing to enter a situation
in the first place.
CBTs for social anxiety disorder are demonstrably effective; however, estimates
vary considerably in terms of how effective. In a review of five meta-analyses evaluat-
ing CBT techniques (exposure only; cognitive restructuring only; cognitive restruc-
turing and exposure; social skills training; applied relaxation), Rodebaugh, Holaway,
and Heimberg (2004) concluded that each of the CBT interventions revealed moder-
ate to large effect sizes. For more information on empirically supported treatments
for social anxiety disorder, see Division 12’s website on Research-Supported Psycho-
logical Treatments (www.div12.org/diagnosis/social-anxiety-disorder-and-public-speaking-
anxiety), the NICE guidelines website (nice.org.uk/guidance/cg159), or one of the many
meta-analyses (e.g., Acarturk, Cuijpers, van Straten, & de Graaf, 2009).
A variety of pharmacological agents have also been used to treat social anxiety
disorder. For instance, Mayo-Wilson and colleagues (2014) conducted a meta-analysis
to evaluate both psychological and pharmacological treatments for social anxiety
disorder. Results indicated that standardized mean differences (SMDs) across CBT
interventions (SMD = –1.19) and pharmacological treatments (SMDs ranging from
–0.80 to –1.01) were significantly different from the reference comparison, although
they did not differ from one another. Of the pharmacological treatments, phenelzine
(a monoamine oxidase inhibitor [MAOI]) led to the largest symptom improvements
in social anxiety symptoms, but it did not produce significantly better outcomes
than other medications included in the investigation (e.g., benzodiazepines, SSRIs,
and SNRIs). Given the problematic side effects tied to MAOIs (e.g., risk of hyperten-
sion) and benzodiazepines (e.g., physical dependence), medications such as the SSRIs
may provide a better first-line pharmacological treatment option for social anxiety
disorder (Rodebaugh et al., 2004). (For a more complete list of U.S. Food and Drug
Administration [FDA]–approved medications used to treat social anxiety disorder,
see www.drugs.com/condition/social-anxiety-disorder.html.)
To date, it is not clear whether pharmacological or psychotherapeutic interven-
tions are preferable for treating social anxiety disorder. Some studies have demon-
strated that pharmacotherapies may be more effective than CBT in the short term
(Blanco et al., 2011), and that the effects of medication on social anxiety may occur
more rapidly (Praško et al., 2006). In contrast, there is also evidence that the coping
skills learned during CBT may help patients better maintain their treatment gains in
the long term (Hollon, Stewart, & Strunk, 2006). Finally, some research indicates no
clear differences in the effectiveness of medication and CBT techniques (Roshanaei-
Moghaddam et al., 2011). There are also inconsistent findings regarding whether
combined psychological and pharmacological treatments for social anxiety disorder
are more (or less) effective than either treatment in isolation (see Canton, Scott, &
Glue, 2012), leading Turk, Heimberg, and Hope (2001) to recommend that patients
with social anxiety disorder stabilize their medication regimens prior to starting
therapy and refrain from adjusting or changing their medications during treatment.
Treatment decisions likely need to be made on a case-by-case basis, ideally in consul-
tation with both a psychiatrist and a psychologist.
Finally, there is some promising evidence for experimental anxiety reduction
interventions (termed “cognitive bias modification”) designed to train cognitive

-- 18 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	95
processing biases away from threatening cues, though the ultimate clinical utility of
this work remains unknown. For example, Amir, Weber, Beard, Bomyea, and Taylor
(2008) found that socially anxious participants trained to attend away from threat-
relevant social information experienced decreased social anxiety as assessed by an
independent rater. Similarly, Murphy, Hirsch, Mathews, Smith, and Clark (2007)
demonstrated that it is possible to experimentally manipulate catastrophic misin-
terpretations and reduce social anxiety symptoms, even with one brief session of
training.
Although meta-analyses make clear the need for strengthening the reliability
and effectiveness of cognitive bias modification effects in reducing symptoms (see
Cristea, Kok, & Cuijpers, 2015; Hallion & Ruscio, 2011), these experimental interven-
tions raise a number of intriguing theoretical and clinical implications. For instance,
in line with cognitive models, this research suggests that not only are cognitive
processing biases significantly correlated with symptoms of social anxiety but they
are also causally related. Additionally, because state anxiety is typically not directly
influenced by the training procedures, these studies challenge prior beliefs that it is
necessary to activate subjective fear or anxiety directly in order to change elements
of the fear network (see Foa & Kozak, 1986) or that verbal mediation is essential to
influence cognition and behavior (see Beck & Clark, 1997).
Specific Phobia
Data that address the naturalistic course of specific phobias are relatively sparse,
but the general impression is that the disorder in adults tends to be quite stable and
enduring without treatment (Becker et al., 2007), although there is variability across
phobia subtypes (Depla, ten Have, van Balkom, & de Graaf, 2008). Children with
specific phobias, on the other hand, often grow out of their fears (see Kim et al.,
2010). For instance, Agras, Chapin, and Oliveau (1972) found that the vast majority of
patients under age 20 with specific phobias reported improvement in their fear at a
5-year follow-up assessment. In contrast, fewer than half of adult patients reported
improvement.
The picture is quite different when one examines treatment outcome. While
individuals with specific phobias rarely present for treatment (McCabe, Ashbaugh,
& Antony, 2010), the success rate for exposure-based treatments is very high (e.g., a
meta-analysis indicated that the average person receiving treatment was better off
than approximately 85% of nontreated persons; Wolitzky-Taylor, Horowitz, Powers,
& Telch, 2008).
It is unfortunate that more people do not seek treatment given that improvement
can occur rapidly. In fact, there is evidence that a single session of exposure therapy is
effective to treat some specific phobias (see Zlomke & Davis, 2008). For specific pho-
bias in general, multi-session (vs. single-session) treatments tend to achieve slightly
more favorable results (see Wolitzky-Taylor, Horowitz, Powers, & Telch, 2008), but
even these treatments are often brief (e.g., three to eight sessions). Furthermore, the
gains made in treatment tend to be maintained for at least 1 year, though more stud-
ies with longer follow-up periods are necessary (Choy, Fyer, & Lipsitz, 2007).
The term “exposure therapies” refers to a class of behavioral approaches that are
all based on exposing phobic persons to the stimuli that frighten them. The goal is

-- 19 of 74 --

96 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
to provide usually avoidant persons an opportunity to learn that they can tolerate or
cope with the fear, which will come down on its own without avoiding or escaping
it, and that feared outcomes (e.g., that a snake will lunge, lightning will strike) often
do not come true or are not as awful as imagined. The choice of situations to encoun-
ter usually follows an individually tailored fear hierarchy that starts with mildly
anxiety-provoking situations and builds up to extremely feared situations (though in
“flooding” therapy, exposure starts with a very anxiety-provoking stimulus).
Numerous variants of exposure therapy have also been examined, and while
many have been found to work effectively, research suggests more favorable out-
comes for in vivo exposure (which involves actually confronting the feared stimuli)
than for other approaches (e.g., systematic desensitization, in which fear-evoking
images and thoughts or actual phobic stimuli are paired with relaxation or another
response that is incompatible with fear; Choy et al., 2007). Actual contact with feared
stimuli also seems to outperform other modes of exposure, such as imaginal or vir-
tual reality exposure (which uses an immersive computer program to generate a
phobic situation, e.g., a plane experiencing turbulence). Interestingly, this difference
is evident at posttreatment, but in vivo exposure’s advantage disappears at follow-
up, seemingly because those receiving the less direct exposure therapies continue to
improve after treatment ends (Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008). Another interesting (and
effective) variant on standard exposure therapy involves adding applied muscle ten-
sion to in vivo exposure for the treatment of blood–injection–injury phobia (Ayala,
Meuret, & Ritz, 2009). By adding exercises to manipulate muscle tension, patients
are able to address the decreases in blood pressure that can lead to fainting with this
phobia.
A significant challenge with exposure therapies, especially in vivo exposure, con-
cerns fairly high dropout rates and discomfort with the treatment because of the fear
associated with trying exposures (Choy et al., 2007). Thus, other treatment options
have also been examined, though far less extensively than exposure therapies, and
there are some open questions about whether benefits from these treatments that do
not include exposure reflect nonspecific treatment effects (due to attention, general
support, etc.; see Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008). Notwithstanding, cognitive therapies
presented either alone or as an augmentation to exposure therapies have received
some support, though there is considerable heterogeneity in findings across studies
and phobias types (Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008).
Finally, the evidence for medication treatment of specific phobias (e.g., use of
benzodiazepines or beta-blockers, used either alone or in combination with expo-
sure interventions) has not suggested that anti-anxiety medications consistently
add much to treatment outcomes (beyond temporarily making a particular anxiety-
provoking encounter, such as a plane flight, easier to endure; see Choy et al., 2007).
It should be noted, however, that pharmacological treatments have not been as
widely investigated for specific phobias as they have been for other anxiety disor-
ders (Kimmel, Roy-Byrne, & Cowley, 2015). One interesting possible exception to this
conclusion about medications concerns D-cycloserine, which is a partial agonist at
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor site. This medication is not designed to
reduce fear or the phobia directly; instead, it appears to enhance the pace of exposure
therapy by stimulating the amygdala and influencing how readily fear responses
are unlearned. While it is too early to determine the ultimate potential for this

-- 20 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	97
medication to enhance treatment of specific phobias, initial evidence (e.g., examin-
ing D-cycloserine-enhanced virtual reality exposure for fear of heights; Ressler et al.,
2004) has been promising (see Tart et al., 2013).
Clinical Implications
As reviewed earlier, a large and helpful literature evaluates the efficacy of various
treatments for panic and phobias. At the same time, this literature leaves open many
questions about how to best implement these interventions and what to do when
the first-line recommended treatment does not achieve maximal results. Among the
clinical implications that follow from this research review are the importance of the
therapeutic alliance and clinician’s experience, the need to make exposure therapy
more appealing to the patient, and the use of general principles of change associated
with the treatment of anxiety disorders.
Importance of the Therapeutic Alliance and Experience
We can legitimately give patients good reasons to be hopeful about exposure ther-
apy; the challenge is to get them to try it in the first place and to recognize that toler-
ating anxiety and exposing themselves to the feared situation, object, or event do not
impose any realistic danger. It is here that the therapeutic alliance is most important,
in that there needs to be a strong bond between therapist and patient, and both need
to be in agreement on the goals and methods of change (Norcross & Lambert, 2019;
Norcross & Wampold, 2019). There is no doubt that exposure can effectively reduce
avoidance and anxiety—provided that the patient remains in treatment and agrees
to engage in the therapeutic procedures. The therapy relationship can increase the
likelihood that this will happen.
As we indicated earlier, framing the therapy as a means of teaching coping
skills—where patients learn to manage and tolerate their anxiety—is particularly
important. There is also some evidence that the experience level of the therapist
can play an important role (though this has not been a consistent finding). Mason,
Grey, and Veale (2016) found that in providing CBT to individuals with panic disor-
der and social anxiety disorder, severely anxious clients achieved greater symptom
reductions with qualified therapists compared to trainee therapists, though therapist
adherence and competence were not measured (see also Huppert et al., 2001). It is not
clear whether the difference was a function of the alliance, or the use of more gen-
eral clinical skills in dealing with issues during the course of treatment, or whether
therapist adherence and competence explain these differences.
Making Exposure Therapy More Appealing
In addition to using the therapeutic relationship and gradual exposure (vs. flooding)
to make starting the exposure process easier for some patients, the use of relaxation
as a coping skill may also help patients to reduce their anxiety and obtain a sense of
control. In this regard, however, it is important to note that the literature indicates
that some patients (e.g., with panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder) experi-
ence a paradoxical increase in anxiety as a consequence of relaxation. Lilienfeld (2007)

-- 21 of 74 --

98 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
has even questioned whether relaxation training is potentially harmful in treating
some patients with panic disorder. The phenomenon of relaxation-provoked anxiety
in some patients has long been noted in the practice of behavior therapy (e.g., Gold-
fried & Davison, 1976), and there are indeed ways the skilled clinician can deal with
it. Patients who are likely to fear losing control should be forewarned that the sensa-
tions they may experience are not signs that they are losing control, but that they are
in fact learning to manage their sensations of anxiety (see Goldfried & Davison, 1994).
When utilizing relaxation techniques, it is also important to stress that the use of
relaxation should not be confused with the inability to tolerate anxiety—an idea that
clearly runs counter to the goals of exposure. Accordingly, one of the ways we intro-
duce relaxation exercises in treatment for panic disorder is by noting that relaxation
can help to reduce one’s resting level of anxiety, making panic and intense anxiety
reactions less likely in the first place.
Being Familiar with Principles of Change
In addition to ensuring that clinical interventions are informed by the findings of
basic research on anxiety and randomized clinical trials, therapists can enhance
their clinical effectiveness by being familiar with general therapeutic principles of
change (Eubanks & Goldfried, 2019; Hayes & Hofmann, 2018; Norcross & Goldfried,
2019). Woody and Ollendick (2006) have extrapolated from the research literature
a number of principles that can guide practicing therapists in implementing tech-
niques for the treatment of anxiety disorders. Although space limitations prevent
us from enumerating all of them, they include general guidelines such as fostering
cognitive change, increasing behavioral skills for coping with anxiety and reducing
avoidance, and repeatedly using emotionally evocative procedures.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Examining the prevalence rates for panic disorder and phobias highlights not only
how common these problems are but also the fascinating differences in prevalence
when comparing rates as a function of gender, age, race, ethnicity and nationality.
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Lifetime prevalence estimates for panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia,
range from 3.8 to 4.7%, with 1-year prevalence rate estimates between 1.8 and 2.4%
in Western societies (Goodwin et al., 2005, Kessler, Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky,
& Wittchen, 2012). The presence of agoraphobia without panic is less common, with
an approximately 2.5% lifetime prevalence, and a 1.7% 1-year prevalence (Kessler et
al., 2012).
The panic disorder median age of onset is 24 years of age (Kessler et al., 2005),
and the onset of panic disorder and agoraphobia appears to be less common in pre-
pubescent children (Kessler et al., 2007), with estimates of less than 0.4% in general
pediatric populations (Merikangas et al., 2010). Puberty seems to be an important
predictor of panic attacks (even beyond age), and many adolescents do experience
panic attacks (Craske et al., 2010).

-- 22 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	99
In general, panic disorder and agoraphobia appear to be less pervasive in elderly
populations (Wolitzky-Taylor, Castriotta, Lenze, Stanley, & Craske, 2010). Also, there
is some debate about the validity of using DSM criteria with older adults that have
been validated primarily in younger adult populations, especially given concerns
about high rates of medical comorbidity in older populations in which the symptoms
of medical problems may mimic anxiety symptoms (see Mohlman et al., 2012). While
panic disorder in older adults typically reflects a preexisting condition (Flint, 1994), a
later age of onset certainly does occur. New onset in older adulthood may be related
to stressful life events, such as illness or injury, other medical or psychiatric disor-
ders, or emerging dementia (see Bryant, Jackson, & Ames, 2008).
Large gender differences in panic disorder and agoraphobia have been consis-
tently reported (approximately 2:1 more women than men: see Kessler et al., 2006),
even cross-culturally (de Jonge et al., 2016). The source of the gender differences is not
entirely clear, though some have proposed that sex-based biological differences play
a role (see Craske, 2003). Gender roles that indicate it is more acceptable for women
to avoid (and for men to turn to substance abuse to self-medicate when they are emo-
tionally dysregulated) may also be contributing factors (see Robinson, Sareen, Cox,
& Bolton, 2009). Notwithstanding the gender gap in prevalence, the general course,
phenomenology, and treatment response do not vary strongly for men and women,
except that women are more likely to have severe agoraphobia (e.g., Bekker & van
Mens-Verhulst, 2007).
The data are somewhat mixed with respect to prevalence differences based on
ethnic or racial subgroups. A cross-ethnic comparison of lifetime prevalence rates
conducted by Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology Studies revealed that non-
Latinx White Americans consistently endorsed symptoms of panic disorder more
than did African Americans, Latinx Americans, and Asian Americans (5.1, 3.8, 4.1,
and 2.1%, respectively; Asnaani, Richey, Dimaite, Hinton, & Hofmann, 2010), and that
non-Latinx White Americans endorsed more panic symptoms in general, including
palpitations, in comparison to African American, Hispanic, and Asian individuals
(Asnaani, Gutner, Hinton, & Hofmann, 2009). Other data suggest that Native Ameri-
cans report significantly higher rates of panic disorder compared to White Ameri-
cans (Smith et al., 2006), and that African Americans have higher 1-year prevalence
rates of agoraphobia compared to White Americans even after researchers controlled
for demographic differences (Himle, Baser, Taylor, Campbell, & Jackson, 2009). How-
ever, other population-based studies have not found differences in panic disorder
and agoraphobia prevalence among African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and
European American groups (e.g., Kessler et al., 2006). Notably, there may be some
ethnic group differences in the presentation of panic disorder and agoraphobia. For
instance, in certain cultures, the triggers for panic attacks are specified by cultural
syndromes (e.g., in Latinx groups, shakiness is often considered a disorder of the ner-
vous system and the potential onset of an ataque de nervios; Hinton, Chong, Pollack,
Barlow, & McNally, 2008). African Americans may have a later age of onset (Lewis-
Fernández et al., 2011), and more frequently use coping strategies tied to “counting
one’s blessings” or religiosity than do European Americans (Friedman & Paradis,
2002). African Americans with panic disorder and agoraphobia also show stronger
associations with hypertension (e.g., Friedman & Paradis, 2002) and are more likely
to experience panic-like isolated sleep paralysis than do European Americans or
other groups with panic disorder and agoraphobia (Paradis & Friedman, 2005).

-- 23 of 74 --

100 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Epidemiological data across numerous countries suggest comparable lifetime
prevalence, age of onset, and gender differences for panic disorder (de Jonge et al.,
2016), indicating considerable consistency in the cross-cultural presentation of panic.
At the same time, there are some interesting cross-cultural differences in the experi-
ence of panic attacks. For instance, in Vietnamese populations, trúng gió attacks are
relatively common, sharing many symptoms of DSM-defined panic attacks, but the
attacks are linked to anticipatory anxiety regarding the pathogenic effect of winds
(see Hinton et al., 2007). Khmer refugees in the United States also experience khyâl
attacks, sometimes called “wind overload,” which include common panic symptoms
and fear of dizziness upon standing (Hinton, Hinton, Pham, Chau, & Tran, 2003).
Social Anxiety Disorder
Approximately 3–13% of individuals in Western societies have social anxiety disor-
der at some point in their lifetime (Bandelow & Michaelis, 2015). For instance, the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication Study of DSM-IV disorders found that
social anxiety disorder has a lifetime prevalence rate of 12.1%, making it one of the
most common disorders (Kessler et al., 2005). The median age of onset is 13 years,
which is consistent with other research indicating that social anxiety disorder typi-
cally develops prior to age 18 (Chavira & Stein, 2005). Along these lines, while social
anxiety disorder remains a common disorder in later life, the incidence appears to
be lower in older than in younger cohorts. For example, research investigating Cana-
dian adults age 55 and over found that the lifetime prevalence rate for social anxiety
disorder in later life was only 4.9% (Cairney et al., 2007).
Similar to many anxiety disorders, in the general population, social anxiety dis-
order appears to be more prevalent in women than in men (Asher & Aderka, 2018).
Interestingly, the sexes are more equally distributed among treatment-seeking popu-
lations (Asher, Asnaani, & Aderka. 2017), leading some researchers to speculate that
having social anxiety disorder as a man may be relatively more difficult in certain
societies (e.g., because of the impairment it can cause in work situations in societ-
ies in which men more often tend to be in leadership positions that require public
speaking; Rapee, 1995). However, women’s pattern of employment and exposure to
leadership roles have significantly changed in recent decades, making it important
to repeat these evaluations before firm conclusions are drawn. At the same time,
research suggests that among individuals with lifetime social anxiety disorder, there
are not meaningful gender differences in overall probability of treatment seeking,
age at first time of treatment seeking, or delay of treatment seeking after initial onset,
but women may be more likely to receive prescriptions for pharmacological treat-
ments (Xu et al., 2012).
When evaluating the epidemiological profile of social anxiety disorder, it is
also critical to incorporate cultural considerations. For instance, prevalence rates
for social anxiety disorder in Southeast Asian countries (Korea and Taiwan) tend to
be much lower than prevalence rates in Western countries (Hofmann, Asnaani, &
Hinton, 2010). One explanation for this discrepancy is that the expression of social
anxiety disorder may differ cross-culturally. For example, taijin kyofusho, a variant of
social anxiety common to Japan, is characterized by the fear of embarrassing or caus-
ing offense to others. Given the continuous nature of social anxiety symptoms, it is
also plausible that the threshold for receiving a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder

-- 24 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	101
differs across cultures, even though symptom profiles are the same (Rapee & Spence,
2004). Finally, it is possible that social interactions may be more “scripted” or regu-
lated in certain cultures, thereby leading to different rates of social anxiety disorder.
Specific Phobia
There is considerable variability in lifetime prevalence rates of specific phobia across
studies, with estimates ranging from 6 to 12% (Kessler, Ruscio, Shear, & Wittchen,
2009). Subclinical fears are also extremely common, with the majority of the popu-
lation reporting a significant fear (Depla et al., 2008). The most frequent phobias in
adult samples focus on animals or heights (e.g., Becker et al., 2007), though, again,
there is inconsistency across studies.
Collapsing across different types of specific phobias (animal, situational, etc.),
the mean age of onset is 8 years old (e.g., Becker et al., 2007), with considerable dif-
ferences observed across phobia subtypes. For instance, while animal and blood–
injection–injury phobias often begin in childhood, situational and height phobias
are more likely to emerge in adolescence or adulthood. There are also interesting age
differences in overall prevalence rates of specific phobias. Prevalence seems to be
highest in childhood and adolescence, peaking at age 21, at which point it follows a
fairly stable pattern across the adult lifespan, then decreases around 56 years of age
(Oosterink, de Jongh, & Hoogstraten, 2009).
As with the other anxiety disorders reviewed in this chapter, specific phobias
are consistently found to be more prevalent among women (e.g., Stinson et al., 2007),
especially for fears of snakes, thunder, darkness, and enclosed spaces (Oosterink et
al., 2009). Gender differences for phobias of heights, dentists, and flying tend to be
lower (see Rowa et al., 2006). There are many possible reasons for the higher pho-
bia prevalence among females, including some intriguing evidence that women are
both biologically and socially motivated to avoid threats more than men (see Craske,
2003). Also, more women are apt to seek treatment for specific phobias, so the gender
gap is especially pronounced in treatment-seeking samples (McLean, Asnaani, Litz,
& Hofmann, 2011).
Research examining variation in the prevalence of specific phobias across
diverse cultural, national, and ethnic groups is lacking, and available studies reach
conflicting conclusions. For instance, the National Comorbidity Survey Replication
found no significant differences in lifetime prevalence of specific phobia across
English-speaking Latinx, African American, and non-Latinx White individuals
(Himle et al., 2009). Another epidemiological study that included Spanish-speaking
Latinx individuals found significantly lower lifetime rates in Asian Americans and
Latinx individuals in comparison to non-Latinx White individuals, who did not dif-
fer from African Americans and Native Americans (Stinson et al., 2007). The content
of phobias also varies by racial/ethnic group, though data are limited. For example,
in one study, African Americans endorsed greater animal fears, whereas non-Latinx
White individuals endorsed greater blood–injection–injury fears (Chapman, Kertz,
Zurlage, & Woodruff-Borden, 2008). Not surprisingly, given variability in cultural
norms, taboos, and so forth, across countries, there is also variability in phobia
prevalence rates. In one striking example concerning a comparison of 22 countries,
phobias were higher in high and higher-middle income countries (8.0–8.1%) than in
low/lower-middle income countries (5.7%), with the highest cross-national lifetime

-- 25 of 74 --

102 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
prevalence for animal fears, and the highest differences seen for fear of flying, which
had prevalence three times higher in high-income than in low- to lower-middle-
income countries (Wardenaar et al., 2017). These data also suggest that individuals
with some college or less education compared to those who completed college, and
individuals with low and low-average income compared to those with high income,
are at higher risk of developing a specific phobia (Wardenaar et al., 2017).
Clinical Implications
Sharing a common diagnostic label is only the starting point in deciding on a treat-
ment plan; cultural and diversity issues need to be carefully considered.
Cultural and Diversity Issues in Assessment and Treatment
In treating any anxiety disorder, it is essential to consider the sociocultural context of
patients, such as their ethnic identity, age, gender expectations/roles, sexual orienta-
tion, gender identity, and acculturation. These factors should be considered through-
out case conceptualization because they will likely play a role in symptom presenta-
tion, assessment, and treatment planning. For example, patients may have specific
cultural beliefs that panic attacks reflect a punishment from God or an angry spirit.
Indeed, there exist some disconcerting examples in which the failure to take into
account the unique experiences and beliefs of certain minority groups has resulted
in diagnostic bias and inappropriate treatment. Paradis, Friedman, Lazar, Grubea,
and Kesselman (1992) found this to be the case in an outpatient clinic for Black
patients with panic disorder who had emigrated from the West Indies. The belief
system of such patients often includes the practice of voodoo, resulting in an atypi-
cal description of symptoms. The authors provide an example of a young woman
from Guyana, who came to the clinic describing the typical symptoms of panic that
followed a breakup with a boyfriend (e.g., rapid heartbeat, dizziness). In addition
to describing the traditional symptoms of panic, she added, “I feel like I’m going to
die. . . . I worry it’s not natural . . . not natural causes, evil like someone put a curse
on me . . . I’m afraid people might look at me and ridicule me because of how I look,
people might talk about me” (p. 63). The evaluating clinician gave her the diagno-
sis “schizophrenia, chronic paranoid type,” with the following justification: “The
patient’s bizarre delusion of an evil spirit inside her body, persecutory delusions of
her boyfriend plotting against her, her paranoid delusions of people thinking she is
ugly and laughing at her all speak for the diagnosis of schizophrenia, although the
onset of delusions at age 33, her normal affect, and the absence of formal thought
disorder are inconsistent with the classical presentation of schizophrenia” (p. 64).
Misdiagnoses of social anxiety among gay men similarly fail to take into account
the cultural and epidemiological context of the individuals. With the continued pres-
ence of verbal and physical harassment of sexual minorities in our society, there are
legitimate reasons that such individuals may be concerned about the opinion and
reaction of others (e.g., Pachankis, Goldfried, & Ramrattan, 2008).
Finally, when treating older adults, age may be an important consideration
throughout case conceptualization. For instance, somatic complaints may mask
anxiety problems among elderly patients with late-onset anxiety. Some older adults

-- 26 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	103
choose to describe their symptoms of anxiety as problems with sleep, for example,
because this may be perceived as a less stigmatizing way of describing their experi-
ences (Mohlman et al., 2012). Older adults may also be particularly reactive to certain
types of anxiety-provoking triggers, such as threats to physical health (Teachman &
Gordon, 2009).
COMORBIDITY
Comorbidity among the anxiety disorders is the norm rather than the exception.
Interestingly, however, the disorders are by no means uniform with respect to the
likelihood or types of co-occurring psychological and medical disorders; thus, we
evaluate each disorder in turn.
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Kessler and colleagues (2006) found that 83% of persons with panic had an additional
psychiatric disorder. As noted, rates of agoraphobia are very high, with approximately
20% of persons diagnosed with panic disorder in community samples also meeting
criteria for agoraphobia, and even higher rates have been observed in clinical settings
(Kessler et al., 2006). Comorbidity with other anxiety disorders is also quite common,
including generalized anxiety disorder, as well as social anxiety and specific phobias
(each occurring in 21–34% of individuals with panic disorder: Kessler et al., 2006).
Mood disorders, both unipolar and bipolar, also frequently co-occur with panic
and agoraphobia (Simon et al., 2004). For instance, among individuals with panic
disorder, with or without agoraphobia, the lifetime prevalence of major depression
is 35–40% (Kessler et al., 2006). Notably, analyses have revealed that panic disorder
not only increases the risk for subsequent depression, but that the treatment of panic
attacks also may reduce the risk of developing major depressive disorder, suggesting
that depression onset may follow the onset of panic disorder (vs. preceding panic;
Bittner et al., 2004). Critically, this additional diagnosis of a mood disorder is associ-
ated with a worse course for panic, with patients being one-half as likely to recover
from panic disorder (Bruce et al., 2005). Although data are limited, there is some
indication that depressive symptoms may improve spontaneously following CBT for
panic (Allen et al., 2010). All of this raises the question of whether it might be profit-
able to think of “comorbidity” as reflecting the functional relations among various
clinical problems.
Substance use also complicates the presentation of panic disorder, with around
20% of patients with panic disorder meeting criteria at some point for alcohol or
other substance abuse (Sansone, Griffith, & Sansone, 2005). In one study, approxi-
mately half of those with comorbid panic and substance use disorders developed
the panic difficulties prior to the onset of substance use, and 23% indicated use of
alcohol or drugs to help reduce anxiety symptoms (Bolton, Cox, Clara, & Sareen,
2006). Dual-diagnosis patients can be especially challenging to treat because of the
numerous ways that substance abuse interferes with treatment participation, and
there are many open questions about whether integrated or sequential treatment is
recommended (see American Psychiatric Association, 2009).

-- 27 of 74 --

104 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Rates for comorbid personality disorders can also be extremely high, with esti-
mates of 40–50% of persons with panic disorder also meeting criteria for at least
one personality disorder; typically, avoidant, obsessive– compulsive, or dependent
personality disorder (Grant et al., 2005). This comorbidity has the potential to inter-
fere with treatment when the clinician must contend with pervasive and entrenched
personality problems. Complications may be particularly likely if personality dif-
ficulties interact with the aims of exposure-based therapy (e.g., building trust and
a strong alliance with the therapist in individuals with borderline personality dis-
order, or encouraging confrontation of fears in persons with avoidant personality
disorder).
In addition to these high rates of comorbid psychiatric disorders, medical comor-
bidity is also a significant issue with panic disorder. Many symptoms of panic attacks
share features with the presentation of other, nonpsychiatric medical illnesses, such
as myocardial infarction, diabetes, arrhythmia, mitral valve prolapse, hypoglycemia,
irritable bowel syndrome, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This
apparent overlap likely contributes to the tendency of people with panic disorder to
believe they are experiencing a serious medical illness (Ratcliffe, MacLeod, & Sen-
sky, 2006) and their consequent frequent trips to the emergency room during panic
attacks (see Deacon, Lickel, & Abramowitz, 2008). Although panic attacks themselves
are not a sign of a serious medical illness, individuals with panic disorder, compared
to the general population, do have higher reported prevalence of hypertension,
angina, and other cardiac problems; ulcer disease; and thyroid disease, among other
illnesses (Meuret, Kroll, & Ritz, 2017).
Social Anxiety Disorder
There are high rates of comorbidity between social anxiety disorder and avoidant
personality disorder, with the frequency of avoidant personality disorder among
patients with social anxiety disorder ranging from 25 to 100% across a series of stud-
ies (see Hummelen, Willberg, Pedersen, & Karterud, 2007). There is also a high rate
of comorbidity between social anxiety disorder and both depression and alcohol use
disorders. In fact, according to the National Comorbidity Survey Replication, 62.9%
of individuals who met criteria for lifetime social anxiety disorder with one to four
fears had a coexisting disorder, with percentages even higher for social anxiety dis-
order with five to seven fears (75.2%), and eight to 10 fears (81.5%). Lifetime social
anxiety disorder had a significantly elevated OR for all DSM-IV disorders assessed,
including depression (OR = 4.6) and anxiety disorders (OR = 4.9; Ruscio et al., 2008).
Meanwhile, 7.2% of individuals with social anxiety disorder met criteria for alcohol
abuse, and 9.3% met criteria for alcohol dependence (Chartier, Walker, & Stein, 2003;
note that DSM-5 does not delineate between substance abuse and dependence). It is
also notable that when social anxiety disorder is comorbid with another psychologi-
cal disorder, age of onset of social fears has been found to precede age of onset of
comorbid disorders in 32% of cases with comorbid anxiety disorders, 71% of cases
with comorbid affective disorders, and 80% of cases with comorbid substance depen-
dence/abuse disorder (Chartier et al., 2003). However, this may be an artifact of the
early age of onset for social anxiety disorder, as opposed to indicating a causal rela-
tionship.

-- 28 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	105
Specific Phobia
Data from the past twenty years suggest that specific phobias often co-occur with
other specific phobias; in fact, 75.8% of individuals diagnosed with specific phobia
were found to have multiple phobias (Wittchen, Lecrubier, Beesdo, & Nocon, 2003),
and many individuals had more than three phobias. In contrast, earlier studies found
multiple specific phobias to be relatively rare (e.g., in a Swedish sample, only 18.1% of
patients with specific phobias had multiple phobias; Fredrikson, Annas, Fischer, &
Wik, 1996), leaving open questions about how measurement issues and cohort effects
may be influencing results.
Clinical Implications
Responding to Co-Occurring Symptoms of Physical Illness
It is common for patients with panic disorder to label their physical symptoms as a
heart attack. Although this is usually a mislabeling, there nonetheless exists a some-
what higher prevalence of cardiac problems in patients with panic disorder than in
the general population. It is therefore important to help patients distinguish between
signs of a heart attack and those of a panic attack, and, when relevant, to encourage
them to get a full medical examination to determine the presence of a complicating
medical condition. When co-occurring medical illnesses are present in the context of
CBT for panic, some creativity is often required to adjust exposure exercises so that
patients can still meet the goal of eliciting fear and panic sensations while being care-
ful of medically relevant limitations (e.g., hyperventilation exercises can be modified
for patients with asthma, so they still get the feeling of shortness of breath).
Alternative Ways to View Comorbidity
As our conceptualization of psychological problems has been shaped over the years
by the ascendancy of the DSM, our thinking has changed, so that we understand
clinical problems in terms of their diagnostic category. No longer “problems in liv-
ing,” what we see clinically are “disorders.” Along with this shift, our understanding
of multiple problems is viewed in terms of “comorbidity” rather than the potential
functional relationship between problematic emotions, behaviors, and cognitions.
The labeling of comorbidity of anxiety and depression in many individuals is quite
typical, but unfortunately it does not provide the practicing therapist with guide-
lines for how to proceed. On the other hand, if one thinks in terms of the functional
relationship between anxiety and depression, it is not at all unusual to see function-
ing impaired because of anxiety and behavioral avoidance, resulting in patients feel-
ing helpless and hopeless about being able to cope with the demands of their lives.
For example, patients might receive a diagnosis of both social anxiety disorder and
depression due to the fact that they are impaired in both their social and occupa-
tional lives by behavioral avoidance, and this failure to function competently leads
to depression. Practicing therapists know this to be the case, and it is important for
research to focus more on this important clinical issue.
Notably, by focusing on principles of change (e.g., reducing avoidance of distress-
ing situations), rather than diagnoses, it becomes easier to tackle multiple problem

-- 29 of 74 --

106 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
areas simultaneously. Analogously, considering common vulnerability factors that
can account for multiple problem manifestations can be helpful in this situation. Not-
withstanding, it is often necessary to prioritize targets of therapy because not every
problem can be addressed at once. When comorbidity occurs, we generally think
about prioritizing or ordering the foci of treatment based on multiple considerations.
For instance, is improvement in one domain likely to generalize to other areas of
functioning (e.g., will reduced fears of flying likely alleviate depressive symptoms)?
What domain does the patient feel is most important to target first? Is one domain
versus another (e.g., fear of future panic vs. anhedonia in depression) more clearly
impairing functioning? Where are we most likely to effect positive change? Answer-
ing these questions is often challenging and may involve some trial and error.
ETIOLOGY
As with most (if not all) psychological disorders, a multitude of factors contributes to
the onset of panic disorder and phobias. Thus, isolating the “cause” of a disorder is
rarely a realistic goal. Instead, we can talk to patients about the levels of vulnerability
and causal factors that may interact to lead to the expression of a specific problem.
Barlow (2002) outlines a model of triple vulnerabilities. The first, a general biologi-
cal vulnerability, makes an individual more susceptible to becoming anxious. This
first level interacts with a second, general psychological vulnerability, which focuses
on a sense that the environment is uncontrollable and unpredictable. The combina-
tion of these two broad vulnerabilities can lead an individual to become extremely
fearful in situations that are not objectively dangerous (termed “false alarms”). The
third level constitutes specific psychological vulnerabilities that lead to the expression of
an identifiable anxiety disorder as a function of an individual’s particular learning
experiences about what aspects of the environment are threatening. For instance,
learning that evaluation by others can be dangerous may lead to social anxiety disor-
der, and learning that heights are hazardous may result in a specific phobia, whereas
learning to fear changes in bodily sensations may manifest as panic disorder. Given
the considerable overlap in etiological models, we highlight the common vulner-
abilities for panic disorder and phobias in this section. However, we also provide
examples of the unique ways in which these vulnerability factors manifest across
the specific disorders.
General Biological Vulnerabilities
At the biological level, family and genetic studies point to the conclusion that there
is a broad genetic basis to anxiety and related areas of emotion dysregulation (e.g.,
depression). For example, first-degree relatives of samples with anxiety disorders
have higher rates of anxiety difficulties than the relatives of nonanxious control
samples (e.g., Weissman, 1993). Similarly, the children of parents with anxiety dis-
orders have been observed to have more than nine times greater risk of having a
psychiatric disorder than the children of nonanxious control parents (see Beidel &
Turner, 1997). More specifically, the children of parents with panic disorder tend
to be more anxious than the children of nonanxious control parents (e.g., Sylvester,

-- 30 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	107
Hyde, & Reichler, 1988). These children also tend to be more depressed, pointing to
the general nature of the vulnerability (though some anxiety disorders may have a
more disorder-specific transmission, such as specific phobias; Page & Martin, 1998).
Along these lines, genetic factors appear to play a moderate but meaningful role in
the development of social anxiety disorder, explaining approximately 30–50% of the
variance in the disorder (Kendler, Karkowski, & Prescott, 1999). However, it is less
clear whether these genetic factors are specific to the development of social anxiety
disorder, as opposed to the development of mental health problems more broadly
(Kimbrel, 2008). Finally, twin studies, which help to minimize potential confounds
between genetic and nongenetic influences, also support the heritability of a gen-
eral anxiety proneness. For instance, there are higher concordance rates of anxiety
disorders in monozygotic (12–26%) than in dizygotic (4–15%) twins (Hettema, Neale,
& Kendler, 2001). Critically, the evidence to date does not point to a specific anxi-
ety gene; instead, there appear to be relatively weak contributions from an array of
genes (Smoller, Block, & Young, 2009). It is also important to highlight that many of
the studies on biological vulnerabilities do not guarantee that the finding of higher
rates of anxiety disorders among family members is due purely to genetic factors, as
opposed to other influences, such as social learning experiences.
Temperamental vulnerabilities tied to anxiety (Kampman, Viikki, & Leinonen,
2017) also seem to play a role in setting the stage for later expression of an anxi-
ety problem. For example, behavioral inhibition, “a temperamental trait observed
in infants and young children characterized by behavioral withdrawal, decreased
approach behavior, increased vigilance, and increased arousal in response to novel
and unfamiliar situations” (Kimbrel, 2008, p. 594), has been found to predict later
anxiety disorders. Persons with a stable pattern of high behavioral inhibition were
more likely to develop an anxiety disorder, especially social anxiety disorder (Fox,
Henderson, Marshall, Nichols, & Ghera, 2005), and behavioral inhibition at age 8 was
linked to increased risk for anxiety and depressive disorders at ages 16–21 (Goodwin,
Fergusson, & Horwood, 2004). Behavioral inhibition has received considerable atten-
tion as an early risk factor within the context of social anxiety disorder. For example,
Clauss and Blackford (2012) found that 43% of behaviorally inhibited children met
criteria for social anxiety disorder as compared to 12% of noninhibited children.
Numerous other biomarkers have also been linked to heightened risk for anxi-
ety disorders, though the strength of the evidence varies considerably across mark-
ers. For instance, an imbalance of the neurotransmitter serotonin has often been pro-
posed as a factor in the etiology of anxiety pathology (e.g., in panic disorder; Stein
& Hugo, 2002), but this proposal is based mostly on the effective treatment response
of anxiety to SSRIs rather than on prospective evidence. Other proposed neuropsy-
chiatric contributions, derived in part from animal models, include differences in
the anatomy of the amygdala and hippocampus, and altered stress responses with
respect to cortisol levels and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (see review by
Uhde & Singareddy, 2002).
There is also considerable evidence that certain biological triggers make panic
attacks more likely, and there is a rich tradition of eliciting panic attacks in the
laboratory by altering respiration in vulnerable individuals (e.g., through induc-
ing hyperventilation or inhaling CO2; see Barlow, 2002, Chapter 5). This has led to
the suggestion that individuals who are particularly sensitive to increased levels of

-- 31 of 74 --

108 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
CO2 may be at greater risk of developing panic attacks, an idea known as the “false-
suffocation alarm theory” (Klein, 1993), though this hypothesis has received only
mixed empirical support (see Barlow, 2002). Notably, the likelihood of cueing a panic
attack through a biochemical or respiration challenge depends in part on other bio-
logical vulnerabilities (e.g., respiratory hypersensitivity; Blechert, Wilhelm, Meuret,
Wilhelm, & Roth, 2010). Furthermore, the occurrence of panic attacks following a bio-
logical challenge is heavily influenced by other psychological vulnerabilities, such
as greater baseline experiential avoidance (e.g., Karekla, Forsyth, & Kelly, 2004) and
anxiety sensitivity (e.g., Blechert, Wilhelm, Meuret, Wilhelm, & Roth, 2013), which
brings us to the second level of vulnerabilities.
General Psychological Vulnerabilities
Interacting with general biological vulnerabilities is a set of broad psychological
vulnerabilities that set the individual up to see the world as an uncontrollable and
unpredictable place. This focus on the importance of perceived and actual control
is based partly on extensive evidence from animal models that show having mini-
mal control over the environment during early development can lead to chronic dif-
ficulties with anxiety (e.g., work with rhesus monkeys; Suomi, 2000). In humans,
an attributional style reflecting a sense that outcomes are uncontrollable, either in
general or because of personal limitations, also seems to be a risk factor (see Rear-
don & Williams, 2007). Interestingly, this cognitive style may be more common in
girls, which may contribute to the often-cited gender differences in anxiety disorder
prevalence rates. Hilt and Nolen-Hoeksema (2009) propose that this gender disparity
may be due to higher rates of negative life events during childhood and adolescence
among girls (e.g., sexual abuse), and more experiences that suggest one’s behavior
has limited impact on the environment. Other evidence that early learning experi-
ences about controllability and predictability are important follow from the finding
that parenting styles promoting a sense of control by being contingently responsive
yet not overprotective (i.e., permitting exploration) seem to protect against the devel-
opment of anxiety problems (see Murray, Creswell, & Cooper, 2009). It is important
to note that most of the evidence in humans linking uncontrollability with anxiety
is correlational given the ethical barriers to manipulating children’s environments to
enhance uncontrollability.
In addition to early learning experiences that focus on uncontrollability, stressful
life events more generally seem to enhance vulnerability. These events serve as trig-
gers for various forms of psychopathology and seem most closely implicated in anxi-
ety pathology if the events are either threatening (e.g., involvement in an accident) or
uncontrollable in some way (e.g., Eley & Stevenson, 2000). For instance, patients with
panic disorder reported a higher number of salient life events, especially those that
seemed out of their control in the 12 months before onset of panic relative to the same
time period for control participants (Klauke et al., 2010).
The interpretation of an event as negative and stressful is, of course, highly
dependent on how individuals process that event, and there is extensive evidence
that anxious individuals selectively process threatening information (see MacLeod
& Mathews, 2012). These cognitive biases are thought to maintain anxiety and dys-
functional avoidance behaviors by keeping threatening cues salient to the vulnerable

-- 32 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	109
person. For instance, the general tendency among anxious samples to interpret
ambiguous situations as threatening manifests as a focus on (mis)interpretations of
bodily sensations in panic disorder. Specifically, the cognitive model of panic attacks
was developed in part from observations of pharmacological and neurochemical
studies of agents that promoted panic attacks, but only in select individuals—those
who tended to interpret the bodily sensations induced by the agents in a disastrous
way (Clark, 1986). This led Clark to suggest that panic attacks occur because cer-
tain bodily sensations are misinterpreted as indicating a catastrophe, such as a heart
attack or loss of control. In social anxiety disorder, cognitive processing biases and
related emotional responses in social situations are thought to reinforce the idea
that social or performance situations are threatening, and that negative evaluation
is likely (Heimberg & Magee, 2014). When conversing with acquaintances at a party,
for instance, individuals with social anxiety disorder may notice the one person who
does not smile at something they have said and interpret this as evidence that they
are uninteresting.
In addition to the abundant data indicating that selective information process-
ing is associated with anxiety disorders (see MacLeod & Mathews, 2012), there is also
evidence that these information-processing biases enhance vulnerability to react
more negatively to subsequent challenging life events (e.g., MacLeod, Rutherford,
Campbell, Ebsworthy, & Holker, 2002). Similarly, “anxiety sensitivity” (the belief that
anxiety symptoms are themselves scary) and explicit threat appraisals have been
found to predict the onset of anxiety disorder symptoms (e.g., Schmidt, Zvolensky,
& Maner, 2006).
Specific Psychological Vulnerabilities
The combination of general biological and psychological vulnerabilities is thought
to enhance anxiety proneness, while an individual’s particular learning experiences
are expected to predict whether a specific type of anxiety disorder is expressed. For
instance, the emergence of panic disorder would be especially likely if the dangers of
somatic symptoms and illnesses were emphasized and reinforced during childhood
(see Barlow, 2002). Meanwhile, “sensitizing social experiences,” such as being exces-
sively teased, are thought potentially to increase the risk for developing generalized
social anxiety disorder (Kimbrel, 2008).
There is also considerable evidence that conditioning experiences can be central
to the onset of phobias (see Field, 2006), and stories of a traumatic dog bite leading to
a dog phobia are not unusual. Furthermore, Mowrer’s (1947) influential two-factor
theory includes both classical and operant conditioning mechanisms—specifically,
fear becomes a classically conditioned response to a previously neutral stimulus
through a negative conditioning event, then avoidance and escape behaviors are
operantly reinforced because of their (temporary) anxiety-reducing qualities. How-
ever, classical conditioning models are not able to explain all the varied ways that
fear acquisition can occur (i.e., lots of people who experience dog bites do not go
on to develop a phobia and many, if not most, people with phobias did not experi-
ence a bad bite). Thus, Rachman (1990) has suggested multiple pathways to acquire
specific fears. In addition to classical conditioning, a person may vicariously learn
via modeling (e.g., watching someone else be bitten by a dog), or simply through the

-- 33 of 74 --

110 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
transmission of information that a given situation is dangerous (e.g., reading about
plane crashes; see also Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006).
An additional challenge in explaining the development of fear and phobias con-
cerns the unequal distribution of fears in the population (e.g., particularly high rates
of snake and spider phobias relative to other animal phobias, despite fewer stories
of snake bites than dog bites). This has led to the suggestion that we are predis-
posed to acquire some fears very readily because it was adaptive to be fearful of
certain objects or situations in our evolutionary past. This idea, termed “biological
preparedness theory” (Seligman, 1971), has some support from nonhuman primate
studies (e.g., monkeys are more likely to exhibit fear when observing another monkey
showing fear in response to a snake than to a rabbit; Cook & Mineka, 1989), though
the broader status of preparedness theory remains controversial (see McNally, 2016).
Linked to early learning experiences, social skills and behaviors also feature
prominently in many etiological models of social anxiety disorder. For example,
Rapee and Spence (2004) draw a distinction between poor social skills and “inter-
rupted social performance,” which they define as “the interference of appropriate
social behavior due to heightened anxiety” (p. 758). According to Rapee and Spence,
interrupted social performance likely plays a larger role in the maintenance (vs.
development) of social anxiety. At extreme levels, however, interrupted social perfor-
mance may also interfere with one’s ability to obtain and nurture meaningful friend-
ships, which in turn could contribute to the development of social anxiety disorder.
It seems clear at this point that it is the interaction of a range of general and
specific biological and psychological vulnerabilities that explains why a given per-
son develops an anxiety problem. Even in the primate studies, the likelihood of fear
conditioning is dependent in part on the monkeys’ prior experience. For instance,
fear conditioning is less likely if the monkeys have previously observed nonfearful
behavior in response to the potential fear stimulus (Mineka & Cook, 1986). Thus,
updated learning models (e.g., Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006) tend to be more compre-
hensive and reflect the likely interaction of biological, cultural, and environmental
vulnerabilities, as well as particular stressors that can influence the impact of a given
learning experience.
Clinical Implications
Here, we consider the question of connecting etiology to treatment, and the diversity
of developmental pathways for a given anxiety disorder.
Connecting Etiology to Treatment
When behavioral approaches to treatment were first introduced in the late 1950s,
it was proposed that knowledge of etiology was not needed to plan treatment. It
was assumed that problematic behavior—especially anxiety—was learned, and what
the patient needed was new learning experiences. Consequently, intervention pro-
cedures were developed that focused on the current life situation, and not the past.
Although contemporary CBT continues to emphasize the here and now, a focus on
etiology can have important therapeutic benefits, especially in discussing the ongo-
ing contributions to current fears from early life experiences. Take the example of

-- 34 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	111
socially anxious individuals who were frequently berated by others for being shy.
While their anxiety may be partially a function of a biological vulnerability, a psy-
choeducational intervention could potentially allow them to reattribute one of the
“causes” of their problem to something other than themselves.
Diverse Developmental Pathways for a Given Disorder
Given that the DSM classification system is topographical and does not assess the
function associated with the symptoms for a given disorder, it can include within a
single category clinical problems that have different developmental pathways. Thus,
one individual who is anxious in social situations may have adequate social skills
but nevertheless be overly concerned about the negative reaction of others. Mean-
while, another individual may have serious deficiencies in their social skills, so their
concern about the negative reaction of others would be more realistic.
The etiological factors underlying panic can be highly idiosyncratic. For exam-
ple, one of us (M. R. G.) worked with an actress whose panic disorder caused her
considerable anxiety prior to stage performances. In conducting an assessment of the
trigger for her initial panic attack, the therapist inquired whether she had recently
undergone any surgical procedures that might have been stressful. The actress indi-
cated that she indeed had a “tummy tuck” shortly before her initial panic attack. As
the therapy progressed and as abdominal breathing was introduced as one of the
interventions, the patient indicated that she already knew how to do this and had
used this successfully throughout her career. However, when she was asked to dem-
onstrate her abdominal breathing ability, it was apparent that she was not doing it
properly; indeed, the tummy tuck interfered with her ability to engage in abdominal
breathing, likely enhancing her anxiety and setting her up to panic when she prac-
ticed this technique before going on stage.
CONCLUSION
Our goal in this chapter has been to summarize the basic and applied research on
panic disorder, social anxiety, and phobias, and to extrapolate clinical implications
from these findings to aid therapists in developing their case formulations and treat-
ment plans. In our review of the research literature on treatment, our focus has been
primarily on the cognitive-behavioral techniques that are demonstrably efficacious.
However, we also noted the very critical role of the therapeutic relationship, accep-
tance of symptoms, agreement between therapist and patient on the goals for treat-
ment, and an agreement about the specific intervention procedures. Furthermore,
treatment is not one size fits all. Practicing clinicians have always known this to be
the case, but it appears that the research literature needs to focus more on this con-
cept. For instance, research focused on cultural considerations, treatment effective-
ness in real-world settings, and therapeutic outcomes for patients with dual diagno-
ses is sorely needed.
Although there are specific procedures for particular clinical problems, it is
also important for the clinician to keep in mind the overriding principles of change
that may be reflected in the specific procedures. Among these are (1) a positive

-- 35 of 74 --

112 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
expectation that therapy will help and the presence of sufficient motivation to
participate; (2) an optimal therapeutic alliance; (3) doing what is necessary to help
patients to become better aware of what they are doing and not doing, and how that
contributes to their life problems and symptoms; (4) corrective experiences (e.g., via
exposure) that encourage new learning and result in altered emotions and behavior,
followed by changes in expectations that encourage further corrective experiences;
and (5) reevaluation of biased thinking (Eubanks & Goldfried, 2019).
Human behavior is far too varied and complex to be understood by any single
therapeutic model or procedure. If we think in terms of general principles of change
and routine monitoring of therapy progress and outcomes, we can then begin to
investigate the parameters associated with an intervention’s efficacy and effective-
ness for different patients. In pursuing such an evidenced-based approach, we can
begin to build a body of knowledge that—rather than being restricted by any single
theoretical orientation—is empirically based.
Finally, while this chapter is structured to derive clinical implications from
research findings, the clinical situation should also be thought of as the context of
discovery, whereby therapists’ clinical observations provide invaluable directions
for hypothesis generation and future research. To have a meaningful interaction
between research and practice, the bridge needs to go both ways. After a drug has
been approved by the FDA following randomized clinical trials, practitioners have
the opportunity to provide feedback to the FDA on the use of the drug in clinical
practice. The Society of Clinical Psychology, Division 12 of the American Psycho-
logical Association, established a similar mechanism, providing a two-way bridge
between research findings on empirically supported treatments and therapy expe-
riences that use these treatments in practice (www.stonybrook.edu/commcms/two-way-
bridge).
REFERENCES
Aaronson, C. J., Shear, M. K., Goetz, R. R., Allen, L. B., Barlow, D. H., White, K. S., . . . Gor-
man, J. M. (2008). Predictors and time course of response among panic disorder patients
treated with cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 418–424.
Acarturk, C., Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & de Graaf, R. (2009). Psychological treatment of
social anxiety disorder: A meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 39, 241–254.
Agras, W. S., Chapin, H. M., & Oliveau, D. C. (1972). The natural history of phobias: Course
and prognosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 26, 315–317.
Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman, J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010).
Cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety and
depression comorbidity with treatment outcome. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 32, 185–192.
Alonso, J., Angermeyer, M. C., Bernert, S., Bruffaerts, R., Brugha, T. S., Bryson, H., . . . Inves-
tigators, European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental Disorders (ESEMeD) Project.
(2004). Sampling and methods of the European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental
Disorders (ESEMeD) project. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109(Suppl. 420), 8–20.
American Psychiatric Association. (2009). Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with
panic disorder (2nd ed.). Retrieved November 11, 2019, from https://psychiatryonline.org/
pb/assets/raw/sitewide/practice_guidelines/guidelines/panicdisorder.pdf.

-- 36 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	113
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Amir, N., Weber, G., Beard, C., Bomyea, J., & Taylor, C. T. (2008). The effect of a single session
attention modification program on response to a public speaking challenge in socially
anxious individuals. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 860–868.
Andrews, G., Cuijpers, P., Craske, M. G., McEvoy, P., & Titov, N. (2010). Computer therapy for
the anxiety and depressive disorders is effective, acceptable and practical health care: A
meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 5, e13196.
Ansell, E. B., Pinto, A., Edelen, M. O., Markowitz, J. C., Sanislow, C. A., Yen, S., . . . Gunderson,
J. G. (2011). The association of personality disorders with the prospective 7-year course
of anxiety disorders. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1019–1028.
Antony, M. M. (1994). Heterogeneity among specific phobias types in DSM-IV. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, State University of New York at Albany, Albany, NY.
Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Specific phobias. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety and its
disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (pp. 380–417). New York: Guilford
Press.
Asher, M., & Aderka, I. M. (2018). Gender differences in social anxiety disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 74, 1730–1741.
Asher, M., Asnaani, A., & Aderka, I. M. (2017). Gender differences in social anxiety disorder:
A review. Clinical Psychology Review, 56, 1730–1741.
Asnaani, A., Gutner, C. A., Hinton, D. E., & Hofmann, S. G. (2009). Panic disorder, panic
attacks and panic attack symptoms across race-ethnic groups: Results of the collabora-
tive psychiatric epidemiology studies. CNS Neuroscience and Therapeutics, 15, 249–254.
Asnaani, A., Richey, J. A., Dimaite, R., Hinton, D. E., & Hofmann, S. G. (2010). A cross-ethnic
comparison of lifetime prevalence rates of anxiety disorders. Journal of Nervous and Men-
tal Disease, 198, 551–555.
Ayala, E. S., Meuret, A. E., & Ritz, T. (2009). Treatments for blood–injury–injection phobia: A
critical review of current evidence. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43, 1235–1242.
Bandelow, B., & Michaelis, S. (2015). Epidemiology of anxiety disorders in the 21st century.
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 17, 327–335.
Bandelow, B., Seidler-Brandler, U., Becker, A., Wedekind, D., & Rüther, E. (2007). Meta-analysis
of randomized controlled comparisons of psychopharmacological and psychological
treatments for anxiety disorders. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 8, 175–187.
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2006). Mastery of your panic and anxiety: Client workbook (4th ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy, imipramine, or their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 283(19), 2529–2536.
Barlow, D. H., O’Brien, G. T., & Last, C. A. (1984). Couples treatment of agoraphobia. Behavior
Therapy, 15, 41–58.
Batelaan, N. M., de Graaf, R., Spijker, J., Smit, J. H., van Balkom, A. J., Vollebergh, W. A., &
Beekman, A. T. (2010). The course of panic attacks in individuals with panic disorder
and subthreshold panic disorder: A population-based study. Journal of Affective Disorders,
121, 30–38.
Baxter, A. J., Vos, T., Scott, K. M., Ferrari, A. J., & Whiteford, H. A. (2014). The global burden of
anxiety disorders in 2010. Psychological Medicine, 44, 2363–2374.
Beck, A. T., & Clark, D. A. (1997). An information processing model of anxiety: Automatic and
strategic processes. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35(1), 49–58.
Becker, E. S., Rinck, M., Veneta, T., Kause, P., Goodwin, R., Neumer, S., & Margraf, J. (2007).

-- 37 of 74 --

114 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Epidemiology of specific phobia subtypes: Findings from the Dresden Mental Health
Study. European Psychiatry, 22(2), 69–74.
Beidel, D. C., & Turner, S. M. (1997). At risk for anxiety: I. Psychopathology in the offspring
of anxious parents. Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36,
918–924.
Bekker, M. H., & van Mens-Verhulst, J. (2007). Anxiety disorders: Sex differences in preva-
lence, degree, and background, but gender-neutral treatment. Gender Medicine, 4, S178–
S193.
Beutel, M. E., Scheurich, V., Knebel, A., Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Graf-Morgenstern, M., . . .
Subic-Wrana, C. (2013). Implementing panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy
into clinical practice. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 58, 326–334.
Bittner, A., Goodwin, R. D., Wittchen, H. U., Beesdo, K., Höfler, M., & Lieb, R. (2004). What
characteristics of primary anxiety disorders predict subsequent major depressive disor-
der? Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 618–626.
Blanco, C., Xu, Y., Schneier, F. R., Okuda, M., Liu, S. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). Predictors
of persistence of social anxiety disorder: A national study. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
45, 1557–1563.
Blechert, J., Wilhelm, F. H., Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, E. M., & Roth, W. T. (2010). Respiratory,
autonomic, and experiential responses to repeated inhalations of 20% CO2 enriched air
in panic disorder, social phobia, and healthy controls. Biological Psychology, 84, 104–111.
Blechert, J., Wilhelm, F. H., Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, E. M., & Roth, W. T. (2013). Experiential,
autonomic, and respiratory correlates of CO2 reactivity in individuals with high and low
anxiety sensitivity. Psychiatry Research, 209, 566–573.
Bolton, J., Cox, B., Clara, I., & Sareen, J. (2006). Use of alcohol and drugs to self-medicate anxi-
ety disorders in a nationally representative sample. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
194, 818–825.
Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2009). A proposal for a dimensional classification system based
on the shared features of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications for
assessment and treatment. Psychological Assessment, 21, 256–271.
Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J. R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current
and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical
sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 585–599.
Brozovich, F., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). The relationship of post-event processing to self-
evaluation of performance in social anxiety. Behavior Therapy, 42, 224–235.
Bruce, S. E., Vasile, R. G., Goisman, R. M., Salzman, C., Spencer, M., Machan, J. T., & Keller,
M. B. (2003). Are benzodiazepines still the medication of choice for patients with panic
disorder with or without agoraphobia? American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1432–1438.
Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., . . . Keller, M.
B. (2005). Influence of psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized
anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A 12-year prospective study. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1179–1187.
Bryant, C., Jackson, H., & Ames, D. (2008). The prevalence of anxiety in older adults: Method-
ological issues and a review of the literature. Journal of Affective Disorders, 109, 233–250.
Cairney, J., McCabe, L., Veldhuizen, S., Corna, L. M., Streiner, D., & Herrmann, N. (2007).
Epidemiology of social phobia in later life. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(3),
224–233.
Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage (2nd ed.). New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
Canton, J., Scott, K. M., & Glue, P. (2012). Optimal treatment of social phobia: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 8, 203–215.
Capron, D. W., Norr, A. M., Macatee, R. J., & Schmidt, N. B. (2013). Distress tolerance and

-- 38 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	115
anxiety sensitivity cognitive concerns: Testing the incremental contributions of affect
dysregulation constructs on suicidal ideation and suicide attempt. Behavior Therapy, 44,
349–358.
Carpiniello, B., Baita, A., Carta, M. G., Sitzia, R., Macciardi, A. M., Murgia, S., & Altamura, A.
C. (2002). Clinical and psychosocial outcome of patients affected by panic disorder with
or without agoraphobia: Results from a naturalistic follow-up study. European Psychiatry,
17, 394–398.
Chambless, D. L., Milrod, B., Porter, E., Gallop, R., McCarthy, K. S., Graf, E., . . . Barber, J. P.
(2017). Prediction and moderation of improvement in cognitive-behavioral and psycho-
dynamic psychotherapy for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
85, 803–813.
Chapman, L. K., Kertz, S. J., Zurlage, M. M., & Woodruff-Borden, J. (2008). A confirmatory fac-
tor analysis of specific phobia domains in African American and Caucasian American
young adults. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 763–771.
Chartier, M. J., Walker, J. R., & Stein, M. B. (2003). Considering comorbidity in social phobia.
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 38, 728–734.
Chavira, D. A., & Stein, M. B. (2005). Childhood social anxiety disorder: From understanding
to treatment. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics, 14, 797–818.
Choy, Y., Fyer, A. J., & Lipsitz, J. D. (2007). Treatment of specific phobia in adults. Clinical Psy-
chology Review, 27, 266–286.
Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Feldner, M. T., & Forsyth, J. P. (2010). Emotion regulation and the
anxiety disorders: An integrative review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assess-
ment, 32(1), 68–82.
Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., & Lohr, J. M. (2009). Disgust, fear, and the anxiety disorders: A
critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 29(1), 34–46.
Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 461–470.
Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In R. Heimberg, M.
Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment and
treatment (pp. 69–93). New York: Guilford Press.
Clauss, J. A., & Blackford, J. U. (2012). Behavioral inhibition and risk for developing social
anxiety disorder: A meta-analytic study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Ado-
lescent Psychiatry, 51, 1066–1075.
Clerkin, E. M., Werntz, A. J., Magee, J. C., Lindgren, K. P., & Teachman, B. A. (2014). Evaluating
age differences in coping motives as a mediator of the link between social anxiety symp-
toms and alcohol problems. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 28(3), 880–886.
Cook, M., & Mineka, S. (1989). Observational conditioning of fear to fear-relevant versus fear-
irrelevant stimuli in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 448–459.
Cougle, J. R., Keough, M. E., Riccardi, C. J., & Sachs-Ericsson, N. (2009). Anxiety disorders
and suicidality in the National Comorbidity Survey—Replication. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 43(9), 825–829.
Craske, M. G. (2003). Origins of phobias and anxiety disorders: Why more women than men? (BRAT
Series in Clinical Psychology). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2008). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.),
Clinical handbook of psychological disorders (pp. 1–64). New York: Guilford Press.
Craske, M. G., Golinelli, D., Stein, M. B., Roy-Byrne, P., Bystritsky, A., & Sherbourne, C. (2005).
Does the addition of cognitive behavioral therapy improve panic disorder treatment out-
come relative to medication alone in the primary-care setting? Psychological Medicine,
35(11), 1645–1654.
Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Epstein, A., Wittchen, H. U., Pine, D. S., Lewis-Fernández, R., &
Hinton, D. (2010). Panic disorder: A review of DSM-IV panic disorder and proposals for
DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 93–112.

-- 39 of 74 --

116 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., Bystritsky, A., & Yan-go, F. (2002).
Does nocturnal panic represent a more severe form of panic disorder? Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 190(9), 611–618.
Cristea, I. A., Kok, R. N., & Cuijpers, P. (2015). Efficacy of cognitive bias modification interven-
tions in anxiety and depression: Meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 7–16.
Cuijpers, P., Marks, I. M., van Straten, A., Cavanagh, K., Gega, L., & Andersson, G. (2009).
Computer-aided psychotherapy for anxiety disorders: A meta-analytic review. Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy, 38, 66–82.
Davey, G. C. L. (1992). Classical conditioning and the acquisition of human fears and phobias:
A review and synthesis of the literature. Advances in Behaviour Research and Therapy, 14,
29–66.
de Jong, P. J., Andrea, H., & Muris, P. (1997). Spider phobia in children: Disgust and fear before
and after treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35(6), 559–562.
de Jonge, P., Roest, A. M., Lim, C. C., Florescu, S. E., Bromet, E. J., Stein, D. J., . . . Al-Hamzawi,
A. O. (2016). Cross-national epidemiology of panic disorder and panic attacks in the
world mental health surveys. Depression and Anxiety, 33, 1155–1177.
Deacon, B., & Abramowitz, J. (2006). A pilot study of two-day cognitive-behavioral therapy for
panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 807–817.
Deacon, B., Lickel, J., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2008). Medical utilization across the anxiety disor-
ders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 344–350.
Depla, M. F. I. A., ten Have, M. L., van Balkom, A. J. L. M., & de Graaf, R. (2008). Specific fears
and phobias in the general population: Results from the Netherlands mental health sur-
vey and incidence study (NEMESIS). Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 43(3),
200–208.
Eifert, G. H., & Forsyth, J. P. (2005). Acceptance and commitment therapy for anxiety disorders:
A practitioner’s treatment guide to using mindfulness, acceptance, and values-based behavior
change. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Eisner, L. R., Johnson, S. L., & Carver, C. S. (2009). Positive affect regulation in anxiety disor-
ders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23(5), 645–649.
Eley, T. C., & Stevenson, J. (2000). Specific life events and chronic experiences differentially
associated with depression and anxiety in young twins. Journal of Abnormal Child Psy-
chology, 28, 383–394.
Eubanks, C. F., & Goldfried, M. R. (2019). A principle-based approach to psychotherapy inte-
gration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(3rd ed., pp. 88–104). New York: Oxford University Press.
Eysenck, M. (2014). Anxiety and cognition: A unified theory. New York: Psychology Press.
Farach, F. J., Pruitt, L. D., Jun, J. J., Jerud, A. B., Zoellner, L. A., & Roy-Byrne, P. P. (2012). Phar-
macological treatment of anxiety disorders: Current treatments and future directions.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 833–843.
Field, A. P. (2006). Is conditioning a useful framework for understanding the development and
treatment of phobias? Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 857–875.
Flint, A. J. (1994). Epidemiology and comorbidity of anxiety disorders in the elderly. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151(5), 640–649.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective informa-
tion. Psychological Bulletin, 99(1), 20–35.
Fox, N. A., Henderson, H. A., Marshall, P. J., Nichols, K. E., & Ghera, M. M. (2005). Behavioral
inhibition: Linking biology and behavior within a developmental framework. Annual
Review of Psychology, 56, 235–262.
Fredrikson, M., Annas, P., Fischer, H., & Wik, G. (1996). Gender and age differences in the
prevalence of specific fears and phobias. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34(1), 33–39.
Friedman, S., & Paradis, C. (2002). Panic disorder in African-Americans: Symptomatology and
isolated sleep paralysis. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 26, 179–198.

-- 40 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	117
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1976). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1994). Clinical behavior therapy (expanded ed.). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley.
Goldstein, A. J., & Chambless, D. L. (1978). A reanalysis of agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 9,
47–59.
Goodwin, R. D., Faravelli, C., Rosi, S., Cosci, F., Truglia, E., de Graaf, R., & Wittchen, H. U.
(2005). The epidemiology of panic disorder and agoraphobia in Europe. European Neuro-
psychopharmacology, 15, 435–443.
Goodwin, R. D., Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2004). Childhood abuse and familial vio-
lence and the risk of panic attacks and panic disorder in young adulthood. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 881–890.
Grant, B. F., Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Ruan, W. J., & Huang, B.
(2005). Co-occurrence of 12-month mood and anxiety disorders and personality disor-
ders in the US: Results from the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related
conditions. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 39(1), 1–9.
Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Dufour, M. C., Compton, W., . . . Kaplan,
K. (2004). Prevalence and co-occurrence of substance use disorders and independent
mood and anxiety disorders: Results from The National Epidemiologic Survey on Alco-
hol and Related Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 807–816.
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (1996). The neuropsychology of anxiety: Reprise. In D. A.
Hope (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1995: Perspectives on anxiety, panic, and fear
(pp. 61–134). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Gunnar, M., & Quevedo, K. (2007). The neurobiology of stress and development. Annual
Review of Psychology, 58, 145–173.
Hallion, L. S., & Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of the effect of cognitive bias modifica-
tion on anxiety and depression. Psychological Bulletin, 137, 940–958.
Harris, E. C., & Barraclough, B. (1997). Suicide as an outcome for mental disorders: A meta-
analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 170(3), 205–228.
Hayes, S. C., & Hoffman, S. G. (2018). Process-based CBT: The science and core clinical competencies
of cognitive behavioral therapy. Oakland, CA: Context Press.
Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia: Basic
mechanisms and clinical strategies. New York: Guilford Press.
Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S., Schneier, F. R., Spitzer, R. L., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1993). The issue
of subtypes in the diagnosis of social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 7(3), 249–269.
Heimberg, R. G., & Magee, L. (2014). Social anxiety disorder. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical
handbook of psychological disorders (pp. 114–154). New York: Guilford Press.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and meta-analysis of the genetic
epidemiology of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1568–1578.
Heuzenroeder, L., Donnelly, M., Haby, M. M., Mihalopoulos, C., Rossell, R., Carter, R., . . .
Vos, T. (2004). Cost-effectiveness of psychological and pharmacological interventions for
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 38(8), 602–612.
Hilt, L., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2009). The emergence of gender differences in depression in
adolescence. In S. Nolen-Hoeksema & L. Hilt (Eds.), Handbook of depression in adolescents
(pp. 111–135). New York: Routledge.
Himle, J. A., Baser, R. E., Taylor, R. J., Campbell, R. D., & Jackson, J. S. (2009). Anxiety disorders
among African Americans, blacks of Caribbean descent, and non-Hispanic whites in the
United States. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 578–590.
Hinton, D. E., Chong, R., Pollack, M. H., Barlow, D. H., & McNally, R. J. (2008). Ataque de
nervios: Relationship to anxiety sensitivity and dissociation predisposition. Depression
and Anxiety, 25, 489–495.

-- 41 of 74 --

118 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Hinton, D., Hinton, S., Pham, T., Chau, H., & Tran, M. (2003). “Hit by the wind” and temperature-
shift panic among Vietnamese refugees. Transcultural Psychiatry, 40, 342–376.
Hinton, D. E., Hinton, L., Tran, M., Nguyen, M., Nguyen, L., Hsia, C., & Pollack, M. H. (2007).
Orthostatic panic attacks among Vietnamese refugees. Transcultural Psychiatry, 44, 515–
544.
Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., & Hinton, D. E. (2010). Cultural aspects in social anxiety and
social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 1117–1127.
Hofmann, S. G., & Otto, M. W. (2017). Cognitive behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder:
Evidence-based and disorder-specific treatment techniques. New York: Routledge.
Hollon, S. D., Stewart, M. O., & Strunk, D. (2006). Enduring effects for cognitive behavior ther-
apy in the treatment of depression and anxiety. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 285–315.
Hummelen, B., Wilberg, T., Pedersen, G., & Karterud, S. (2007). The relationship between
avoidant personality disorder and social phobia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 48, 348–356.
Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001).
Therapists, therapist variables, and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a multi-
center trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 747–755.
Kampman, O., Viikki, M., & Leinonen, E. (2017). Anxiety disorders and temperament—An
update review. Current Psychiatry Reports, 21, 19–27.
Karekla, M., Forsyth, J. P., & Kelly, M. M. (2004). Emotional avoidance and panicogenic
responding to a biological challenge procedure. Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 725–746.
Kashdan, T. B., Farmer, A. S., Adams, L. M., Ferssizidis, P., McKnight, P. E., & Nezlek, J. B.
(2013). Distinguishing healthy adults from people with social anxiety disorder: Evidence
for the value of experiential avoidance and positive emotions in everyday social interac-
tions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122(3), 645–655.
Kashdan, T. B., Goodman, F. R., Machell, K. A., Kleiman, E. M., Monfort, S. S., Ciarrochi, J., &
Nezlek, J. B. (2014). A contextual approach to experiential avoidance and social anxiety:
Evidence from an experimental interaction and daily interactions of people with social
anxiety disorder. Emotion, 14, 769–781.
Kendler, K. S., Karkowski, L. M., & Prescott, C. A. (1999). Fears and phobias: Reliability and
heritability. Psychological Medicine, 29, 539–553.
Kessler, R. C., Amminger, G. P., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alonso, J., Lee, S., & Ustun, T. B. (2007).
Age of onset of mental disorders: A review of recent literature. Current Opinion in Psy-
chiatry, 20, 359–364.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 593–602.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Walters, E. E. (2006). The epide-
miology of panic attacks, panic disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 415–424.
Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2012).
Twelve-month and lifetime prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood
disorders in the United States. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21,
169–184.
Kessler, R. C., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Wittchen, H. U. (2009). Epidemiology of anxiety dis-
orders. In M. B. Stein & T. Steckler (Eds.), Behavioral neurobiology of anxiety and its treatment
(pp. 21–35). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Kessler, R. C., Stein, M. B., & Berglund, P. (1998). Social phobia subtypes in the National
Comorbidity Survey. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(5), 613–619.
Kim, S. J., Kim, B. N., Cho, S. C., Kim, J. W., Shin, M. S., Yoo, H. J., & Kim, H. W. (2010). The
prevalence of specific phobia and associated co-morbid features in children and adoles-
cents. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 629–634.

-- 42 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	119
Kimbrel, N. A. (2008). A model of the development and maintenance of generalized social
phobia. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 592–612.
Kimmel, R. J., Roy-Byrne, P. P., & Cowley, D. S. (2015). Pharmacological treatments for panic
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia, and social anxiety disorder. In P.
E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (pp. 463–506). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Klauke, B., Deckert, J., Reif, A., Pauli, P., & Domschke, K. (2010). Life events in panic disor-
der—an update on “candidate stressors.” Depression and Anxiety, 27, 716–730.
Klein, D. F. (1993). False suffocation alarms, spontaneous panics, and related conditions: An
integrative hypothesis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 306–317.
Landau, R. J. (1980). The role of semantic schemata in phobic word interpretation. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 4, 427–434.
Lang, P. J. (1985). The cognitive physiology of emotion: Fear and anxiety. In A. H. Tuma & J. D.
Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 131–170). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lang, P. J., Cuthbert, B. N., & Bradley, M. M. (1998). Measuring emotion in therapy: Imagery,
activation, and feeling. Behavior Therapy, 29, 655–674.
Lewis-Fernández, R., Hinton, D. E., Laria, A. J., Patterson, E. H., Hofmann, S. G., Craske, M.
G., . . . Liao, B. (2011). Culture and the anxiety disorders: Recommendations for DSM-V.
Focus, 9, 351–368.
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2007). Psychological treatments that cause harm. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 2, 53–70.
MacLeod, C., & Mathews, A. (2012). Cognitive bias modification approaches to anxiety. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 8(1), 189–217.
MacLeod, C., Rutherford, E., Campbell, L., Ebsworthy, G., & Holker, L. (2002). Selective attention
and emotional vulnerability: Assessing the causal basis of their association through the
experimental manipulation of attentional bias. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 107–123.
Marchand, A., Roberge, P., Primiano, S., & Germain, V. (2009). A randomized, controlled clini-
cal trial of standard, group and brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder
with agoraphobia: A two-year follow-up. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 1139–1147.
Mason, L., Grey, N., & Veale, D. (2016). My therapist is a student?: The impact of therapist expe-
rience and client severity on cognitive behavioural therapy outcomes for people with
anxiety disorders. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 44(2), 193–202.
Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S., Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K., Clark, D. M., Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S.
(2014). Psychological and pharmacological interventions for social anxiety disorder in
adults: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 368–376.
McCabe, R. E., Ashbaugh, A. R., & Antony, M. M. (2010). Specific and social phobia. In M. M.
Antony & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), Handbook of assessment and treatment planning for psychologi-
cal disorders (pp. 186–223). New York: Guilford Press.
McLean, C. P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B. T., & Hofmann, S. G. (2011). Gender differences in anxiety
disorders: Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of illness. Journal of Psy-
chiatric Research, 45, 1027–1035.
McNally, R. J. (2016). The legacy of Seligman’s “phobias and preparedness” (1971). Behavior
Therapy, 47, 585–594.
Merikangas, K. R., He, J. P., Burstein, M., Swanson, S. A., Avenevoli, S., Cui, L., . . . Swendsen,
J. (2010). Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in US adolescents: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication—Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 980–989.
Meuret, A. E., Kroll, J., & Ritz, T. (2017). Panic disorder comorbidity with medical conditions
and treatment implications. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 13, 209–240.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2012). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (3rd ed.).
New York: Guilford Press.

-- 43 of 74 --

120 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Milrod, B., Chambless, D. L., Gallop, R., Busch, F. N., Schwalberg, M., McCarthy, K. S., . . . Bar-
ber, J. P. (2016). Psychotherapies for panic disorder: A tale of two sites. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 77, 927–935.
Mineka, S., & Cook, M. (1986). Immunization against the observational conditioning of snake
fear in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 307–318.
Mineka, S., & Zinbarg, R. (2006). A contemporary learning theory perspective on the etiology
of anxiety disorders: It’s not what you thought it was. American Psychologist, 61(1), 10–26.
Mogg, K., & Bradley, B. P. (2006). Time course of attentional bias for fear-relevant pictures in
spider-fearful individuals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(9), 1241–1250.
Mohlman, J., Bryant, C., Lenze, E. J., Stanley, M. A., Gum, A., Flint, A., . . . Craske, M. G. (2012).
Improving recognition of late life anxiety disorders in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: Observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee to the
Lifespan Disorders Work Group. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 27, 549–556.
Mollema, E. D., Snoek, F. J., Ader, H. J., Heine, R. J., & van der Ploeg, H. M. (2001). Insulin-
treated diabetes patients with fear of self-injecting or fear of self-testing: Psychological
comorbidity and general well-being. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 51, 665–672.
Moscovitch, D. A., McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., Rocca, L., & Swinson, R. P. (2008). Anger
experience and expression across the anxiety disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 25(2),
107–113.
Mowrer, O. H. (1947). On the dual nature of learning: A reinterpretation of “conditioning” and
“problem solving.” Harvard Educational Review, 17, 102–148.
Murphy, R., Hirsch, C., Mathews, A., Smith, K., & Clark, D. M. (2007). Facilitating a benign
interpretation bias in a high socially anxious population. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 1517–1529.
Murray, L., Creswell, C., & Cooper, P. J. (2009). The development of anxiety disorders in child-
hood: An integrative review. Psychological Medicine, 39, 1413–1423.
Nay, W., Brown, R., & Roberson-Nay, R. (2013). Longitudinal course of panic disorder with and
without agoraphobia using the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions (NESARC). Psychiatry Research, 208, 54–61.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Watkins, E. R. (2011). A heuristic for developing transdiagnostic mod-
els of psychopathology: Explaining multifinality and divergent trajectories. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 6(6), 589–609.
Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2019). Handbook of psychotherapy integration (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 1.
Evidence-based therapist contributions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 2.
Evidence-based therapist responsiveness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Norton, P. J., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Kernels of truth or distorted perceptions: Self and observer
ratings of social anxiety and performance. Behavior Therapy, 32(4), 765–786.
Olatunji, B. O., Armstrong, T., & Elwood, L. (2017). Is disgust proneness associated with anxi-
ety and related disorders?: A qualitative review and meta-analysis of group comparison
and correlational studies. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 12(4), 613–648.
Olatunji, B. O., Forsyth, J. P., & Cherian, A. (2007). Evaluative conditioning of disgust: A sticky
form of relational learning that is resistant to extinction. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21,
820–834.
Olatunji, B. O., & McKay, D. (2009). Disorders of disgust: Assessment, theory, and treatment. Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Ollendick, T. H., White, S. W., & White, B. A. (Eds.). (2018). The Oxford handbook of clinical child
and adolescent psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Oosterink, F. M., de Jongh, A., & Hoogstraten, J. (2009). Prevalence of dental fear and phobia
relative to other fear and phobia subtypes. European Journal of Oral Sciences, 117, 135–143.

-- 44 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	121
Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Nations, K. R., Utschig, A. C., Rothbaum, B. O., Hofmann, S. G., &
Smits, J. A. (2012). Five sessions and counting: Considering ultra-brief treatment for panic
disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 29, 465–470.
Ozkan, M., & Altindag, A. (2005). Comorbid personality disorders in subjects with panic dis-
order: Do personality disorders increase clinical severity? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 46,
20–26.
Pachankis, J. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (2006). Social anxiety in young gay men. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 20, 996–1015.
Pachankis, J. E., Goldfried, M. R., & Ramrattan, M. E. (2008). Extension of the rejection sen-
sitivity construct to the interpersonal functioning of gay men. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76, 306–317.
Page, A. C., & Martin, N. G. (1998). Testing a genetic structure of blood–injury–injection fears.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 81, 377–384.
Paradis, C. M., & Friedman, S. (2005). Sleep paralysis in African Americans with panic disor-
der. Transcultural Psychiatry, 42, 123–134.
Paradis, C. M., Friedman, S., Lazar, R. M., Grubea, J., & Kesselman, M. (1992). Use of a struc-
tured interview to diagnosis anxiety disorders in a minority population. Hospital and
Community Psychiatry, 43, 61–64.
Pollack, M., Mangano, R., Entsuah, R., Tzanis, E., & Simon, N. M. (2007). A randomized con-
trolled trial of venlafaxine ER and paroxetine in the treatment of outpatients with panic
disorder. Psychopharmacology, 194, 233–242.
Praško, J., Dockery, C., Horáĉek, J., Houbova, P., Kosová, J., Klaschka, J., . . . Höschl, C. (2006).
Moclobemide and cognitive behavioral therapy in the treatment of social phobia. Neuro-
endocrinology Letters, 27, 473–481.
Rachman, S. J. (1990). Fear and courage (2nd ed.). New York: Freeman.
Rachman, S. J. (1994). The overprediction of fear: A review. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32,
683–690.
Rapee, R. M. (1995). Descriptive psychopathology of social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R.
Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and
treatment (pp. 41–66). New York: Guilford Press.
Rapee, R. M., & Lim, L. (1992). Discrepancy between self- and observer ratings of performance
in social phobics. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101(4), 728–731.
Rapee, R. M., & Spence, S. H. (2004). The etiology of social phobia: Empirical evidence and an
initial model. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 737–767.
Ratcliffe, D., MacLeod, A., & Sensky, T. (2006). Anxiety in patients who have had a myocardial
infarction: The maintaining role of perceived physical sensations and causal attribu-
tions. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 34(2), 201–217.
Reardon, J. M., & Williams, N. L. (2007). The specificity of cognitive vulnerabilities to emo-
tional disorders: Anxiety sensitivity, looming vulnerability and explanatory style. Jour-
nal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 625–643.
Reich, J. (2001). The relationship of social phobia to avoidant personality disorder. In S. G.
Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), From social anxiety to social phobia: Multiple perspectives
(pp. 148–161). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Ressler, K. J., Rothbaum, B. O., Tannenbaum, L., Anderson, P., Graap, K., Zimand, E., . . . Davis,
M. (2004). Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to psychotherapy: Use of D-cycloserine in
phobic individuals to facilitate extinction of fear. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61(11),
1136–1144.
Robinson, J., Sareen, J., Cox, B. J., & Bolton, J. (2009). Self-medication of anxiety disorders with
alcohol and drugs: Results from a nationally representative sample. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 23, 38–45.
Rodebaugh, T. L., Holaway, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2004). The treatment of social anxiety
disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 883–908.

-- 45 of 74 --

122 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Rodrigues, H., Figueira, I., Gonçalves, R., Mendlowicz, M., Macedo, T., & Ventura, P. (2011).
CBT for pharmacotherapy non-remitters—A systematic review of a next-step strategy.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 129, 219–228.
Romano, E., Tremblay, R. E., Vitaro, F., Zoccolillo, M., & Pagani, L. (2001). Prevalence of psy-
chiatric diagnoses and the role of perceived impairment: Findings from an adolescent
community sample. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 42(4),
451–461.
Roshanaei-Moghaddam, B., Pauly, M. C., Atkins, D. C., Baldwin, S. A., Stein, M. B., & Roy-
Byrne, P. (2011). Relative effects of CBT and pharmacotherapy in depression versus anxi-
ety: Is medication somewhat better for depression, and CBT somewhat better for anxi-
ety? Depression and Anxiety, 28, 560–567.
Rowa, K., McCabe, R. I., & Antony, M. M. (2006). Specific phobias. In F. Andrasik (Ed.), Compre-
hensive handbook of personality and psychopathology: Vol. 2. Adult psychopathology (pp. 154–
168). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Ruscio, A. M., Brown, T. A., Chiu, W. T., Sareen, J., Stein, M. B., & Kessler, R. C. (2008). Social
fears and social phobia in the USA: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Rep-
lication. Psychological Medicine, 38, 15–28.
Sánchez-Meca, J., Rosa-Alcázar, A. I., Marín-Martínez, F., & Gómez-Conesa, A. (2010). Psy-
chological treatment of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 37–50.
Sansone, R. A., Griffith, K. A., & Sansone, L. A. (2005). Panic disorder, alcohol and substance
abuse, and benzodiazepine prescription primary care companion. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chiatry, 7(5), 246–248.
Sarfan, L. D., Cody, M. W., & Clerkin, E. M. (2019). The mediating role of state maladaptive
emotion regulation in the relation between social anxiety symptoms and self-evaluation
bias. Cognition and Emotion, 33(2), 361–369.
Schmidt, N. B., & Trakowski, J. (2004). Interoceptive assessment and exposure in panic disor-
der: A descriptive study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 11(1), 81–92.
Schmidt, N. B., Woolaway-Bickel, K., & Bates, M. (2001). Evaluating panic-specific factors in
the relationship between suicide and panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
39(6), 635–649.
Schmidt, N. B., Zvolensky, M. J., & Maner, J. K. (2006). Anxiety sensitivity: Prospective pre-
diction of panic attacks and Axis I pathology. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 691–699.
Schneier, F. R., Foose, T. E., Hasin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Liu, S. M., Grant, B. F., & Blanco, C.
(2010). Social anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder co-morbidity in the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medicine, 40(6),
977–988.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1971). Phobias and preparedness. Behavior Therapy, 2, 307–320.
Simon, N. M., Otto, M. W., Wisniewski, S. R., Fossey, M., Sagduyu, K., Frank, E., . . . Pollack, M.
H. (2004). Anxiety disorder comorbidity in bipolar disorder patients: Data from the first
500 participants in the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder
(STEP-BD). American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2222–2229.
Smith, S. M., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Goldstein, R., Huang, B., & Grant, B. F. (2006). Race/
ethnic differences in the prevalence and co-occurrence of substance use disorders and
independent mood and anxiety disorders: Results from the National Epidemiologic Sur-
vey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medicine, 36, 987–998.
Smoller, J. W., Block, S. R., & Young, M. M. (2009). Genetics of anxiety disorders: The complex
road from DSM to DNA. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 965–975.
Stein, D. J., & Hugo, F. (2002). Neuropsychiatric aspects of anxiety disorders. In S. C. Yudofsky
& R. E. Hales (Eds.), The American Psychiatric Publishing textbook of neuropsychiatry and
clinical neurosciences (pp. 1049–1068). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.

-- 46 of 74 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	123
Stein, M. B., Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G., Campbell-Sills, L., Lang, A. J., Golinelli, D., . . .
Sherbourne, C. D. (2011). Quality of and patient satisfaction with primary health care for
anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 970–976.
Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Smith, S., Goldstein, R. B., Ruan, W. J., & Grant,
B. F. (2007). The epidemiology of DSM-IV specific phobia in the USA: Results from the
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medi-
cine, 37, 1047–1059.
Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive processes in social phobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 31(3), 255–267.
Suomi, S. J. (2000). A biobehavioral perspective on developmental psychopathology. In A.
J. Sameroff, M. Lewis, & S. M. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of developmental psychopathology
(pp. 237–256). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press.
Susman, J., & Klee, B. (2005). The role of high-potency benzodiazepines in the treatment of
panic disorder. Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 7, 5–11.
Sylvester, C. E., Hyde, T. S., & Reichler, R. J. (1988). Clinical psychopathology among children
of adults with panic disorder. In D. L. Dunner, E. S. Gershon, & J. E. Barrett (Eds.), Rela-
tives at risk for mental disorders (pp. 87–102). New York: Raven Press.
Tart, C. D., Handelsman, P. R., DeBoer, L. B., Rosenfield, D., Pollack, M. H., Hofmann, S. G., . . .
Smits, J. A. (2013). Augmentation of exposure therapy with post-session administration
of D-cycloserine. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47, 168–174.
Taschereau-Dumouchel, V., Kawato, M., & Lau, H. (2020). Multivoxel pattern analysis reveals
dissociations between subjective fear and its physiological correlates. Molecular Psychia-
try, 25, 2342–2354.
Teachman, B. A., Clerkin, E. M., Cunningham, W. A., Dreyer- Oren, S., & Werntz, A. (2019).
Implicit cognition and psychopathology: Looking back and looking forward. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 123–148.
Teachman, B. A., & Gordon, T. G. (2009). Age differences in anxious responding: Older and
calmer, unless the trigger is physical. Psychology and Aging, 24, 703–714.
Teachman, B. A., Smith-Janik, S. B., & Saporito, J. (2007). Information processing biases and
panic disorder: Relationships among cognitive and symptom measures. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 45(8), 1791–1811.
Teachman, B. A., Stefanucci, J. K., Clerkin, E. M., Cody, M. W., & Proffitt, D. R. (2008). A new
mode of fear expression: Perceptual bias in height fear. Emotion, 8, 296–301.
Trower, P., Bryant, B., & Argyle, M. (1978). Social skills and mental health. London: Methuen.
Turk, C. L., Heimberg, R. G., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Social anxiety disorder. In D. H. Barlow
(Ed.), Clinical handbook of psychological disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (3rd ed.,
pp. 114–153). New York: Guilford Press.
Uhde, T. W., & Singareddy, R. (2002). Biological research in anxiety disorders. In J. J. López-
Ibor, W. Gaebel, M. Maj, & N. Sartorius (Eds.), Psychiatry as a neuroscience (pp. 237–285).
New York: Wiley.
Wallace, S. T., & Alden, L. E. (1997). Social phobia and positive social events: The price of suc-
cess. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(3), 416–424.
Wardenaar, K. J., Lim, C. C., Al-Hamzawi, A. O., Alonso, J., Andrade, L. H., Benjet, C., . . .
Gureje, O. (2017). The cross-national epidemiology of specific phobia in the World Men-
tal Health Surveys. Psychological Medicine, 47, 1744–1760.
Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., & Rodebaugh, T. L. (2008). The Fear of Positive Evaluation Scale:
Assessing a proposed cognitive component of social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
22(1), 44–55.
Weissman, M. M. (1993). Family genetic studies of panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
27(Suppl.), 69–78.
Wersebe, H., Lieb, R., Meyer, A. H., Miche, M., Mikoteit, T., Imboden, C., . . . Gloster, A. T.

-- 47 of 74 --

124 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
(2018). Well-being in major depression and social phobia with and without comorbidity.
International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology, 18(3), 201–208.
Wittchen, H. U., Lecrubier, Y., Beesdo, K., & Nocon, A. (2003). Relationships among anxiety
disorders: Patterns and implications. In D. J. Nutt & J. C. Ballenger (Eds.), Anxiety disor-
ders (pp. 25–37). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B., Castriotta, N., Lenze, E. J., Stanley, M. A., & Craske, M. G. (2010). Anxi-
ety disorders in older adults: A comprehensive review. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 190–
211.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B., Horowitz, J. D., Powers, M. P., & Telch, M. J. (2008). Psychological
approaches in the treatment of specific phobias: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology
Review, 28(6), 1021–1037.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K., Zimmermann, M., Arch, J. J., De Guzman, E., & Lagomasino, I. (2015). Has
evidence-based psychosocial treatment for anxiety disorders permeated usual care in
community mental health settings? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 72, 9–17.
Woody, S. R., & Ollendick, T. H. (2006). Technique factors in treating anxiety disorders. In L.
G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 167–200).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Woody, S., & Teachman, B. A. (2000). Intersection of disgust and fear: Normative and patho-
logical views. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 7, 291–311.
Xu, Y., Schneier, F., Heimberg, R. G., Princisvalle, K., Liebowitz, M. R., Wang, S., & Blanco, C.
(2012). Gender differences in social anxiety disorder: Results from the National Epidemi-
ologic Sample on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 12–19.
Zlomke, K., & Davis, T. E., III. (2008). One-session treatment of specific phobias: A detailed
description and review of treatment efficacy. Behavior Therapy, 39, 207–223.

-- 48 of 74 --

125
Our goal in this chapter is to outline and discuss the psychopathology of obsessive–
compulsive disorder (OCD), especially as it guides implementation of treatment of
this often baffling disorder.
OCD SYMPTOM PRESENTATION AND CLASSIFICATION
OCD is characterized by two main symptoms: obsessions and compulsions (Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2013). “Obsessions” are unwanted thoughts, ideas,
images, or impulses and urges that are experienced as repugnant, threatening,
obscene, blasphemous, nonsensical, or all of these. The content of obsessions is
highly individualized and shaped by the thinker’s personal experiences, although
the general themes of obsessions can be organized into several general categories:
contamination, responsibility for harm, violence, sex, religion, and the need for order
or exactness (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2010; McKay et al., 2004). Most people with OCD
evince multiple obsessional themes and forms, and the form and content of these
may shift over time. Table 5.1 provides examples of common obsessions. Obsessions
often evoke intense distress and impairment that result from avoidance of related
situations. For example, someone with obsessions about harming hurting or killing
family members (e.g., spouse, child) may avoid loved ones and experience depressive
symptoms as a result.
Three characteristics set clinical obsessions apart from other types of repetitive
thinking (e.g., worries, daydreams). First, obsessions are experienced as unwanted
or uncontrollable, in that they intrude into consciousness (often triggered by cues or
something in the environment). Second, while personally relevant, the content of
C H A P T E R 5
Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder
Jonathan S. Abramowitz
Lynne Siqueland

-- 49 of 74 --

126 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
obsessions is incongruent with the individual’s belief system and is not the type of
thought one would normally expect oneself to have. Third, obsessions are resisted;
that is, they are accompanied by the sense that a fix is needed, so the obsession
must be “dealt with,” neutralized, or altogether avoided. The motivation to resist is
activated by the fear that if action is not taken, disastrous consequences may occur.
Compulsive rituals are the most noticeable feature of OCD and often account
for the most functional impairment. The DSM specifies that “compulsions” are moti-
vated and intentional, in contrast to mechanical or robotic repetitive behaviors, as
observed in disorders such as Tourette syndrome. Moreover, compulsions are per-
formed in response to obsessions and to reduce obsession-related distress. This is in
contrast to repetitive behaviors in addictive or impulse control disorders problems
(e.g., “sexual addiction,” trichotillomania), which are carried out because they may
produce pleasure or gratification. Examples of the most common compulsive rituals
include washing and cleaning, checking, seeking reassurance, ordering and arrang-
ing, counting, and repeating routine behaviors (e.g., stepping through a doorway,
flicking a light switch, getting up from a chair). Specific examples of common rituals
are listed in Table 5.2.
Studies on the structure of OCD symptoms consistently identify symptom
dimensions that comprise certain obsessions and compulsions, including (1) harm-
ing (aggressive obsessions and checking rituals), (2) contamination (contamination
TABLE 5.1. Common Obsessions
Category 	Examples
Contamination 	• Concerns about getting AIDS from touching a bathroom door
knob
• Fear of getting cancer from using lawn fertilizer
• Fear that “germs” will spread to others and make them ill
• Fear of getting sick from touching dirty laundry
Responsibility for harm 	• Thought that you’ve hit someone with your car without realizing it
• Doubts about whether the door is locked or the oven is turned off
• Doubts about whether you dropped pills on the floor and a child
thought they were candy and ate them
Symmetry/order 	• The need to have the environment “balanced” on the left and right
sides
• Thoughts that a parent will die if the books aren’t arranged in
alphabetical order
Sexual 	• Impulses to kiss one’s boss
• Thoughts of having sex with children or family members
• Doubts regarding whether one is homosexual or heterosexual
Violence/aggression 	• Impulses to harm loved ones
• Thoughts of injuring a vulnerable person (small child or elderly)
Religious 	• Blasphemous images of Jesus with an erection on the cross
• Doubts about whether one is “faithful enough”

-- 50 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	127
obsessions and decontamination rituals), (3) symmetry (obsessions about order or
neatness and arranging rituals), and (4) unacceptable immoral or violent thoughts
with mental rituals and neutralization (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2010). These symptom
dimensions overlap, such that someone might have, for example, both contamination
and harming symptoms. In addition, some sufferers undergo changes in their symp-
tom picture over time with changes in both obsessions or compulsions, for example,
shifting from unacceptable thoughts to symmetry concerns. Each of these symptom
dimensions also has implications for the psychological treatment of OCD because
the use (and effectiveness) of specific treatment techniques depends in part on the
patient’s symptom presentation (see treatment section).
In many instances, it is clear how compulsive rituals are intended to reduce
obsessional anxiety about particular feared consequences—for example, compul-
sively checking the stove/door locks to reduce the fears of a fire/break-in, or repetitive
handwashing rituals intended to remove feared contaminants and prevent disease.
In some cases, patients perform rituals simply to reduce a general sense of anxiety
or the sense of “incompleteness.” Compulsive rituals can also be overt behaviors or
covert mental acts aimed at preventing a negative outcome. Examples of common
mental rituals include repetition of special phrases, prayers, or numbers in a specific
manner, and ritualistically going over (mentally reviewing, analyzing) one’s behav-
ior or conversations to reassure oneself that one has not made egregious mistakes or
said anything offensive.
In addition to compulsive rituals, many people with OCD use various overt and
covert strategies that do not meet DSM-5 criteria to control, remove, or prevent their
obsessions (Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014; Ladouceur et al., 2000). Examples include
overanalyzing the meaning of obsessional thoughts, rational self-talk (i.e., to con-
vince oneself of the unimportance of the obsession), reassurance seeking, replac-
ing the obsessional thought with a “safe” thought, performing a brief behavioral act
(e.g., putting one’s hand in one’s pockets to prevent losing control), distraction, and
TABLE 5.2. Common Compulsive Rituals
Category 	Examples
Decontamination 	• Handwashing for 15 minutes at a time
• Ritualized showering routines, including washing the shower itself
• Wiping down mail and groceries before bringing them into the house
• Demanding that others wash before touching items in the house
Checking 	• Locks, windows, appliances, paperwork
• That others are safe
• Asking repeated questions of others to gain assurances
Repeating 	• Going up and down the stairs several times until an unwanted thought is
dismissed
• Getting dressed and undressed over and over, until it feels “just right”
Mental rituals 	• Repeating prayers, words, or phrases to oneself to neutralize unwanted
thoughts
• Mentally reviewing what one said or did (reassurance)

-- 51 of 74 --

128 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
thought suppression (Ladouceur et al., 2000). Because these strategies may be covert
and automatic, the individual may not even recognize these behaviors as part of
OCD. Thus, the assessment should include examples to help the individual identify
neutralization.
Avoidance is also present to some degree in most individuals with OCD, and is
intended to prevent exposure to situations that provoke obsessional thoughts and
urges to ritualize. Sometimes the aim of avoidance is to prevent specific feared con-
sequences, such as illness or harm. Other times, avoidance is used to prevent obses-
sional thoughts, such as avoiding public stairways because they evoke obsessions of
impulsively pushing people down the steps.
Differentiating OCD from Similar Disorders
Illness Anxiety Disorder and Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Illness anxiety disorder (IAD; formerly “hypochondriasis”) is a somatic symptom dis-
order characterized by a preoccupation with fears of having a serious disease (e.g.,
cancer). The intrusive health-related preoccupations in IAD have been compared
to obsessional thoughts or fears in OCD, and the repetitive attempts to seek reas-
surance in IAD, to compulsive checking rituals (e.g., Fallon, Javitch, Hollander, &
Liebowitz, 1991).
Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), which is categorized as an OCD-related disorder
in DSM-5, involves extreme concerns about one or more physical flaws that either
are not real or are so slight that others would not notice (e.g., “My nose is too large”).
The thoughts of unsightliness occur in the absence of any noticeable physi-
cal defect, are often resisted, and lead to significant anxiety about how the person
appears to others. In this way, preoccupations in BDD are functionally similar to
obsessions in OCD. To circumvent anticipated embarrassment, individuals with
BDD may avoid certain social situations or engage in behaviors aimed to reduce
distress or the visibility of their imagined defect, including excessive checking in
mirrors, grooming, and hiding the perceived defect (e.g., with large sunglasses or
a hat). Because IAD and BDD involve anxiety-provoking preoccupations and exces-
sive behaviors aimed at reducing this anxiety, these problems might be related to
OCD. In clinically distinguishing IAD and BDD from OCD, it is important to assess
the full range of obsessions and compulsions, and determine whether any health
and appearance concerns occur along with other more quintessential types of obses-
sions and compulsions. If this is the case, OCD is the proper diagnosis. If the person
appears singly obsessed with appearance or health concerns, somatic symptom dis-
order is likely the correct diagnosis.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
The main features of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) are chronic worry and tension
that are unfounded or more severe than would be expected in most people, and that
lead to insomnia and other physical symptoms, including fatigue, headaches, irrita-
bility, and hot flashes. Worries in GAD can be intrusive, unwanted, repetitive, and
highly distressing to the individual; thus, they are often mistaken for obsessions. Yet

-- 52 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	129
whereas the content of worries in GAD is focused on real-life circumstances such as
finances, social and family relationships, work, and school performance, obsessional
content in OCD does not typically concern everyday problems. Worries also tend
to involve exclusively verbal content, whereas obsessions are often experienced as
images and impulses, along with thoughts and doubts. Worry content often shifts
from one topic to another over time, whereas the focus of obsessions is typically sta-
ble. Some individuals with GAD show ritual-like reassurance-seeking and checking
behavior (e.g., calling one’s spouse repeatedly if one is late getting home); however,
these behaviors are more specific to worry content and do not neutralize anxiety in
the same way that compulsive rituals neutralize obsessions.
Obsessive–Compulsive Personality Disorder
The main features of obsessive– compulsive personality disorder (OCPD) are an enduring
pattern of perfectionism, rigidity, stubbornness, and orderliness that interferes with
task completion; preoccupation with rules, organization, and schedules, so that the
point of activities is lost; overconscientiousness and inflexibility regarding ethical or
moral issues (not accounted for by normal cultural or religious values); and excessive
devotion to work and productivity to the exclusion of friendships or leisure time
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Although some of these characteristics are
informally referred to as “compulsive” and might be found among some individu-
als with OCD, there are important differences in the function of these symptoms. In
OCD, perfectionistic behavior is provoked by fear and is resisted; the person wishes
they did not feel compelled to behave this way. In contrast, people with OCPD do
not have obsessional fears and instead perceive their “compulsive” traits as useful,
agreeable, and consistent with their worldview. Thus, when individuals do not resist
their behavior patterns and reject the suggestion of adapting a less rigid lifestyle,
OCPD is the likely diagnosis rather than OCD.
Schizophrenia and Delusional Disorders
It is important to distinguish schizophrenia and delusional disorders from OCD,
since these conditions possess superficial similarities that have led some to speculate
a relationship among them (e.g., Enright, 1996). For instance, these other conditions
may involve bizarre thoughts (i.e., “delusions”) and behavior. Yet unlike in OCD,
most people with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders do not resist their
bizarre, intrusive thoughts, and the thoughts do not produce anxiety or urges to neu-
tralize. Rather, the bizarre ideation might be believed or even defended as reasonable
(i.e., as in delusions). Other differences are that repetitive behaviors in schizophrenia
(e.g., undifferentiated or catatonic subtypes) and other psychotic disorders are point-
less motor behaviors rather than responses to obsessional anxiety. Nevertheless,
patients with OCD are sometimes misdiagnosed as having delusions or psychotic
thinking, especially if the OCD is characterized by bizarre obsessions (e.g., fear of
making a pact with the devil, intrusions about murdering loved ones). Therefore, the
unwanted nature of the thoughts and the anxiety response, in concert with the pres-
ence of avoidance and compulsions (overt and covert), must be carefully assessed, as
these features differentiate psychotic symptoms from those of OCD.

-- 53 of 74 --

130 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Clinical Implications for Understanding the Role
of Obsessions and Compulsions
The clinician should keep in mind that obsessions and rituals (including avoid-
ance and neutralizing) are functionally related—the compulsive ritual is an attempt to
reduce obsessional distress. For example, the obsession that one has mistakenly hit
a pedestrian while driving would increase anxiety and lead to the urge compulsively
to check (ritual) or ask for assurances to reduce this anxiety. It is therefore not surpris-
ing that certain types of obsessions and rituals co-occur in the following patterns: (1)
Obsessions about responsibility for harm and mistakes are associated with checking
rituals; (2) symmetry obsessions occur along with ordering and counting rituals; (3)
contamination obsessions co-occur with washing and cleaning rituals; and (4) reli-
gious, sexual, and violent obsessions often trigger mental rituals and reassurance
seeking (e.g., McKay et al., 2004).
It is also important for the clinician to understand the content and triggers of
obsessional thoughts, as well as the feared consequences predicted to result from
the obsessions. Information about the compulsive rituals and avoidance strategies
must be collected, including the individual’s rationale for deploying each type of
ritual; that is, how does the ritual prevent feared negative consequences? This under-
standing of the function of the symptoms and the relationship between obsession
and compulsion is essential to accurate diagnosis of OCD and its lack leads to fre-
quent misdiagnosis and treatment recommendations. The rationale and effective-
ness of psychological treatments for OCD hinge on this conceptualization. Finally, it
is important to determine individuals’ insight into the senselessness of their symp-
toms, since poor insight is associated with attenuated outcome (e.g., Foa, Abramow-
itz, Franklin, & Kozak, 1999).
COURSE AND ASSOCIATED FEATURES
OCD is a chronic condition with a very low rate of spontaneous remission. Left
untreated, symptoms fluctuate, with worsening during periods of increased life
stress. In a 40-year follow-up study of 144 individuals with OCD (Skoog & Skoog,
1999), 83% of this cohort had improved, and 48% no longer met diagnostic criteria
for OCD, although about half of the nonclinical individuals reported some residual
symptoms. Thus, although OCD symptoms are likely to improve with treatment, full
recovery is the exception rather than the rule. The clinical implications of this fact are
discussed in the section on treatment.
Having OCD is associated with impaired social and role functioning, troubled
romantic and family relationships, diminished academic performance, unemploy-
ment, comorbid psychological disorders, sleep and sexual problems, and increased
receipt of disability income (Koran, 2000). Despite the fact that severe OCD can lead
to functional impairment, people with OCD do not differ substantially from the
general U.S. population in terms of the rates of alcohol abuse, suicide, or marriage.
Relatives of patients with OCD also suffer, since symptoms often result in restricted
access to certain rooms, involvement of others in compulsive rituals, and difficulty
in enjoying life (e.g., the inability to enjoy a family vacation because of the sufferer’s

-- 54 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	131
obsessions and rituals; Black, Gaffney, Schlosser, & Gabel, 1998). A diagnosis of OCD
is also related to increased (non-mental-health) medical utilization.
Clinical Implications of Comorbid Conditions or Mitigating Factors
Accordingly, at the beginning and end of treatment, therapists should assess for
associated features of OCD such as mood and other anxiety disorders, interpersonal
functioning, academic and occupational performance, general quality of life, and
physiological indices such as sleep and sexual functioning. Assessment of these vari-
ables before beginning treatment helps the therapist plan for therapy that addresses,
as comprehensively as possible, the clinical problems frequently associated with
OCD. The same assessment at the end of treatment might also help therapists pre-
pare patients who might be at greater risk for relapse, especially since some of the
associated features, such as poor family functioning and mood disturbance, are
associated with greater OCD symptom severity.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Once considered a rare condition, OCD is known to affect from 2–3% of the adult
population across the world (Ruscio, Stein, Chiu, & Kessler, 2010). The disorder is
slightly more common among females than males. OCD onset is in childhood or ado-
lescence, typically begins by the age of 25, and only rarely after age 50 (Rasmussen
& Tsuang, 1986). The mean age of onset tends to be earlier in males (about 21 years of
age) than in females (22–24 years; Lensi et al., 1996).
Although most individuals with OCD do not identify clear-cut precipitants
to symptom onset, stressful or traumatic events and experiences may play a role
for some patients (Gershuny, Baer, Radomsky, Wilson, & Jenike, 2003). Symptoms
also occur at higher than expected rates among childbearing women (Abramowitz,
Schwartz, Moore, & Luenzmann, 2003; Russell, Fawcett, & Mazmanian, 2013). More-
over, the content of obsessional thoughts and rituals is clearly influenced by envi-
ronmental and sociological factors, as evidenced by the predominance of obsessions
concerning timely issues. For example, the highly prevalent contamination obses-
sions relating to gonorrhea in the 1970s have largely been replaced by fears of acquir-
ing AIDS since the mid-1980s. Similarly, individuals with religious obsessions show
concerns related to their specific religion (e.g., Jewish patients afraid of violating the
dietary laws associated with that religion).
COMORBIDITY
Individuals with OCD are at an increased risk for additional forms of psychopathol-
ogy, with depressive disorders among the most commonly co-occurring difficulties.
The lifetime prevalence of major depressive disorder (MDD) among patients with
OCD ranges from 12.4 to 60.3% cross-nationally (mean = 29%; Weissman et al., 1994)
and, for the most part, OCD predates MDD, suggesting that depressive symptoms
usually occur in response to the distress and impairment associated with OCD.

-- 55 of 74 --

132 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Depressive symptoms also seem to be more strongly related to the severity of obses-
sions than to severity of compulsions (Ricciardi & McNally, 1995). Also, coexisting
depressive symptoms are especially predictive of poor quality of life for those suf-
fering with OCD.
OCD may also be accompanied by additional anxiety disorders (e.g., Weiss-
man et al., 1994), with social phobia, panic disorder, and GAD being most commonly
reported (Nestadt et al., 2001). Estimates of comorbidity between OCD and personal-
ity disorders vary widely (from 8.7 to 87.5%), yet those personality disorders belong-
ing to the anxious cluster (e.g., obsessive– compulsive, avoidant) are more common
than those of other clusters (e.g., Steketee, Eisen, Dyck, Warshaw, & Rasmussen,
1999). We present the clinical implications of comorbid conditions, especially the
impact of mood and personality disorders, later in the chapter.
ETIOLOGY
Biological Models
The Serotonin Hypothesis
The serotonin hypothesis was the leading neurochemical theory of OCD. It pro-
posed that obsessions and compulsions arise from abnormalities in the serotonin
neurotransmitter system, specifically, a hypersensitivity of the postsynaptic sero-
tonergic receptors (Zohar & Insel, 1987). The most consistent findings in support of
this model came from the pharmacotherapy literature, which suggests that selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine) are more effective than medica-
tions with other mechanisms of action (e.g., norepineherine inhibitors) in reducing
OCD symptoms. Actual studies of biological markers—such as blood and cerebro-
spinal fluid levels of serotonin metabolites—however, largely do not support a rela-
tionship between serotonin and OCD (Bandelow et al., 2016). As a result of these
findings, contemporary biological theorists have all but abandoned the serotonin
hypothesis of OCD.
Structural Models
Structural models hypothesize that OCD symptoms are caused by neuroanatomical
abnormalities in localized brain regions, specifically the orbitofrontal–subcortical
circuits (Saxena, Bota, & Brody, 2001), which are thought to connect regions of the
brain responsible for the initiation of behaviors implemented with little conscious
awareness. There is, however, a lack of consistent evidence to support this hypoth-
esis (e.g., Bandelow et al., 2016). These models were derived from neuroimaging stud-
ies comparing brain function between people with and without OCD (for a review,
see Whiteside, Port, & Abramowitz, 2004). Although findings vary across studies, a
meta-analysis of 10 positron emission tomographic (PET) and single-photon emis-
sion computed tomographic (SPECT) studies found that relative to healthy individu-
als, those with OCD evidence more activity in the orbital gyrus and the head of the
caudate nucleus (Whiteside et al., 2004).

-- 56 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	133
Limitations of Biological Models
There are important limitations of biological models of OCD, which render these
hypotheses untenable. First, there is little correspondence between the patterns of
symptoms that patients report and the biological mechanisms proposed to account
for them; that is, there is no sufficient explanation for how neurotransmitter or neu-
roanatomical abnormalities translate into obsessions and compulsions but not into
other psychological symptoms such as eating disorder symptoms (e.g., body image
disturbance). Second, biological models are unable to explain the fact that OCD
symptoms concern some themes (e.g., fears of harming vulnerable individuals), but
not others (e.g., fears of harming those who could defend themselves). Also, why
do some people experience contamination-related obsessions, whereas others have
intrusive sexual obsessions? Finally, existing serotonin and neuroimaging studies
are correlational in design and therefore do not provide evidence that biological
abnormalities cause OCD symptoms.
Psychological Models
Learning Theory
Behavioral (learning and conditioning) models of OCD were based on Mowrer’s
(1960) two-stage theory of fear acquisition and maintenance. Obsessional fears were
thought to be acquired (Stage 1: classical conditioning) as a result of traumatic condi-
tioning experiences in which a previously neutral stimulus (the conditioned stimu-
lus, or CS) was paired with an aversive stimulus (the unconditioned stimulus, or
UCS; e.g., a traumatic experience), so that the CS comes to elicit a conditioned fear
response (CR). As a result of this associative learning process, specific situations (e.g.,
using a public bathroom), objects (e.g., door knobs), and thoughts, images, doubts, or
impulses (e.g., incestuous images) that pose no objective threat may come to evoke
obsessional fear. Stage 2 of the model (operant conditioning) proposes that avoidance
behaviors and compulsive rituals become habitual because they reduce obsessional
anxiety immediately (i.e., negative reinforcement). By the 1980s, however, limitations
of learning models had become apparent. Specifically, many people with OCD did
not describe the types of classical conditioning experiences that were thought to lead
to obsessions. Thus, additional models were sought to explain obsessional thinking.
Cognitive-Behavioral Models
Most theorists and researchers now apply Beck’s (1976) cognitive specificity theory
of emotion to understanding the development and persistence of OCD. This model
proposes that emotional distress—such as anxiety and fear—arises not from nega-
tive or threatening situations and stimuli themselves, but from how one interprets or
appraises such stimuli. Accordingly, obsessional fears are thought to arise from inac-
curate beliefs about the importance of intrusive thoughts. Indeed, unpleasant mental
intrusions (i.e., thoughts, images, and impulses that intrude into consciousness) are a
normal and universal experience for people with and without OCD (Rachman & de
Silva, 1978). Rachman (1997) and Salkovskis (1996) have proposed that these mental

-- 57 of 74 --

134 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
intrusions develop into clinical obsessions when they are misappraised as overly sig-
nificant, threatening, harmful, or as posing a threat for which the individual is per-
sonally responsible.
A number of similar cognitive-behavioral theories have been proposed, each
emphasizing a slightly different type of belief or appraisal of intrusive thoughts.
Salkovskis (1996), for example, emphasized inflated responsibility as a key cogni-
tive bias. Rachman (1997) emphasized the overimportance of thoughts. Clark (2004)
emphasized the need to control intrusive thoughts as the main dysfunctional belief.
A comprehensive model that incorporates all of these beliefs and appraisals was
developed by the Obsessive Compulsive Cognitions Working Group (e.g., Frost &
Steketee, 2002), which identified six domains of dysfunctional beliefs that play a role
in OCD, as described in Table 5.3. To illustrate, consider an unwanted image of mur-
dering a loved one. Most people would regard such a thought as “mental noise” (i.e.,
having no harm-related implications). Such an intrusion, however, might develop
into a clinical obsession if the person appraises it as having serious consequences,
for example, “This thought means I am a dangerous person.” Such appraisals evoke
anxiety and the urge to suppress or remove the unwanted intrusion and the anxiety
using compulsive rituals or other neutralizing strategies, and to avoid reminders of
the thought (e.g., by locking away all knives), to minimize worries about disasters.
Salkovskis (1996) proposed that compulsive rituals and avoidance develop into
strong patterns because they seem to work immediately (albeit temporarily) to reduce
distress and remove the unwanted obsessional thought, and are therefore negatively
reinforced. Such behaviors, however, also prevent the person from discovering that
the feared outcome (e.g., acting on a senseless intrusive thought) is highly unlikely
TABLE 5.4. Domains of Dysfunctional Beliefs Associated with OCD as Identified
by the Obsessive–Compulsive Cognitions Working Group
Belief domain 	Description
Excessive responsibility 	Belief that one has the special power to cause and/or the duty to
prevent negative outcomes.
Overimportance of thoughts 	Belief that the mere presence of a thought indicates that the
thought is significant. For example, the belief that the thought
has ethical or moral ramifications, or that thinking the thought
increases the probability of the corresponding behavior or
event.
Need to control thoughts 	Belief that complete control over one’s thoughts is both
necessary and possible.
Overestimation of threat 	Belief that negative events are especially likely and would be
especially awful.
Perfectionism 	Belief that mistakes and imperfection are intolerable.
Intolerance for uncertainty 	Belief that it is necessary and possible to be completely certain
that negative outcomes will not occur.

-- 58 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	135
in the first place. Thus, the mistaken interpretation of the thought persists, and the
obsessional fear is maintained.
Treatment approaches derived from the biological and psychological models are
reviewed in the following section on treatment outcome.
TREATMENT OUTCOME
Cognitive-behavioral models hold the greatest promise for understanding and treat-
ing OCD symptoms, as they are the only approaches that are empirically supported
and provide a logically consistent basis for treatment. In particular, from this per-
spective, successful treatment for OCD must (1) correct maladaptive beliefs and
appraisals that lead normal intrusive thoughts to escalate into obsessional fear and (2)
terminate avoidance and compulsive rituals that prevent the correction of these mal-
adaptive beliefs. This section provides a concise description of two interventions—
exposure and response prevention (ERP) and acceptance and commitment therapy
(ACT)—that are consistent with cognitive-behavioral models and can be used on
their own or in tandem to reduce OCD symptoms. Detailed guidelines for their use
are available in various treatment manuals (e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014).
Exposure and Response Prevention
Exposure therapy comprises a set of psychological treatment procedures designed
to help individuals confront stimuli that provoke obsessional fear, but that objec-
tively pose a low risk of harm. Exposure for OCD can occur in the form of repeated
encounters with the actual feared situations (situational exposure) and imaginal
confrontation with the feared disastrous consequences of confronting these situa-
tions (imaginal exposure). For example, an individual with obsessional thoughts of
harming children might for situational exposure be asked to go to playgrounds and
schools where there are small children. The individual might also practice imagi-
nal exposure to images of harming children. A patient with fears of contamination
from disabled persons might for situational exposure shake hands with a visually
impaired or hearing-impaired individual. For imaginal exposure, the patient would
then confront thoughts of losing their vision or hearing as a result of the encounter.
During exposure tasks, individuals are helped to put their fear predictions to the
test in a range of contexts and using varied fear stimuli, so they can learn that their
obsessional triggers are in fact safe. They are also helped to learn that obsessional
anxiety and uncertainty are safe and manageable, often by observing the naturally
occurring process of habituation in which anxiety temporarily increases followed by
a natural decline in distress.
The response prevention component of treatment entails refraining from com-
pulsive rituals and other strategies that serve as an escape from obsessional fear.
Response prevention helps to prolong exposure and facilitate safety learning. In the
earlier examples, the first patient might practice refraining from any strategies they
typically use to reassure themself that they won’t act on thoughts of harming chil-
dren. The second patient would be instructed to refrain from decontamination ritu-
als such as washing.

-- 59 of 74 --

136 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
Most ERP treatment manuals (e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby 2014) recommend that
ERP be conducted over the course of 12–20 sessions. The initial few sessions include
a thorough assessment of obsessions, compulsive rituals, avoidance strategies, and
anticipated consequences of confronting feared situations. This information is used
to plan the specific ERP exercises that will be pursued. The therapist also never phys-
ically restrains the individual from performing rituals; rather, the therapist helps the
person to resist these behaviors. Exposure exercises may progress gradually using
a hierarchy—a list of feared situations and thoughts arranged from the least to the
most anxiety provoking—although this not required. Beginning exposure with less
anxiety-evoking tasks increases the likelihood that the patient will learn to manage
distress and fosters confidence in the treatment. At the end of each treatment session,
the therapist instructs the patient to continue exposure for several hours and in dif-
ferent environmental contexts, without the therapist.
Numerous studies involving thousands of individuals with OCD affirm that
ERP is an effective treatment for this condition. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
show the superiority of ERP over placebo treatments such as progressive muscle
relaxation training (e.g., Fals-Stewart, Marks, & Schafer, 1993), anxiety management
training (Lindsay, Crino, & Andrews, 1997), and pill placebo (Foa et al., 2005). RCTs
also show that ERP is more effective than the antidepressant clomipramine, believed
to be the most effective form of pharmacotherapy for OCD (Foa et al., 2005). Although
patients receiving ERP typically show a 50–60% reduction in their OCD symptoms,
some residual symptoms usually remain even posttreatment (Olatunji, Davis, Pow-
ers, & Smits, 2013).
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
ACT (Hayes, Stroshal, & Wilson, 2011) is a set of techniques that can be applied in
the treatment of OCD to help individuals foster a willingness to experience their
obsessional thoughts, uncertainty, and anxiety, and respond flexibly in the presence
of these unwanted private events (Twohig et al., 2015). ACT is also used to foster
improvements in quality of life and the pursuit of things the patient values in life.
The ACT perspective on OCD is consistent with the cognitive-behavioral model pre-
viously presented, as well as with ERP—in fact, one can implement ACT along with
ERP (e.g., Twohig et al., 2015). While an important goal of both ACT and ERP is to
broaden the patient’s engagement with feared stimuli and improve quality of life,
ACT explicitly focuses on (1) fostering willingness to experience obsessional dis-
tress, (2) recognizing thoughts and feelings as neither right nor wrong (i.e., “cogni-
tive defusion”), and (3) using treatment to move toward what one values in life. Most
ACT-based techniques take the form of metaphors that are discussed in the context
of OCD and its treatment, and are referred to throughout treatment to revisit the
processes described next.
Fostering Willingness
Willingness, in this context, refers to being open to “experiencing your own experi-
ences” without trying to change, avoid, or escape them. Metaphors, such as “two
scales,” “jerk at the door,” and “tug of war with a monster” (e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby,

-- 60 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	137
2014) can be used to help the patient understand the goal of treatment as developing a
healthier (more peaceful) relationship to OCD-related inner experiences.
Defusing from Thoughts and Feelings
Defusion strategies help people with OCD give less power to their anxiety-provoking
thoughts, feelings, and body sensations. More specifically, patients are helped
to shift away from evaluating these and other internal experiences as objectively
“good,” “bad,” “dangerous,” “immoral,” and so forth. Put another way, the aim is
to use metaphors (e.g., “passengers on the bus,” “becoming the chessboard”; e.g.,
Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014) to help the individual see obsessions and anxiety for
what they really are (streams of words, passing sensations), not what they say they
are (facts or dangers). Patients get to decide for themselves how much weight to give
to particular experiences.
Moving toward Values in Life
Improving patients’ quality of life is an important outcome of ACT, and a number
of exercises can be used to help patients realize that the hard work of treatment is
worthwhile.
Research on the efficacy of ACT for OCD is in its nascent stages, but preliminary
evidence is encouraging. Twohig and colleagues (2010) found that ACT is superior to
muscle relaxation at posttreatment and at follow-up, with between-group effect sizes
of 0.77 and 0.62, respectively. Nevertheless, when Twohig and colleagues (2018) com-
pared ACT-based ERP to standard ERP, there was no evidence that ACT enhances
the effects of ERP. Thus, further research on the effects of ACT and how it may best
be used in the treatment of OCD is warranted.
Hypothesized Mechanisms of Change in Psychological Treatments
From a learning perspective, ERP provides an opportunity for the extinction of con-
ditioned fear responses. Traditionally the efficacy of ERP was understood in terms of
emotional processing theory (EPT; Foa, Huppert, & Cahill, 2006; Foa & Kozak, 1986),
which credits initial fear activation followed by habituation as the mechanisms of
improvement. The basic assumptions of EPT, however, are not well supported by the
research evidence (Craske, Treanor, Conway, Zbozinek, & Vervliet, 2014): Habitua-
tion during ERP often fails to predict long-term outcomes, and successful outcomes
may occur in the absence of habituation.
Numerous developments in research on learning and memory relevant to expo-
sure and extinction point to inhibitory learning as the mechanism of extinction (e.g.,
Craske et al., 2014). From the inhibitory learning perspective, the original danger-
based association between the conditioned and unconditioned stimulus (e.g., “Floors
cause sickness,” and “Uncertainty about the future is intolerable”) remain intact dur-
ing ERP, while competing non-danger-based associations (e.g., “Floors are generally
safe,” “Uncertainty is manageable”) are formed.
Increasing willingness to experience fear and uncertainty, as in ACT, comple-
ments the goal of inhibitory learning. To the degree that distress is accepted (e.g.,

-- 61 of 74 --

138 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
“Anxiety is a part of life, so I’m better off learning to accept it rather than trying
to fight it”), inhibitory associations can be more robustly acquired (“If fear is tol-
erable, then I can push myself to try exposure therapy and learn that I can man-
age this acceptable risk”). Increasing tolerance for experiences such as fear, disgust,
and uncertainty also reduces the likelihood that an inevitable unexpected encounter
with one of these experiences in a new context (e.g., once treatment has ended) will
lead to the return of fear and a relapse.
Pharmacotherapy
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) medication is the most widely used
pharmacological treatment for OCD. The specific agents in this class of drugs include
fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, and fluvoxamine. Clomipramine, a tri-
cyclic medication that possesses serotonergic properties, is also used in the treat-
ment of OCD. On average, relative to placebo, SSRIs produce a 20–40% reduction in
obsessions and compulsions (Rauch & Jenike, 1998). The major strengths of a phar-
macological approach to treating OCD include the convenience and the little effort
required on the individual’s part. Limitations include the relatively modest improve-
ment and likelihood of residual symptoms, high rate of nonresponse (40–60% of
patients do not show any favorable response), and the prospect of unpleasant side
effects (which can often be stabilized by adjusting the dose). Moreover, once SSRIs
are terminated, OCD symptoms typically return rapidly (Pato, Zohar-Kadouch,
Zohar, & Murphy, 1988).
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF BASIC RESEARCH FOR TREATMENT
Various aspects of the psychopathology of OCD have direct treatment implications
and can be used to establish informal guidelines regarding the use of ERP and medi-
cation, or their combination. We discuss these implications in this section.
Poor Insight
Research consistently demonstrates that relative to individuals who recognize their
obsessions and compulsions as illogical and senseless, those with poor insight into
senselessness of their symptoms show attenuated response to both ERP and phar-
macotherapy (e.g., Foa et al., 1999). It appears that patients with poor insight have
difficulty consolidating information that is inconsistent with their obsessional fears;
thus, their beliefs and expectations of danger are not modified with repeated expo-
sure to obsessional cues. Moreover, because of their extreme fear, these patients
might not engage in ERP tasks as well as do those with good insight. As a result, they
do not gain opportunities to correct strongly held inaccurate beliefs and appraisals.
The reason that poor insight hinders response to medication is not well understood,
yet the fact that both of these treatments are attenuated by poor insight suggests that
augmentation strategies are necessary. In the case of psychological treatment, some
authors suggest the use of cognitive therapy approaches to help with verbally chang-
ing beliefs and appraisals rather than using exposure alone (McKay et al., 2015).

-- 62 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	139
Severe Depression
Between 25 and 50% of patients with OCD suffer from comorbid depressive disor-
ders (Abramowitz, 2004), and studies that have examined the effects of depressive
symptoms on the outcome of ERP have revealed that relative to mildly and mod-
erately depressed patients with OCD, those with severe depression—and indeed a
diagnosis of MDD—have attenuated outcomes with ERP. Perhaps because of their
high emotional activity, severely depressed individuals fail to undergo a reduction in
anxiety/distress (i.e., habituation) that normally occurs following extended exposure
to feared stimuli. Thus, depressed patients with OCD may not learn how to feel com-
fortable in the presence of obsessionally feared situations. Motivational difficulties,
which often accompany depression, may also account for poor treatment outcome;
that is, patients may not adhere to instructions to face their fears and resist urges to
ritualize if they are extremely depressed and unmotivated to help themselves. Some
research points to the use of antidepressant medication to help depressed patients
benefit from ERP (e.g., Simpson & Liebowitz, 2005). Other authors have proposed
that the use of cognitive therapy for both OCD and depression may enhance out-
come for this group of patients (Abramowitz, 2004).
Personality Disorders
The presence of certain personality traits and personality disorders is known to hin-
der response to ERP and medication for OCD (Steketee, Chambless, & Tran, 2001).
OCPD and histrionic personality disorder traits, for example, might interfere with
developing rapport and adherence to ERP instructions. If, however, a good thera-
peutic relationship can be developed, ERP can be successful despite these traits.
Clinicians should also consider that some patients with dramatic traits gain rein-
forcement for their OCD symptoms. In such circumstances, psychological treatment
approaches are unlikely to succeed because patients do not perceive themselves as
gaining rewards for their efforts to reduce obsessions and rituals. Individuals with
personality traits in the odd cluster (e.g., schizotypal personality disorder) present a
challenge for clinicians because such patients have a reduced ability to profit from
corrective information obtained during exposure or cognitive interventions.
Clinical Implications for Treatment Planning
with Different OCD Symptom Presentations
As described earlier in this chapter, the symptoms of OCD vary considerably. Below
are some specific treatment implications for particular presentations of this clinical
disorder.
Contamination Concerns
Contamination obsessions and decontamination rituals respond well to ERP involv-
ing planned exposure to sources of contamination, contaminated objects, or “dirty”
environments. Response prevention can pose a challenge, especially if the patient
fears situations such as using the bathroom, which will be confronted multiple times

-- 63 of 74 --

140 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
per day. Ideally, response prevention should include no washing at all, although
exceptions for bathroom use and before meals can be made initially (until such items
are confronted for exposure). If the patient is reluctant to end all washing, a limited
amount of ritualizing may be permitted per day, with gradual reductions over time.
It is important for the therapist to attend closely to the actual washing methods,
which may be lengthy, detailed, or completed according to a set of “rules.”
Order and Symmetry Concerns
This symptom dimension often responds well to ERP, which emphasizes the
response prevention component, because rather than specific obsessions, there may
be only anxiety about “not feeling right” unless rituals are carried out. Exposure
may involve deliberately leaving things “not just right”—pictures hung crookedly,
books arranged in a haphazard manner, doors left open, and so forth—in which case
the urge to complete the associated ordering or arranging rituals is resisted. The
focus is on tolerating the anxiety and “not just right” feelings, and finding out they
diminish with time, even without performing compulsive rituals.
Responsibility Obsessions and Checking Rituals
Responsibility obsessions often require the use of both situational exposure to feared
situations and imaginal exposure to feared consequences. For example, a woman
afraid of hitting pedestrians while she is driving, and who checks the roadside for
bodies, might perform situational exposure to driving in areas with high pedestrian
traffic (e.g., parking lots) and subsequently imagine that she hit someone but did not
realize it. Instead of acting on her urges to return to the parking lot to check, she
would be helped to use response prevention to remain exposed to her uncertainty
and learn that her obsessional anxiety eventually subsides. ACT might also be used
directly to address the tendency to resist feelings of guilt and respond as if inflated
perceptions of responsibility are accurate.
Mental Rituals
It has long been thought that mental rituals, which are often accompanied by dis-
turbing obsessional thoughts about violence (e.g., images of stabbing loved ones),
sex (e.g., doubts about whether one is becoming gay), and religion (e.g., blasphemous
ideas), are the most difficult presentation of OCD to manage with psychological treat-
ments. In addition to the typical anxiety and fear of acting on intrusive thoughts that
seem senseless, individuals with these types of symptoms often become concerned
that their obsessions reflect their true nature (e.g., “Why would I be thinking about
this if I didn’t really feel this way?”). It can be helpful for patients to know that “bad
thought OCD” tricks them in three ways: It says this thought is important, it means
something about them as a person, and the thought requires a response. Also, their
more typical thoughts, even if about difficult content, are not accompanied by a wave
of anxiety or distress.
An important goal for the clinician is to assess carefully rituals and other strate-
gies used to respond to such obsessions, and to avoid falling into the trap of labeling

-- 64 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	141
such individuals as “pure obsessional” even if no rituals can be observed. Most likely,
patients are using covert (mental) rituals and brief neutralizing strategies in response
to their obsessions. Mental rituals can take many forms, such as replacing a “bad”
thought with a “good” one, mentally blocking a “bad” thought by imagining an X
through it, saying a prayer, repeating magic words or phrases to oneself (“God keep
them safe”), or mentally reviewing one’s behavior for evidence of the trait concerned
about. One of the most problematic rituals or reactions for patients is when they check
for or believe they experience an arousal reaction in their groin to sexual intrusions.
Exposure therapy involves confronting stimuli that trigger obsessional thoughts
(e.g., places of worship, knives), as well as imaginal confrontation with the obsession
itself, and the feared consequences of not ritualizing (e.g., thoughts and images of
molesting children). Imaginal exposure tasks usually involve first writing scripts of
the patient’s obsessional fears that incorporate varying amounts of detail to modu-
late anxiety (e.g., “I have a thought about my grandmother dying, but I don’t say a
prayer for her. As a result, she dies, it is all my fault, and my family abandons me”).
The patient is then helped to record and listen to the scenario, or simply to read
it repeatedly until habituation occurs (i.e., the scene becomes “boring” or does not
provoke anxiety). In addition, the patient is helped to refrain from rituals that would
artificially reduce the obsession and the resulting anxiety. ACT techniques can be
used to further help the patient defuse from obsessional thoughts and learn how to
persist with valued activities without allowing these obsessions to get in the way.
Engaging Patients, Motivation, and Collaboration
Most psychological therapies require engaging patients and motivating them for
treatment, but this is especially true in the treatment of OCD when trying to con-
vince patients to confront anxiety-provoking thoughts, take perceived risks, and not
engage in behaviors that they believe are essential for their own (or others’) safety.
One thing that would surprise most clinicians who do not work in a cognitive-
behavioral format is how much education alone can help with engagement and moti-
vation. Patients often say to clinicians familiar with OCD, “You really get this” or
“You know what I am talking about,” just by the questions asked and the responses
provided by the knowledgeable therapist. This knowledge increases the therapist’s
credibility and increases hope that recovery is possible.
Especially with OCD symptoms that can seem “crazy,” it is comforting that there
is some explanation about how patients get stuck and why. Fortunately, education
about how OCD works both teaches the patient about the problem and leads directly
to how to treat it. Education is essential before any treatment can begin. Talking with
patients about the fact that they have a low tolerance for uncertainty and respond
more negatively to that uncertainty or intrusive thoughts often resonates with them.
Also discussing how rituals begin and are maintained—because they work in the
short run by decreasing anxiety—teaches patients why they feel better right after
they do their rituals. Explaining that everyone would do rituals if they felt it was the
only way to keep their family safe or protected expresses empathy and understand-
ing of what the client is experiencing. Indeed, rituals may seem like a small price to
pay if they were the only way and they worked. However, patients themselves know
and report that relief is short lived, and the concern repeats and repeats.

-- 65 of 74 --

142 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
The cruel trick of OCD is that performing the ritual makes obsessional thoughts
occur more frequent and the ritual feel more necessary. The short-term relief is
traded for longer-term loss of freedom and interference with living. The other lie
of OCD is that the intense distress the patient experiences after the obsession will
continue on—that day, that night, or longer, if the ritual is not performed. Cognitive-
behavioral therapists talk to patients about retraining their brains to respond differ-
ently to the error message or danger warning, and to break the cycle between the
ritual and relief. While education is not enough, therapists who use it are continually
reminded of how important it can be. This might be especially true of OCD because
so little about it seems to make sense, and patients not only know they are doing
“crazy” things but also know how difficult it feels to stop.
One important aspect of motivation is discussing the loss of freedom and time,
and ascertaining what the patient is missing because of OCD. They may lose time for
favored activities, sleep, enjoying a meal, being able to touch or hug a family mem-
ber, travel, and so forth. Each person is different, but it is important to have incentive
to start this effective but challenging treatment, and it has to be the patient’s own
motivation. Motivational interviewing, formal or informal, can be helpful to discuss
the reasons whether to change or not. It is important to be clear that it is fine to be
ambivalent and afraid, and most clients start that way. It is also crucial to talk to
patients about what they believe about the obsessions when in a state of calm, versus
in an OCD crisis moment.
The therapist sets the tone of a collaborative venture in discussing, planning,
and designing treatment goals. Patients are told that they are in charge of the pace
and content of their exposures, since they cannot and will not be forced to do any-
thing. However, the therapist will be using their knowledge to guide treatment, to
recommend and select goals, and to push patients past their comfort zone. Indeed,
patients need to understand that if they do not feel anxiety or distress at the begin-
ning of treatment and exposures, the treatment is not working. The goal is to start
with manageable levels of anxiety and easier tasks, and build competence and confi-
dence, session by session. It can be helpful to tell patients that most people with OCD
do not feel it until they see it for themselves by doing the treatment. Patients need to
experience that the distress goes away, lowers or at the least is tolerable.
While education is very important, clinical experience suggests that patients
only begin to believe in the treatment of OCD and hope for recovery when they
do something different relative to their OCD. What patients with OCD need, in
other words, are corrective experiences, particularly about the nature of anxiety and
their ability to tolerate it. In contrast, patients with OCD can be experts at engag-
ing therapists in endless discussions and questions about their fears and obsessions.
The anticipation and concern about exposure is often the most difficult part, so it is
important to pick a small threat exposure (something as small as writing K_ _ _ for
kill) soon and get to it rather than have anxiety build and allowing avoidance by
more explaining.
A more supportive, exploratory “talk-oriented” therapy can get hijacked by
OCD, with therapists’ spending session after session providing reassurance, answer-
ing questions, reviewing past events, or trying to be logical about OCD. While the
treatment of other anxiety-related problems may benefit from supportive therapy
or logical analysis of thought styles or patterns, OCD rarely does. Indeed, what is

-- 66 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	143
helpful is to perform early exposures with therapist supervision so that the patient
can understand and experience what exposure is like, see how to address issues that
arise, and modify tasks or goals as needed.
All of these components of treatment—education, defining the motivation, and
collaboration—are essential for all therapeutic approaches to be successful. These
components are a basis for a good therapeutic alliance. These factors, in addition to
empathy and soliciting regular feedback, about the working relationship have been
found to be associated with good outcomes for empirically supported treatments
across multiple disorders. These relationship qualities are likely to be especially
essential when treatment of OCD requires clients to take risks in facing fears, and
to trust the process and the therapist to do so. Many therapists who treat OCD have
had clients say, “I did not like this process or how you pushed me but it worked and
I am glad you did.” Compliance, an additional treatment variable with in-session
and out-of-session tasks, is crucial to the success of OCD treatment and likely is far
more important than in the treatment of other anxiety disorders or other disorders
overall.
Exposure and Response Prevention
The only way to do ERP is to face feared situations and to eliminate rituals. In other
words, a cognitive-behavioral therapist might distinguish between providing ther-
apy and treating OCD. Behavioral treatment of OCD cannot involve just talking; it
has to include doing. Rather than being asked, “What can’t you do?” the patient is
often asked, “What can you do?” Doing nothing is not an option for recovery. How-
ever, any small step can provide an opening.
For all OCD thoughts, but especially for intrusive bad thoughts, OCD therapists
are teaching clients to respond differently to the presence of a thought. Simply put,
we want to have patients label thoughts as just thoughts and nothing more. OCD
often presses patients to feel they have to respond to them, do something, or get
rid of them. So we teach patients to let OCD thoughts go in and go out, as they do
with other thoughts. Do not make efforts not to think or block thoughts. That does
not work, or it makes them come more frequently. But, also, do not hang on to the
thought through actions physical or mental (use it as reason to check, analyze evi-
dence for the bad thought, review the day, or replace it with a good thought). The
ACT approaches described below can also help with this for ERP, or as an alternative
treatment approach.
While the goal of the treatment of OCD is to eliminate rituals, there are a num-
ber of ways to address this other than full-scale elimination if this is not possible.
This is where the protocol-limited research programs and independent clinical work
may diverge. Often, after the education component is completed, the patient who is
not ready to begin exposure may be “deemed inappropriate for the treatment pro-
gram.” Some research-based programs require full adherence to a planned limita-
tion of rituals (e.g., a week of no washing or limited showering); however, only some
patients can do this, and other options are available for the private practice clini-
cian. Actually, the patients who agree readily to treatment and jump in are often the
easiest to treat. It is important to tell patients that while it may be more difficult and
anxiety provoking to try to eliminate rituals (e.g., washing only before meals or after

-- 67 of 74 --

144 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
going to the bathroom), they will get faster relief. While the former may be prefer-
able, a more gradual approach is workable, and more patients may be able to comply.
For all OCD symptom presentations, there are ways to delay or modify rituals.
Many patients are more willing to consider these as first steps to delay a ritual (e.g.,
delay checking for 20 minutes). The other option is to pick one period of day to be
OCD free (e.g., “From 9:00 to 12:00 P.M., I won’t rearrange things in my kitchen”).
Also, a patient can work to reduce the frequency of the ritual (limit reassurance ques-
tions to 10 rather than usual 30 per day). Finally, a patient can “do OCD wrong” (e.g.,
use two squirts of soap instead of four, or do their full OCD prayer ritual but in a
different order).
An important component of safety learning is having a plan for what to do
when anxiety persists during and after ERP sessions. Rather than white-knuckling it
through the experience, or trying to fight the anxiety, patients should engage in daily
activities. This helps them learn that uncertainty, anxiety, and obsessional thoughts
are manageable experiences that do not have to bully the person into avoidance or
interrupt or limit their activities. Also, clients need to have their OCD treatment
plan in mind or nearby, knowing how to react rather than just waiting for it to arise
and being surprised. This often involves written notes, reminders on phones, and
so forth, since being able to remember is difficult under stress and especially in the
beginning
Implications of Client Variables for Treatment Planning
As in the predictors of outcome for other anxiety disorders, severity of disorder,
comorbidity with other psychological disorders, and overvalued ideation of OCD
thoughts are predictors of poorer outcome in OCD treatment. It may be that these
patients show slower progress, need more sessions, set more modest goals, and dem-
onstrate more modest outcomes. However, clinically, we have found with OCD that
severity may interact with motivation, such that if the OCD is very distressing or
interfering, patients are motivated to reclaim their lives or “not want to continue
like this anymore.” If the client is willing, it may be helpful to attempt treatment
even with comorbid conditions because OCD is often easier to treat and quicker to
show treatment response, which can help with hope and motivation. Very serious
depression or substance use may require alternative psychosocial and/or medication
treatments before the person has enough energy and focus to engage in the challeng-
ing work of ERP. Overvalued ideation may require more cognitive therapy before
ERP can begin. Finally, demographic variables have not been strong predictors of
response to treatments for anxiety.
Group Therapy
A few studies have examined the effectiveness of group treatment (ERP and cogni-
tive therapy) for OCD (McLean et al., 2001). One strength of a group approach is
that patients can get support and understanding, and learn that they do not suffer
alone. Education about OCD can be delivered in a didactic format, since the general
cognitive-behavioral model of OCD applies to patients across symptom dimensions.
However, the symptom heterogeneity in OCD also limits this approach. Specifically,

-- 68 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	145
different patients in the group may require individual ERP plans that cannot practi-
cally be implemented in group format, or even within a group therapy room. Still,
patients may experience vicarious learning by watching others engage and manage
feared situations, and help their cohorts to challenge mistaken beliefs. Patients can
also provide support and encouragement to each other. There are also consumer-led
support groups that supplement professional treatment or help with relapse preven-
tion.
Partner or Family Involvement in Symptoms
Individuals with OCD who live with a partner (e.g., spouse) or relatives often involve
these other people in obsessions, avoidance, and compulsive rituals. For example, a
man with contamination obsessions required that his family take showers with a
specific type of soap before coming into his bedroom. In a less direct manner, OCD
can affect friends and coworkers. People interacting with individuals with OCD
often comply with requests to follow rituals, provide reassurance, and engage in
avoidance strategies to keep their loved ones from experiencing anxiety. Because
such accommodation is akin to OCD sufferers performing rituals by themselves, it
must be targeted in treatment, and the extent to which others can be helped to cut
down on such behavior is a predictor of more successful treatment outcome. Indeed,
family accommodation is one of the strongest predictors of symptom severity and
treatment outcome for both child and adult OCD. This is not that family behavior is
the cause of the OCD, but it certainly can maintain OCD. Families and spouses can
have a very positive impact on recovery. Additional suggestions for treating OCD in
the context of family accommodation can be found in Abramowitz and colleagues
(2013). In a more global manner, low levels of social support or, in contrast, high
levels of hostility and criticism, are negative predictors of outcome and influence
relapse across multiple disorders, including anxiety disorders. Therefore, interven-
tions that increase social support and decrease negative social interactions are likely
to impact treatment outcome. These interventions need to be “responsive.” Some
families are very supportive and have low levels of OCD accommodation. Other
family work is crucial for treatment success to address impediments that are clearly
present and impactful.
Relapse Prevention
For the majority of people with OCD, treatment produces noticeable improvement
in symptoms, but residual obsessional fears, avoidance, and compulsive urges usu-
ally remain (Abramowitz, 1998). In addition, these residual symptoms are likely to
wax and wane over time, often becoming more intense during periods of stress (e.g.,
relationship difficulties, job loss). Thus, any improvement attained during treatment
should be carefully monitored to ensure that temporary lapses do not turn into full-
blown relapses. Relapse prevention programs for OCD using ERP and cognitive
therapy have been developed and tested (e.g., Hiss, Foa, & Kozak, 1994), and can be
used as a way to taper off treatment.
An important part of preventing relapse is recognizing that obsessions and com-
pulsions may be inevitable. Thus, the patient should not be surprised or frightened

-- 69 of 74 --

146 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
by such symptoms when they occur. Cognitive therapy techniques can be used to
modify any maladaptive beliefs about the recurrence of symptoms (e.g., “It’s my
fault that I’m slipping,” “I’ll be back to how I was before treatment”). Psychoedu-
cation helps patients understand that OCD is usually a chronic problem, that they
should expect symptom exacerbation during times of life stress, and that they should
interpret symptoms within this framework and use the skills they have learned dur-
ing treatment to manage these residual problems. Relapse prevention also teaches
patients to recognize when new or different obsessions and compulsions arise, and
how to view these as similar to symptoms that may already have been addressed by
recognizing any rule or “have to” behavior is OCD and to recognize the function of
the behavior or compulsion to get rid of anxiety. Indeed, rapid application of ERP
techniques can prevent symptoms from escalating or interfering with functioning.
Other Treatment Approaches
While a wealth of research evidence supports the use of ERP, pharmacotherapy, and
to a lesser extent, ACT, other forms of psychotherapy have not been evaluated for
OCD. Mindfulness approaches, often a part of ACT protocols, provide clients with a
way to notice rather than react to their thoughts or feel compelled to action, and may
therefore be a helpful tool for addressing OCD. Unfortunately, at times, therapists
who do not use empirically supported approaches end up inadvertently reinforcing
OCD symptoms. For example, therapists who repeatedly try to provide reassurance
to patients with obsessional doubts—instead of helping them face their anxiety and
learn to manage obsessional uncertainty and doubt—are helping the patient ritualize
by reassurance seeking. Others try to “help” patients overcome obsessions by trying
to stop these thoughts (e.g., by snapping a rubber band on their arm when an obses-
sion comes to mind) rather than confront them therapeutically to learn that they are
not dangerous. This “thought stopping” technique, however, is akin to mental rituals
such as thought suppression, which, as we have discussed, do not work in the long
run (i.e., obsessions return, especially when the person tries to dismiss them). Finally,
the first inclination of many therapists when they see anxious and fearful individu-
als may be to try to soothe them, perhaps by teaching them relaxation strategies
or biofeedback. Unfortunately, however, this approach is the opposite of exposure
therapy, in which the person is helped to go toward anxiety in order to learn that it is
a temporary feeling, that, although unpleasant, is not dangerous. Approaches such
as these are not consistent with the conceptual models of OCD described earlier;
therefore, they are not likely to provide patients with long-term relief from obses-
sions and compulsions.
CONCLUSION
OCD is a severe and functionally impairing condition with a heterogeneous pre-
sentation. Even the most experienced clinicians find themselves at once astounded
and baffled by the complexity of the psychopathology, the rich patterns of anxiety-
provoking thoughts and anxiety-reducing behaviors, and the severity of the impair-
ments that occur in OCD. Although a definitive cause has not been established,

-- 70 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	147
various biological and psychological models have been proposed. Yet, as with many
psychological disorders, more is understood about the symptoms of OCD than about
its etiology. Fortunately, understanding the symptoms—specifically, that obsessional
thoughts provoke anxiety and compulsive rituals are performed to reduce anxiety—
has led to tremendous breakthroughs in treatment. Exposure, response prevention,
and ACT are all effective strategies for reducing symptoms, although each comes
with its own barriers to success. Many patients achieve excellent outcomes that were
unheard of before the 1960s, but residual symptoms are still the norm. The field has,
however, begun to identify factors that may reliably predict poorer response, such
as poor insight into the senselessness of obsessional fears, severe depression, and
family hostility.
Still, important topics require further study. For example, patient readiness
programs would ensure a lower refusal or premature dropout rate. Treatments that
teach partners (and other family members) effectively how to assist with a loved
one’s ERP would also prove beneficial given the high prevalence of relational prob-
lems and symptom accommodation in families of patients with OCD. From the clini-
cal perspective, providing successful treatment for OCD can be one of the greatest
challenges a therapist may experience. Yet the fact that most patients show at least
some response to contemporary cognitive and behavioral techniques and return
to meaningful and value driven lives makes working with this patient population
highly rewarding.
REFERENCES
Abramowitz, J. S. (1998). Does cognitive-behavioral therapy cure obsessive– compulsive dis-
order?: A meta-analytic evaluation of clinical significance. Behavior Therapy, 29, 339–355.
Abramowitz, J. S. (2004). Treatment of obsessive– compulsive disorder in patients with comor-
bid major depression. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 60, 1133–1141.
Abramowitz, J. S., Baucom, D. H., Wheaton, M. G., Boeding, S., Fabricant, L. E., Paprocki, C., &
Fischer, M. S. (2013). Enhancing exposure and response prevention for OCD: A couple-
based approach. Behavior Modification, 37(2), 189–210.
Abramowitz, J. S., Deacon, B., Olatunji, B., Wheaton, M. G., Berman, N., Losardo, D., . . . Hale,
L. R. (2010). Assessment of obsessive– compulsive symptom dimensions: Development
and evaluation of the Dimensional Obsessive– Compulsive Scale. Psychological Assess-
ment, 22, 180–198.
Abramowitz, J. S., & Jacoby, R. J. (2014). Obsessive– compulsive disorder in adults. Boston: Hogrefe.
Abramowitz, J. S., Schwartz, S. A., Moore, K. M., & Luenzmann, K. R. (2003). Obsessive–
compulsive symptoms in pregnancy and the puerperium: A review of the literature.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 17, 461–478.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Bandelow, B., Baldwin, D., Abelli, M., Altamura, C., Dell’Osso, B., Domschke, K., . . . Rie-
derer, P. (2016). Biological markers for anxiety disorders, OCD and PTSD—a consensus
statement: Part I. Neuroimaging and genetics. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 17(5),
321–365.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Univer-
sities Press.
Black, D. W., Gaffney, G., Schlosser, S., & Gabel, J. (1998). The impact of obsessive– compulsive

-- 71 of 74 --

148 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
disorder on the family: Preliminary findings. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186,
440–442.
Clark, D. A. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for OCD. New York: Guilford Press.
Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., & Vervliet, B. (2014). Maximizing
exposure therapy: An inhibitory learning approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 58,
10–23.
Enright, S. (1996). Obsessive– compulsive disorder: Anxiety disorder or schizotype? In R.
Rapee (Ed.), Current controversies in the anxiety disorders (pp. 161–190). New York: Guilford
Press.
Fallon, B. A., Javitch, J. A., Hollander, E., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1991). Hypochondriasis and
obsessive– compulsive disorder: Overlaps in diagnosis and treatment. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 52, 457–460.
Fals-Stewart, W., Marks, A. P., & Schafer, J. (1993). A comparison of behavioral group therapy
and individual behavior therapy in treating obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 189–193.
Foa, E. B., Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Kozak, M. J. (1999). Feared consequences, fixity
of belief and treatment outcome in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 30,
717–724.
Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., & Cahill, S. P. (2006). Emotional processing theory: An update. In
B. O. Rothbaum (Ed.), Pathological anxiety: Emotional processing in etiology and treatment
(pp. 3–24). New York: Guilford Press.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective informa-
tion. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20–35.
Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S., Campeas, R., Franklin, M. E., . . . Tu,
X. (2005). Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of exposure and ritual prevention, clo-
mipramine, and their combination in the treatment of obsessive– compulsive disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 151–161.
Frost, R. O., & Steketee, S. (2002). Cognitive approaches to obsessions and compulsions: Theory,
assessment, and treatment. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Gershuny, B. S., Baer, L., Radomsky, A. S., Wilson, K. A., & Jenike, M. A. (2003). Connections
among symptoms of obsessive– compulsive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder:
A case series. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 1029–1041.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2011). Acceptance and commitment therapy: The
process and practice of mindful change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Hiss, H., Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1994). Relapse prevention program for treatment of
obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 801–808.
Koran, L. M. (2000). Quality of life in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 23, 509–517.
Ladouceur, R., Freeston, M. H., Rheaume, J., Dugas, M. J., Gagnon, F., Thibodeau, N., & Fournier,
S. (2000). Strategies used with intrusive thoughts: A comparison of OCD patients with
anxious and community controls. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 179–187.
Lensi, F., Cassano, G. B., Correddu, G., Ravagli, S., Kunovac, J. L., & Akiskal, H. S. (1996).
Obsessive– compulsive disorder: Familial– developmental history, symptomatology,
comorbidity and course with special reference to gender-related differences. British Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 169, 101–107.
Lindsay, M., Crino, R., & Andrews, G. (1997). Controlled trial of exposure and response pre-
vention in obsessive– compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 135–139.
McKay, D., Abramowitz, J. S., Calamari, J. E., Kyrios, M., Radomsky, A. S., Sookman, D., . . .
Wilhelm, S. (2004). A critical evaluation of obsessive– compulsive disorder subtypes:
Symptoms versus mechanisms. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 283–313.

-- 72 of 74 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	149
McKay, D., Sookman, D., Neziroglu, F., Wilhelm, S., Stein, D. J., Kyrios, M., . . . Veale, D. (2015).
Efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatry
Research, 225, 236–246.
McLean, P. D., Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S., Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., . . . Ander-
son, K. W. (2001). Cognitive versus behavior therapy in the group treatment of obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 205–214.
Mowrer, O. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New York: Wiley.
Nestadt, G., Samuels, J., Riddle, M. A., Liang, K.-Y., Bienvenu, O. J., Hoehn-Saric, R., . . . Cul-
len, B. (2001). The relationship between obsessive– compulsive disorder and anxiety and
affective disorders: Results from the Johns Hopkins OCD Family Study. Psychological
Medicine, 31, 481–487.
Olatunji, B. O., Davis, M. L., Powers, M. B., & Smits, J. A. (2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy
for obsessive– compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis of treatment outcome and modera-
tors. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47(1), 33–41.
Pato, M. T., Zohar-Kadouch, R., Zohar, J., & Murphy, D. L. (1988). Return of symptoms after
discontinuation of clomipramine in patients with obsessive– compulsive disorder. Amer-
ican Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1521–1525.
Rachman, S. (1997). A cognitive theory of obsessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 793–
802.
Rachman, S., & de Silva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal obsessions. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 16, 233–248.
Rasmussen, S. A., & Tsuang, M. T. (1986). Clinical characteristics and family history in DSM-
III obsessive– compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 317–322.
Rauch, S., & Jenike, M. (1998). Pharmacological treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder.
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work. London: Oxford
University Press.
Ricciardi, J. N., & McNally, R. J. (1995). Depressed mood is related to obsessions but not com-
pulsions in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 249–256.
Ruscio, A. M., Stein, D. J., Chiu, W. T., & Kessler, R. C. (2010). The epidemiology of obsessive–
compulsive disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Molecular Psychia-
try, 15(1), 53–63.
Russell, E. J., Fawcett, J. M., & Mazmanian, D. (2013). Risk of obsessive– compulsive disorder
in pregnant and postpartum women: A meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74(4),
377–385.
Salkovskis, P. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral approaches to the understanding of obsessional
problems. In R. Rapee (Ed.), Current controversies in the anxiety disorders (pp. 103–133).
New York: Guilford Press.
Saxena, S., Bota, R. G., & Brody, A. L. (2001). Brain–behavior relationships in obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 6, 82–101.
Simpson, H., & Liebowitz, M. (2005). Combining pharmacotherapy and cognitive behavioral
therapy in the treatment of OCD. In J. Abramowitz & A. Houts (Eds.), Concepts and con-
troversies in OCD (pp. 359–376). New York: Springer Science.
Skoog, G., & Skoog, I. (1999). A 40-year follow-up of patients with obsessive– compulsive dis-
order. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 121–127.
Steketee, G. S., Chambless, D. L., & Tran, G. Q. (2001). Effects of Axis I and II comorbidity on
behavior therapy outcome for obsessive– compulsive disorder and agoraphobia. Compre-
hensive Psychiatry, 42, 76–86.
Steketee, G., Eisen, J., Dyck, I., Warshaw, M., & Rasmussen, S. (1999). Predictors of course in
obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 89, 229–238.
Twohig, M. P., Abramowitz, J. S., Bluett, E. J., Fabricant, L. E., Jacoby, R. J., Morrison, K. L.,

-- 73 of 74 --

150 	P S Y C H O P A T H O L O G Y
. . . Smith, B. M. (2015). Exposure therapy for OCD from an acceptance and commit-
ment therapy (ACT) framework. Journal of Obsessive– Compulsive and Related Disorders, 6,
167–173.
Twohig, M. P., Abramowitz, J. S., Smith, B. M., Fabricant, L. E., Jacoby, R. J., Morrison, K. L.,
. . . Ledermann, T. (2018). Adding acceptance and commitment therapy to exposure and
response prevention for obsessive– compulsive disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 108, 1–9.
Twohig, M. P., Hayes, S. C., Plumb, J. C., Pruitt, L. D., Collins, A. B., Hazlett-Stevens, H., &
Woidneck, M. R. (2010). A randomized clinical trial of acceptance and commitment ther-
apy versus progressive relaxation training for obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(5), 705–716.
Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Greenwald, S., Hwu, H.-G., Kyoon Lee, C., . . .
Cross National Collaborative Group. (1994). The cross national epidemiology of obses-
sive compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 55, 5–10.
Whiteside, S. P., Port, J. D., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2004). A meta-analysis of functional neuro-
imaging in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 132, 69–79.
Zohar, J., & Insel, T. R. (1987). Obsessive– compulsive disorder: Psychobiological approaches to
diagnosis, treatment, and pathophysiology. Biological Psychiatry, 22, 667–687.

-- 74 of 74 --

