7
C H A P T E R 	1
Openings and Introductions
By the time you have completed an initial interview, you should have
(1) obtained information from your patient and (2) established the basis
for a good working relationship. The information includes various types
of history (a history is a detailed account that includes current symptoms,
previous illnesses, medications, family and social relationships, health risk
issues—in short, everything that bears on your patient’s life and mental
health problems) and a mental status examination (or MSE, which is an eval-
uation of your patient’s current thinking and behavior).
In the course of this book, I will take you through each section of
the history and MSE, in more or less the chronological order you would
use when talking with your patient. In separate chapters, I’ll discuss the
content of the information you should expect to obtain and the inter-
view techniques that are most appropriate to that content. Where it seems
appropriate, I will also discuss issues of rapport.
TIME FACTORS
In the first few moments of an initial interview, you will need to accom-
plish several tasks.
• You should indicate what form your interview will take—how much
time it will take, what sort of questions you will ask, and the like.
• You should convey some idea about the sort of information you
expect your patient (or other informant) to give you.
• You must create a comfortable and secure environment that will
allow your patient as much control as possible, under the circum-
stances.

-- 1 of 35 --

8 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Table 1.1 lists the basic material that should be covered by the time
you complete your interview. An experienced clinician might take 45 min-
utes to examine the average patient. A student will probably require sev-
eral hours to obtain all the relevant information. Regardless of your level
of experience, your emphasis should be on collecting the most informa-
tion possible early in the relationship—before you can become too com-
mitted to a diagnosis.
Even a seasoned interviewer occasionally requires more than one ses-
sion for an initial evaluation, and anyone needs more time for a patient
who is unusually talkative, vague, hostile, suspicious, or hard to under-
stand, or for one who has a complicated story to tell. Some patients sim-
ply cannot tolerate a lengthy interview, and even those who are hospital-
ized may have other appointments to keep. Multiple interviews also give a
patient time to reflect and to recall material that might have been initially
omitted. Of course, if you interview relatives or other informants, you will
need additional sessions, plus time to integrate the information from all
of your sources.
I realize that with the rush of modern health care, time available is
constantly shrinking. So I’ve expressed as percentages the amounts of
time you should plan to devote to the various portions of an average ini-
tial interview:
15%: Determine the chief complaint and encourage free speech.
30%: Pursue specific diagnoses; ask about suicide, history of vio-
lence, and substance misuse.
15%: Obtain medical history; conduct review of systems; obtain fam-
ily history.
25%: Obtain rest of personal and social history; evaluate character
pathology.
10%: Conduct MSE.
5%: Discuss diagnosis and treatment with patient; plan next meeting.
Your own professional needs may change the focus somewhat. For
example, social workers may spend additional time on the personal and
social history. (At one time, some institutions and agencies assigned to
social workers the responsibility for obtaining the entire social history.
Today, we believe that all aspects of the entire history should be gathered
by at least one clinician, who can then synthesize this information into a
coherent clinical picture.)
Regardless of your profession, I recommend that you try to get the
whole story early in the relationship with your patient. After the first few
sessions, even experienced clinicians sometimes assume that they know a

-- 2 of 35 --

9
TABLE 1.1. Outline of the Initial Interview
Chief complaint
History of present illness
Stressors
Onset
Symptoms
Previous episodes
Treatment
Consequences
Course
Treatment so far
Hospitalizations?
Effects on patient, others
Personal and social history
Childhood and growing up
Where born?
Number of siblings and
position
Reared by one or both
parents?
Relationship with parents
If adopted:
What circumstances?
Extrafamilial?
Health as child
Problems related to puberty
Abuse (physical or sexual)?
Education
Last grade completed
Scholastic problems
Overly active
School refusal
Behavior problems
Suspension or expulsion?
Sociable as child?
Hobbies, interests
Life as an adult
Current living situation
Lives with whom?
Where?
Ever homeless?
Support network
Mobility
Finances
Marital history
Age(s) at marriage(s)
Number of marriages
Age(s) at termination(s) and
how ended
Number, age, sex of children
Stepchildren?
Marital problems?
Sexual preference, adjustment
Problems with intercourse
Birth control methods
Extramarital partners?
Physical, sexual abuse?
Work history
Current occupation
Number of jobs
Reason(s) for job change(s)
Ever fired?
Life as an adult (cont.)
Leisure activities
Clubs, organizations
Interests, hobbies
Military service
Branch, rank
Years served
Disciplinary problems?
Combat?
Legal problems ever?
Criminal record?
Litigation
Religion
Denomination
Levels of interest
Medical history
Major illnesses
Operations
Nonmental medications
Allergies
Environmental
Food
Medications
Nonmental hospitalizations
Physical impairments
Risk factors for HIV/AIDS?
Adult physical or sexual abuse?
Review of systems
Changes in appetite
Head injury
Seizures
Chronic pain
Unconsciousness
Premenstrual syndrome
Review for somatization
disorder
Family history
Describe relatives
Mental disorder in relatives?
Substance misuse
Type(s) of substance(s)
Duration of use
Quantity
Consequences
Medical problems
Loss of control
Personal and interpersonal
problems
Job difficulties
Legal consequences
Financial problems
Misuse of medications
Prescription
Over-the-counter
Personality traits
Lifelong behavior patterns
Violence
Arrests
Suicide attempts
Methods
Consequences
Drugs or alcohol associated?
Suicide attempts (cont.)
Seriousness
Psychological
Physical
Mental status exam
Appearance
Apparent age
Race
Posture
Nutrition
Hygiene
Hairstyle
Clothing
Neat?
Clean?
Type/fashion?
Behavior
Activity level
Tremors?
Mannerisms and stereotypies
Smiles?
Eye contact
Speech clear?
Mood
Type
Lability
Appropriateness
Flow of thought
Word associations
Rate and rhythm of speech
Content of thought
Phobias
Anxiety
Obsessions, compulsions
Thoughts of suicide
Delusions
Hallucinations
Language
Comprehension
Fluency
Naming
Repetition
Reading
Writing
Cognition
Orientation
Person
Place
Time
Memory
Immediate
Recent
Remote
Attention and concentration
Serial sevens
Count backwards
Cultural information
Five presidents
Abstract thinking
Similarities
Differences
Insight and judgment

-- 3 of 35 --

10 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
patient well and ignore certain vital information that may have escaped
them.
Of course, just as no one has unlimited time, no evaluation can ever
be considered complete. As long as you continue to care for your patient,
you will be adding new facts and observations to your original database.
But if you have done your job well in the beginning, these will largely be
matters of corroborative detail that won’t substantially affect diagnosis or
treatment.
Many patients seek help for serious problems that they find frighten-
ing, overwhelming, or even life-threatening. You should elicit their stories
in such a way that they feel they have received a complete, fair, profes-
sional evaluation. If your patient is unusually dramatic, slow, or discur-
sive, try to understand this behavior in the light of the stresses and anxi-
eties anyone might face, and allow additional time.
SETTINGS
The first moments any professional person spends with a new patient set
the tone for all subsequent interactions. Careful attention to such simple
matters as introductions and the patient’s comfort and sense of control
helps establish a relationship grounded in respect and cooperation. If you
have your own private office, you can decorate it as nicely as you choose,
but institutional offices are often less than regal. Fortunately, the effec-
tiveness of the interview is not related to the elegance of the surround-
ings. Though a measure of privacy will yield the most information, I have
seen excellent interviews done at the bedside, or even in a corner of a busy
hospital day room. What’s paramount is your concern for the patient’s
comfort and privacy.
Make the best of what you have available. Sitting across a desk from
the patient, as is traditional in so many offices, creates an inflexible bar-
rier between the two of you. It doesn’t allow leeway to give more space
to the suspicious patient or to draw nearer someone whose depression
requires the close comfort of another human being. Try instead to
arrange your chairs so you can face the patient across the corner of a desk
or table. That way, you can vary the distance between the two of you, as
the needs of the moment indicate. If you are right-handed, you can more
comfortably take notes if the patient sits to your left. Of course, two chairs
that directly face one another will work well, too. By the way, try to have
available a box or pocket pack of facial tissues. You never know who in the
room is going to need one.
At the same time, you have another duty—one whose importance I
won’t have to spend any time at all trying to sell. That task is maintaining

-- 4 of 35 --

Openings and Introductions 	11
your own safety. The vast majority of mental health encounters are unevent-
ful, but in rare cases something untoward happens that results in harm
to the clinician, the patient, or both. (In 2006 Wayne Fenton, a psychia-
trist who specialized in the management of schizophrenia at the National
Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Maryland, was beaten to death
by one of his patients—an attack that made headlines across the country.)
It should become instinctive with you that at the beginning of every
patient interview, you check to ensure your own safety and that of others.
Practically speaking, this means following three principles: (1) Interview
in a place where there are others nearby; (2) have available an easily trig-
gered emergency alert system, such as an alarm bell; and (3) when you are
conducting an interview in a closed office, seat yourself so that you are
closer to the door than the patient is, with no desk or other furniture that
could hinder a speedy exit if one should become necessary.
Regardless of where you interview, your own appearance can affect
your relationship with the patient. What’s considered professional may
depend somewhat upon the region where you work and the customs of
your particular clinic or hospital. This observation may seem obvious, but
it bears repeating: You will be perceived as more professional if you pay
attention to your dress, grooming, and manner.
OK, standards may have changed a bit over the past decade or two,
but dress can still make a difference. In general, patients readily accept
conservative clothing and hairstyles; excessively casual dress or manners
may suggest nonchalance about the importance of your meeting. Indeed,
a 2005 survey revealed that by huge margins, patients preferred physi-
cians to be formally dressed and were more inclined to reveal personal
information to clinicians who wore white coats than to those who were
casually attired. Most of the patients also stated that they were more
likely to follow the advice of someone who was professionally attired.
The patients surveyed were on average middle-aged; though teenagers
and children could yet prove to be significant exceptions to this rule, the
report bears careful consideration. (It is probably relevant to other health
care personnel as well.)
Although most mental health clinicians don’t wear white coats, cloth-
ing that is neat, clean, and not too casual will advertise your status as
a professional. Limit any jewelry to something modest; don’t antago-
nize someone whose cooperation you need with adornments that sug-
gest wealth or status the patient could never hope to achieve. If you wear
pins, pendants, or items of clothing that indicate a religious affiliation,
consider whether any of your prospective clients might regard them as a
barrier to an effective relationship. Observe how other professionals in
your setting dress and behave; their examples can help you judge what’s
appropriate.

-- 5 of 35 --

12 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
BEGINNING THE RELATIONSHIP
Introduce yourself, offer to shake hands, and indicate the seating arrange-
ment you prefer. (At a patient’s bedside, always sit down, even if you intend
to stay for only a few minutes. Even if you have a plane to catch, you don’t
want to appear too hurried to take time with the patient. Besides, if you’re
a patient lying in bed, it’s uncomfortable to have someone staring down
on you.) If you happen to be late for the interview, acknowledge it with an
apology. Is your patient’s name an uncommon one? Be sure that you have
pronounced it correctly. If this is the first time you have met, explain your
status (student? intern? consultant?) and the purpose of this interview.
What do you hope to learn? What information do you have already? Try
to give your patient an estimate of how much time you expect to spend
together.
Often you will already know something about the patient from case
notes of previous workers, from a hospital chart, or from a physician’s
referral. You can save time and increase the accuracy of your assessment
by reviewing this material before you begin. However, for most of this
book, we’ll assume that you have no access to such information.
Although some interviewers try to ease into a relationship with
small talk, I usually recommend against it. In most cases your patient has
come for treatment because of troubling problems. Comments about the
weather, baseball, or television shows may seem a distraction or, worse, an
expression of unconcern on your part. It seems better to go right to the
heart of the matter.
Should you feel that you must start with small talk, ask a question
that demands more than a yes–no response. For example:
“How was the traffic coming here?”
“How have you been enjoying the summer months?”
If nothing else, such a question shows that you expect active participation.
Especially during the early part of your interview, you want to encourage
the patient to elaborate, not to answer “yes” or “no” while you do most
of the work. (We’ll further consider this and other aspects of interview
control in Chapters 4 and 10.)
Occasionally a relative or close friend will want to accompany the
patient into the interview room—a situation to which you can respond
in either of two ways. I prefer to see patients and informants separately,
because it maximizes the amount of information I obtain. To reinforce
the patient’s sense of autonomy, I almost always start with the patient,
advising the informant that “you’ll be next.” Occasionally, however, you
may need to take the other tack and see patient and informant together.

-- 6 of 35 --

Openings and Introductions 	13
That can happen when the patient is severely impaired, such as with an
advanced case of dementia. Then having the relative in the room can be a
real time saver. Another occasion on which you’ll need the dual-interview
format is when the patient strongly requests it, such as when a person with
severe anxiety or depression requires extra support.
TAKING NOTES
In most cases you will want to take notes. Few of us can remember even
briefly all the material we hear, and you may not have the opportunity to
write up your interview right away. So point out that you will be taking
notes, and make sure that this is all right with the patient.
Nonetheless, you should try to keep note taking to a minimum. This
will allow you to spend more time observing your patient’s behavior and
facial expressions for clues to feelings. You won’t be able to get every-
thing down on paper or to write complete sentences (other than the chief
complaint, which we’ll discuss in the next chapter). Instead, jot down key
words that can indicate which issues to explore later or that can serve as
reminders when you write up your report. Try to keep your pen in hand;
this avoids the distraction of repeatedly picking it up. You can lay it aside
when you discuss especially sensitive topics that the patient might not care
to have recorded.
This brings up the vexed question of computerized records. With our
record systems increasingly online, even in the cloud, we clinicians face
pressure to keyboard information as we talk with our patients. I confess
that I simply cannot imagine an effective way of doing this while talking
with a new patient, if we are to have any hope of creating good rapport.
For me, the answer still seems to be to take notes with a pencil, and write
up the summary later. This position seems to resonate with colleagues—
some of whom point out that with the advent of increasingly accurate
dictation programs, even those of us who type at the hunt-and-peck level
can enter digital information efficiently.
Now here’s another problem: Sometimes a patient will ask that you
keep certain material out of the chart. If you’re a student, no problem. But
if this request comes early in your relationship as the responsible clinician,
it is usually better to comply, especially when it only applies to a limited
portion of the interview. If the patient seems extremely uncomfortable
with any note taking, you can explain that you will need some notes for
later review to help make sense of it all. In the rare event that the patient
insists, give in, put down your pen, and later transcribe all that you can
remember. What you want is to complete an informative interview, not
to win a contest of wills. However, at some point—perhaps not right now
when you are trying to complete the interview—you might raise the point

-- 7 of 35 --

14 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
again. Having a significant hole in the database could prove problematic,
especially if this patient will be seen by other clinicians later.
Reviewing an audio recording of a session can help you spot diffi-
culties in your interview style. You can often uncover deficiencies that
you would have missed with a less faithful record of your conversation.
As an everyday practice, however, it has drawbacks: Reviewing a record-
ing takes a lot of time, and some patients may feel even less comfortable
with recording than with note taking. If you do decide to make an audio
recording, begin only after you have explained its educational purpose
and obtained permission.
You may also need to explain that state laws and professional ethics
could require you to report certain information that has a bearing on
the safety of others. This principle, formalized in California in 1974 by
the Tarasoff decision, clearly states that health care personnel have a duty
to protect identifiable persons against whom threats have been made.
Although not all states have enacted such a statute, clinicians everywhere
are advised to behave as if it has been enacted. Of course, if you are a stu-
dent, you should never take such action on your own; discuss at once any
threats or other concerns you have with a supervisor, who will then take
the lead in fulfilling the duty to protect.
SAMPLE OPENINGS
Effective openings have many possible variations. Here is a good one.
INTERVIEWER: Good morning, Mr. Dean. I’m Emily Watts, a third-
year medical student. I’d like to talk with you for about an hour
to learn as much as I can about people with problems like yours.
Do you have the time to spend with me now?
PATIENT: Yes, that will be fine.
INTERVIEWER: Why don’t you sit right here? (Motions toward a chair.)
Do you mind if I take some notes?
PATIENT: No, everyone else seems to.
This opening works because it quickly conveys information that is impor-
tant to the patient: the interviewer’s name and position, the purpose of
the interview, and the time that will be required. The interviewer also
manages the business of seating arrangements and obtaining permis-
sion for note taking. However, some patients may bridle at the notion of
having a problem. Ms. Watts was interviewing an established patient, so
her question went unchallenged. New patients might respond better to a
simple “Please tell me why you are here.”

-- 8 of 35 --

Openings and Introductions 	15
Here’s another useful opening:
PATIENT: Are you the student they told me about?
INTERVIEWER: No, I’m Dr. Holden, a psychology intern. I spoke with
your therapist earlier this afternoon, and I’d like to spend some
time with you to see what we can do to help you out. We can use
this little room.
PATIENT: (Nods.)
INTERVIEWER: To help you best, I’m going to need all the information
I can get. I’d like to jot down a few notes, if that’s all right with
you.
PATIENT: No problem.
Sometimes the information- gathering phase takes more than a sin-
gle interview. You might start the follow-up session by saying, “Have you
thought of anything more to say from our previous discussion?” or “What
did you say to your [husband, daughter, etc.] about our last meeting?”
Otherwise, just pick up where you left off last session when time ran out.

-- 9 of 35 --

16
C H A P T E R 	2
Chief Complaint
and Free Speech
The chief complaint states the patient’s reasons for seeking care, whereas
the free speech that immediately follows encourages the patient to talk
about all these reasons. The words you use to prime the information
pump can greatly affect your subsequent yield, and they fall into one of
two principal interviewing styles: directive and nondirective.
DIRECTIVE VERSUS NONDIRECTIVE QUESTIONS
By asking many specific questions, a directive interviewer explicitly
provides the structure that tells the patient what sort of information is
wanted. The nondirective interviewer more passively absorbs whatever
information the patient chooses to present. A nondirective style usually
yields strong rapport and reliable facts. However, an exclusively nondirec-
tive style also produces less information. For example, without direction,
the patient may not realize that family history is important or could feel
too embarrassed to volunteer highly personal information. A maximally
effective initial interview will use both nondirective and directive ques-
tions.
Most of the early portion of your interview should be nondirective.
This helps you establish your working relationship and learn what sorts
of problems and feelings are uppermost in your patient’s mind. But your
opening request for information should clearly state what you expect of
your patient.

-- 10 of 35 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	17
THE OPENING QUESTION
When you ask your first question, be specific. Let your patient know
exactly what you want to hear about. If, like some nondirective interview-
ers, you leave matters completely up to the patient (“What would you like
to talk about?”), you could end up with quite a lot of information about
last Sunday’s football game or the patient’s new sports car. Eventually you
would get the interview back on track, but at the cost of time and perhaps
rapport with a patient who might wonder whether you knew what you
really wanted.
You can avoid these difficulties by asking the right sort of question
in the first place:
“Please tell me what problems made you come for treatment.”
For most patients, this will serve very well. Once in a while, however, you’ll
run into someone who resents the notion that there is a problem. Of
course, you could bypass the difficulty by asking, “Please tell me why you
are here,” or “Why did you come for treatment?” For some individuals,
each of these carries seeds of discontent: Teens often don’t come of their
own volition, and you’ll encounter occasional patients whose goal is sim-
ply to find meaning in their lives. In the end, there’s no perfect opening.
If your patient objects to your opening gambit (“There’s nothing wrong
with me!”), you can usually fix the situation with the response, “Perhaps
you could just tell me your idea of why you are here.”
Whatever the exact content of the question, notice that the sample
opening requests have two qualities that affect the type of information
you will obtain:
• It tells the patient just what sort of information you seek.
• It is also open-ended. Open-ended inquiries are questions or state-
ments that cannot readily be answered in a word or two. Because
they invite patients to talk for a while about what seems important
to them, they promote a relaxed interview style early in the inter-
view that helps build rapport.
Open-ended questions and statements can serve two functions. Some
simply request more information about a point:
“I’d like to hear some more about that.”
“Could you expand on that?”
“What else happened?”

-- 11 of 35 --

18 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Others also move the story along toward the present:
“What happened after that?”
“And then what?”
“What did you do next?”
Open-ended requests can broaden the scope of information you
obtain; with more freedom to respond, patients tell you what’s important
to them. They let patients know that their stories matter to you. They also
allow you to spend less time talking and more time observing. The value
of this will become more evident in Chapter 11 when we talk about the
MSE.
Closed-ended questions more narrowly direct the sort of answer
desired and can be answered in a few words. They can be “yes–no” or
limited- choice questions (“Where were you born?” as opposed to “Tell
me about your childhood”). They, too, are useful; they are sometimes
necessary to obtain the most information in the least time. But in early
parts of the interview, use open-ended questions that will encourage your
patient to tell a story that touches on as many aspects of the case history
as are relevant.
THE CHIEF COMPLAINT
The chief complaint is the patient’s stated reason for seeking help. It is usu-
ally the first full sentence or two of the reply to your opening question:
“Tell me about the problem that brought you here.”
Importance
The chief complaint is important for either of two reasons.
1. Because it is usually the problem uppermost in the patient’s mind,
it suggests an area to explore first. Most patients have some sort of a spe-
cific problem or request. Here are some samples:
“I can’t reach my goals.”
“I have trouble forming relationships with women.”
“I hear voices.”
“I’m so depressed I feel that I can’t go on.”

-- 12 of 35 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	19
Each of these typical examples expresses some discomfort, life problem,
or fear that the patient wants help with.
2. By contrast, sometimes the chief complaint is a flat denial that any-
thing is wrong. When this is the case, it tips you off about your patient’s
insight, intelligence, or cooperation. For example:
“There’s nothing wrong with me. I’m only here because the judge
ordered it.”
“I don’t remember anything about it.”
“Absolute zero is coming, and when it gets here my brain is going
to turn to bread.”
Chief complaints like these three indicate serious pathology or resis-
tance that requires special handling. In Chapter 16 we’ll discuss patients
who resist being interviewed.
Responding
Some chief complaints suggest that your patient doesn’t quite understand
the purpose of the interview. You will sometimes encounter this sort of
vague or slightly quarrelsome chief complaint, so you should be prepared
with some good responses.
INTERVIEWER: Why did you come here for treatment?
PATIENT: You can read all about it in my record.
INTERVIEWER: I could, but it would help me learn more about you if
you’d tell me in your own words.
Here’s how one interviewer reacted to a patient who, instead of a com-
plaint, gave a prescription:
PATIENT: I think I just need some vitamins.
INTERVIEWER: Perhaps, but let’s decide that after you tell me what’s
been bothering you.
Another patient made a plea for help in getting started:
PATIENT: I really don’t know where to begin.
INTERVIEWER: Why don’t you start with when your most recent trou-
ble began?

-- 13 of 35 --

20 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Try to Learn the Real Reason for Coming
A patient’s first words don’t always express the real reason for seeking
help. Some patients don’t recognize the real reason; others may feel
ashamed or fearful of what they’ll be told. In either case, the stated chief
complaint may be only a “ticket of admission” to the help a clinician can
provide:
“I’ve been in such pain.” (But the real pain is emotional.)
“I feel anxious nearly every moment I’m awake.” (Heavy drinking is
avoided.)
“I’d like to discuss some of my relationships.” (The patient is afraid to
mention HIV/AIDS.)
“I want some advice about my mother. I wonder if she’s becoming
senile.” (The patient really wonders, “Am I going crazy?”)
Each of these initial complaints masks a deeper, less obvious reason for
seeking help. Often you can ferret out the real problem later in the inter-
view by asking:
“Is anything else bothering you?”
Sometimes you might determine your patient’s underlying motivation
only after you think you’ve completed your initial evaluation.
Regardless of what chief complaint is presented, you should write it
down in your patient’s exact words. Later, you will want to contrast it with
what you believe prompted the patient to seek help.
FREE SPEECH
During the few minutes following the chief complaint, your patient should
have the chance to discuss freely the reasons for seeking treatment. To
encourage the widest possible range of information, allow the story to
emerge with little detailed probing or other interruption from you. We’ll
call this nondirected flow of information free speech, to distinguish it from
the relatively constrained question- and-answer format of the later clinical
interview.
What Is Free Speech?
Free speech, simply put, is just an opportunity for patients to express their
thoughts without constraint or direction. “Speech with a minimum of

-- 14 of 35 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	21
structuring” is how some clinicians would put it. Experienced interview-
ers recommend this period (as much as 8 or 10 minutes in an hour-long
session) of free speech for several reasons. Some of them are the reasons
for asking any open-ended question:
• Free speech establishes you as someone who cares enough to listen
to your patient’s concerns.
• It provides the patient an opportunity to organize and explore the
reasons for seeking treatment.
• You have the opportunity to learn what is uppermost in your
patient’s mind.
• It gives you the flavor of the patient’s personality.
• Unhampered by any need to direct the conversation, you can start
making observations about mood, behavior, and thought pro-
cesses.
• Character traits may be more likely to emerge in a person who is
speaking spontaneously than in one who is answering a stream of
questions.
• When you share control during this portion of the conversation,
you establish early the expectation that your patient will be an
active partner throughout therapy.
• You can devote close attention to the content of your patient’s
speech. One study showed that as many as half the total symptoms
reported by patients are mentioned in the first 3 minutes of an
initial interview.
• It provides your patient an opportunity to bring up other concerns
that weren’t mentioned in the chief complaint.
Most patients will respond quickly and appropriately to your request
that they talk about their problems. Getting them to tell you everything
you need to know will take little redirection on your part. Some have
had so much experience telling their stories that they give you complete,
chronological accounts of their illnesses.
The opposite may be true of others, some of whom may have expe-
rienced too many interviewers who want only specific answers to closed-
ended questions. You may have to teach these patients to give you an
expanded version of their feelings and experiences. If your patient per-
sistently makes brief statements, then waits for more questions from you,
you should explicitly state what you expect. For example:
“What I’d really like is for you to tell me in your own words about your
problem. Later I’ll ask some specific questions that you can answer
briefly.”

-- 15 of 35 --

22 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
In fact, few histories unfold like a classic textbook account of a men-
tal health problem. Patients have their own ideas about what is important,
and, regardless of the apparent value of their information, it is impor-
tant that you let them make a stab at telling their stories. An occasional
patient with low intelligence or severe psychosis might not be able to give
a satisfactory narration. Then you’ll have to fall back on a much more
structured, question-and-answer strategy to obtain any history. But these
patients will be infrequent, and everyone who speaks at all will at least
give you information in the form of the mental status observations you
can make.
Allowing patients time to speak freely is at least as important now
as it has ever been, but health care reimbursement models have put an
ever-tightening squeeze on clinicians’ time. It threatens to crowd out all
but the most basic clinical interactions, tempting an interviewer to cut
directly to the chase and focus too quickly on a patient’s very first words.
I know this because I’ve done it—and must occasionally remind myself of
the importance of a prolonged period of free-running speech. If I do find
that I’ve allowed too little time at the outset for free speech, I’ll try to slip
it in later on.
AREAS OF CLINICAL INTEREST
During free speech, your patient will probably mention one or more prob-
lems. These concerns can be emotional, physical, or social; most will fall
into one of several major areas of clinical interest. When people become
mental health patients, it is usually because of problems covered by these
seven areas:
Difficulty thinking (cognitive problems, especially what DSM-5 now
calls neurocognitive disorders)
Substance use
Psychosis
Mood disturbance (depression or mania)
Excessive anxiety, avoidance behavior, and arousal
Physical complaints
Social and personality problems
Each area of clinical interest comprises a number of diagnoses that
have symptoms in common; of course, some of these diagnoses turn
up in more than one area. Later, when you obtain the history of the
present illness, you will systematically ask about the symptoms usually

-- 16 of 35 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	23
associated with each of these areas you have identified. This informa-
tion will allow you to determine which of the associated diagnoses
seems appropriate for your patient. But for now, during free speech,
just make a note (mentally or on paper) about any subject that seems
worth exploring later.
Signaling Areas of Clinical Interest
A number of symptoms and items of historical information specific to
each area of clinical interest signal the need for further exploration.
When you encounter one in your interview, consider an intensive review
of that area (discussed in Chapter 13). These “red flag” symptoms are
summarized in Table 2.1.
HOW MUCH TIME?
Unless your patient’s speech is unusually vague or rambling, the chief
complaint usually takes only a few seconds. However, the time you devote
to free speech can vary tremendously. In the rare event that your patient
is incoherent or nearly mute, you might decide within moments to adopt
a more directive interview style. But with a patient who is experienced,
well organized, and motivated to tell all, you could conceivably spend an
entire interview in free speech, listening to a history that is presented just
the way you would read it in a textbook.
Most patients will be neither of the above. Sometimes you can listen
without much interruption for the first 5 or 10 minutes. But don’t try to
stick to this recommendation too strictly; your allotment to free speech
will depend on the total time you can spend interviewing and on what you
already know about the history. As a rule, you should allow your patient
to speak freely as long as the information you obtain seems important
and relevant.
MOVING ON
The free- speech portion of the interview will draw to a close as you sense
that you have obtained a broad outline of the problems that are upper-
most in your patient’s mind. Before proceeding to the next section of your
interview, you should ask whether there are problems other than those
already mentioned. This decreases the risk that you will overlook vital
problem areas. (Even if you missed something big, it would probably show
up later. Yet the whole point of the initial interview is to try to get as much
relevant information as possible up front.)

-- 17 of 35 --

24
TABLE 2.1. Problems That Signal Areas of Clinical Interest
Difficulty thinking (cognitive problems)
Affect fluctuates
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Decreased judgment
Delusions
Hallucinations
Memory defects
Toxin ingestion
Substance misuse
Alcohol use heavier than one or two
drinks per day
Arrests or other legal problems
Financial: spending money needed for
other items
Health: blackouts, cirrhosis, abdominal
pain, vomiting
Illegal substance use
Job loss, tardiness, demotions
Memory impairment
Social problems: fights, loss of friends
Psychosis
Affect that is flat or inappropriate
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Delusions
Fantasies or illogical ideas
Hallucinations (of any of the senses)
Insight or judgment that is disturbed
Muteness
Perceptual distortions (illusions,
misinterpretations)
Social withdrawal
Speech that is hard to follow or
incoherent
Mood disturbance: depression
Activity level that is either markedly
increased or decreased
Anxiety symptoms
Appetite changes
Concentration poor
Death wishes
Feelings of worthlessness
Interest decreased for usual activities
(including sex)
Sleeplessness or excessive sleepiness
Substance misuse recently increased
Suicidal ideas
Tearfulness
Weight loss or gain
Mood disturbance: mania
Activity level increased
Distractibility
Mood disturbance: mania (cont.)
Grandiose sense of self-worth
Judgment deteriorating
Mood that is euphoric or irritable
Plans many activities
Sleep decreased (reduced need for sleep)
Speech rapid, loud, hard to interrupt
Substance misuse recently increased
Thoughts moving rapidly from one idea to
another
Anxiety and related disorders
Anxiety
Chest pain
Compulsive behavior
Dizziness
Fear of going crazy
Fear of dying or impending doom
Fear of objects or situations
Heaviness in the chest
Irregular heart beat
Nervousness
Obsessional ideas
Palpitations
Panic
Shortness of breath
Sweating
Trauma: history of severe emotional or
physical
Trembling
Worries
Physical complaints
Appetite disturbance
Convulsions
Depression, chronic
Headache
History that is complicated
Multiple complaints
Neurological complaints
Repeated treatment failures
Sexual or physical abuse during childhood
Substance misuse
Vague history
Weakness
Weight changes (up or down)
Social and personality problems
Anxiety
Behaviors that seem odd or bizarre
Dramatic presentation
Drug or alcohol misuse
Job loss, tardiness, demotions
Legal difficulties
Marital conflict

-- 18 of 35 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	25
This is also a good time to check on your understanding of all prob-
lems. Briefly summarize each, and invite your patient’s assessment of your
analysis.
INTERVIEWER: Let’s see if I have this right. You felt just fine until
about 2 weeks ago, when you proposed to your girlfriend, and
she accepted you. Since then you’ve had increasing attacks of
anxiety, you’ve felt depressed, and you can’t concentrate on your
studies. Now you’re afraid you might have heart disease because
your pulse races. Is that about right?
PATIENT: That’s pretty much it.
INTERVIEWER: I want to learn more about that—but first, is there any-
thing else that’s been bothering you?
And for those patients who present multiple complaints, it can some-
times be useful to ask, “Which of these problems bothers you the most?”
At a minimum, such a question can provide focus for later summaries and
discussions of treatment.

-- 19 of 35 --

26
C H A P T E R 	3
Developing Rapport
Rapport is the feeling of harmony and confidence that should exist
between patient and clinician. As one of the goals of a good interview,
good rapport has practical consequences. This point is especially relevant
if you will be treating this patient in the future. The trust and confidence
you begin to develop even in the opening minutes of the first session can
greatly enhance your ability to manage a course of therapy. In fact, how
well you convey your interest is the factor most likely to keep your patient
in treatment.
But good rapport is also vital for obtaining information. During the
evaluation phase of your relationship, positive rapport will help motivate
your patient to talk spontaneously and to reveal important personal data.
The foundation for rapport is usually ready-made. Most patients
come looking for help and expect that they will get it from a clinician. You
can build on this expectation with your words and body language, which
should express real interest in the patient. Of course, anyone could inad-
vertently say something that’s upsetting, but there is little you are likely to
say or do that can’t be retrieved if you remain caring and sensitive to what
your patient is experiencing.
THE BASIS OF RAPPORT
Right from the start, most patients will expect to like you. But real rapport
between two individuals doesn’t usually spring up overnight. It develops
gradually, with long acquaintance and the cooperation of both parties.
Still, you can use certain behaviors to speed its growth.
Your demeanor is key. Remember that professionalism doesn’t
demand stiff formality. In fact, you should take care to avoid the image of

-- 20 of 35 --

Developing Rapport 	27
the stone-faced therapist that was once popular in movies, cartoons, and
fiction. If you appear relaxed, interested, and sympathetic, your patient
is more likely to feel safe and comfortable. Carefully monitor your facial
expression: Don’t frown, grimace, or show other signs of negativity that
could be interpreted as disapproval. Although you should avoid fixed
stares, which can make you appear cold and critical, be sure to make fre-
quent eye contact— even if you are taking notes. Of course, you don’t want
to appear insincere, but appropriate smiles and nods will demonstrate
that you are attentive and sympathetic.
Just at first, however, I’d be a bit sparing in the use of praise. Praise
used as a reinforcer can powerfully shape behavior, but early in any rela-
tionship, you don’t know enough to be sure what behavior you will be
reinforcing. For instance, you wouldn’t want to praise apparent openness
if your patient hasn’t told you the whole truth.
The patient’s own demeanor will probably shape your interaction
more than any other factor. Body language— drooping shoulders, restless
feet, tears, a clenched fist—often clearly indicates how your patient feels.
Observe tone of voice for other clues to feelings. Suppose you have asked
your patient, Mr. Kimble, how he and his wife get along, and he responds,
“Just fine.” If his tone is warm and light, the couple probably has relatively
few interpersonal problems. If his “Just fine” is delivered through clenched
teeth, in a dull monotone, or with a sigh, Mr. Kimble may be harboring
feelings of hopelessness or anger that he can’t put into words just yet.
Because you have arranged the furniture so that there’s no barrier
between you and your patient, you can easily and naturally adjust even
to minor shifts in affect, promoting rapport. If your patient is depressed,
you will probably feel like drawing a little closer to show your concern.
You can follow that natural inclination. If you sense hostility, you may feel
like withdrawing physically, even if only a few inches. Doing so will help
relax the tension by giving each of you more elbow room. Similarly, you
may laugh when your patient makes a joke, or display a worried frown of
concern and support during a panic attack. By the time you have inter-
viewed your first dozen patients, you will do these things automatically in
response to the cues each patient unconsciously gives.
At the same time, you should carefully maintain a certain neutrality
toward what you are told. If your patient criticizes relatives, you would be
unlikely to defend them. But joining in the criticism risks offending some-
one whose feelings may be ambivalent. A safe response is an empathic
comment that doesn’t take sides.
PATIENT: My mother is a real bitch! She keeps trying to interfere
between me and my husband.
INTERVIEWER: (Leans slightly forward.) That must be a real problem
for you.

-- 21 of 35 --

28 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
This interviewer’s attitude—sympathetic, nonjudgmental, and respectful of
patient and relatives alike—is likely to foster a good working relationship.
ASSESS YOUR OWN FEELINGS
How you feel about the patient can have important consequences. If your
feelings are positive—here is the sort of person you might choose as a
friend, for example—you will probably come across as warm and caring.
Your attitude may serve as an encouragement to reveal additional sensi-
tive information.
Heavily influenced by your own background and upbringing, your
feelings could in turn affect your ability to make an accurate evaluation.
Throughout the interview, you need to be aware of the nature and the
sources of your feelings, especially when something about the patient dis-
tresses you. It could be as simple as personal hygiene, coarse language,
or the expression of ethnic prejudice. Or does this person remind you of
difficulties you had with one of your own relatives? In any case, you must
carefully monitor how you respond. If you frown or otherwise appear
uncomfortable, your patient may sense your disapproval and frustrate
your efforts to gather accurate information.
Your goal is to express empathy, which means that on some level you
can feel as your patient feels—that you can put yourself in the patient’s
place. Having empathy means understanding the motivation driving a
patient’s behavior, even if it still doesn’t seem like the right thing to do.
Showing your empathy sparks confidence in the process and encourages
the patient to give you the diagnostic information you need. (Surveys show
that mental health clinicians score much higher than do other health care
professionals in the ability to adopt another person’s perspective.) You
will probably convey your empathic feelings best if you keep in mind this
thought: “What would it be like to stand in the shoes of this patient talk-
ing with me now?”
This job might seem daunting when your patient shows a lot of anger,
anxiety, or even psychosis. Throughout your professional life, you will
have to work with all sorts of people. Some of them will seem less agree-
able than others, but you will find that nearly every patient will have
characteristics to which you can relate. If you cannot respond positively
to the content of what you are being told, perhaps you can sympathize
with some of the feelings behind it. For example, a moderately antisocial
patient was speaking about his former therapist:
PATIENT: I had no use for that guy. Once or twice I even thought
about blowing him away!
INTERVIEWER: Sounds as if you were feeling really angry.

-- 22 of 35 --

Developing Rapport 	29
Trying to deal directly with the content of this patient’s comment would
have forced a choice between agreeing with or confronting a potentially
violent patient. By keying into the patient’s anger, this interviewer said
something that both parties could feel comfortable with.
All professionals have feelings, attitudes, and experiences that can
affect the image they project; we must all be constantly alert to prevent
these personal issues from impairing our effectiveness with patients. Con-
sider the effect of so ordinary an event as divorce:
One clinician found that she was so upset during the time she was
separating from her husband that she could not effectively manage a
patient who was having similar problems.
Another therapist, after a bruising telephone call from his ex-
wife, postponed his next interview while he cooled off enough to
focus on the patient’s problems.
Many beginning interviewers have learned that they can alleviate pres-
sure if they introduce themselves to patients as students. But regardless
of your stage of training or practice, your temperament and experience
will determine how you deal with your personal Achilles’ heel. Whatever
it is, your effectiveness with patients will increase if you remain aware of
your own limitations.
CONSIDER YOUR MANNER OF SPEAKING
For good rapport, the patient must know that you understand. It is
tempting to approach this directly by saying, “I know how you must feel
about . . . ” Unhappily, this statement can ring hollow. By the time they
reach your office, many patients have heard it all too often from people
who don’t really understand at all, or who may understand perfectly but
do nothing to help. Some patients with severe problems, real or perceived,
feel that nobody could possibly appreciate what they are going through.
You will probably be better off using some other response to suggest your
compassion and interest:
“You must have felt terribly unhappy.”
“I’ve never been in that position, so I can only imagine how you felt.”
“That was a terrible experience. I can see that it upset you a great
deal.”
Sometimes you may find that you need to overemphasize your feel-
ings a little. This suggestion might sound deceitful, but I don’t mean it
that way. Actors, for example, know that their recorded voices tend to

-- 23 of 35 --

30 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
flatten out and that they must overact to get across the feelings they in
tend to portray. In similar fashion, you may need to amplify your own
emotional output to impress upon some patients how deeply you sympa-
thize with them. You can accomplish this with your facial expressions,
or with your voice by varying its volume, pitch, and emphasis. Even brief
exclamations can do the job. An “Oh, wow!” that is suitably timed and
intoned may convey understanding and compassion more effectively than
a more elegant speech of condolence. Such emblems of your emotional
involvement, which beginning interviewers often forget to use, can be
vital to your patient and contribute to building rapport.
However, it’s far too easy to go overboard. Consider the patient who
comes to you with a story of betrayal by a lover, or of injury in a military
or civilian calamity. Of course, you will want to show your support, but if
you express your own shock or horror too starkly, you risk reinforcing the
traumatic effects you’re there to dismantle. Sure, go ahead and express
sympathy—you can even provide the support of a proffered tissue—but be
careful not to portray your patient as a victim.
Now let’s consider the use of humor in your interactions with patients.
Humor can be a great facilitator of communication: It helps people to
relax and to feel that they are among friends. But as a clinician, take care
to judge your use of humor carefully. With any recent acquaintance, it
is easy to misjudge and say something in jest that can be taken amiss;
mental health patients are especially vulnerable to this sort of slip. Even
a patient you know well could misinterpret an ill- considered remark. As
always, put yourself in the patient’s place: Consider how you’d feel if you
thought your clinician was laughing at you.
In general, it is safe to laugh with, but of course never at, the patient.
That means that you should generally let the patient start it. During your
first few sessions, any use of humor should be gentle, and only when it
is clear that the patient is in a frame of mind to appreciate it. Beware of
making jokes, which might be misinterpreted as hostile or demeaning.
Whenever the patient jests, be sure to consider whether this is a subcon-
scious attempt to sidetrack both of you from a discussion of important
material. A usually safe response is to smile and meet the patient’s gaze.
Experienced interviewers report that they sometimes seemingly
undergo a personality change as they move from one patient to the next.
They may adopt a formal tone with one, then settle into a folksy per-
sona with the next. One interviewer persistently, and quite unconsciously,
dropped his g’s when talking with a patient from a rural background who
spoke that way. Within limits these behaviors are probably acceptable,
though you should be careful not to overdo them to the point of mimicry.
Regardless of your level of experience, at some point, with some
patient, you will make an error. In the greater scheme of things, it will
probably be of rather minor significance—you ask the same question

-- 24 of 35 --

Developing Rapport 	31
twice; you forget the occupation of your patient’s spouse; or you are sud-
denly aware that your mind has drifted and you can’t recall the question
your patient has just asked (or that you have!)—but both of you know that
you’ve erred. You should take immediate steps to put it right. “Uh-oh,
senior moment,” I might say with a rueful smile. If you aren’t so fortu-
nate as to have age as an excuse, you should admit that you focused for a
moment on something else, and do whatever is necessary to correct your
error (for example, ask the patient to restate the question). Almost always,
the conversation will move safely forward. The important thing is to let
the patient know you’ve taken responsibility for the mistake and that it
matters to you.
TALK THE PATIENT’S LANGUAGE
Take pains to speak in terms your patient can understand. Listen to your
patient’s language and use it, as long as you feel comfortable doing so.
Because teenagers and young adults often distrust older people, they may
respond more positively if you use language that is current for their gen-
eration. But be sure that your “cool” expression is still “in,” or you risk
being considered merely “square.” (There is another point of view on this
issue. Some adolescent patients may resent it enormously and become
even more distrustful if you try to adopt their speech patterns.) How you
speak to any patient should be guided by the need for clarity and rapport,
so monitor your patient’s reactions and adjust your manner of speaking
accordingly.
Certain terms may upset some patients. These loaded words carry a
message of illness, failure, or poor character, and you should generally
avoid them. Here is a brief sample: abortion, bad, brain damage, cancer,
crazy, defective, fantasy, frigidity, hysterical, impotence, neurotic, obscene, per-
version, victim. You will encounter many more during your interviewing
career. Be ready with neutral synonyms for such words, or, even better,
pick up on terms your patient already has used.
Avoid psychological jargon. Even simple terms like psychosis may
be misunderstood, and your patient could think that you seem insensi-
tive toward someone with less education than you. Also ensure that you
understand your patient’s own use of language; don’t assume it is the
same as yours. For example, to you “an occasional drink” may mean once
a month, but to your patient it could mean “intermittently throughout the
day.” Does your teenage patient drink Coke or snort coke? In the language
of the street, “I was really paranoid” doesn’t mean that the speaker felt
psychotically persecuted, but merely frightened.
Your poorly educated patient may recognize “polite” terms for sexual
or excretory functions, but the relationship you develop may be better if

-- 25 of 35 --

32 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
you use plain language. I confess to holding conflicting thoughts about
using the argot of the street. On the one hand (as some studies have
shown), by using everyday terms, you might increase the amount of infor-
mation you get. On the other hand, the same tactic could risk offending
people on whom you depend for accurate information. In the final analy-
sis, you’ll have to base your decision on your own comfort level and your
assessment of the individual patient.
If your patient is foreign-born or was reared in another part of your
own country, you may have trouble understanding one another. Don’t
let your manner imply that it is the patient who “talks funny.” Rather,
acknowledge that you have different accents and that at times you may
have to ask one another for repetition. For a patient who hesitates or
seems unsure of how to proceed, you can remove some of the pressure
with the reassurance that “It’s fine to take this at your own pace, so I can
really understand what you’re experiencing.” On the flip side, to be sure
you do understand, you may want to translate into simpler language the
sometimes florid terms that patients use to express themselves—perhaps
to obfuscate, perhaps because they think a clinician wants to hear psycho-
logical terms.
PATIENT: I’ve always had a phobia about cats—I’ve got four of ’em.
INTERVIEWER: So you’re a real cat fancier!
Later on, perhaps, when you’ve gotten to know one another better, you
can supply an accurate definition.
MAINTAIN BOUNDARIES
How clinicians should relate to their patients has been a moving target
over the years. The traditional image of an authoritarian lawgiver who
decides for the patient has been generally supplanted by that of a less
formal collaborator who explores problems and their solutions with the
patient. I strongly prefer the latter style. To me it feels more comfortable
(it is less arrogant), and it encourages the patient to participate in treat-
ment decisions. In effect, it puts two minds to work, rather than loading
all the responsibility onto the clinician. When patients discuss and con-
tribute to their own management plans, they are more likely to comply
with treatment and less likely to complain about bumps in the road to
improvement.
Yet even clinicians who encourage friendly collaboration need to
maintain boundaries. When I practiced in California, it was customary to
call patients by their first names. For adolescents this seemed just fine. But

-- 26 of 35 --

Developing Rapport 	33
I heard even old men and women addressed in this overly familiar man-
ner by mental health professionals young enough to be their grandchil-
dren. This attitude tends to infantilize patients who, if they are hospital
inpatients, have already lost considerable autonomy. It also increases the
professional person’s tendency to become parentalistic—that is, to make
health care decisions that patients should be making for themselves.
However, before I make too big a deal of this, let me note that times
have changed and that many therapists have maintained successful prac-
tices while they and their patients address one another in familiar terms. I
still reject the idea of first names for hospitalized patients, and I continue
to call my adult patients by last name and title (Miss, Ms., Mrs., Mr., or Dr.
Green). This practice maximizes personal dignity and reinforces a sense
of adulthood, even at a time when there may be loss of autonomy. It also
encourages patients to keep a certain emotional distance by using my title
and last name. This distance may sometimes help head off inappropriate
attempts at amorous and other nonprofessional relationships.
If a patient appears offended when I don’t agree to a first-name basis,
I respond that it is my habit always to use last names and titles, and that
it would be hard for me to change. (If you are still a student, your excuse
might be that this is what your institution requires of trainees, if that’s the
case.) Rarely, I have encountered patients who doggedly insist that I use
their first names. If I judge that sticking to my habit could harm our rela-
tionship, I will use two names—first and second or first and last—plus title.
For example, when calling such a patient from the waiting room, I will
announce, “Mrs. Joanne Cremier,” and say it with a big, friendly smile. So
far, this compromise has always proven satisfactory. However, other clini-
cians (and their patients) may feel differently, so there should probably be
no hard and fast rule about using names.
In general, it’s a good idea not to reveal too much about yourself to
your patients. This is especially true during the initial interview, when you
really don’t know one another very well.
A beginning psychiatry resident confided to his new patient that he
was a reserve peace officer. He later learned to his chagrin that the
patient had both a severe personality disorder and an abiding hatred
of the police.
If you are having difficulty getting information, you might be able to
encourage greater cooperation by identifying something that you and the
patient share. For example, you might remark that, just like the patient,
you enjoy sailboating or were born in Indiana. Your status as fellow sailors
or Hoosiers might nudge you a bit closer to the rapport you seek. This
technique should be used sparingly— seldom more than once with a given

-- 27 of 35 --

34 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
patient—lest you begin to sound too familiar. You should also be careful
not to let any resulting small talk distract you for long from the real pur-
pose of your interview.
Why do patients ask personal questions? Some stem from simple
curiosity; others may cloak concern about interviewers’ professional back-
grounds or ability to help. To provide reassurance about training and
competence is one reason why clinicians in practice display a wall full of
diplomas, licenses, and other certificates. Trainees have the benefit of
neither certificate nor wall. Still, to whatever degree possible, you should
verbally provide this information when it is requested. Don’t hesitate to
invoke the names and positions of your supervisors if this is needed to
reassure an especially anxious patient.
Some requests for personal information may be prompted by a largely
unconscious desire to achieve a sense of equality between interviewer and
patient. Others may be an attempt to avoid discussing sensitive material,
and these should be handled firmly but with tact:
PATIENT: How old are you, anyway?
INTERVIEWER: Why do you want to know?
PATIENT: You seem so young to be doing this kind of work.
INTERVIEWER: Well, thank you for the compliment, but I don’t think
my age is especially relevant to our discussion; let’s focus on you.
Now, to get back to the question I asked . . .
In some circumstances, personal information may seem relevant to
your interview. If you decide that this is the case, you can usually reveal
something of yourself:
PATIENT: Were you raised in this city?
INTERVIEWER: What makes you ask that?
PATIENT: My mother told me to be sure to get a therapist who grew
up here. She says no one else could really understand what it was
like, growing up in a ghetto and all.
INTERVIEWER: I see. Actually, I didn’t grow up here, but this is where
I took most of my training. I’ve lived in town for nearly 8 years,
so I think I have a pretty good idea of what some of your experi-
ences must have been. But I have the feeling you’ll be able to tell
me a whole lot more.
Because I believe it helps build rapport, I tend to answer innocuous ques-
tions frankly, so long as it seems unlikely to complicate the relationship
later.

-- 28 of 35 --

Developing Rapport 	35
SHOW YOUR EXPERTISE
You can pave yet another pathway to rapport by informing the patient
that you know something about the presenting symptoms and what they
could mean. This assessment will naturally come at the end of the initial
interview, when you’ve obtained enough information to know what you’re
talking about. Then you’ll probably say something like this:
“Your condition is actually pretty common— one of the most frequent
problems patients bring to mental health clinicians. I’ve seen several
similar cases just in the last few months. We have several good treat-
ment approaches available, so we can look for a good outcome in
your case.”
Even if you are facing a rare condition, you can reassure the patient
that you know where to turn for guidance:
“We can work through this problem together.”
If you’re a student, you probably won’t have had much in the way of per-
sonal experience with your patient’s condition— or any other. But you are
connected with a training program that employs experienced teachers
who have encountered many patients with similar conditions.
I would offer a few warnings about showing expertise. First, a natural
consequence of empathy is respect, which implies that you should take
pains to avoid sounding authoritarian. Sounding authoritative is fine, if
it’s accurate, but sounding authoritarian smacks of the old, parentalistic
clinical style that seems disrespectful in the 21st century. It never did
work all that well, anyway. Second, in your zeal to put your patient at ease,
don’t succumb to a patient’s too-early request for information or advice.
Part of being expert is waiting until you have the facts to justify offering
support. Jumping in too soon with a diagnosis or with suggestions for
treatment sometimes ends in embarrassment and backpedaling down the
line. Finally, try to wear your erudition lightly. Preface your opinions with
“I think” or “In my experience”—the patient will honor them just as well,
and you’ll avoid the need to live up to an aura of infallibility that no one
can sustain.
Inevitably, you will encounter an occasional patient you just cannot
work with. Sometimes this will be due to your own feelings— about unre-
pentant criminal behavior, perhaps, or about someone who reminds you
too strongly of your own former spouse. At other times you’ll be tipped
off by something the patient says, such as a statement of preference for “a
Christian therapist” or some other therapeutic orientation that just plain
doesn’t fit with what you have to offer.

-- 29 of 35 --

36 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
Such patients will probably be few, but you have a duty to face them
honestly. Of course, to be sure your first impressions are correct, you
should complete the evaluation before deciding. Then you might say
something like this:
“Quite frankly, I’m not sure I’m the right person to deal with your
problem.”
You’d go on to explain why you’ve come to this conclusion (leaving
out the unflattering bits), then recommend where the patient might go
next:
“Yours is the sort of problem that I haven’t had much experience with.
However, I know someone in this same building who has made a
study of people with your kind of difficulty. If you’d like, I can write
a note that describes my findings in your case.”

-- 30 of 35 --

37
C H A P T E R 	4
Managing the Early
Patient Interview
A few minutes into a typical initial interview session, the patient should
be relaxed and giving you the information you need; much of your task
right now will be simply to keep your patient talking. Most patients feel
highly motivated to talk, and you will usually need only to choose the
device that will best encourage them to do so. (If this isn’t the case with
your interview, you can review the material in Chapters 16 and 17 for
help.)
To keep speech flowing freely, intrude as little as possible. Anything
you say— questions, comments, even clearing your throat— can prove dis-
tracting. As long as you are finding out why your patient came for treat-
ment, you should keep out of the way. In practical terms, you will usually
just listen for only the first couple of minutes or so. Then the flow of
information will slow down or take a wrong turn, and you will have to
intervene. Your choice of interventions can help determine the overall
success of your interview.
NONVERBAL ENCOURAGEMENTS
Your most frequent challenge may be dealing with silence. Beginners
often find silence hard to tolerate. They feel that every hole in the con-
versation, no matter how small, must be filled up with words. It is true
that pauses greater than 10 or 15 seconds can make an interviewer seem

-- 31 of 35 --

38 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
cold, and this discourages some patients. Briefer pauses often mean only
that your patient is trying to organize some thoughts for further discus-
sion. Don’t let anxiety cause you to derail a train of thought that has only
paused to gather steam.
You must learn to walk the line between allowing brief pauses to let
your patient think and long gaps that make you seem unfeeling or unin-
terested. A glance should tell you whether the narrative is still underway.
Watch for the patient to draw another breath or to show other signs of
activity, such as the moistening of lips.
You can encourage further speech by using nonverbal cues of your
own. Be careful not to break eye contact; a smile or nod will say, “You’re
doing fine; just keep on going at your own pace.” Another technique expe-
rienced interviewers sometimes use almost without thinking is to lean a
little closer to show interest in what the patient is saying. Nonverbal cues
of this sort are simple and often highly useful encouragements. Without
interrupting, they clearly signal that you are attentive and interested; they
are part of a universal body language that asks the patient to continue.
But don’t overemphasize any of these gestures: A clinician who nods too
vigorously or smiles too broadly may distract the patient, who may then
wonder what these antics mean.
VERBAL ENCOURAGEMENTS
Body language helps, but you will also have to do some talking. Your
choice of words is important: You want to facilitate, not distract. There-
fore, speak as briefly as you can while still conveying your meaning.
A syllable or two is usually all it takes. “Yes” or “Mm-hmm” clearly
indicates that the material is registering with you. Without being direc-
tive, brief interjections and phrases ask the patient to keep on talking. Use
them frequently, perhaps interspersing them randomly with nonverbal
encouragements. One such encouragement every minute or two should
help keep your patient talking.
There are several other verbal techniques you can use to request addi-
tional information. These are more intrusive than those just mentioned,
so you should use them sparingly. I will illustrate each—some of them have
been termed reflective listening—with a brief example.
• Repeat your patient’s own last word or two with a rising inflection
in your voice to make a question of it.
PATIENT: I was so upset that for hours I seemed to be hearing
voices. (Pauses.)
INTERVIEWER: “Voices”?

-- 32 of 35 --

Managing the Early Patient Interview 	39
PATIENT: In my head. I thought I heard the voice of my mother
calling my name.
• Elaborate on a word the patient used earlier. This technique allows
you to reach back to an idea that was not the last thought spoken.
PATIENT: I know I overreacted, but I was feeling desperate. I
couldn’t sleep or eat, and I screamed at my kids.
INTERVIEWER: You said you felt desperate. (Pauses.)
PATIENT: Yes, I even considered suicide.
• Directly request more information.
“Tell me more about that.”
“How do you mean?”
• Re-request information when the patient seems to have misinter-
preted your original question.
INTERVIEWER: What kind of work do you do?
PATIENT: It’s at the foundry on Elm Street.
INTERVIEWER: And what kind of work do you do there?
• Offer brief summaries. These will often begin with “So you feel
that . . . ” or “Do you mean that . . . ” Summaries not only help with transi-
tions; they also offer concrete evidence that the patient has been under-
stood.
INTERVIEWER: So for about 6 months now you’ve been feeling
depressed and anxious.
PATIENT: That’s right. Lately I’ve even started to think terrible
thoughts—thoughts about killing myself.
Sometimes you’ll get information you don’t really want. It isn’t that
descriptions of recent vacations, children’s witticisms, and arguments
with lovers are uninteresting, but they can take up time you could better
spend pursuing other issues. Although you might be able to discourage
this sort of verbal wild-goose chase by simply not reinforcing it, it is often
better to be direct with your patient:
“That’s interesting, and maybe we can get back to it later, but right
now I’d like to know about . . . ”
Or perhaps to be even more direct:
“No, let’s keep our focus on information that can help me help you.”

-- 33 of 35 --

40 	THE FIRST INTERVIEW
OFFERING REASSURANCE
Reassurance is anything you do to increase a patient’s sense of confidence
or well-being. Because it shows that you like or are interested in the other
person, it can also foster rapport. Used sparingly during the initial inter-
view, supportive statements say, “I’m on your side. We’ll get this job done.”
Any interview can be therapeutic. Studies have shown that the mere
act of sharing problems with another human being (even, in some cases,
with a computer!) can help a person take a new view of old issues or put
ideas together in novel ways. But with a new patient, you can’t just jump in
and start giving advice, making interpretations, or otherwise “doing ther-
apy.” Rather, the purpose of the initial interview is to obtain the informa-
tion you need to plan treatment. On the other hand, you shouldn’t pass
up an opportunity to provide reassurance, as long as it doesn’t interfere
with the main goal of your interview. You might even raise the confidence
of some patients enough that they will reveal especially sensitive material
you would not otherwise have obtained.
Body language (smiles and nods) can be reassuring, but mostly you
will reassure with speech. To be truly reassuring, what you say must be
based in fact. You wouldn’t get far saying, “You have a good head for
finances,” to a patient who in 45 years hasn’t saved a nickel toward retire-
ment. And choose your words carefully. Avoid clichés and other stereo-
typed expressions, which will make you sound as if you are responding
only by rote, not from the heart.
In short, supportive reassurance must be factual, sincere, and spe-
cific to the situation. Here are two examples:
PATIENT: I did manage to get two promotions last year.
INTERVIEWER: So you’ve really done well with that job!
PATIENT: When he came at me with a knife, I jumped right through a
second- story window onto a garage roof. It made me feel dumb.
I thought I’d just saved him the work of cutting me to ribbons.
INTERVIEWER: It may have saved your life! Perhaps it was the only
thing you could have done.
Avoid false generalizations that come too early in the interview or
are based on too little factual information. “I’m sure it will all work out,”
or “Those fears seem groundless,” will probably ring hollow to most
patients, especially those with paranoia or severe depression; they know
things won’t turn out well! Even someone who is less severely ill might
begin to question your knowledge if you leap in quickly with bland reas-
surances that cover too much ground to be believable.

-- 34 of 35 --

Managing the Early Patient Interview 	41
Occasionally a patient will express concern based on a misconception
about mental or physical phenomena. Then you can use your expertise to
set the record straight without interfering with the history taking.
PATIENT: I’d never even been to California before, but I suddenly
thought, “I’ve been on this same San Francisco street before.” I
wondered if I was losing my mind.
INTERVIEWER: That feeling is called déjà vu. It’s very common, and
doesn’t mean anything at all is wrong. Now tell me what hap-
pened next.
Notice, however, that this interviewer did make the mistake of providing
unconditional reassurance. Although déjà vu is nearly always a benign
phenomenon, it is sometimes associated with neurological conditions
such as temporal lobe epilepsy. But without more substantiating evidence,
to suggest that there could be any pathological significance would also be
a serious mistake. Here is a reasonable compromise: “It doesn’t usually
signify that anything is wrong.”
Be careful to avoid offhand comments that may prove disquieting.
One patient described a sexual encounter with her cousin, then said that
she didn’t know whether that would be considered molestation. “It sure
sounds like molestation to me,” responded the young interviewer. This
response had the potential for raising anxieties that the patient was not
ready to deal with. (“How do you regard it?” would have been a safer
response.)
Mostly, your efforts at reassurance and encouragement will meet
with success. Nevertheless, any of these techniques can sometimes back-
fire. A patient with persecutory delusions might interpret even a friendly
nod or smile as mockery. If you lean toward someone who is feeling angry,
you might be rewarded not with more information, but with hostility or
deepening silence. Judging when a patient will not be receptive can be
tricky. Your best bet is to start slowly. Be friendly and pleasant, but not
aggressively so.
Watch for cues. If you are being too aggressively forward, your patient
may exhibit some of these behaviors:
Loss of eye contact
Frozen expression
Decreased speech output
Nervous shifting of position
If you spot any of these telltale signs, quickly change to a more reserved
manner.

-- 35 of 35 --

