Psychopathology
Session 5
Clinical interview Video	
Due March 25th
Do you have a partner?
10 MINUTES Only, diagnosis not required, 
Record via Stream, Teams, Zoom, and share link in a word doc posted to discovery
Client- Be ready to answer the questions needed, no suicidal ideation, 
Therapist- focus on clinical interviewing not therapy, you are responsible to your video as the therapist.
Review		
What are the Steps of Differential Diagnosis?
How are the Steps of Differential Diagnosis used?
What are the Key Features of Acute Stress Disorder? What makes it different than PTSD
Consider this scenario and respond the questions following:
You have been working with a male client who is 22 years of age. His primary focus in therapy has been adjusting to living on his own after college. He arrives to his session uncharacteristically 10 minutes late. He appears agitated, his speech is pressured and what he is saying does not make sense. When asked what has caused him to be so agitated, he responds is a loud excited voice, “They did this to me!” “They are out to get me!” “You have to help me, you’re the only one I trust!”
He sits down and seems to calm down enough to continue the session. He continues to speak quickly, but more coherently. He tells you he was out with friends last night to celebrate his best friend’s birthday. During the outing he began to feel unsettled and anxious. These feelings have increased throughout the night and into the morning. He reports feeling panicked all day and feels that he is being followed.
Based on your client’s presentation what is your initial diagnosis?
What information do you need to confirm or rule out this diagnosis?
List other possible diagnoses and your rationale for considering them.
Practice…
Break into table groups
Use the vignettes provided to practice walking through the steps of differential diagnosis for the final exam process
Focus on identifying key features and symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria
Focus on the process of confirming and ruling out by supporting your diagnosis with facts from the vignette
Be sure to address all steps- 1- 6
Eating Disorders
Pica
Non-nutritious and nonfoods
Non-developmentally appropriate
Rumination Disorder
Regurgitating and rechewing already swallowed food
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake
Not eating or restricting types of food
APA, 2022
Eating Disorders	
Anorexia Nervosa
Restriction of food intake resulting in inability to maintain minimum healthy weight
Significant fear of gaining weight and distortion in view of body shape
Psychological experiencing include depression, insomnia, anxiety, distractibility and obsessive thinking/behavior
High comorbidly with, dysthymia, depression, social phobia, GAD, and OCD, 
Social and interpersonal problems exist outside AN and consideration needed as AN treatment progresses. 
Castonguay Oltmanns, Lott 
Eating Disorders
Bulimia Nervosa
Eating more that typical amounts of food in short period of time
Inability to control eating
Usually eat food they otherwise avoid
Compensatory Behaviors
Vomiting, laxatives
Individuals maintain a typical weight
Binge-eating Disorder
Similar eating behaviors to BN, but not compensatory behaviors
APA, 2022
Case Formulation
What is it?
Why is it important?
“A conceptual scheme that organizes, explains, or make sense of large amounts of data and influences the treatment decisions.” (Lazare, 1976)
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulations
Client
Orientation
Orientation
Case Formulation
Client
Orientation
Client
Case Formulation
Problem-oriented method
Problems and goals are well defined
Attainable goals and measurable outcome = higher quality care
Non- Theoretical Framework– problem is clear and understandable
Step-by-Step process
Gather data
Define Problems/Concerns
Specify Outcome Goals
Apply Hypotheses
Create Treatment Plans
Evaluate  Efficacy of Treatment
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation		
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation- Gather Data
Clinical Interviewing
Space for client’s story
Explore first then formulate and intervene
Gather a variety of Data
BASIC SID
Behavior, Affect, Sensations, Imagery, Cognitive, Spiritual, Interpersonal, Drug/Biological  
Personal and Social History (Morrison, 2014)
Family of origin, health, growing up, education, work, social interactions, intimate relationships, religion, interests…
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation- Gather Data
Metamodel 
Deletions, overgeneralizations, distortions, nominalizations, the can’ts or shoulds, mindreading, cause-effect errors…
Vague information provided- client understands what is said but therapist may not
Use questions to gain clarity and specificity
“how specifically?”, “What do you mean by…?”
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation- Defining Problems
Problems- difficulties, dysfunctions complaints, impairments
Discrepancy between the desired state and reality
Defined by the Client or someone who knows the client
Can be identified by the therapist
The presenting problem
May or may not be the only issues (probably not)
We can focus only on that issue, invite client to address other issues we identify, or create a comprehensive “problem list”
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation-Defining the Problem
Definitions should concise, specific, and clear
Definitions based on Data not interpretation or theory
Use BASIC ID to formulate problems
Many domains of functioning, not just the areas the clients reports
Z-Codes
Generate the written definitions
Use terms like: difficulty adjusting, distress over, inability to, conflict between
Must be solvable 
Ingram, 2012
Case Conceptualization- Defining the Problem
Define current real-world problems and functioning
Definition is specific for the client, not a general interpretation based in conceptualization
Avoid vague and generalized comments
Excessively Dependent vs. Excessively dependent in close relationships with romantic partners
Definitions must reflect Client’s values
Why is it important to define problems in this way?
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulations- Setting Goals
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation- Setting Goals
Some other guidelines
Examine values related to goals
The “why” 
Understand client’s definitions
Are they trying the meet the expectations of others
Be aware of imposing our beliefs, values and cultural bias
Goals are client endorsed and connected to presenting concern(s)
Avoid using process language in setting goals
Different goals for outcome and process
Demonstrate competence in relationships vs. Express feelings when confronted.
Ingram, 2012
Case Formulation-Putting It All TogetherAfter all the data are collected from a non-theoretical lens we generate a formulation or conceptualization. What do the data say aboutPathologyHistoryPresent functioningWhat do I think about the client’s experiences and conditionInterpretation through theoretical lensHow client’s pathology is shaped by historyCurrent behavior and functioning
Case Formulation-Putting It All Together
Generate hypotheses for all problems identified
Be sure that all hypotheses are based on the data you have
Avoid speculation- we cannot fill in the gaps to draw conclusions
Hypotheses lead to treatment plans-
Make it specific to the client
The client’s experience/problem vs. this is what depression is…
Gather Data
Define Problem
Set Goals
Treatment Plan
Intake, Clinical Interview, Assessment
Functional impairment, real-word description, Diagnosis
Based on data, use client’s values and desired 
Non- Theoretical
Theoretical
Informed by theory and evidence based-practice
Steps of Differential
Diagnosis
Treatment Planning 
Jongsma, Peterson & Bruce 2014
Treatment Planning 
Establish Goals- Global and long-term
Construct Objectives
Behaviorally measurable terms
Steppingstones to meeting goals
Intervention Creation
One intervention per objective
Selected to meet the needs of client and based in the presenting concerns
Used evidence based interventions
Jongsma, Peterson & Bruce 2014
Treatment Planning
Shaped by Theoretical orientation
Be faithful to follow the plan but flexible to follow the client
Check regularly on progress toward goals and objectives
Be systematic, organized, detailed
Treatment Planning	
Putting it All Together
Case Formulation
Clinical Interview
Diagnosis
Treatment Plan
Bipolar Disorders		
Now Separate from other depressive disorders
“Bridges the gap”  Psychotic disorders and depressive disorders
Manic and Depressive experiences required
Strong Genetic component with 1st degree relatives (Blaney, Krueger, Millon, 2014)
Implications of Neurotransmitters (Blaney, Krueger, Millon, 2014)
Low Serotonin, dysregulation of Dopamine, and Norepinephrine
Bipolar I Disorder
(APA, 2022)
Bipolar II Disorder
Must experience at least one hypomanic and depressive episode
Depressive symptoms more common 
Clients will often seek help for depression
Hypomania not seen as an impairment. 
Differentiate between return of mood after depression and hypomania
(APA, 2022)
Personality Disorders
Personality- Enduring pattern of thinking feeling perception and behavior
What makes people uniquely “them”
Health =  Balance between self and others
Pathology- Persistent self or others focus with marked impairment
PD characterized by interpersonal issues and conflict
Attachment issues- over and under 
Threshold from non-disorder to disorders is not clear
What is the difference between idiosyncratic or eccentric behavior and pathology
(Castonguay & Oltmanns, 2021)
Personality Disorders
Difference between “typical” and pathological
Context dependent- Ability to adapt to demands of life and relationships as they arise
Lack of flexibility and often make situations worse by responding as they always do. 
Those with PD have ego-syntonic experience- lack awareness of impact on others, do not experiences distress and accept as “part of self.
Impact on those around them is often significant
(Castonguay & Oltmanns, 2021)
Domains of Personality	
(Castonguay & Oltmanns, 2021)
Domains of Personality
Temperament- How people behave
Basic innate characteristics for relating to the world
Recognizable in the first years of life
Tend to be the way we describe other- energetic, quiet, difficult…
Some predictive features– connection between impulse control in childhood and conduct disorder with PDs in adulthood
(Castonguay , Oltmanns,  Lott 2021)
Considerations
Gender Differences
Some disorders are more prevalent in one gender or the other
I.E. Narcissistic more male and histrionic more female
Ethnic
Limited differences identified based on limited research
However, there are some differences- be aware in diagnostic process
Age
Characteristics must be evident in childhood
Onset may vary in age of presentation
(Castonguay , Oltmanns,  Lott 2021)
3 Clusters
Clusters based on broad characteristics
Cluster A (eccentric)– Paranoid, Schizoid, & Schizotypal
Cluster B - Antisocial, Borderline,  Histrionic, & Narcissistic
Cluster C- Avoidant, Dependent, Obsessive-Compulsive
(APA, 2022)
General Personality Disorder
Maladaptive and rigid personality that cause significant disruption in daily function- social, occupational other
Onset of symptoms can be connected to at least adolescence (or younger) and are stable/enduring, long-term
Includes cognitive distortions of self and others, challenges with affect (limited or expansive), interpersonal difficulties, and impulsivity
Must not be associated with situations and circumstance. 
(APA, 2022)
Cluster A Disorders
(APA, 2022)
Cluster B
(APA, 2022)
Cluster B Continued
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Uncomfortable when not the center of attention
Flirtatious and sexualized dress and behavior in general
Overestimates the intimacy of relationships. 
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Grandiosity and need for admiration
Sense of self-importance
(APA, 2022)
Cluster C
Avoidant Personality Disorder- Persistent Social inhibition, fear of rejection keeps them from engaging, evaluate actions of others deeply
Dependent Personality Disorder- Need to be taken care of, stuck on every-day decisions, avoid disagreement with others, pessimistic and self-doubt
Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder- Need order, perfection, and control. Need rules and order to function and will ruminate when things are not “perfect”
(APA, 2022)
Diagnostic and Treatment Planning Exercise
Using the vignette you have created work through the diagnostic process and then developed a brief case formulation and treatment plan
Identify relevant data 
Identify Problem(s) and define
Write  goals and objectives
Create interventions
State how and when you would reevaluate 
What information is needed to complete this process?