The APA is offering the Cultural Formulation Interview (including the Informant
Version) and the Supplementary Modules to the Core Cultural Formulation
Interview for further research and clinical evaluation. They should be used in
research and clinical settings as potentially useful tools to enhance clinical
understanding and decision-making and not as the sole basis for making a
clinical diagnosis. Additional information can be found in DSM-5 in the Section
III chapter “Cultural Formulation.” The APA requests that clinicians and
researchers provide further data on the usefulness of these cultural formulation
interviews at http://www.dsm5.org/Pages/Feedback-Form.aspx.
Measure: Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
Rights granted: This material can be reproduced without permission by
researchers and by clinicians for use with their patients.
Rights holder: American Psychiatric Association
To request permission for any other use beyond what is stipulated above,
contact: http://www.appi.org/CustomerService/Pages/Permissions.aspx

-- 1 of 4 --

Page 1 of 3
Copyright © 2013 American Psychiatric Association. All Rights Reserved.
This material can be reproduced without permission by researchers and by clinicians for use with their patients.
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
Supplementary modules used to expand each CFI subtopic are noted in parentheses.
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWER INSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE ITALICIZED.
The following questions aim to clarify key aspects of the
presenting clinical problem from the point of view of
the individual and other members of the individual’s
social network (i.e., family, friends, or others involved
in current problem). This includes the problem’s
meaning, potential sources of help, and expectations
for services.
INTRODUCTION FOR THE INDIVIDUAL:
I would like to understand the problems that bring you here so that I can
help you more effectively. I want to know about your experience and
ideas. I will ask some questions about what is going on and how you
are dealing with it. Please remember there are no right or wrong an-
swers.
CULTURAL DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM
CULTURAL DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM
(Explanatory Model, Level of Functioning)
Elicit the individual’s view of core problems and key
concerns.
Focus on the individual’s own way of understanding the
problem.
Use the term, expression, or brief description elicited in
question 1 to identify the problem in subsequent
questions (e.g., “your conflict with your son”).
1. What brings you here today?
IF INDIVIDUAL GIVES FEW DETAILS OR ONLY MENTIONS
SYMPTOMS OR A MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS, PROBE:
People often understand their problems in their own way, which may
be similar to or different from how doctors describe the problem. How
would you describe your problem?
Ask how individual frames the problem for members of
the social network.
2. Sometimes people have different ways of describing their problem to
their family, friends, or others in their community. How would you
describe your problem to them?
Focus on the aspects of the problem that matter most to
the individual.
3. What troubles you most about your problem?
CULTURAL PERCEPTIONS OF CAUSE, CONTEXT, AND SUPPORT
CAUSES
(Explanatory Model, Social Network, Older Adults)
This question indicates the meaning of the condition for
the individual, which may be relevant for clinical care.
4. Why do you think this is happening to you? What do you think are the
causes of your [PROBLEM]?
Note that individuals may identify multiple causes, de-
pending on the facet of the problem they are consid-
ering.
PROMPT FURTHER IF REQUIRED:
Some people may explain their problem as the result of bad things
that happen in their life, problems with others, a physical illness, a
spiritual reason, or many other causes.
Focus on the views of members of the individual’s social
network. These may be diverse and vary from the indi-
vidual’s.
5. What do others in your family, your friends, or others in your com-
munity think is causing your [PROBLEM]?

-- 2 of 4 --

Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
Page 2 of 3
Copyright © 2013 American Psychiatric Association. All Rights Reserved.
This material can be reproduced without permission by researchers and by clinicians for use with their patients.
STRESSORS AND SUPPORTS
(Social Network, Caregivers, Psychosocial Stressors, Religion and Spirituality, Immigrants and Refugees, Cultural Identity, Older
Adults, Coping and Help Seeking)
Elicit information on the individual’s life context, focusing
on resources, social supports, and resilience. May
also probe other supports (e.g., from co-workers, from
participation in religion or spirituality).
6. Are there any kinds of support that make your [PROBLEM] better,
such as support from family, friends, or others?
Focus on stressful aspects of the individual’s environ-
ment. Can also probe, e.g., relationship problems,
difficulties at work or school, or discrimination.
7. Are there any kinds of stresses that make your [PROBLEM] worse,
such as difficulties with money, or family problems?
ROLE OF CULTURAL IDENTITY
(Cultural Identity, Psychosocial Stressors, Religion and Spirituality, Immigrants and Refugees, Older Adults, Children and Adoles-
cents)
Sometimes, aspects of people’s background or identity can make
their [PROBLEM] better or worse. By background or identity, I
mean, for example, the communities you belong to, the languages
you speak, where you or your family are from, your race or ethnic
background, your gender or sexual orientation, or your faith or reli-
gion.
Ask the individual to reflect on the most salient elements
of his or her cultural identity. Use this information to
tailor questions 9–10 as needed.
8. For you, what are the most important aspects of your background or
identity?
Elicit aspects of identity that make the problem better or
worse.
Probe as needed (e.g., clinical worsening as a result of
discrimination due to migration status, race/ethnicity,
or sexual orientation).
9. Are there any aspects of your background or identity that make a
difference to your [PROBLEM]?
Probe as needed (e.g., migration-related problems;
conflict across generations or due to gender roles).
10. Are there any aspects of your background or identity that are causing
other concerns or difficulties for you?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECTING SELF-COPING AND PAST HELP SEEKING
SELF-COPING
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Caregivers, Psychosocial Stressors)
Clarify self-coping for the problem. 11. Sometimes people have various ways of dealing with problems like
[PROBLEM]. What have you done on your own to cope with your
[PROBLEM]?

-- 3 of 4 --

Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
Page 3 of 3
Copyright © 2013 American Psychiatric Association. All Rights Reserved.
This material can be reproduced without permission by researchers and by clinicians for use with their patients.
PAST HELP SEEKING
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Caregivers, Psychosocial Stressors, Immigrants and Refugees,
Social Network, Clinician-Patient Relationship)
Elicit various sources of help (e.g., medical care, mental
health treatment, support groups, work-based coun-
seling, folk healing, religious or spiritual counseling,
other forms of traditional or alternative healing).
Probe as needed (e.g., “What other sources of help
have you used?”).
Clarify the individual’s experience and regard for pre-
vious help.
12. Often, people look for help from many different sources, including
different kinds of doctors, helpers, or healers. In the past, what kinds
of treatment, help, advice, or healing have you sought for your
[PROBLEM]?
PROBE IF DOES NOT DESCRIBE USEFULNESS OF HELP RE-
CEIVED:
What types of help or treatment were most useful? Not useful?
BARRIERS
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Psychosocial Stressors, Immigrants and Refugees, Social Net-
work, Clinician-Patient Relationship)
Clarify the role of social barriers to help seeking, access
to care, and problems engaging in previous treatment.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “What got in the way?”).
13. Has anything prevented you from getting the help you need?
PROBE AS NEEDED:
For example, money, work or family commitments, stigma or dis-
crimination, or lack of services that understand your language or
background?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECTING CURRENT HELP SEEKING
PREFERENCES
(Social Network, Caregivers, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Coping and Help Seeking)
Clarify individual’s current perceived needs and ex-
pectations of help, broadly defined.
Probe if individual lists only one source of help (e.g.,
“What other kinds of help would be useful to you at this
time?”).
Now let’s talk some more about the help you need.
14. What kinds of help do you think would be most useful to you at this
time for your [PROBLEM]?
Focus on the views of the social network regarding help
seeking.
15. Are there other kinds of help that your family, friends, or other people
have suggested would be helpful for you now?
CLINICIAN-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP
(Clinician-Patient Relationship, Older Adults)
Elicit possible concerns about the clinic or the clini-
cian-patient relationship, including perceived racism,
language barriers, or cultural differences that may
undermine goodwill, communication, or care delivery.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “In what way?”).
Address possible barriers to care or concerns about the
clinic and the clinician-patient relationship raised pre-
viously.
Sometimes doctors and patients misunderstand each other because
they come from different backgrounds or have different expectations.
16. Have you been concerned about this and is there anything that we
can do to provide you with the care you need?

-- 4 of 4 --

