Cultural Concepts in DSM-5
In an effort to improve diagnosis and care to people of all backgrounds, the fifth edition of the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) incorporates a greater cultural sensitivity
throughout the manual. Rather than a simple list of culture-bound syndromes, DSM-5 updates criteria
to reflect cross-cultural variations in presentations, gives more detailed and structured information
about cultural concepts of distress, and includes a clinical interview tool to facilitate comprehensive,
person-centered assessments.
The Impact of Cultural Differences
Different cultures and communities exhibit or explain symptoms in various ways. Because of this, it is
important for clinicians to be aware of relevant contextual information stemming from a patient’s cul-
ture, race, ethnicity, religion or geographical origin. For example, uncontrollable crying and headaches
are symptoms of panic attacks in some cultures, while difficulty breathing may be the primary symptom
in other cultures. Understanding such distinctions will help clinicians more accurately diagnose prob-
lems as well as more effectively treat them.
Cultural Considerations in Clinical Practice
Throughout the DSM-5 development process, the Work Groups made a concerted effort to modify
culturally determined criteria so they would be more equivalent across different cultures. In Section II,
specific diagnostic criteria were changed to better apply across diverse cultures. For example, the crite-
ria for social anxiety disorder now include the fear of “offending others” to reflect the Japanese concept
in which avoiding harm to others is emphasized rather than harm to oneself.
The new manual also addresses cultural concepts of distress, which detail ways in which different
cultures describe symptoms. In the Appendix, they are described through cultural syndromes, idioms
of distress, and explanations. These concepts assist clinicians in recognizing how people in different
cultures think and talk about psychological problems.
Finally, the cultural formulation interview guide will help clinicians to assess cultural factors influencing
patients’ perspectives of their symptoms and treatment options. It includes questions about patients’
background in terms of their culture, race, ethnicity, religion or geographical origin. The interview pro-
vides an opportunity for individuals to define their distress in their own words and then relate this to
how others, who may not share their culture, see their problems. This gives the clinician a more com-
prehensive foundation on which to base both diagnosis and care.
DSM is the manual used by clinicians and researchers to diagnose and classify mental disorders. The American Psychiatric
Association (APA) will publish DSM-5 in 2013, culminating a 14-year revision process.
APA is a national medical specialty society whose more than 37,000 physician members specialize in the diagnosis, treat-
ment, prevention and research of mental illnesses, including substance use disorders. Visit the APA at www.psychiatry.org.
For more information, please contact APA Communications at 703-907-8640 or press@psych.org.
© 2013 American Psychiatric Association

-- 1 of 1 --

