Vignette Example and Guidelines
The following is an example of how a vignette may be drafted. Overall, you have the freedom to be
creative in how you develop the case and tell the story of the client.
Here are some general guidelines and requirements
• The vignette should include information that will lead your classmates to the intended mental
health disorder.
• Choose disorders that have been covered up to the day it is due. DO NOT choose disorders that
have yet to be covered in class.
• You should not simply write out the diagnostic criteria in narrative form. Rather, think about how
a person may experience the symptoms.
• Think about how you may allude to experienced symptoms without stating the symptom or
disorder (IE Client has been anxious and worried for the past month. Instead- client says his mind
has been racing and he feels nothing is going to work out.)
• To start, vignettes should include clear details that lead to a diagnosis. However, as the semester
goes on, they can become more vague and complex. Overall, you should leave room for your
classmates to ask questions and seek clarity to determine a potential diagnosis.
• The written vignette does not need to be an exhaustive description of the client. It can be a clear
and concise description of key elements that represent the starting point of the story. However,
you will need to be able to fill in the blanks and answer questions as a part of the roll play
exercise so be thorough in how you conceptualize the client in your vignette.
• For your Diagnosis, be sure to include the DSM number/ICD number name of the disorder, and
all relevant specifiers. See example below
Sample Vignette:
Ingrid, a married 25-year-old- Hispanic female, has come to see you because she has been feeling
“down”. She reported that she has felt like this in the past at around age 15, but got over it eventually,
Currently, Ingrid reports feeling “numb” for the past two months or so. She explains that, in the past, she
enjoyed being out with her friends, dancing, riding her bike and eating good food. However, recently she
“only wants to sit on the couch”, or “sleep.” When asked, she states that despite sleeping about 11 to 12
hours a night but feels tired all the time. Additionally, even though she does not feel hungry, she has been
eating more that she typically does and reports gaining about 10 pounds in the past two months.
Her experience has started to impact her work. She has missed a number of days and has been late serval
times in the past two months. She was called in to her boss’s office because of her attendance and a
decline in her work performance. Additionally, her husband has expressed concern and encouraged her to
“get some help”, because he has heard her say things like “Nobody wants to hang out with me anyway,
they hate me”, and “Life is pointless.”
Client denies use of alcohol and drugs and reports no history of medical problems. Client reports thoughts
of death, but denies suicidal intent, or plan.
Diagnosis:
F32.1 Major Depressive Disorder, Moderate

-- 1 of 1 --

