

-- 1 of 385 --

ebook
THE GUILFORD PRESS

-- 2 of 385 --

The FirsT inTerview

-- 3 of 385 --

Also from James Morrison
Diagnosis Made Easier, Second Edition
DSM-5 Made Easy:
The Clinician’s Guide to Diagnosis
When Psychological Problems Mask Medical Disorders:
A Guide for Psychotherapists
For more information, see www.guilford.com/morrison

-- 4 of 385 --

The FirsT 	inTerview
F o u r T h 	e d i T i o n
James Morrison
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York 	London

-- 5 of 385 --

© 2014 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
Except as indicated, no part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from
the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
LIMITED PHOTOCOPY LICENSE
These materials are intended for use only by qualified mental health professionals.
The publisher grants to individual purchasers of this book nonassignable permis-
sion to reproduce all materials for which photocopying permission is specifically
granted in a footnote. This license is limited to you, the individual purchaser, for
personal use or use with individual clients. This license does not grant the right to
reproduce these materials for resale, redistribution, electronic display, or any other
purposes (including but not limited to books, pamphlets, articles, video- or audio-
tapes, blogs, file- sharing sites, Internet or intranet sites, and handouts or slides for
lectures, workshops, webinars, or therapy groups, whether or not a fee is charged).
Permission to reproduce these materials for these and any other purposes must be
obtained in writing from the Permissions Department of Guilford Publications.
The author has checked with sources believed to be reliable in his effort to provide
information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards of practice that
are accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error
or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither the author, nor
the editor and publisher, nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation
or publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein is in every
respect accurate or complete, and they are not responsible for any errors or omissions
or the results obtained from the use of such information. Readers are encouraged to
confirm the information contained in this book with other sources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Morrison, James R.
The first interview / James Morrison. — Fourth edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4625-1555-4 (hardback : acid-free paper)
1. Interviewing in psychiatry. 	I. Title.
RC480.7.M67 2014
616.8900835—dc23
2014006717

-- 6 of 385 --

For Chris and Eric

-- 7 of 385 --



-- 8 of 385 --

vii
About the Author
James Morrison, MD, is Affiliate Professor of Psychiatry at Oregon
Health and Science University in Portland. He has extensive experi-
ence in both the private and public sectors. With his acclaimed practi-
cal books—including, most recently, Diagnosis Made Easier, Second Edition,
and DSM-5 Made Easy: The Clinician’s Guide to Diagnosis—Dr. Morrison has
guided hundreds of thousands of mental health professionals and stu-
dents through the complexities of clinical evaluation and diagnosis. His
website (www.guilford.com/jm) offers additional discussion and resources
related to psychiatric diagnosis and DSM-5.

-- 9 of 385 --



-- 10 of 385 --

ix
Preface
The First Interview resulted from my desire to write a manual on interview-
ing mental health patients that was based as much as possible on objec-
tive research and best-practice principles. Of course, that was a pretty
tall order when the first edition was published over two decades ago,
and it remains so today; there isn’t yet nearly enough controlled research
to guide interviewers through the process of evaluating mental health
patients. That’s why, although I’ve updated this new edition with every
scrap of new information I’ve been able to collect, the text still embodies
a synthesis of the best techniques I’ve been able to cull from both the sci-
ence and art of interviewing patients.
Any published book is really the work of more than one person, and
I remain grateful to all those who have helped me over the years. They
remain too many to name them all. But there are several people to whom
I owe a special, ongoing debt of gratitude.
Matt Blusewicz, PhD, Rebecca Dominy, LCSW, Nicholas Rosenlicht,
MD, Mark Servis, MD, and Kathleen Toms, RN, all contributed to the
first edition. James Boehnlein, MD, generously read and provided a cri-
tique for the third edition. Dave Kinzie, MD, provided essential informa-
tion for this edition. As always, Mary Morrison provided insightful and
relevant comments at various stages of the preparation of the manuscript.
I’ll be forever grateful to the crew at The Guilford Press, especially my
long-time friend and editor, Kitty Moore, for her continuing wisdom and
support. Marie Sprayberry, probably the best copy editor in the world,
has immeasurably enhanced the looks and readability of this book with
her close attention to detail. And Anna Brackett, still my editorial project
manager—thanks again for your skills and forbearance in the face of too
many author’s requests for change.

-- 11 of 385 --



-- 12 of 385 --

xi
Contents
inTroducTion. What Is Interviewing? 	1
The Need for Comprehensive Information, 3; The Importance
of Practice, 4
chapTer 1. Openings and Introductions 	7
Time Factors, 7; Settings, 10; Beginning the Relationship, 12;
Taking Notes, 13; Sample Openings, 14
chapTer 2. Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	16
Directive versus Nondirective Questions, 16; The Opening
Question, 17; The Chief Complaint, 18; Free Speech, 20;
Areas of Clinical Interest, 22; How Much Time?, 23; Moving On, 23
chapTer 3. Developing Rapport 	26
The Basis of Rapport, 26; Assess Your Own Feelings, 28;
Consider Your Manner of Speaking, 29; Talk the
Patient’s Language, 31; Maintain Boundaries, 32;
Show Your Expertise, 35
chapTer 4. Managing the Early Patient Interview 	37
Nonverbal Encouragements, 37; Verbal Encouragements, 38;
Offering Reassurance, 40

-- 13 of 385 --

xii 	Contents
chapTer 5. History of the Present Illness 	42
The Present Episode, 42; Describing Symptoms, 43;
Vegetative Symptoms, 43; Consequences of Illness, 45; Onset and
Sequence of Symptoms, 47; Stressors, 48; Previous Episodes, 50;
Previous Treatment, 51
chapTer 6. Getting the Facts about the Present Illness 	53
Be Clear about the Goals of Your Interview, 53; Track Your
Distractions, 54; Use Open‑Ended Questions, 55;
Talk the Patient’s Language, 56; Choose the Right
Probing Questions, 57; Confrontations, 60
chapTer 7. Interviewing about Feelings 	62
Negative and Positive Feelings, 62; Eliciting Feelings, 64;
Other Techniques, 65; Following Up for Details, 68;
Defense Mechanisms, 69; Handling Excessively
Emotional Patients, 70
chapTer 8. Personal and Social History 	73
Childhood and Adolescence, 74; Life as an Adult, 78;
Medical History, 84; Review of Systems, 86; Family History, 87;
Personality Traits and Disorders, 89
chapTer 9. Sensitive Subjects 	96
Suicidal Behavior, 96; Violence and Its Prevention, 101;
Substance Misuse, 104; Sexual Life, 108; Sexual Abuse, 113
chapTer 10. Control of the Later Interview 	116
Take Charge, 116; Closed‑Ended Questions, 118;
Sensitivity Training, 120; Transitions, 120
chapTer 11. Mental Status Exam I: Behavioral Aspects 	123
What Is the Mental Status Exam?, 123; General Appearance
and Behavior, 124; Mood, 128; Flow of Thought, 131
chapTer 12. Mental Status Exam II: Cognitive Aspects 	136
Should You Do a Formal Mental Status Exam?, 136; Content of
Thought, 137; Perception, 142; Consciousness and Cognition, 149;
Insight and Judgment, 157; When Can You Omit the Formal Mental
Status Exam?, 158

-- 14 of 385 --

Contents 	xiii
chapTer 13. Signs and Symptoms in Areas of Clinical Interest 	160
Psychosis, 161; Mood Disturbance: Depression, 164;
Mood Disturbance: Mania, 168; Substance Use Disorders, 170;
Social and Personality Problems, 173; Difficulty Thinking
(Cognitive Problems), 177; Anxiety, Avoidance Behavior,
and Arousal, 181; Physical Complaints, 184
chapTer 14. Closure 	187
The Art of Closing, 187; Quitting Early, 189
chapTer 15. Interviewing Informants 	191
Obtaining Permission First, 192; Choosing an Informant, 193;
What Do You Ask?, 194; Group Interviews, 196;
Other Interview Settings, 197
chapTer 16. Meeting Resistance 	198
Recognizing Resistance, 198; Why Do Patients Resist?, 199;
How to Cope with Resistance, 200; Prevention, 207;
Your Attitude, 208
chapTer 17. Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	210
Vagueness, 210; Lying, 213; Hostility, 215; Potential Violence, 218;
Confusion, 220; Older Patients, 221; Younger Patients, 223;
Other Issues and Behaviors, 224; How to Respond When
the Patient Asks . . . , 235
chapTer 18. Diagnosis and Recommendations 	238
Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis, 238; Choosing Treatment, 240;
Assessing Prognosis, 244; Recommending Further Investigation, 246;
Making Referrals, 247
chapTer 19. Sharing Your Findings with the Patient 	251
Conferring with the Patient, 251; Discussion with the Family, 258;
What If the Plan Is Rejected?, 259
chapTer 20. Communicating Your Findings to Others 	261
The Written Report, 261; Recording Your Diagnosis, 267;
Formulation, 268; The Oral Presentation, 271

-- 15 of 385 --

xiv 	Contents
chapTer 21. Troubleshooting Your Interview 	272
Recognizing the Troubled Interview, 272; How to Determine
What’s Wrong, 274; What You’ll Learn (and What to Do about It), 275
appendix a. Summary of the Initial Interview 	281
appendix B. Descriptions of Selected Disorders 	288
Mood Disorders, 288; Psychotic Disorders, 291;
Substance‑ Related Disorders, 294; Neurocognitive Disorders, 294;
Anxiety Disorders, 296; Obsessive– Compulsive Disorder, 297;
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, 298; Anorexia Nervosa, 298;
Somatization Disorder, 298; Personality Disorders, 300
appendix c. Sample Interview, Written Report, and Formulation 	304
Interview with Patient, 304; Written Report, 323;
Formulation, 325
appendix d. A Semistructured Interview 	327
All Screens, 328; Mood Disorders, 330; Anxiety and Related
Disorders, 332; Psychotic Disorders, 335; Substance
Misuse, 336; Difficulty Thinking (Cognitive Problems), 338;
Physical Complaints, 338; Impulse‑ Control Disorders, 340;
Family History, 341; Childhood through Adult Life, 342;
Social and Personality Problems, 343
appendix e. Assessing Your Interview 	346
appendix F. Bibliography and Recommended Reading 	351
Books, 351; Articles, 352; Other Sources Used in the Preparation
of This Book, 354
Index 	357

-- 16 of 385 --

1
i n T r o d u c T i o n
What Is Interviewing?
You’ll probably never forget your first interviewing experience; I know
I’ll forever remember mine. The patient, a young woman hospitalized
with a thought disorder that turned out to be early schizophrenia, spoke
vaguely and often wandered off the topic. She’d occasionally make sex-
ual references that I, a young student in a more innocent era, had never
before encountered. I wasn’t sure what to talk about, and I spent more
time planning what to ask next than I did considering what the previous
answer meant. Despite it all, this patient seemed to like me, which was a
good thing; I needed three more trips to the ward that weekend just to
get the entire history.
I now realize that my early experience was about par for the course.
No one had told me that most novice interviewers have trouble think-
ing up questions, or that many feel uncomfortable with their first few
patients. I wish someone had pointed out what I now know: that mental
health interviewing is usually easy and almost always quite a lot of fun.
It should be both. After all, clinical interviewing is little more than
helping people talk about themselves, which most people love to do. In
the field of mental health, we ask patients to reveal something of their
emotions and their personal lives. Practice teaches us what to ask and how
to direct the conversation toward the information we need to help the
patient best. Developing this ability is important: In a survey of practicing
and teaching clinicians, comprehensive interviewing was ranked the high-
est of 32 skills needed by mental health practitioners.
If interviewing only involved getting patients to answer questions, cli-
nicians could assign the task to computers and spend more time drinking
coffee. But computers and paper questionnaires cannot begin to perceive
a nuance of wording, or assess the hesitation or the moist eye—signs that
can alert a live clinician to a fruitful line of inquiry. A good interviewer

-- 17 of 385 --

2 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
must know how to work with a range of different personalities and prob-
lems: to give free rein to the informative patient, to guide the rambling
one, to encourage the silent one, and to mollify the hostile one. Nearly
anyone can learn these skills. There is no single kind of interviewing per-
sonality, and you can succeed with a variety of interviewing styles. Still,
you will need guidance and practice to develop a style that works well for
you.
Clinical interviews are used to accomplish various goals, of course,
and professionals from diverse fields have different agendas. But all
interviewers—psychiatrists, 	psychologists, 	family 	practitioners, 	social
workers, nurses, occupational therapists, physicians’ assistants, pastoral
counselors, and drug rehabilitation specialists (I apologize if I’ve left
anyone out)—must first obtain basic information from each patient they
encounter. The similarities in the sort of data they need far outweigh any
differences that might be expected from their different kinds of training
and perspectives.
Good interviewers share three features. They . . .
1. obtain the greatest amount of accurate information relevant to
diagnosis and management,
2. in the shortest period of time,
3. consistent with creating and maintaining a good working relation-
ship (rapport) with the patient.
Of these three components, (1) the database and (3) rapport are crucial.
If you ignored time constraints, you could provide good care, although
you might have difficulty coping with more than a very few patients at
one time.
Your first contact with any patient could be made for a variety of
reasons—a brief screening, an outpatient diagnostic intake, an emer-
gency room visit, a hospital intake, or a consultation for medication or
psychotherapy. A nurse clinician might need to develop a nursing treat-
ment plan based on several behavioral diagnoses. Forensic reports and
research interviews have very different goals, but their methods and con-
tent have much in common with all the other types of interviews I’ve
mentioned— each of which is a specialized use of the basic, comprehen-
sive initial interview. Whatever your interview goals, this book aims to
present the information you should try to obtain for all patients and to
recommend techniques that will help you during the different stages of
your interview.
Over the past several decades, we have learned a great deal about
the interview process. However, in my everyday evaluations of young
mental health professionals, I am often disconcerted at how little this
knowledge is being used in training. Clinicians often use far less than the

-- 18 of 385 --

What Is Interviewing? 	3
time allotted for an interview, fail to ask about suicidal ideas, and forget
that many mental health patients also have substance use issues. In short,
much of what we know about the processes of interviewing and evalua-
tion is being ignored. The First Interview attempts to remedy this deficit.
Addressed primarily to beginners, it emphasizes the basic material that
clinicians of all mental health disciplines need to know. I hope that expe-
rienced clinicians will also find this book a helpful review.
The need For comprehensive inFormaTion
Clinicians can view a patient in an astonishing variety of ways. Indeed, all
clinicians should be able to view each patient from biological, dynamic,
social, and behavioral perspectives, because a single patient may need the
treatment implied by any or even all of these theoretical standpoints. For
example, the problems of a young married woman who drinks too much
alcohol might be determined by a combination of factors:
Dynamic. Her overbearing husband resembles her father, who also
drinks.
Behavioral. She associates drinking with relief from the tensions
induced by these relationships.
Social. Several girlfriends drink; drinking is accepted, even encour-
aged, in her social milieu.
Biological. We should also consider the genetic contribution toward
alcohol misuse from her father.
A comprehensive evaluation brings out the contributions of each of these
points of view. Each is folded into the treatment plan.
Throughout the book I emphasize the need to hold all perspectives
when you are conducting a comprehensive interview. Unless you do a
complete evaluation, you are likely to miss vital data. You might not learn,
for example, that a patient who seeks help for a “problem of living” actu-
ally has an underlying psychosis, is in the midst of a depression, or mis-
uses substances. Even if your patient turns out to have no actual mental
disorder, you need to understand how past experiences contribute to the
current problems. Only a complete interview can satisfactorily give you
this information.
Needless to say, you will obtain much more additional information
as treatment progresses. You may even find that you must revise certain
of the opinions you formed during your first meeting. But you can plan
rationally for management only if you first carefully elicit the relevant
material during the initial interview.

-- 19 of 385 --

4 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Your success as a mental health interviewer will hinge on several dif-
ferent skills. How well can you elicit the entire story? Can you probe deeply
enough to obtain all the relevant information? How quickly can you teach
your patient to tell you accurate, pertinent facts? How adequately do you
evaluate and respond to your patient’s feelings? Can you, when necessary,
motivate your patient to reveal embarrassing experiences? All of these
skills are needed by anyone who must elicit mental health histories. The
time to learn them is early in your training, before ineffective— or even
maladaptive—interviewing habits become a fixed part of your style. The
benefits of early training should persist for a lifetime.
More than half a century ago, two volumes set the tone for interview-
ing style: The Initial Interview in Psychiatric Practice by Gill, Newman, and
Redlich, and The Psychiatric Interview by Harry Stack Sullivan. Although
many other books on interviewing have appeared over the years, most
have followed the models established by these two volumes. But taste and
needs have changed over the decades, and such venerable works no lon-
ger adequately serve the mental health interviewer. Over the past several
decades, a number of research papers—most notably those by Cox and
associates—have provided a scientific basis for modern interviewing prac-
tice. I have based much of this book on these sources. I have also con-
sulted nearly every available relevant monograph and research article on
interviewing published during the past 60 years. Citations for the more
important of these are provided in Appendix F.
In their monograph, Cannell and Kahn (1968) stated, “The people
who write instructions and books for interviewers are not themselves
given much to interviewing.” At least in the case of The First Interview,
that assertion is dead wrong. A significant part of what has gone into this
volume comes from my own experience over the years with more than
15,000 mental health patients. The interviewing approach I recommend
is an amalgam of clinical research, the experience of others, and my own
perception of what works. If it sometimes seems formulaic, it’s a formula
that works well. Once you have learned the basics, you can adapt and
expand it to create your own interviewing style.
The imporTance oF pracTice
When I was in training, my professors often said that a student’s best text-
book is the patient. Nowhere is this truer than in learning to do a mental
health interview. Indeed, no textbook can be more than a supplement—a
guide to the real learning that comes through experience. I therefore
urge you to practice early and often.
First, read Chapters 1 through 5 quickly. Don’t try to memorize this
material; the amount may be daunting, but it is presented in sequence to

-- 20 of 385 --

What Is Interviewing? 	5
help you learn it a bit at a time. (Appendix A provides a concise outline
of the information you need and strategies you can use at each stage of
the typical initial interview.) Then find a patient who will help you learn.
For the beginning interviewer, patients hospitalized in a mental
health unit are an excellent resource. Many of them have been inter-
viewed before (some are highly experienced!), so they have a good idea
of what you expect of them. Even on contemporary hospital wards with
many scheduled activities, they usually have time available. Many patients
appreciate the chance to ventilate, and most enjoy the feeling that from
their own difficulties some good can come—in this case, the training of a
mental health professional. (A study in 1998 found that most patients were
highly satisfied with the students who participated on their hospital care
teams; another study reported that students were experienced as “kind
and understanding” by patients, most of whom said they’d be happy to
repeat the experience.) And sometimes an interview by a fresh observer,
even a trainee, reveals new insights that can help redirect therapy.
So enlist the aid of a cooperative patient and start to work. Don’t
worry about trying to find a “good teaching patient”; for your purposes,
any cooperative patient will do, and all lives are inherently interesting.
Don’t try to follow an outline too closely, especially in the early going.
Relax and try to give both yourself and the patient an enjoyable experi-
ence.
After an hour or so—a longer session will be too tiring for both of
you—break off the interview with the promise that later you’ll come back
for more. Return to The First Interview to read about any areas of inter-
view management that gave you trouble. Carefully compare the personal
and social information you have obtained with the Chapter 8 recommen-
dations (which are also outlined in Appendix A). How complete is your
mental status exam? Compare your observations with the suggestions in
Chapters 11 and 12.
A student might reasonably ask, “How can I interview about mental
disorders when I know so little?” Doing a complete interview does imply
knowing the symptoms, signs, and course typical of various mental disor-
ders, but you can study these while you learn interview technique. In fact,
learning about disorders from patients who have experienced them will
fix the characteristics of these diagnoses in your mind forever. In Chapter
13 you will find listed the features that you should cover in your interview,
broken down by the areas of clinical interest your patient presents.
Armed with a list of the questions you forgot to ask the first time
through, return for another session with your patient. As I learned that
weekend as a beginning medical student, there is no better way to learn
what to ask than by going back to correct your own omissions. The more
patients you interview, the less you will forget. When you have completed
your interview, any of several standard textbooks (see Appendix F for

-- 21 of 385 --

6 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
an annotated list) can help you with the differential diagnosis of your
patient’s disorder.
You will become skilled faster if you have feedback from an experi-
enced interviewer. It could be direct, as when an instructor sits with you
while you interview your patient. Numerous studies have demonstrated
the effectiveness of audio or video recordings, which can be played back
while you and your instructor discuss the facts you have omitted and the
interview techniques you could have used to better effect. You will prob-
ably find that you can learn a lot just by listening in private to recordings
of your own early interviews. I’ve provided a score sheet in Appendix E to
help you evaluate the content and process issues of your interviews.

-- 22 of 385 --

7
c h a p T e r 	1
Openings and Introductions
By the time you have completed an initial interview, you should have
(1) obtained information from your patient and (2) established the basis
for a good working relationship. The information includes various types
of history (a history is a detailed account that includes current symptoms,
previous illnesses, medications, family and social relationships, health risk
issues—in short, everything that bears on your patient’s life and mental
health problems) and a mental status examination (or MSE, which is an eval-
uation of your patient’s current thinking and behavior).
In the course of this book, I will take you through each section of
the history and MSE, in more or less the chronological order you would
use when talking with your patient. In separate chapters, I’ll discuss the
content of the information you should expect to obtain and the inter-
view techniques that are most appropriate to that content. Where it seems
appropriate, I will also discuss issues of rapport.
Time FacTors
In the first few moments of an initial interview, you will need to accom-
plish several tasks.
• You should indicate what form your interview will take—how much
time it will take, what sort of questions you will ask, and the like.
• You should convey some idea about the sort of information you
expect your patient (or other informant) to give you.
• You must create a comfortable and secure environment that will
allow your patient as much control as possible, under the circum-
stances.

-- 23 of 385 --

8 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Table 1.1 lists the basic material that should be covered by the time
you complete your interview. An experienced clinician might take 45 min-
utes to examine the average patient. A student will probably require sev-
eral hours to obtain all the relevant information. Regardless of your level
of experience, your emphasis should be on collecting the most informa-
tion possible early in the relationship—before you can become too com-
mitted to a diagnosis.
Even a seasoned interviewer occasionally requires more than one ses-
sion for an initial evaluation, and anyone needs more time for a patient
who is unusually talkative, vague, hostile, suspicious, or hard to under-
stand, or for one who has a complicated story to tell. Some patients sim-
ply cannot tolerate a lengthy interview, and even those who are hospital-
ized may have other appointments to keep. Multiple interviews also give a
patient time to reflect and to recall material that might have been initially
omitted. Of course, if you interview relatives or other informants, you will
need additional sessions, plus time to integrate the information from all
of your sources.
I realize that with the rush of modern health care, time available is
constantly shrinking. So I’ve expressed as percentages the amounts of
time you should plan to devote to the various portions of an average ini-
tial interview:
15%: Determine the chief complaint and encourage free speech.
30%: Pursue specific diagnoses; ask about suicide, history of vio-
lence, and substance misuse.
15%: Obtain medical history; conduct review of systems; obtain fam-
ily history.
25%: Obtain rest of personal and social history; evaluate character
pathology.
10%: Conduct MSE.
5%: Discuss diagnosis and treatment with patient; plan next meeting.
Your own professional needs may change the focus somewhat. For
example, social workers may spend additional time on the personal and
social history. (At one time, some institutions and agencies assigned to
social workers the responsibility for obtaining the entire social history.
Today, we believe that all aspects of the entire history should be gathered
by at least one clinician, who can then synthesize this information into a
coherent clinical picture.)
Regardless of your profession, I recommend that you try to get the
whole story early in the relationship with your patient. After the first few
sessions, even experienced clinicians sometimes assume that they know a

-- 24 of 385 --

9
TABLE 1.1. Outline of the Initial Interview
Chief complaint
History of present illness
Stressors
Onset
Symptoms
Previous episodes
Treatment
Consequences
Course
Treatment so far
Hospitalizations?
Effects on patient, others
Personal and social history
Childhood and growing up
Where born?
Number of siblings and
position
Reared by one or both
parents?
Relationship with parents
If adopted:
What circumstances?
Extrafamilial?
Health as child
Problems related to puberty
Abuse (physical or sexual)?
Education
Last grade completed
Scholastic problems
Overly active
School refusal
Behavior problems
Suspension or expulsion?
Sociable as child?
Hobbies, interests
Life as an adult
Current living situation
Lives with whom?
Where?
Ever homeless?
Support network
Mobility
Finances
Marital history
Age(s) at marriage(s)
Number of marriages
Age(s) at termination(s) and
how ended
Number, age, sex of children
Stepchildren?
Marital problems?
Sexual preference, adjustment
Problems with intercourse
Birth control methods
Extramarital partners?
Physical, sexual abuse?
Work history
Current occupation
Number of jobs
Reason(s) for job change(s)
Ever fired?
Life as an adult (cont.)
Leisure activities
Clubs, organizations
Interests, hobbies
Military service
Branch, rank
Years served
Disciplinary problems?
Combat?
Legal problems ever?
Criminal record?
Litigation
Religion
Denomination
Levels of interest
Medical history
Major illnesses
Operations
Nonmental medications
Allergies
Environmental
Food
Medications
Nonmental hospitalizations
Physical impairments
Risk factors for HIV/AIDS?
Adult physical or sexual abuse?
Review of systems
Changes in appetite
Head injury
Seizures
Chronic pain
Unconsciousness
Premenstrual syndrome
Review for somatization
disorder
Family history
Describe relatives
Mental disorder in relatives?
Substance misuse
Type(s) of substance(s)
Duration of use
Quantity
Consequences
Medical problems
Loss of control
Personal and interpersonal
problems
Job difficulties
Legal consequences
Financial problems
Misuse of medications
Prescription
Over-the-counter
Personality traits
Lifelong behavior patterns
Violence
Arrests
Suicide attempts
Methods
Consequences
Drugs or alcohol associated?
Suicide attempts (cont.)
Seriousness
Psychological
Physical
Mental status exam
Appearance
Apparent age
Race
Posture
Nutrition
Hygiene
Hairstyle
Clothing
Neat?
Clean?
Type/fashion?
Behavior
Activity level
Tremors?
Mannerisms and stereotypies
Smiles?
Eye contact
Speech clear?
Mood
Type
Lability
Appropriateness
Flow of thought
Word associations
Rate and rhythm of speech
Content of thought
Phobias
Anxiety
Obsessions, compulsions
Thoughts of suicide
Delusions
Hallucinations
Language
Comprehension
Fluency
Naming
Repetition
Reading
Writing
Cognition
Orientation
Person
Place
Time
Memory
Immediate
Recent
Remote
Attention and concentration
Serial sevens
Count backwards
Cultural information
Five presidents
Abstract thinking
Similarities
Differences
Insight and judgment

-- 25 of 385 --

10 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
patient well and ignore certain vital information that may have escaped
them.
Of course, just as no one has unlimited time, no evaluation can ever
be considered complete. As long as you continue to care for your patient,
you will be adding new facts and observations to your original database.
But if you have done your job well in the beginning, these will largely be
matters of corroborative detail that won’t substantially affect diagnosis or
treatment.
Many patients seek help for serious problems that they find frighten-
ing, overwhelming, or even life-threatening. You should elicit their stories
in such a way that they feel they have received a complete, fair, profes-
sional evaluation. If your patient is unusually dramatic, slow, or discur-
sive, try to understand this behavior in the light of the stresses and anxi-
eties anyone might face, and allow additional time.
seTTings
The first moments any professional person spends with a new patient set
the tone for all subsequent interactions. Careful attention to such simple
matters as introductions and the patient’s comfort and sense of control
helps establish a relationship grounded in respect and cooperation. If you
have your own private office, you can decorate it as nicely as you choose,
but institutional offices are often less than regal. Fortunately, the effec-
tiveness of the interview is not related to the elegance of the surround-
ings. Though a measure of privacy will yield the most information, I have
seen excellent interviews done at the bedside, or even in a corner of a busy
hospital day room. What’s paramount is your concern for the patient’s
comfort and privacy.
Make the best of what you have available. Sitting across a desk from
the patient, as is traditional in so many offices, creates an inflexible bar-
rier between the two of you. It doesn’t allow leeway to give more space
to the suspicious patient or to draw nearer someone whose depression
requires the close comfort of another human being. Try instead to
arrange your chairs so you can face the patient across the corner of a desk
or table. That way, you can vary the distance between the two of you, as
the needs of the moment indicate. If you are right-handed, you can more
comfortably take notes if the patient sits to your left. Of course, two chairs
that directly face one another will work well, too. By the way, try to have
available a box or pocket pack of facial tissues. You never know who in the
room is going to need one.
At the same time, you have another duty—one whose importance I
won’t have to spend any time at all trying to sell. That task is maintaining

-- 26 of 385 --

Openings and Introductions 	11
your own safety. The vast majority of mental health encounters are unevent-
ful, but in rare cases something untoward happens that results in harm
to the clinician, the patient, or both. (In 2006 Wayne Fenton, a psychia-
trist who specialized in the management of schizophrenia at the National
Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Maryland, was beaten to death
by one of his patients—an attack that made headlines across the country.)
It should become instinctive with you that at the beginning of every
patient interview, you check to ensure your own safety and that of others.
Practically speaking, this means following three principles: (1) Interview
in a place where there are others nearby; (2) have available an easily trig-
gered emergency alert system, such as an alarm bell; and (3) when you are
conducting an interview in a closed office, seat yourself so that you are
closer to the door than the patient is, with no desk or other furniture that
could hinder a speedy exit if one should become necessary.
Regardless of where you interview, your own appearance can affect
your relationship with the patient. What’s considered professional may
depend somewhat upon the region where you work and the customs of
your particular clinic or hospital. This observation may seem obvious, but
it bears repeating: You will be perceived as more professional if you pay
attention to your dress, grooming, and manner.
OK, standards may have changed a bit over the past decade or two,
but dress can still make a difference. In general, patients readily accept
conservative clothing and hairstyles; excessively casual dress or manners
may suggest nonchalance about the importance of your meeting. Indeed,
a 2005 survey revealed that by huge margins, patients preferred physi-
cians to be formally dressed and were more inclined to reveal personal
information to clinicians who wore white coats than to those who were
casually attired. Most of the patients also stated that they were more
likely to follow the advice of someone who was professionally attired.
The patients surveyed were on average middle-aged; though teenagers
and children could yet prove to be significant exceptions to this rule, the
report bears careful consideration. (It is probably relevant to other health
care personnel as well.)
Although most mental health clinicians don’t wear white coats, cloth-
ing that is neat, clean, and not too casual will advertise your status as
a professional. Limit any jewelry to something modest; don’t antago-
nize someone whose cooperation you need with adornments that sug-
gest wealth or status the patient could never hope to achieve. If you wear
pins, pendants, or items of clothing that indicate a religious affiliation,
consider whether any of your prospective clients might regard them as a
barrier to an effective relationship. Observe how other professionals in
your setting dress and behave; their examples can help you judge what’s
appropriate.

-- 27 of 385 --

12 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Beginning The relaTionship
Introduce yourself, offer to shake hands, and indicate the seating arrange-
ment you prefer. (At a patient’s bedside, always sit down, even if you intend
to stay for only a few minutes. Even if you have a plane to catch, you don’t
want to appear too hurried to take time with the patient. Besides, if you’re
a patient lying in bed, it’s uncomfortable to have someone staring down
on you.) If you happen to be late for the interview, acknowledge it with an
apology. Is your patient’s name an uncommon one? Be sure that you have
pronounced it correctly. If this is the first time you have met, explain your
status (student? intern? consultant?) and the purpose of this interview.
What do you hope to learn? What information do you have already? Try
to give your patient an estimate of how much time you expect to spend
together.
Often you will already know something about the patient from case
notes of previous workers, from a hospital chart, or from a physician’s
referral. You can save time and increase the accuracy of your assessment
by reviewing this material before you begin. However, for most of this
book, we’ll assume that you have no access to such information.
Although some interviewers try to ease into a relationship with
small talk, I usually recommend against it. In most cases your patient has
come for treatment because of troubling problems. Comments about the
weather, baseball, or television shows may seem a distraction or, worse, an
expression of unconcern on your part. It seems better to go right to the
heart of the matter.
Should you feel that you must start with small talk, ask a question
that demands more than a yes–no response. For example:
“How was the traffic coming here?”
“How have you been enjoying the summer months?”
If nothing else, such a question shows that you expect active participation.
Especially during the early part of your interview, you want to encourage
the patient to elaborate, not to answer “yes” or “no” while you do most
of the work. (We’ll further consider this and other aspects of interview
control in Chapters 4 and 10.)
Occasionally a relative or close friend will want to accompany the
patient into the interview room—a situation to which you can respond
in either of two ways. I prefer to see patients and informants separately,
because it maximizes the amount of information I obtain. To reinforce
the patient’s sense of autonomy, I almost always start with the patient,
advising the informant that “you’ll be next.” Occasionally, however, you
may need to take the other tack and see patient and informant together.

-- 28 of 385 --

Openings and Introductions 	13
That can happen when the patient is severely impaired, such as with an
advanced case of dementia. Then having the relative in the room can be a
real time saver. Another occasion on which you’ll need the dual-interview
format is when the patient strongly requests it, such as when a person with
severe anxiety or depression requires extra support.
Taking noTes
In most cases you will want to take notes. Few of us can remember even
briefly all the material we hear, and you may not have the opportunity to
write up your interview right away. So point out that you will be taking
notes, and make sure that this is all right with the patient.
Nonetheless, you should try to keep note taking to a minimum. This
will allow you to spend more time observing your patient’s behavior and
facial expressions for clues to feelings. You won’t be able to get every-
thing down on paper or to write complete sentences (other than the chief
complaint, which we’ll discuss in the next chapter). Instead, jot down key
words that can indicate which issues to explore later or that can serve as
reminders when you write up your report. Try to keep your pen in hand;
this avoids the distraction of repeatedly picking it up. You can lay it aside
when you discuss especially sensitive topics that the patient might not care
to have recorded.
This brings up the vexed question of computerized records. With our
record systems increasingly online, even in the cloud, we clinicians face
pressure to keyboard information as we talk with our patients. I confess
that I simply cannot imagine an effective way of doing this while talking
with a new patient, if we are to have any hope of creating good rapport.
For me, the answer still seems to be to take notes with a pencil, and write
up the summary later. This position seems to resonate with colleagues—
some of whom point out that with the advent of increasingly accurate
dictation programs, even those of us who type at the hunt-and-peck level
can enter digital information efficiently.
Now here’s another problem: Sometimes a patient will ask that you
keep certain material out of the chart. If you’re a student, no problem. But
if this request comes early in your relationship as the responsible clinician,
it is usually better to comply, especially when it only applies to a limited
portion of the interview. If the patient seems extremely uncomfortable
with any note taking, you can explain that you will need some notes for
later review to help make sense of it all. In the rare event that the patient
insists, give in, put down your pen, and later transcribe all that you can
remember. What you want is to complete an informative interview, not
to win a contest of wills. However, at some point—perhaps not right now
when you are trying to complete the interview—you might raise the point

-- 29 of 385 --

14 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
again. Having a significant hole in the database could prove problematic,
especially if this patient will be seen by other clinicians later.
Reviewing an audio recording of a session can help you spot diffi-
culties in your interview style. You can often uncover deficiencies that
you would have missed with a less faithful record of your conversation.
As an everyday practice, however, it has drawbacks: Reviewing a record-
ing takes a lot of time, and some patients may feel even less comfortable
with recording than with note taking. If you do decide to make an audio
recording, begin only after you have explained its educational purpose
and obtained permission.
You may also need to explain that state laws and professional ethics
could require you to report certain information that has a bearing on
the safety of others. This principle, formalized in California in 1974 by
the Tarasoff decision, clearly states that health care personnel have a duty
to protect identifiable persons against whom threats have been made.
Although not all states have enacted such a statute, clinicians everywhere
are advised to behave as if it has been enacted. Of course, if you are a stu-
dent, you should never take such action on your own; discuss at once any
threats or other concerns you have with a supervisor, who will then take
the lead in fulfilling the duty to protect.
sample openings
Effective openings have many possible variations. Here is a good one.
I ntervIewer: Good morning, Mr. Dean. I’m Emily Watts, a third-
year medical student. I’d like to talk with you for about an hour
to learn as much as I can about people with problems like yours.
Do you have the time to spend with me now?
PatIent: Yes, that will be fine.
I ntervIewer: Why don’t you sit right here? (Motions toward a chair.)
Do you mind if I take some notes?
PatIent: No, everyone else seems to.
This opening works because it quickly conveys information that is impor-
tant to the patient: the interviewer’s name and position, the purpose of
the interview, and the time that will be required. The interviewer also
manages the business of seating arrangements and obtaining permis-
sion for note taking. However, some patients may bridle at the notion of
having a problem. Ms. Watts was interviewing an established patient, so
her question went unchallenged. New patients might respond better to a
simple “Please tell me why you are here.”

-- 30 of 385 --

Openings and Introductions 	15
Here’s another useful opening:
PatIent: Are you the student they told me about?
I ntervIewer: No, I’m Dr. Holden, a psychology intern. I spoke with
your therapist earlier this afternoon, and I’d like to spend some
time with you to see what we can do to help you out. We can use
this little room.
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: To help you best, I’m going to need all the information
I can get. I’d like to jot down a few notes, if that’s all right with
you.
PatIent: No problem.
Sometimes the information- gathering phase takes more than a sin-
gle interview. You might start the follow-up session by saying, “Have you
thought of anything more to say from our previous discussion?” or “What
did you say to your [husband, daughter, etc.] about our last meeting?”
Otherwise, just pick up where you left off last session when time ran out.

-- 31 of 385 --

16
C h a p t e r 	2
Chief Complaint
and Free Speech
The chief complaint states the patient’s reasons for seeking care, whereas
the free speech that immediately follows encourages the patient to talk
about all these reasons. The words you use to prime the information
pump can greatly affect your subsequent yield, and they fall into one of
two principal interviewing styles: directive and nondirective.
DireCtive versus NoNDireCtive QuestioNs
By asking many specific questions, a directive interviewer explicitly
provides the structure that tells the patient what sort of information is
wanted. The nondirective interviewer more passively absorbs whatever
information the patient chooses to present. A nondirective style usually
yields strong rapport and reliable facts. However, an exclusively nondirec-
tive style also produces less information. For example, without direction,
the patient may not realize that family history is important or could feel
too embarrassed to volunteer highly personal information. A maximally
effective initial interview will use both nondirective and directive ques-
tions.
Most of the early portion of your interview should be nondirective.
This helps you establish your working relationship and learn what sorts
of problems and feelings are uppermost in your patient’s mind. But your
opening request for information should clearly state what you expect of
your patient.

-- 32 of 385 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	17
The opening QuesTion
When you ask your first question, be specific. Let your patient know
exactly what you want to hear about. If, like some nondirective interview-
ers, you leave matters completely up to the patient (“What would you like
to talk about?”), you could end up with quite a lot of information about
last Sunday’s football game or the patient’s new sports car. Eventually you
would get the interview back on track, but at the cost of time and perhaps
rapport with a patient who might wonder whether you knew what you
really wanted.
You can avoid these difficulties by asking the right sort of question
in the first place:
“Please tell me what problems made you come for treatment.”
For most patients, this will serve very well. Once in a while, however, you’ll
run into someone who resents the notion that there is a problem. Of
course, you could bypass the difficulty by asking, “Please tell me why you
are here,” or “Why did you come for treatment?” For some individuals,
each of these carries seeds of discontent: Teens often don’t come of their
own volition, and you’ll encounter occasional patients whose goal is sim-
ply to find meaning in their lives. In the end, there’s no perfect opening.
If your patient objects to your opening gambit (“There’s nothing wrong
with me!”), you can usually fix the situation with the response, “Perhaps
you could just tell me your idea of why you are here.”
Whatever the exact content of the question, notice that the sample
opening requests have two qualities that affect the type of information
you will obtain:
• It tells the patient just what sort of information you seek.
• It is also open-ended. Open-ended inquiries are questions or state-
ments that cannot readily be answered in a word or two. Because
they invite patients to talk for a while about what seems important
to them, they promote a relaxed interview style early in the inter-
view that helps build rapport.
Open-ended questions and statements can serve two functions. Some
simply request more information about a point:
“I’d like to hear some more about that.”
“Could you expand on that?”
“What else happened?”

-- 33 of 385 --

18 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Others also move the story along toward the present:
“What happened after that?”
“And then what?”
“What did you do next?”
Open-ended requests can broaden the scope of information you
obtain; with more freedom to respond, patients tell you what’s important
to them. They let patients know that their stories matter to you. They also
allow you to spend less time talking and more time observing. The value
of this will become more evident in Chapter 11 when we talk about the
MSE.
Closed-ended questions more narrowly direct the sort of answer
desired and can be answered in a few words. They can be “yes–no” or
limited- choice questions (“Where were you born?” as opposed to “Tell
me about your childhood”). They, too, are useful; they are sometimes
necessary to obtain the most information in the least time. But in early
parts of the interview, use open-ended questions that will encourage your
patient to tell a story that touches on as many aspects of the case history
as are relevant.
The chieF complainT
The chief complaint is the patient’s stated reason for seeking help. It is usu-
ally the first full sentence or two of the reply to your opening question:
“Tell me about the problem that brought you here.”
Importance
The chief complaint is important for either of two reasons.
1. Because it is usually the problem uppermost in the patient’s mind,
it suggests an area to explore first. Most patients have some sort of a spe-
cific problem or request. Here are some samples:
“I can’t reach my goals.”
“I have trouble forming relationships with women.”
“I hear voices.”
“I’m so depressed I feel that I can’t go on.”

-- 34 of 385 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	19
Each of these typical examples expresses some discomfort, life problem,
or fear that the patient wants help with.
2. By contrast, sometimes the chief complaint is a flat denial that any-
thing is wrong. When this is the case, it tips you off about your patient’s
insight, intelligence, or cooperation. For example:
“There’s nothing wrong with me. I’m only here because the judge
ordered it.”
“I don’t remember anything about it.”
“Absolute zero is coming, and when it gets here my brain is going
to turn to bread.”
Chief complaints like these three indicate serious pathology or resis-
tance that requires special handling. In Chapter 16 we’ll discuss patients
who resist being interviewed.
Responding
Some chief complaints suggest that your patient doesn’t quite understand
the purpose of the interview. You will sometimes encounter this sort of
vague or slightly quarrelsome chief complaint, so you should be prepared
with some good responses.
I ntervIewer: Why did you come here for treatment?
PatIent: You can read all about it in my record.
I ntervIewer: I could, but it would help me learn more about you if
you’d tell me in your own words.
Here’s how one interviewer reacted to a patient who, instead of a com-
plaint, gave a prescription:
PatIent: I think I just need some vitamins.
I ntervIewer: Perhaps, but let’s decide that after you tell me what’s
been bothering you.
Another patient made a plea for help in getting started:
PatIent: I really don’t know where to begin.
I ntervIewer: Why don’t you start with when your most recent trou-
ble began?

-- 35 of 385 --

20 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Try to Learn the Real Reason for Coming
A patient’s first words don’t always express the real reason for seeking
help. Some patients don’t recognize the real reason; others may feel
ashamed or fearful of what they’ll be told. In either case, the stated chief
complaint may be only a “ticket of admission” to the help a clinician can
provide:
“I’ve been in such pain.” (But the real pain is emotional.)
“I feel anxious nearly every moment I’m awake.” (Heavy drinking is
avoided.)
“I’d like to discuss some of my relationships.” (The patient is afraid to
mention HIV/AIDS.)
“I want some advice about my mother. I wonder if she’s becoming
senile.” (The patient really wonders, “Am I going crazy?”)
Each of these initial complaints masks a deeper, less obvious reason for
seeking help. Often you can ferret out the real problem later in the inter-
view by asking:
“Is anything else bothering you?”
Sometimes you might determine your patient’s underlying motivation
only after you think you’ve completed your initial evaluation.
Regardless of what chief complaint is presented, you should write it
down in your patient’s exact words. Later, you will want to contrast it with
what you believe prompted the patient to seek help.
Free speech
During the few minutes following the chief complaint, your patient should
have the chance to discuss freely the reasons for seeking treatment. To
encourage the widest possible range of information, allow the story to
emerge with little detailed probing or other interruption from you. We’ll
call this nondirected flow of information free speech, to distinguish it from
the relatively constrained question- and-answer format of the later clinical
interview.
What Is Free Speech?
Free speech, simply put, is just an opportunity for patients to express their
thoughts without constraint or direction. “Speech with a minimum of

-- 36 of 385 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	21
structuring” is how some clinicians would put it. Experienced interview-
ers recommend this period (as much as 8 or 10 minutes in an hour-long
session) of free speech for several reasons. Some of them are the reasons
for asking any open-ended question:
• Free speech establishes you as someone who cares enough to listen
to your patient’s concerns.
• It provides the patient an opportunity to organize and explore the
reasons for seeking treatment.
• You have the opportunity to learn what is uppermost in your
patient’s mind.
• It gives you the flavor of the patient’s personality.
• Unhampered by any need to direct the conversation, you can start
making observations about mood, behavior, and thought pro-
cesses.
• Character traits may be more likely to emerge in a person who is
speaking spontaneously than in one who is answering a stream of
questions.
• When you share control during this portion of the conversation,
you establish early the expectation that your patient will be an
active partner throughout therapy.
• You can devote close attention to the content of your patient’s
speech. One study showed that as many as half the total symptoms
reported by patients are mentioned in the first 3 minutes of an
initial interview.
• It provides your patient an opportunity to bring up other concerns
that weren’t mentioned in the chief complaint.
Most patients will respond quickly and appropriately to your request
that they talk about their problems. Getting them to tell you everything
you need to know will take little redirection on your part. Some have
had so much experience telling their stories that they give you complete,
chronological accounts of their illnesses.
The opposite may be true of others, some of whom may have expe-
rienced too many interviewers who want only specific answers to closed-
ended questions. You may have to teach these patients to give you an
expanded version of their feelings and experiences. If your patient per-
sistently makes brief statements, then waits for more questions from you,
you should explicitly state what you expect. For example:
“What I’d really like is for you to tell me in your own words about your
problem. Later I’ll ask some specific questions that you can answer
briefly.”

-- 37 of 385 --

22 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
In fact, few histories unfold like a classic textbook account of a men-
tal health problem. Patients have their own ideas about what is important,
and, regardless of the apparent value of their information, it is impor-
tant that you let them make a stab at telling their stories. An occasional
patient with low intelligence or severe psychosis might not be able to give
a satisfactory narration. Then you’ll have to fall back on a much more
structured, question-and-answer strategy to obtain any history. But these
patients will be infrequent, and everyone who speaks at all will at least
give you information in the form of the mental status observations you
can make.
Allowing patients time to speak freely is at least as important now
as it has ever been, but health care reimbursement models have put an
ever-tightening squeeze on clinicians’ time. It threatens to crowd out all
but the most basic clinical interactions, tempting an interviewer to cut
directly to the chase and focus too quickly on a patient’s very first words.
I know this because I’ve done it—and must occasionally remind myself of
the importance of a prolonged period of free-running speech. If I do find
that I’ve allowed too little time at the outset for free speech, I’ll try to slip
it in later on.
areas oF clinical inTeresT
During free speech, your patient will probably mention one or more prob-
lems. These concerns can be emotional, physical, or social; most will fall
into one of several major areas of clinical interest. When people become
mental health patients, it is usually because of problems covered by these
seven areas:
Difficulty thinking (cognitive problems, especially what DSM-5 now
calls neurocognitive disorders)
Substance use
Psychosis
Mood disturbance (depression or mania)
Excessive anxiety, avoidance behavior, and arousal
Physical complaints
Social and personality problems
Each area of clinical interest comprises a number of diagnoses that
have symptoms in common; of course, some of these diagnoses turn
up in more than one area. Later, when you obtain the history of the
present illness, you will systematically ask about the symptoms usually

-- 38 of 385 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	23
associated with each of these areas you have identified. This informa-
tion will allow you to determine which of the associated diagnoses
seems appropriate for your patient. But for now, during free speech,
just make a note (mentally or on paper) about any subject that seems
worth exploring later.
Signaling Areas of Clinical Interest
A number of symptoms and items of historical information specific to
each area of clinical interest signal the need for further exploration.
When you encounter one in your interview, consider an intensive review
of that area (discussed in Chapter 13). These “red flag” symptoms are
summarized in Table 2.1.
how much Time?
Unless your patient’s speech is unusually vague or rambling, the chief
complaint usually takes only a few seconds. However, the time you devote
to free speech can vary tremendously. In the rare event that your patient
is incoherent or nearly mute, you might decide within moments to adopt
a more directive interview style. But with a patient who is experienced,
well organized, and motivated to tell all, you could conceivably spend an
entire interview in free speech, listening to a history that is presented just
the way you would read it in a textbook.
Most patients will be neither of the above. Sometimes you can listen
without much interruption for the first 5 or 10 minutes. But don’t try to
stick to this recommendation too strictly; your allotment to free speech
will depend on the total time you can spend interviewing and on what you
already know about the history. As a rule, you should allow your patient
to speak freely as long as the information you obtain seems important
and relevant.
moving on
The free- speech portion of the interview will draw to a close as you sense
that you have obtained a broad outline of the problems that are upper-
most in your patient’s mind. Before proceeding to the next section of your
interview, you should ask whether there are problems other than those
already mentioned. This decreases the risk that you will overlook vital
problem areas. (Even if you missed something big, it would probably show
up later. Yet the whole point of the initial interview is to try to get as much
relevant information as possible up front.)

-- 39 of 385 --

24
TABLE 2.1. Problems That Signal Areas of Clinical Interest
Difficulty thinking (cognitive problems)
Affect fluctuates
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Decreased judgment
Delusions
Hallucinations
Memory defects
Toxin ingestion
Substance misuse
Alcohol use heavier than one or two
drinks per day
Arrests or other legal problems
Financial: spending money needed for
other items
Health: blackouts, cirrhosis, abdominal
pain, vomiting
Illegal substance use
Job loss, tardiness, demotions
Memory impairment
Social problems: fights, loss of friends
Psychosis
Affect that is flat or inappropriate
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Delusions
Fantasies or illogical ideas
Hallucinations (of any of the senses)
Insight or judgment that is disturbed
Muteness
Perceptual distortions (illusions,
misinterpretations)
Social withdrawal
Speech that is hard to follow or
incoherent
Mood disturbance: depression
Activity level that is either markedly
increased or decreased
Anxiety symptoms
Appetite changes
Concentration poor
Death wishes
Feelings of worthlessness
Interest decreased for usual activities
(including sex)
Sleeplessness or excessive sleepiness
Substance misuse recently increased
Suicidal ideas
Tearfulness
Weight loss or gain
Mood disturbance: mania
Activity level increased
Distractibility
Mood disturbance: mania (cont.)
Grandiose sense of self-worth
Judgment deteriorating
Mood that is euphoric or irritable
Plans many activities
Sleep decreased (reduced need for sleep)
Speech rapid, loud, hard to interrupt
Substance misuse recently increased
Thoughts moving rapidly from one idea to
another
Anxiety and related disorders
Anxiety
Chest pain
Compulsive behavior
Dizziness
Fear of going crazy
Fear of dying or impending doom
Fear of objects or situations
Heaviness in the chest
Irregular heart beat
Nervousness
Obsessional ideas
Palpitations
Panic
Shortness of breath
Sweating
Trauma: history of severe emotional or
physical
Trembling
Worries
Physical complaints
Appetite disturbance
Convulsions
Depression, chronic
Headache
History that is complicated
Multiple complaints
Neurological complaints
Repeated treatment failures
Sexual or physical abuse during childhood
Substance misuse
Vague history
Weakness
Weight changes (up or down)
Social and personality problems
Anxiety
Behaviors that seem odd or bizarre
Dramatic presentation
Drug or alcohol misuse
Job loss, tardiness, demotions
Legal difficulties
Marital conflict

-- 40 of 385 --

Chief Complaint and Free Speech 	25
This is also a good time to check on your understanding of all prob-
lems. Briefly summarize each, and invite your patient’s assessment of your
analysis.
I ntervIewer: Let’s see if I have this right. You felt just fine until
about 2 weeks ago, when you proposed to your girlfriend, and
she accepted you. Since then you’ve had increasing attacks of
anxiety, you’ve felt depressed, and you can’t concentrate on your
studies. Now you’re afraid you might have heart disease because
your pulse races. Is that about right?
PatIent: That’s pretty much it.
I ntervIewer: I want to learn more about that—but first, is there any-
thing else that’s been bothering you?
And for those patients who present multiple complaints, it can some-
times be useful to ask, “Which of these problems bothers you the most?”
At a minimum, such a question can provide focus for later summaries and
discussions of treatment.

-- 41 of 385 --

26
C h a p t e r 	3
Developing Rapport
Rapport is the feeling of harmony and confidence that should exist
between patient and clinician. As one of the goals of a good interview,
good rapport has practical consequences. This point is especially relevant
if you will be treating this patient in the future. The trust and confidence
you begin to develop even in the opening minutes of the first session can
greatly enhance your ability to manage a course of therapy. In fact, how
well you convey your interest is the factor most likely to keep your patient
in treatment.
But good rapport is also vital for obtaining information. During the
evaluation phase of your relationship, positive rapport will help motivate
your patient to talk spontaneously and to reveal important personal data.
The foundation for rapport is usually ready-made. Most patients
come looking for help and expect that they will get it from a clinician. You
can build on this expectation with your words and body language, which
should express real interest in the patient. Of course, anyone could inad-
vertently say something that’s upsetting, but there is little you are likely to
say or do that can’t be retrieved if you remain caring and sensitive to what
your patient is experiencing.
the Basis of rapport
Right from the start, most patients will expect to like you. But real rapport
between two individuals doesn’t usually spring up overnight. It develops
gradually, with long acquaintance and the cooperation of both parties.
Still, you can use certain behaviors to speed its growth.
Your demeanor is key. Remember that professionalism doesn’t
demand stiff formality. In fact, you should take care to avoid the image of

-- 42 of 385 --

Developing Rapport 	27
the stone-faced therapist that was once popular in movies, cartoons, and
fiction. If you appear relaxed, interested, and sympathetic, your patient
is more likely to feel safe and comfortable. Carefully monitor your facial
expression: Don’t frown, grimace, or show other signs of negativity that
could be interpreted as disapproval. Although you should avoid fixed
stares, which can make you appear cold and critical, be sure to make fre-
quent eye contact— even if you are taking notes. Of course, you don’t want
to appear insincere, but appropriate smiles and nods will demonstrate
that you are attentive and sympathetic.
Just at first, however, I’d be a bit sparing in the use of praise. Praise
used as a reinforcer can powerfully shape behavior, but early in any rela-
tionship, you don’t know enough to be sure what behavior you will be
reinforcing. For instance, you wouldn’t want to praise apparent openness
if your patient hasn’t told you the whole truth.
The patient’s own demeanor will probably shape your interaction
more than any other factor. Body language— drooping shoulders, restless
feet, tears, a clenched fist—often clearly indicates how your patient feels.
Observe tone of voice for other clues to feelings. Suppose you have asked
your patient, Mr. Kimble, how he and his wife get along, and he responds,
“Just fine.” If his tone is warm and light, the couple probably has relatively
few interpersonal problems. If his “Just fine” is delivered through clenched
teeth, in a dull monotone, or with a sigh, Mr. Kimble may be harboring
feelings of hopelessness or anger that he can’t put into words just yet.
Because you have arranged the furniture so that there’s no barrier
between you and your patient, you can easily and naturally adjust even
to minor shifts in affect, promoting rapport. If your patient is depressed,
you will probably feel like drawing a little closer to show your concern.
You can follow that natural inclination. If you sense hostility, you may feel
like withdrawing physically, even if only a few inches. Doing so will help
relax the tension by giving each of you more elbow room. Similarly, you
may laugh when your patient makes a joke, or display a worried frown of
concern and support during a panic attack. By the time you have inter-
viewed your first dozen patients, you will do these things automatically in
response to the cues each patient unconsciously gives.
At the same time, you should carefully maintain a certain neutrality
toward what you are told. If your patient criticizes relatives, you would be
unlikely to defend them. But joining in the criticism risks offending some-
one whose feelings may be ambivalent. A safe response is an empathic
comment that doesn’t take sides.
PatIent: My mother is a real bitch! She keeps trying to interfere
between me and my husband.
I ntervIewer: (Leans slightly forward.) That must be a real problem
for you.

-- 43 of 385 --

28 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
This interviewer’s attitude—sympathetic, nonjudgmental, and respectful of
patient and relatives alike—is likely to foster a good working relationship.
assess Your own Feelings
How you feel about the patient can have important consequences. If your
feelings are positive—here is the sort of person you might choose as a
friend, for example—you will probably come across as warm and caring.
Your attitude may serve as an encouragement to reveal additional sensi-
tive information.
Heavily influenced by your own background and upbringing, your
feelings could in turn affect your ability to make an accurate evaluation.
Throughout the interview, you need to be aware of the nature and the
sources of your feelings, especially when something about the patient dis-
tresses you. It could be as simple as personal hygiene, coarse language,
or the expression of ethnic prejudice. Or does this person remind you of
difficulties you had with one of your own relatives? In any case, you must
carefully monitor how you respond. If you frown or otherwise appear
uncomfortable, your patient may sense your disapproval and frustrate
your efforts to gather accurate information.
Your goal is to express empathy, which means that on some level you
can feel as your patient feels—that you can put yourself in the patient’s
place. Having empathy means understanding the motivation driving a
patient’s behavior, even if it still doesn’t seem like the right thing to do.
Showing your empathy sparks confidence in the process and encourages
the patient to give you the diagnostic information you need. (Surveys show
that mental health clinicians score much higher than do other health care
professionals in the ability to adopt another person’s perspective.) You
will probably convey your empathic feelings best if you keep in mind this
thought: “What would it be like to stand in the shoes of this patient talk-
ing with me now?”
This job might seem daunting when your patient shows a lot of anger,
anxiety, or even psychosis. Throughout your professional life, you will
have to work with all sorts of people. Some of them will seem less agree-
able than others, but you will find that nearly every patient will have
characteristics to which you can relate. If you cannot respond positively
to the content of what you are being told, perhaps you can sympathize
with some of the feelings behind it. For example, a moderately antisocial
patient was speaking about his former therapist:
PatIent: I had no use for that guy. Once or twice I even thought
about blowing him away!
I ntervIewer: Sounds as if you were feeling really angry.

-- 44 of 385 --

Developing Rapport 	29
Trying to deal directly with the content of this patient’s comment would
have forced a choice between agreeing with or confronting a potentially
violent patient. By keying into the patient’s anger, this interviewer said
something that both parties could feel comfortable with.
All professionals have feelings, attitudes, and experiences that can
affect the image they project; we must all be constantly alert to prevent
these personal issues from impairing our effectiveness with patients. Con-
sider the effect of so ordinary an event as divorce:
One clinician found that she was so upset during the time she was
separating from her husband that she could not effectively manage a
patient who was having similar problems.
Another therapist, after a bruising telephone call from his ex-
wife, postponed his next interview while he cooled off enough to
focus on the patient’s problems.
Many beginning interviewers have learned that they can alleviate pres-
sure if they introduce themselves to patients as students. But regardless
of your stage of training or practice, your temperament and experience
will determine how you deal with your personal Achilles’ heel. Whatever
it is, your effectiveness with patients will increase if you remain aware of
your own limitations.
consider Your manner oF speaking
For good rapport, the patient must know that you understand. It is
tempting to approach this directly by saying, “I know how you must feel
about . . . ” Unhappily, this statement can ring hollow. By the time they
reach your office, many patients have heard it all too often from people
who don’t really understand at all, or who may understand perfectly but
do nothing to help. Some patients with severe problems, real or perceived,
feel that nobody could possibly appreciate what they are going through.
You will probably be better off using some other response to suggest your
compassion and interest:
“You must have felt terribly unhappy.”
“I’ve never been in that position, so I can only imagine how you felt.”
“That was a terrible experience. I can see that it upset you a great
deal.”
Sometimes you may find that you need to overemphasize your feel-
ings a little. This suggestion might sound deceitful, but I don’t mean it
that way. Actors, for example, know that their recorded voices tend to

-- 45 of 385 --

30 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
flatten out and that they must overact to get across the feelings they in
tend to portray. In similar fashion, you may need to amplify your own
emotional output to impress upon some patients how deeply you sympa-
thize with them. You can accomplish this with your facial expressions,
or with your voice by varying its volume, pitch, and emphasis. Even brief
exclamations can do the job. An “Oh, wow!” that is suitably timed and
intoned may convey understanding and compassion more effectively than
a more elegant speech of condolence. Such emblems of your emotional
involvement, which beginning interviewers often forget to use, can be
vital to your patient and contribute to building rapport.
However, it’s far too easy to go overboard. Consider the patient who
comes to you with a story of betrayal by a lover, or of injury in a military
or civilian calamity. Of course, you will want to show your support, but if
you express your own shock or horror too starkly, you risk reinforcing the
traumatic effects you’re there to dismantle. Sure, go ahead and express
sympathy—you can even provide the support of a proffered tissue—but be
careful not to portray your patient as a victim.
Now let’s consider the use of humor in your interactions with patients.
Humor can be a great facilitator of communication: It helps people to
relax and to feel that they are among friends. But as a clinician, take care
to judge your use of humor carefully. With any recent acquaintance, it
is easy to misjudge and say something in jest that can be taken amiss;
mental health patients are especially vulnerable to this sort of slip. Even
a patient you know well could misinterpret an ill- considered remark. As
always, put yourself in the patient’s place: Consider how you’d feel if you
thought your clinician was laughing at you.
In general, it is safe to laugh with, but of course never at, the patient.
That means that you should generally let the patient start it. During your
first few sessions, any use of humor should be gentle, and only when it
is clear that the patient is in a frame of mind to appreciate it. Beware of
making jokes, which might be misinterpreted as hostile or demeaning.
Whenever the patient jests, be sure to consider whether this is a subcon-
scious attempt to sidetrack both of you from a discussion of important
material. A usually safe response is to smile and meet the patient’s gaze.
Experienced interviewers report that they sometimes seemingly
undergo a personality change as they move from one patient to the next.
They may adopt a formal tone with one, then settle into a folksy per-
sona with the next. One interviewer persistently, and quite unconsciously,
dropped his g’s when talking with a patient from a rural background who
spoke that way. Within limits these behaviors are probably acceptable,
though you should be careful not to overdo them to the point of mimicry.
Regardless of your level of experience, at some point, with some
patient, you will make an error. In the greater scheme of things, it will
probably be of rather minor significance—you ask the same question

-- 46 of 385 --

Developing Rapport 	31
twice; you forget the occupation of your patient’s spouse; or you are sud-
denly aware that your mind has drifted and you can’t recall the question
your patient has just asked (or that you have!)—but both of you know that
you’ve erred. You should take immediate steps to put it right. “Uh-oh,
senior moment,” I might say with a rueful smile. If you aren’t so fortu-
nate as to have age as an excuse, you should admit that you focused for a
moment on something else, and do whatever is necessary to correct your
error (for example, ask the patient to restate the question). Almost always,
the conversation will move safely forward. The important thing is to let
the patient know you’ve taken responsibility for the mistake and that it
matters to you.
Talk The paTienT’s language
Take pains to speak in terms your patient can understand. Listen to your
patient’s language and use it, as long as you feel comfortable doing so.
Because teenagers and young adults often distrust older people, they may
respond more positively if you use language that is current for their gen-
eration. But be sure that your “cool” expression is still “in,” or you risk
being considered merely “square.” (There is another point of view on this
issue. Some adolescent patients may resent it enormously and become
even more distrustful if you try to adopt their speech patterns.) How you
speak to any patient should be guided by the need for clarity and rapport,
so monitor your patient’s reactions and adjust your manner of speaking
accordingly.
Certain terms may upset some patients. These loaded words carry a
message of illness, failure, or poor character, and you should generally
avoid them. Here is a brief sample: abortion, bad, brain damage, cancer,
crazy, defective, fantasy, frigidity, hysterical, impotence, neurotic, obscene, per-
version, victim. You will encounter many more during your interviewing
career. Be ready with neutral synonyms for such words, or, even better,
pick up on terms your patient already has used.
Avoid psychological jargon. Even simple terms like psychosis may
be misunderstood, and your patient could think that you seem insensi-
tive toward someone with less education than you. Also ensure that you
understand your patient’s own use of language; don’t assume it is the
same as yours. For example, to you “an occasional drink” may mean once
a month, but to your patient it could mean “intermittently throughout the
day.” Does your teenage patient drink Coke or snort coke? In the language
of the street, “I was really paranoid” doesn’t mean that the speaker felt
psychotically persecuted, but merely frightened.
Your poorly educated patient may recognize “polite” terms for sexual
or excretory functions, but the relationship you develop may be better if

-- 47 of 385 --

32 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
you use plain language. I confess to holding conflicting thoughts about
using the argot of the street. On the one hand (as some studies have
shown), by using everyday terms, you might increase the amount of infor-
mation you get. On the other hand, the same tactic could risk offending
people on whom you depend for accurate information. In the final analy-
sis, you’ll have to base your decision on your own comfort level and your
assessment of the individual patient.
If your patient is foreign-born or was reared in another part of your
own country, you may have trouble understanding one another. Don’t
let your manner imply that it is the patient who “talks funny.” Rather,
acknowledge that you have different accents and that at times you may
have to ask one another for repetition. For a patient who hesitates or
seems unsure of how to proceed, you can remove some of the pressure
with the reassurance that “It’s fine to take this at your own pace, so I can
really understand what you’re experiencing.” On the flip side, to be sure
you do understand, you may want to translate into simpler language the
sometimes florid terms that patients use to express themselves—perhaps
to obfuscate, perhaps because they think a clinician wants to hear psycho-
logical terms.
PatIent: I’ve always had a phobia about cats—I’ve got four of ’em.
I ntervIewer: So you’re a real cat fancier!
Later on, perhaps, when you’ve gotten to know one another better, you
can supply an accurate definition.
mainTain Boundaries
How clinicians should relate to their patients has been a moving target
over the years. The traditional image of an authoritarian lawgiver who
decides for the patient has been generally supplanted by that of a less
formal collaborator who explores problems and their solutions with the
patient. I strongly prefer the latter style. To me it feels more comfortable
(it is less arrogant), and it encourages the patient to participate in treat-
ment decisions. In effect, it puts two minds to work, rather than loading
all the responsibility onto the clinician. When patients discuss and con-
tribute to their own management plans, they are more likely to comply
with treatment and less likely to complain about bumps in the road to
improvement.
Yet even clinicians who encourage friendly collaboration need to
maintain boundaries. When I practiced in California, it was customary to
call patients by their first names. For adolescents this seemed just fine. But

-- 48 of 385 --

Developing Rapport 	33
I heard even old men and women addressed in this overly familiar man-
ner by mental health professionals young enough to be their grandchil-
dren. This attitude tends to infantilize patients who, if they are hospital
inpatients, have already lost considerable autonomy. It also increases the
professional person’s tendency to become parentalistic—that is, to make
health care decisions that patients should be making for themselves.
However, before I make too big a deal of this, let me note that times
have changed and that many therapists have maintained successful prac-
tices while they and their patients address one another in familiar terms. I
still reject the idea of first names for hospitalized patients, and I continue
to call my adult patients by last name and title (Miss, Ms., Mrs., Mr., or Dr.
Green). This practice maximizes personal dignity and reinforces a sense
of adulthood, even at a time when there may be loss of autonomy. It also
encourages patients to keep a certain emotional distance by using my title
and last name. This distance may sometimes help head off inappropriate
attempts at amorous and other nonprofessional relationships.
If a patient appears offended when I don’t agree to a first-name basis,
I respond that it is my habit always to use last names and titles, and that
it would be hard for me to change. (If you are still a student, your excuse
might be that this is what your institution requires of trainees, if that’s the
case.) Rarely, I have encountered patients who doggedly insist that I use
their first names. If I judge that sticking to my habit could harm our rela-
tionship, I will use two names—first and second or first and last—plus title.
For example, when calling such a patient from the waiting room, I will
announce, “Mrs. Joanne Cremier,” and say it with a big, friendly smile. So
far, this compromise has always proven satisfactory. However, other clini-
cians (and their patients) may feel differently, so there should probably be
no hard and fast rule about using names.
In general, it’s a good idea not to reveal too much about yourself to
your patients. This is especially true during the initial interview, when you
really don’t know one another very well.
A beginning psychiatry resident confided to his new patient that he
was a reserve peace officer. He later learned to his chagrin that the
patient had both a severe personality disorder and an abiding hatred
of the police.
If you are having difficulty getting information, you might be able to
encourage greater cooperation by identifying something that you and the
patient share. For example, you might remark that, just like the patient,
you enjoy sailboating or were born in Indiana. Your status as fellow sailors
or Hoosiers might nudge you a bit closer to the rapport you seek. This
technique should be used sparingly— seldom more than once with a given

-- 49 of 385 --

34 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
patient—lest you begin to sound too familiar. You should also be careful
not to let any resulting small talk distract you for long from the real pur-
pose of your interview.
Why do patients ask personal questions? Some stem from simple
curiosity; others may cloak concern about interviewers’ professional back-
grounds or ability to help. To provide reassurance about training and
competence is one reason why clinicians in practice display a wall full of
diplomas, licenses, and other certificates. Trainees have the benefit of
neither certificate nor wall. Still, to whatever degree possible, you should
verbally provide this information when it is requested. Don’t hesitate to
invoke the names and positions of your supervisors if this is needed to
reassure an especially anxious patient.
Some requests for personal information may be prompted by a largely
unconscious desire to achieve a sense of equality between interviewer and
patient. Others may be an attempt to avoid discussing sensitive material,
and these should be handled firmly but with tact:
PatIent: How old are you, anyway?
I ntervIewer: Why do you want to know?
PatIent: You seem so young to be doing this kind of work.
I ntervIewer: Well, thank you for the compliment, but I don’t think
my age is especially relevant to our discussion; let’s focus on you.
Now, to get back to the question I asked . . .
In some circumstances, personal information may seem relevant to
your interview. If you decide that this is the case, you can usually reveal
something of yourself:
PatIent: Were you raised in this city?
I ntervIewer: What makes you ask that?
PatIent: My mother told me to be sure to get a therapist who grew
up here. She says no one else could really understand what it was
like, growing up in a ghetto and all.
I ntervIewer: I see. Actually, I didn’t grow up here, but this is where
I took most of my training. I’ve lived in town for nearly 8 years,
so I think I have a pretty good idea of what some of your experi-
ences must have been. But I have the feeling you’ll be able to tell
me a whole lot more.
Because I believe it helps build rapport, I tend to answer innocuous ques-
tions frankly, so long as it seems unlikely to complicate the relationship
later.

-- 50 of 385 --

Developing Rapport 	35
show Your experTise
You can pave yet another pathway to rapport by informing the patient
that you know something about the presenting symptoms and what they
could mean. This assessment will naturally come at the end of the initial
interview, when you’ve obtained enough information to know what you’re
talking about. Then you’ll probably say something like this:
“Your condition is actually pretty common— one of the most frequent
problems patients bring to mental health clinicians. I’ve seen several
similar cases just in the last few months. We have several good treat-
ment approaches available, so we can look for a good outcome in
your case.”
Even if you are facing a rare condition, you can reassure the patient
that you know where to turn for guidance:
“We can work through this problem together.”
If you’re a student, you probably won’t have had much in the way of per-
sonal experience with your patient’s condition— or any other. But you are
connected with a training program that employs experienced teachers
who have encountered many patients with similar conditions.
I would offer a few warnings about showing expertise. First, a natural
consequence of empathy is respect, which implies that you should take
pains to avoid sounding authoritarian. Sounding authoritative is fine, if
it’s accurate, but sounding authoritarian smacks of the old, parentalistic
clinical style that seems disrespectful in the 21st century. It never did
work all that well, anyway. Second, in your zeal to put your patient at ease,
don’t succumb to a patient’s too-early request for information or advice.
Part of being expert is waiting until you have the facts to justify offering
support. Jumping in too soon with a diagnosis or with suggestions for
treatment sometimes ends in embarrassment and backpedaling down the
line. Finally, try to wear your erudition lightly. Preface your opinions with
“I think” or “In my experience”—the patient will honor them just as well,
and you’ll avoid the need to live up to an aura of infallibility that no one
can sustain.
Inevitably, you will encounter an occasional patient you just cannot
work with. Sometimes this will be due to your own feelings— about unre-
pentant criminal behavior, perhaps, or about someone who reminds you
too strongly of your own former spouse. At other times you’ll be tipped
off by something the patient says, such as a statement of preference for “a
Christian therapist” or some other therapeutic orientation that just plain
doesn’t fit with what you have to offer.

-- 51 of 385 --

36 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Such patients will probably be few, but you have a duty to face them
honestly. Of course, to be sure your first impressions are correct, you
should complete the evaluation before deciding. Then you might say
something like this:
“Quite frankly, I’m not sure I’m the right person to deal with your
problem.”
You’d go on to explain why you’ve come to this conclusion (leaving
out the unflattering bits), then recommend where the patient might go
next:
“Yours is the sort of problem that I haven’t had much experience with.
However, I know someone in this same building who has made a
study of people with your kind of difficulty. If you’d like, I can write
a note that describes my findings in your case.”

-- 52 of 385 --

37
c h a p T e r 	4
Managing the Early
Patient Interview
A few minutes into a typical initial interview session, the patient should
be relaxed and giving you the information you need; much of your task
right now will be simply to keep your patient talking. Most patients feel
highly motivated to talk, and you will usually need only to choose the
device that will best encourage them to do so. (If this isn’t the case with
your interview, you can review the material in Chapters 16 and 17 for
help.)
To keep speech flowing freely, intrude as little as possible. Anything
you say— questions, comments, even clearing your throat— can prove dis-
tracting. As long as you are finding out why your patient came for treat-
ment, you should keep out of the way. In practical terms, you will usually
just listen for only the first couple of minutes or so. Then the flow of
information will slow down or take a wrong turn, and you will have to
intervene. Your choice of interventions can help determine the overall
success of your interview.
nonverBal encouragemenTs
Your most frequent challenge may be dealing with silence. Beginners
often find silence hard to tolerate. They feel that every hole in the con-
versation, no matter how small, must be filled up with words. It is true
that pauses greater than 10 or 15 seconds can make an interviewer seem

-- 53 of 385 --

38 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
cold, and this discourages some patients. Briefer pauses often mean only
that your patient is trying to organize some thoughts for further discus-
sion. Don’t let anxiety cause you to derail a train of thought that has only
paused to gather steam.
You must learn to walk the line between allowing brief pauses to let
your patient think and long gaps that make you seem unfeeling or unin-
terested. A glance should tell you whether the narrative is still underway.
Watch for the patient to draw another breath or to show other signs of
activity, such as the moistening of lips.
You can encourage further speech by using nonverbal cues of your
own. Be careful not to break eye contact; a smile or nod will say, “You’re
doing fine; just keep on going at your own pace.” Another technique expe-
rienced interviewers sometimes use almost without thinking is to lean a
little closer to show interest in what the patient is saying. Nonverbal cues
of this sort are simple and often highly useful encouragements. Without
interrupting, they clearly signal that you are attentive and interested; they
are part of a universal body language that asks the patient to continue.
But don’t overemphasize any of these gestures: A clinician who nods too
vigorously or smiles too broadly may distract the patient, who may then
wonder what these antics mean.
verBal encouragemenTs
Body language helps, but you will also have to do some talking. Your
choice of words is important: You want to facilitate, not distract. There-
fore, speak as briefly as you can while still conveying your meaning.
A syllable or two is usually all it takes. “Yes” or “Mm-hmm” clearly
indicates that the material is registering with you. Without being direc-
tive, brief interjections and phrases ask the patient to keep on talking. Use
them frequently, perhaps interspersing them randomly with nonverbal
encouragements. One such encouragement every minute or two should
help keep your patient talking.
There are several other verbal techniques you can use to request addi-
tional information. These are more intrusive than those just mentioned,
so you should use them sparingly. I will illustrate each—some of them have
been termed reflective listening—with a brief example.
• Repeat your patient’s own last word or two with a rising inflection
in your voice to make a question of it.
PatIent: I was so upset that for hours I seemed to be hearing
voices. (Pauses.)
I ntervIewer: “Voices”?

-- 54 of 385 --

Managing the Early Patient Interview 	39
PatIent: In my head. I thought I heard the voice of my mother
calling my name.
• Elaborate on a word the patient used earlier. This technique allows
you to reach back to an idea that was not the last thought spoken.
PatIent: I know I overreacted, but I was feeling desperate. I
couldn’t sleep or eat, and I screamed at my kids.
I ntervIewer: You said you felt desperate. (Pauses.)
PatIent: Yes, I even considered suicide.
• Directly request more information.
“Tell me more about that.”
“How do you mean?”
• Re-request information when the patient seems to have misinter-
preted your original question.
I ntervIewer: What kind of work do you do?
PatIent: It’s at the foundry on Elm Street.
I ntervIewer: And what kind of work do you do there?
• Offer brief summaries. These will often begin with “So you feel
that . . . ” or “Do you mean that . . . ” Summaries not only help with transi-
tions; they also offer concrete evidence that the patient has been under-
stood.
I ntervIewer: So for about 6 months now you’ve been feeling
depressed and anxious.
PatIent: That’s right. Lately I’ve even started to think terrible
thoughts—thoughts about killing myself.
Sometimes you’ll get information you don’t really want. It isn’t that
descriptions of recent vacations, children’s witticisms, and arguments
with lovers are uninteresting, but they can take up time you could better
spend pursuing other issues. Although you might be able to discourage
this sort of verbal wild-goose chase by simply not reinforcing it, it is often
better to be direct with your patient:
“That’s interesting, and maybe we can get back to it later, but right
now I’d like to know about . . . ”
Or perhaps to be even more direct:
“No, let’s keep our focus on information that can help me help you.”

-- 55 of 385 --

40 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
oFFering reassurance
Reassurance is anything you do to increase a patient’s sense of confidence
or well-being. Because it shows that you like or are interested in the other
person, it can also foster rapport. Used sparingly during the initial inter-
view, supportive statements say, “I’m on your side. We’ll get this job done.”
Any interview can be therapeutic. Studies have shown that the mere
act of sharing problems with another human being (even, in some cases,
with a computer!) can help a person take a new view of old issues or put
ideas together in novel ways. But with a new patient, you can’t just jump in
and start giving advice, making interpretations, or otherwise “doing ther-
apy.” Rather, the purpose of the initial interview is to obtain the informa-
tion you need to plan treatment. On the other hand, you shouldn’t pass
up an opportunity to provide reassurance, as long as it doesn’t interfere
with the main goal of your interview. You might even raise the confidence
of some patients enough that they will reveal especially sensitive material
you would not otherwise have obtained.
Body language (smiles and nods) can be reassuring, but mostly you
will reassure with speech. To be truly reassuring, what you say must be
based in fact. You wouldn’t get far saying, “You have a good head for
finances,” to a patient who in 45 years hasn’t saved a nickel toward retire-
ment. And choose your words carefully. Avoid clichés and other stereo-
typed expressions, which will make you sound as if you are responding
only by rote, not from the heart.
In short, supportive reassurance must be factual, sincere, and spe-
cific to the situation. Here are two examples:
PatIent: I did manage to get two promotions last year.
I ntervIewer: So you’ve really done well with that job!
PatIent: When he came at me with a knife, I jumped right through a
second- story window onto a garage roof. It made me feel dumb.
I thought I’d just saved him the work of cutting me to ribbons.
I ntervIewer: It may have saved your life! Perhaps it was the only
thing you could have done.
Avoid false generalizations that come too early in the interview or
are based on too little factual information. “I’m sure it will all work out,”
or “Those fears seem groundless,” will probably ring hollow to most
patients, especially those with paranoia or severe depression; they know
things won’t turn out well! Even someone who is less severely ill might
begin to question your knowledge if you leap in quickly with bland reas-
surances that cover too much ground to be believable.

-- 56 of 385 --

Managing the Early Patient Interview 	41
Occasionally a patient will express concern based on a misconception
about mental or physical phenomena. Then you can use your expertise to
set the record straight without interfering with the history taking.
PatIent: I’d never even been to California before, but I suddenly
thought, “I’ve been on this same San Francisco street before.” I
wondered if I was losing my mind.
I ntervIewer: That feeling is called déjà vu. It’s very common, and
doesn’t mean anything at all is wrong. Now tell me what hap-
pened next.
Notice, however, that this interviewer did make the mistake of providing
unconditional reassurance. Although déjà vu is nearly always a benign
phenomenon, it is sometimes associated with neurological conditions
such as temporal lobe epilepsy. But without more substantiating evidence,
to suggest that there could be any pathological significance would also be
a serious mistake. Here is a reasonable compromise: “It doesn’t usually
signify that anything is wrong.”
Be careful to avoid offhand comments that may prove disquieting.
One patient described a sexual encounter with her cousin, then said that
she didn’t know whether that would be considered molestation. “It sure
sounds like molestation to me,” responded the young interviewer. This
response had the potential for raising anxieties that the patient was not
ready to deal with. (“How do you regard it?” would have been a safer
response.)
Mostly, your efforts at reassurance and encouragement will meet
with success. Nevertheless, any of these techniques can sometimes back-
fire. A patient with persecutory delusions might interpret even a friendly
nod or smile as mockery. If you lean toward someone who is feeling angry,
you might be rewarded not with more information, but with hostility or
deepening silence. Judging when a patient will not be receptive can be
tricky. Your best bet is to start slowly. Be friendly and pleasant, but not
aggressively so.
Watch for cues. If you are being too aggressively forward, your patient
may exhibit some of these behaviors:
Loss of eye contact
Frozen expression
Decreased speech output
Nervous shifting of position
If you spot any of these telltale signs, quickly change to a more reserved
manner.

-- 57 of 385 --

42
C h a p t e r 	5
History of the Present Illness
Once you feel that there are no additional major problem areas to dis-
cover, close the period of free speech and move smoothly into the history
of the present illness. (However, throughout the balance of your history
taking, listen carefully for other clues that could suggest the need for
further exploration.)
Now you will explore more thoroughly the problems that have brought
the patient into treatment—the “meat” of the initial interview, including
a description of symptoms, their timing, and possible stressors for each
of the problems you’ve identified. To aid this process, you might consider
the areas of clinical interest that you identified during free speech. These
areas have been first mentioned in Chapter 2; because they include mate-
rial from the MSE, they will not be considered fully until Chapter 13.
Although some patients have no diagnosable disorder, it is a conven-
tion to label as “illness” whatever brings anyone in for evaluation. In this
broad sense, then, marital disagreements and other problems of living—
even the desire to understand oneself better—may constitute a present
“illness” that no one, least of all the patient, would recognize as disease.
But all of these issues do have precipitants, symptoms, course, and other
features that will allow you to suggest an effective plan of action.
the present episode
Although you will eventually want to learn about any and all episodes,
first focus on the current episode of illness. Your patient will be most
concerned about it, and its details will be freshest in the minds of all your
informants. Of course, you’ll need to know what symptoms you can expect
to find in an episode of illness. For that, refer to textbooks and other

-- 58 of 385 --

History of the Present Illness 	43
resources that cover this material (I’ve written one or two of these myself).
Appendix D in this book presents a semistructured interview that covers
the symptoms typically found in mental health patients. And Appendix B
gives some very basic information about a few of the more common men-
tal disorders clinicians commonly encounter. If your early interviewing
experiences are anything like mine (see the very beginning of the Intro-
duction to this book), you’ll benefit by returning to your patient to ask the
questions you’ve forgotten the first—or second—time around.
descriBing sYmpToms
Learn as much as you can about each symptom your patient reports.
(Remember that a symptom is any subjective sensation the patient reports.
It doesn’t even have to be unpleasant; pain, hallucinations, and anxiety
are all symptoms, but so could be the ecstasy or feeling of strength in
mania.) Clarify any descriptive terms that are used: For example, what
does nervous mean to the patient?
Characterize each symptom as fully as you can. Is it always present,
or does it come and go (is it episodic)? If episodic, as is the case with anxi-
ety attacks and many depressions, how often does it occur? How intense
is it? Is it always the same, or does it vary? Remember that symptoms can
wax and wane with time or with changes in the environment. Has the
patient noticed any factors (such as activity or time of day) that seem to
be associated with the symptom? Has the intensity or frequency of the
symptom been increasing, staying the same, or decreasing? When your
patient has the symptom, how long does it last? In what context does it
occur? (Only at night? Only when alone? Or at any time at all?)
How does the patient describe the symptom? Pain can feel cutting,
burning, crushing, sharp, or dull. You can describe auditory hallucina-
tions by their content (noises, mumbles, isolated words, complete sen-
tences), location (inside the patient’s head, in the air, out in the hall), and
intensity (ranging from loud screams to faraway whispers). Other sorts
of hallucinations— of vision, touch, smell, or taste—can be described simi-
larly. I’ll have more to say about this in Chapter 12.
vegeTaTive sYmpToms
Many patients with serious problems such as anxiety attacks, depres-
sion, and psychosis have experienced vegetative symptoms. This old term
refers to body functions that are concerned with maintaining health and
vigor. Vegetative symptoms include problems with sleep, appetite, weight
change, energy level, and sexual interest.

-- 59 of 385 --

44 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Not every patient will spontaneously report these symptoms, but they
are found in so many of the more serious mental disorders that they serve
as a useful diagnostic indicator. You should ask about them routinely.
Look especially for evidence of change from previous normal functioning.
You may find one or more of the following responses:
• Sleep. Your patient may complain of either excessive sleepiness
(hypersomnia) or inability to sleep (insomnia). If the latter, find out what
portion of the normal sleep period is affected— early (initial insomnia),
middle (interval insomnia), or late (terminal insomnia). Terminal insom-
nia is usually associated with more severe mental problems, such as major
depression with melancholia. Much more common is initial insomnia,
which sometimes affects normal adults when they are having problems of
living. Interval insomnia, in the form of awakening with nightmares, may
be found in patients who drink alcohol heavily or who have posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). Here is how you might inquire about problems
with sleep:
I ntervIewer: Have you had any problems with your sleeping?
PatIent: Yeah, it’s been murder.
I ntervIewer: What sort of trouble have you had?
PatIent: What do you mean?
I ntervIewer: Well, what part of the night do you not sleep well?
PatIent: Oh. Mostly, it’s trouble getting to sleep.
I ntervIewer: Do you ever wake up early in the morning, before
it’s time to get up, and then you can’t get back to sleep?
PatIent: Yeah, that too. I do that a lot.
I ntervIewer: How long do you usually sleep?
PatIent: Lately, I guess . . . probably only 4 or 5 hours.
I ntervIewer: And do you feel rested when you wake up?
PatIent: Yeah, rested like I’ve been hauling bricks all night!
I ntervIewer: How much of a change is this for you?
• Appetite and weight. These, too, may increase or decrease during
an episode of illness. You should also learn how significant the change
has been (how much weight has the patient gained or lost, and over what
period of time?) Also ask whether this weight change was intentional.
Some patients will tell you that they haven’t weighed themselves recently;
asking whether clothing has become too loose or too tight may help you
judge.

-- 60 of 385 --

History of the Present Illness 	45
• Energy level. Does the patient complain of feeling constantly tired?
Is this a change from what’s usual for this person? Has it interfered in
some way with performance at work or school, or with getting jobs done
around the house? You may also hear complaints of change in other body
functions, such as bowel habits. For example, some severely depressed
patients experience constipation.
• Diurnal variation of mood. This phrase refers to the tendency of
some patients to feel better during a certain part of the day. Patients with
severe depression often feel worse upon arising and better as the day goes
on. By bedtime they may feel nearly normal. Those who are less depressed
are more likely to report feeling better early in the day, but depressed,
sluggish, and weary by nightfall.
• Sexual interest and performance. Sexual functioning usually depends
strongly upon the individual’s sense of well-being. Therefore, loss of inter-
est in sex is often an early casualty of mental distress. Also learn how
these aspects of the patient’s sex life have changed: frequency, ability,
and enjoyment. The direction of change could be either up or down,
depending on the specific mental health problem. Number and choice
of partners can also be affected if judgment is impaired. A more detailed
description of sexual symptoms and patterns will be given in Chapter 9.
conseQuences oF illness
Mental disorder can interfere with the entire range of human interac-
tion. For several reasons, it is important to learn how your patient’s illness
has affected functioning and relationships across all areas of functioning,
including social, educational/occupational, and family life.
1. It may provide your most reliable index of severity. So far, most
of the history you have heard is highly subjective: You depend on your
patient’s ability to sort out facts from opinions. Partly because it can be
verified by talking with informants, the fact that a patient has not gone
to work for a week may be subject to less distortion than, say, how much
vodka this same person has consumed.
2. The definition of many disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5)—the current iteration
of the chief diagnostic manual used in the United States and abroad—
depends heavily on social consequences: What have been the effects on
the patient? On others? Substance use disorders and antisocial personal-
ity disorder are examples of conditions that can entail legal, financial,

-- 61 of 385 --

46 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
health, and interpersonal problems. However, the criteria for most disor-
ders require that you know the how symptoms affect functioning.
3. You may learn that relatives blame the patient for being fired,
getting divorced, or separating from family members. Yet these and vari-
ous other ruptured human relationships are really effects of the person’s
mental disorder. This view may prove useful to patient and relatives alike:
Teaching family and friends about the consequences of illness can help
get your patient off the hook.
To learn what social problems your patient’s illness has caused, start
with an open-ended question— one that doesn’t limit the information you
might obtain. If your patient asks what your question means, respond
with some examples of the sort of facts that would interest you.
I ntervIewer: What sort of difficulties has this problem caused you?
PatIent: What do you mean, “difficulties”?
I ntervIewer: For example, it would help to know whether your prob-
lem has changed the way you get along with your family and
friends, how you do on the job, your hobbies—that sort of thing.
Be sure to obtain details about any positive answers. Areas to explore
include the following:
• Marital/couple. Patients who are even moderately ill commonly
experience discord in their marriages and other love relationships. All
too often, mental disorder can lead to divorce or breakup.
• Interpersonal. Has your patient felt estranged from relatives or
shunned by friends? Can you tell whether this is only a perceived prob-
lem, or has behavior been problematic long enough that others really do
avoid the patient? Ask:
“Did anything you did cause problems for you or your friends or
family?”
• Legal. Have there been legal difficulties? These are especially likely
when the history is complicated by alcohol or other substance use. Ask:
“Have you ever had any police or legal difficulties?”
“Have you ever been arrested? How many times? What for?”
“Have you been in jail? For a total of how long?”
“Have you ever been committed to an institution or placed under
the control of a conservator, guardian, or fiduciary?”

-- 62 of 385 --

History of the Present Illness 	47
When such legal steps occur during a siege of mental disorder, they
suggest serious illness. Be sure to obtain details: events leading up to the
legal action; duration; name and responsibilities of the legally responsible
person; and the effect the action has had upon the course of the disorder.
• Occupational/educational. As a result of emotional problems, has
the patient ever missed work, quit a job, or been fired? How often has
this happened? Difficulties with job performance are sometimes noted by
supervisors or co-workers even before family members take much notice
of the patient’s difficulties. For younger patients, ask analogous questions
concerning school attendance and performance.
• Disability payments. Have benefits been awarded from the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Social Security Administration, a state
compensation board, or private insurance? For what disorder? What per-
cent is the disability rating? What is the dollar amount? How long will the
payments last?
• Interests. Has the patient’s interest in hobbies, reading, or watching
TV changed? Has interest in sex either increased or decreased? What
about sexual performance? Have there been complaints of impotence,
painful intercourse, or inability to have climax? There’s more about this
in Chapter 9.
• Symptoms. How much discomfort do the symptoms cause? What
fears does your patient have about the meanings of the symptoms? Do
they seem to imply death or permanent disability? Insanity? This informa-
tion will also help you evaluate depth of insight and soundness of judg-
ment, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 12.
onseT and seQuence oF sYmpToms
In addition to a complete and accurate description of the symptoms, you
should establish their timing and sequence. First, when did these prob-
lems begin? Some patients may report this quite precisely: “I started
drinking again last New Year’s Eve,” or “I woke up feeling depressed a
week ago Thursday.” But more often the answer will be less exact, either
because the patient is vague or because the episode began so gradually
that neither the patient nor you can pinpoint the onset.
Try to encourage precision about the onset of especially noticeable
symptoms. (Sometimes details are especially important, as in the case of
a first panic attack or a horrific event precipitating PTSD.) Patients can
often remember the first time they experienced such important problems
as death wishes or loss of interest in sex. You might be able to relate onset
to noteworthy dates or events.

-- 63 of 385 --

48 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: Had you started to feel depressed by the Fourth of July
last year?
PatIent: No, I don’t think so.
I ntervIewer: What about in the fall, around the time of your birth-
day?
No matter how much you prompt, some patients simply can’t give
a date or even an approximation: “I only know it’s been a long time. A
very long time.” Pressing for a more precise answer will probably only
frustrate both of you. Try focusing instead on something the patient may
have thought about many times:
“When did you last feel well?”
If even this effort fails, at least try to learn which of your patient’s several
problems started first. It is often important for diagnosis and treatment to
know, for example, whether an episode of depression or a bout of drink-
ing began earlier. So ask:
“Which did you notice first, the drinking or the depression?”
“How long did it take before the other problem developed?”
If symptoms fluctuate, ask:
“Do they come and go together?”
sTressors
Of course, having mental symptoms is enormously stressful itself, but
here let’s consider stress in a different sense. A stressor is any condition or
event that seems to cause, precipitate, or worsen a patient’s mental health
problems. Sometimes they are referred to as precipitants.
“My husband ran off with his secretary.”
“I flunked out of school.”
“My cat died.”
The variety of possible stressors is vast, and what one person might
find mildly stressful could seem catastrophic to someone else. For years
(until the publication of DSM-5), the diagnostic manuals listed nine
groups of potential psychosocial and environmental problems, comprising

-- 64 of 385 --

History of the Present Illness 	49
many individual stressors. In Table 5.1, I have paraphrased many of these
stressors; they should have occurred within the year prior to your evalua-
tion. When you are listing them as part of your diagnostic evaluation (see
Chapter 18), be as specific as possible.
Patients often mention stressors during free speech, or even when
stating the chief complaint. If they don’t, you will have to ask. A good time
to do so is right after you have pinned down the approximate onset of the
episode of illness. If you find a stressor, try to learn how it affected the
course of your patient’s difficulty. Ask:
“Was anything happening then that might have started your symp-
toms?”
“How did it affect you?”
If your patient can think of no possible stressor, you should run through
a list of possibilities, pausing briefly to allow thinking time:
“Could there have been anything that happened at home? At work?
With friends? Any legal problems? Sickness? Problems with the kids?
With your spouse?”
TABLE 5.1. Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
These stressors may have been caused by a mental disorder, or they may be
independent events.
Access to health care services: inadequate insurance or health care services; lack of
transportation to health care services
Economic: marked poverty; inadequate finances or welfare support
Educational: academic problems; arguments with classmates or teachers; illiteracy;
inadequate school environment
Housing: homelessness; inadequate housing; dangerous neighborhood; arguments
with landlord or neighbors
Legal system/crime: arrest; incarceration; litigation; being the victim of crime
Occupational: stressful work conditions or schedule; job change or dissatisfaction;
arguments with supervisor or co-workers; retirement; unemployment; threatened
job loss
Social environment: death or loss of friend; difficulty with acculturation;
discrimination; living alone; social isolation
Support group: death or illness of relative; family disruption by divorce or
separation; parent’s remarriage; physical or sexual abuse; discord with relative
Other: arguments with nonfamily caregivers (counselor, social workers, physician);
unavailable social service agencies; exposure to disasters, war, or other hostilities

-- 65 of 385 --

50 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
For some episodes of illness you’ll find no stressors at all, but to a
patient almost anything can seem a possible cause of emotional disorder.
Therefore, events reported as stressors may include births, deaths, mar-
riages, divorces, job loss, a broken love affair, health problems, and vir-
tually any other emotional trauma you can think of, as well as many life
experiences that might seem routine.
Of course, your patient’s identification of something as a stressor
doesn’t mean that it actually caused the disorder to happen. Often two
events simply occur by coincidence, but we humans tend to blame any
problem on whatever happened before it. For example, if you carefully
checked the time course of Mrs. Albertson’s depression, you might find
that she had some symptoms—perhaps insomnia and some crying spells—
even before her husband left her.
Another patient’s “stressor” may seem an unlikely cause of illness,
as in the case of the woman whose overwhelming depression started,
she said, when she learned her niece was pregnant. Whether or not the
stressor seems related to the disorder, note it down. You can evaluate it
later in the light of everything else you learn about your patient.
Even though you might find nothing that could have precipitated
the episode of mental illness, try to answer this question: Why has your
patient appeared for evaluation now? In some cases, it will not have been
the patient’s choice, but someone else who perceived the need for help in
the purchase of a gun, withdrawal from family life, or acute intoxication.
If the answer isn’t so obvious, the best approach is to ask:
“This problem has been bothering you for a long time. What made
you seek help now?”
When the patient has come voluntarily for evaluation, you are likely
to hear about the urging of concerned relatives, fear of losing a valued
job, or the patient’s own anxiety about worsening symptoms.
previous episodes
Knowing about previous episodes of the same or a similar mental condi-
tion can help you determine diagnosis and prognosis. By this time you
may already have heard details about any prior episodes. If not, ask:
“When was the first time you felt like this?”
“Did you first seek treatment then or later?”
“Why did you delay?”
“What was the diagnosis?” (There may have been more than one.)

-- 66 of 385 --

History of the Present Illness 	51
Since that first episode, has there ever been complete recovery, or
has the patient continued to have some residual symptoms or an apparent
change of personality? This issue of complete recovery can be critically
important. For example, it can help differentiate schizophrenia (from
which most patients never totally recover) from a mood disorder with
psychosis (which usually resolves completely).
How has your patient reacted to previous symptoms or prior epi-
sodes of illness? Some patients may have simply ignored them; others may
have tried to escape by quitting work, running away from home, attempt-
ing suicide, or abusing alcohol or other drugs. People who experience
auditory hallucinations sometimes play the radio loudly to drown out
the sound. A few will have talked with a friend or a religious counselor.
Whatever the coping behavior, this information may help you evaluate
the severity of the present episode by comparing it with earlier episodes.
It could also help you predict how your patient would behave if the illness
continued untreated.
previous TreaTmenT
Has your patient received treatment before? If so, to guide your plans for
future therapy, you’ll want to obtain details about what was offered and
what was tried.
If the patient had psychotherapy, what was its nature? Cognitive-
behavioral therapy is popular nowadays, but there are many other pos-
sibilities. Was the therapy individual, group, or couple? Try to learn the
name— certainly the profession— of the previous therapist. How long did
treatment last? Why did it stop?
Were drugs prescribed? If so, which ones and at what doses? Were
there any side effects to drug therapy? If your patient doesn’t know the
names of previous medications, a physical description of the tablets or
capsules might give you or a pharmacist consultant some clues. A list of
side effects might also help you with drug identification. Find out whether
injectable medications were ever used, especially the long- acting inject-
able antipsychotics such as fluphenazine (Prolixin), haloperidol (Haldol),
risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), and paliperidone (Invega).
Also try to evaluate how well the patient complied with treatment.
If you ask a straight question about this, pride or guilt may cause some
patients to have trouble answering the question candidly. Try instead:
“Were you usually able to follow your therapist’s directions?”
If the answer to that question is “No,” ask:

-- 67 of 385 --

52 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“What sort of trouble did you have?”
What have been the effects of previous treatment—has anything
helped? If so, try to get an opinion as to which treatment helped most
(talking with a therapist? behavior therapy? electroconvulsive therapy?
medications?). You could be surprised. Even though an antipsychotic
might be the current medication, your patient might answer that lithium
helped most, and request it again.
Was the patient ever hospitalized? If so, how many times? Where,
and for how long? If time is short and your patient is both knowledgeable
and cooperative, you might instead ask for a written summary of previous
hospitalizations and treatment to be given to you at your next interview.

-- 68 of 385 --

53
c h a p T e r 	6
Getting the Facts
about the Present Illness
Of all portions of the initial mental health interview, the history of
the present illness is probably the most important. (It is also frequently
neglected.) Here is where you will develop most of the information and
test the hypotheses that provide the basis for your diagnosis. This process
requires obtaining highly valid information; that is, it should reflect as
closely as possible the true facts of your patient’s history. You can take
several steps to increase the validity of the information you record in your
history of the present illness.
Be clear aBouT The goals oF Your inTerview
Ideally, your patient will understand your expectations for accuracy from
the very beginning. Still, in the middle of the interview, your apparently
truthful patient may seem to be holding back on you. Something in the
patient’s manner may tell you—a hesitation of speech or an unwillingness
to look you in the eye. Of course, your first task should be to try to under-
stand any such behavior; we’ll cover in detail the reasons for patient resis-
tance in Chapter 16. For minor evasions and omissions, it may be enough
simply to restate the goal of your interview:
“I know some of these topics are hard to talk about, but to help you
most, I need every scrap of information I can get.”
If you are a student, you will have less authority to require coopera-
tion, so you might try something like this:

-- 69 of 385 --

54 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“I’m sorry to be causing you distress with this line of questioning, but
you’ve really been helping me with my studies. I know it’s painful to
talk about, but maybe getting in touch with some of these memories
and feelings could even help you understand your problems.”
It can be especially hard to obtain good- quality facts from teenagers.
Some teens worry a lot about what you might tell their parents; others
may mistrust anyone more than 5 years older than they are. Whatever the
cause, some teenagers have trouble telling the truth. It sometimes helps to
repeat your reassurances about confidentiality. I say something like this:
“As you’d expect, after we’re finished I will have to talk with your par-
ents. But anything I might tell them I will first discuss with you. And
as long as I think you’re safe, if you tell me anything that you don’t
want me to repeat, I’ll respect that confidence.”
Some jurisdictions allow you to counsel or treat teenagers for cer-
tain problems such as venereal disease and birth control, even without
informing their parents, in the hopes of encouraging young people to
consult appropriate caregivers about important health conditions. In
such a case, you might work with your patient to determine the best
way of informing the parent, but you shouldn’t take it upon yourself to
volunteer this information. If a teenager is brought in by a parent, then
you would usually consult the parent— after informing your patient what
you plan to say.
Information that isn’t valid can be confusing, especially in the initial
interview, so some clinicians begin interviews with teenagers by indicat-
ing that they prefer silence to misinformation. Here’s how they might put
it:
“A lot of the questions I am going to ask you are personal. Some of
them may be pretty embarrassing or even frightening. But if I’m to
help you, it’s important that I not get confused by something that isn’t
the truth. So if you can’t bear to discuss what I’m asking about, please
don’t make up an answer. Just say that you don’t want to talk about
that now, and we’ll go on to something else. OK?”
Track Your disTracTions
Hardly any interviewer proceeds smoothly and logically, covering one
topic completely before moving on to another. In fact, experienced inter-
viewers expect to be distracted occasionally by—well, the unexpected.

-- 70 of 385 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	55
When new material interrupts the flow of your interview, you can either
pursue it immediately or, if you feel the original topic is more important,
make a note to come back to it later. If you choose the latter course, you
should acknowledge that your patient has said something important, and
promise that you will return to it shortly.
PatIent: Yesterday I felt so disgusted with myself that I got out my
suitcase, just to see how it felt in my hand.
I ntervIewer: You must have been feeling pretty bad, to think about
leaving home. I’ll ask you more about those thoughts in a few
minutes, after we’ve finished talking about your drinking.
In clinical interviewing, you must constantly reconcile two oppos-
ing principles: harvesting all the necessary information while avoiding
the bog of excessive detail. For example, you’d certainly want to know
about the family uproar that occurred last month when your patient
was becoming severely depressed, but not at the expense of uncovering
enough symptoms of depression to make a solid diagnosis. Resolving this
dilemma often means putting off until later questions that, however much
you’d like their answers, must take a back seat to other, more burning
issues. It’s an ideal time to make some notes for future reference.
use open‑ended QuesTions
Above all else, you want information that is valid. Studies have shown that
patients give the most valid information when they are allowed to answer
freely, in their own words, and as completely as they wish. For that, you
need an open-ended question— one that cannot be answered “yes” or “no”
or with a specific piece of information (such as someone’s age, a loca-
tion, a physical attribute). Whenever possible, phrase your question in an
open-ended way that allows the widest possible scope of response. Here
are some examples:
Instead of “Did you have insomnia when you were most depressed?”
try “How was your sleep then?” (Your patient might have been sleeping
too much, rather than too little.)
Instead of “How many times have you been hospitalized?” try “Tell
me about your previous hospitalizations.” (The details could reveal sui-
cide attempts or bouts of drinking.)
Instead of “Did you lose your appetite?” try “To what extent did your
appetite change?” (The phrase “to what extent” can change nearly any
closed- ended question into one that is more open-ended.)

-- 71 of 385 --

56 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Talk The paTienT’s language
Even the most experienced interviewers must guard against using techni-
cal words that patients might not understand.
“Has your libido remained healthy?” asked one professor of psychia-
try (!) during ward rounds. The patient, a burly high school dropout,
looked perplexed.
If you use an unfamiliar word and are asked to define it, you won’t
lose anything but a little time. However, some patients are reluctant to
admit their ignorance, and so say nothing. Others sometimes think they
understand when they don’t. If they answer the question they thought you
asked, the information you get might not be accurate.
You will improve validity if you pitch your questions at a level the
patient can understand. Even then, you may find that your patient has a
different understanding of a word whose meaning you thought was pretty
well standardized. For example, some people will hear anxious and think
“eager”; others may say paranoid to mean “fearful.”
At the same time, be careful not to talk down to your patient.
An interviewer asked one patient, a man with a master’s degree in
psychology, “How’s your thinker?” The patient at first did not under-
stand. When the clinician’s meaning was finally explained, the
patient felt so insulted that he left the room without finishing the
interview.
Although most patients will not react so extremely, remember to approach
all adults (and children, for that matter) with full regard for their intel-
ligence and feelings.
In polite society, everyone uses circumlocutions at one time or
another. For example, “sleeping with” is commonly used to mean “having
sexual relations with”—any actual sleep is an afterthought. You should
try to preserve amenities, of course, but your first obligation should be
to communicate accurately. Asking whether your patient had “sex before
getting married” is discreet but inaccurate; nearly everybody has, even if
it’s only masturbation. If you really need to know about a history of sexual
intercourse, ask that question in so many words. In Chapter 9 we’ll take
up some methods to help you approach the sensitive subjects of sex, sui-
cide, and substance use.
You should work hard to be sure that you understand what your
patient is trying to say. For example, what does “I was off the wall” mean?
To find out, you could do one of two things:

-- 72 of 385 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	57
1. State your understanding of the expression: “You mean you felt
very upset?”
2. Simply ask what was meant: “I don’t understand how your state-
ment relates to what we were talking about.”
Ensuring good communication requires your constant vigilance. It is all
too easy to assume that you know what your patient means, when in fact
the two of you are speaking in different idioms.
In the same vein, be careful not to judge other people’s behavior by
your own. A common example is duration of sleep. You might suppose that
your patient, who sleeps only 6 hours each night, suffers from insomnia,
but for some people that’s plenty (Thomas Edison slept only 4). Keep in
mind that humans have an almost endless variety of preferences and habits,
and guard against the temptation to impose your standards on others.
choose The righT proBing QuesTions
When you want to know about something, just ask. A simple request for
information will often produce what you need for a minimum effort. Your
patient might appreciate your directness; if you use an open-ended ques-
tion, you’ll probably get the details.
When it comes time to delve more deeply into your patient’s present-
ing problems, choose your probing questions with two principles in mind:
1. Select probes that will resolve unanswered questions. It’s more
efficient to concentrate your efforts on areas you haven’t already
covered.
2. If your questions show your familiarity with the illness, you will
be perceived as knowledgeable. The resulting rapport and trust
should lead to increased sharing of information.
At this point in your interview, you are interested in the facts, so
questions that begin with “Why . . . ” are often better avoided. This is
especially true if the questions refer to the patient’s opinions or to other
people’s behavior. Besides, “Why . . . ” questions can prove frustrating to
a patient who lacks insight, and this frustration can inhibit the formation
of rapport.
“Why do you think you’re having these symptoms now?”
“Why did your boss say that?”
“Why did your son leave home?”

-- 73 of 385 --

58 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Each of these questions invites speculation rather than facts. Later you
may want to hear about possible interpretations, but at first you should
try to avoid the opinions and concentrate on the data that will allow you
to form your own conclusions. Try asking instead for more details or for
some typical examples. (Fair warning: Later, I’ll break my own rule and
mention a couple of specific situations where you might use “Why . . . ”
questions to good effect.)
Getting a good history depends in part on knowing what questions
will help you better understand the facts about your patient’s symptoms
or problems. Each symptom has its unique set of details that must be
explored, but for a full, rich exploration of any behavior or event, certain
items of information are always necessary. They include accurate details
about these aspects of your patient’s symptoms:
Type
Severity
Frequency
Duration
Context in which they occur
Because you will now be looking for specific details, you will be using
more closed- ended questions—those that can be answered in a few words
and don’t invite further comment from your patient. Even when pursuing
details, you should still sprinkle in some open-ended questions, which
will stimulate your patient to relate additional material that you may not
have thought to ask about. In the following example, the clinician uses a
mixture of closed- and open-ended questions to explore a patient’s anxi-
ety attacks:
I ntervIewer: When did you first notice these episodes of anxiety?
[Closed-ended]
PatIent: I guess it must have been about 2 months ago—I had just
started my new job with the county.
I ntervIewer: Would you describe an episode for me? [Open-ended]
PatIent: It’s pretty much the same every time. For no reason I start
to feel nervous, and then I’m afraid I won’t be able to breathe.
It’s awfully scary.
I ntervIewer: How often have they occurred? [Closed-ended]
PatIent: It’s been getting more frequent. I’m not sure I can say.
I ntervIewer: Well, has it been several times a day, once a day, once
a week? [Closed-ended, multiple- choice]

-- 74 of 385 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	59
PatIent: About once or twice a day now, I’d say.
I ntervIewer: What do you do about it? [Open-ended]
PatIent: Usually I just sit down. I’m usually too shaky to stand, any-
way. After about 15 minutes, it starts to go away.
I ntervIewer: What sort of help have you sought before? [Open-
ended]
Some rules of interviewing seem obvious, but they should be men-
tioned for the sake of completeness.
• Don’t phrase questions in the negative. (“You haven’t been drinking
heavily, have you?”) The effect is to telegraph an expected answer, which
in this case would be “Heck, no.”
• Don’t ask double (or, worse, multiple) questions. (“Have you had trou-
ble with your sleep or appetite?”) Double questions may seem efficient,
but they are often confusing. Without your realizing it, the patient may
respond to one part of the question while ignoring another.
• Avoid obvious pejorative questions. (“Has your drinking ever caused
a serious lapse of judgment?”) Here, for no gain, you risk raising your
patient’s defenses. Better accepted might be a simple question about any
problems the patient may have had from drinking.
• Avoid leading questions. (“Did your wife’s leaving you cause you to
start drinking?”) A leading question is one that (often broadly) hints at
the answer expected. Judges on TV crime shows overrule leading ques-
tions, and so should you. They represent the opposite of your quest for
honest, open-ended inquiry. Instead try, “What was going on in your life
before you started drinking?”
• Encourage precision. Where appropriate, ask for dates, times, and
numbers. And ask your patient to define any use of vague words such as
seldom, sort of, occasionally, sometimes, many, and most. (By the way, try to
make your own language as precise as possible.)
• Keep questions brief. Long questions with much explanatory detail
can confuse the patient; they also occupy time you could be using to
obtain information.
• Watch for new leads. Even when you are hot on the trail of vital infor-
mation, be alert for hints of other directions to explore later.
PatIent: . . . That’s about the story of my first suicide attempt. It
really upset my mother, so bad she had a nervous breakdown.
Now did you want to hear about the other attempt?
I ntervIewer: (Noting on pad, “Mother’s breakdown.”) Yes, please.

-- 75 of 385 --

60 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
conFronTaTions
Of course, confrontation does not mean showing anger, much less com-
ing to blows. In the context of a mental health interview, it simply means
pointing out something that requires clarification. It could be an incon-
sistency between two points of the history, or between the story and how
the patient appears to feel about it. The purpose of the confrontation is
to help you and the patient communicate better.
I ntervIewer: I’ve noticed that whenever I ask about your father, you
glance away. Did you realize that?
PatIent: No, I didn’t.
I ntervIewer: What do you suppose it means?
In the usual initial interview, you should try to avoid any confronta-
tion that’s more than the mild sort I’ve just illustrated. In the first visit or
two, you don’t know one another well at all; your patient could feel tricked
or trapped by a relative stranger who points out inconsistencies. That
could lead in turn to decreased cooperation with the history taking or, in
extreme cases, to a breakdown in communications. But if you seem to be
getting contradictory information on an important point, try to enhance
validity by asking for clarification.
When you do ask, be gentle. The experience of being interrogated
is an unpleasant one; it makes the subject feel attacked and defensive. If
instead you coat your confrontation in warm empathy, it is less likely to be
rejected. If the patient sees you as interested and concerned, the confron-
tation should lead to an increase in self- exploration.
You can also make the confrontation seem less like a challenge by
choosing your phrases carefully. You might express puzzlement and ask
for help:
“Here’s something I don’t understand. You just said that your husband
drove you to the hospital, but I thought that earlier you told me he
had run off with his secretary.”
Notice the “I thought.” It implies that you, the interviewer, might have
been mistaken. The overall effect of the confrontation just quoted is to
make you and the patient collaborators in the search for truth. In another
example, to a patient who has made what seems to you an illogical (per-
haps delusional) connection, you might simply probe, “I don’t think I
quite follow that.”
Suppose you observe that your patient’s appearance and thought con-
tent do not jibe. A confrontation asks for clarification:

-- 76 of 385 --

Getting the Facts about the Illness 	61
“What you told me about your mother-in-law is sad, but you seem to be
smiling. There must be something else to this story.”
Whatever the issue, try to restrict your confrontations to one or two
essential issues. Otherwise, you do put rapport with your new patient at
risk. To be sure that you reserve this treatment for only the most impor-
tant issues, it might be better to save any confrontation until near the end
of the interview. Your relationship should be stronger by then (the risk
will be lessened), and you will have already obtained most of your infor-
mation (you’ll have less to lose). Any risk you do take will be in the service
of resolving an important issue.

-- 77 of 385 --

62
C h a p t e r 	7
Interviewing about Feelings
Dates, events, and other facts provide only the bare bones of your
patient’s problems; they must be fleshed out with feelings and reactions
to give the problems substance. Whatever the nature of the presenting
problems— even in patients with psychosis—feelings about the illness, and
indeed about the interview itself, will probably rank among the most
important data you obtain during the entire interview. Yet studies have
shown that of all the topics that must be covered in an initial mental
health interview, the one most often ignored by beginning interviewers
is feelings.
Negative aNd positive FeeliNgs
People can experience an impressive range of feelings. In listing a few
of them (Table 7.1), I have tried to be comprehensive. Some are major
moods or affects; others are variants or combinations. All are represented
by commonly used words. Although in nearly every case a noun form
exists, I have listed adjectives (with some synonyms and related words),
because that is how people express these ideas in reference to themselves.
For example, we are more likely to say, “I feel [am] anxious” than “I have
anxiety.”
In most cases I have paired feelings with their opposites. (Note that
the negative feelings considerably outnumber the positive ones.) I have
omitted most of the obvious antonyms (un- and in- words) and have omit-
ted some words that are too vague to be useful as descriptors, such as
bad, good, nervous, and uncomfortable. Because I wanted to include only
those terms that are used to describe how people feel, in some cases I

-- 78 of 385 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	63
TABLE 7.1. Negative and Positive Feelings
Negative feelings 	Positive feelings
Afraid, fearful, apprehensive 	Confident
Angry
Anxious 	Contented, calm, peaceful
Apathetic, indifferent, aloof, detached 	Eager, enthusiastic, interested, enchanted
Ashamed, humiliated 	Proud
Confused, perplexed, puzzled 	Certain, sure
Disappointed 	Fulfilled
Disgusted 	Delighted
Dissatisfied 	Satisfied
Embarrassed
Envious, jealous
Foolish 	Wise
Frustrated 	Encouraged
Guilty
Hateful 	Affectionate, loving
Helpless, dependent 	Independent
Hopeless, trapped 	Hopeful
Horrified
Impatient 	Patient
Indignant 	Pleased
Inferior 	Important, superior
Lonely 	Sociable
Pessimistic 	Optimistic
Regretful
Rejected 	Accepted
Resentful
Sad, gloomy, depressed 	Cheerful, happy, euphoric
Shy, timid 	Confident
Surprised, astonished, amazed 	Prepared
Suspicious 	Trusting
Tense 	Relaxed
Uncertain 	Determined
Ungrateful 	Appreciative, grateful
Unsympathetic, callous 	Sympathetic, compassionate
Useless, worthless 	Useful, worthy
Vulnerable 	Secure
Wary 	Trusting
Worried 	Carefree
Note. Some terms, such as wary and trusting, could be considered positive or negative,
depending on context. I’ve tried to compose this list according to the more prevalent mean-
ing.

-- 79 of 385 --

64 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
have listed no antonym. Thus innocent isn’t given as an antonym for guilty,
because people don’t usually state that they feel innocent—“I am inno-
cent” proclaims conviction, not emotion.
Of course, you can obtain information about feelings from most nor-
mally expressive people just by careful watching and listening. But some
patients are reluctant to share their feelings; even when they are willing to
talk, they bury their emotions deeply. Then you will have to go prospect-
ing to uncover feelings.
eliciTing Feelings
Many patients—perhaps most—will express their feelings adequately if you
just ask. Patients don’t seem to mind this method. In fact, studies show
that this direct approach is preferred by most patients and informants, as
long as the interviewer has a warm and caring manner and is attentive,
courteous, and responsive to cues.
Successful examiners effectively use two techniques that are espe-
cially good at eliciting emotions. These are the already-mentioned direct
requests and open-ended questions.
Direct Requests for Feelings
Watch for the opportunity to ask about the feelings associated with any
of the facts you have been discussing. Simply asking is probably the most
effective method of eliciting emotions, but be careful to use the word feel-
ings or a synonym. If you slip and say, for example, “What do you think?”
you risk harvesting instead a lot of factual and cognitive material, espe-
cially if your patient is highly educated or otherwise tends to intellectual-
ize. Here are a couple of examples of useful requests for feelings:
“How did you feel when you found out that you would have to move?”
“What was your state of mind when you were served with that sub-
poena?”
Patients are used to answering questions and will usually give you
information about nearly any emotional state that you seem interested
enough to ask about.
Open‑Ended Questions
Without specifically asking how the patient feels, open-ended questions
encourage the free expression of emotions. This method works because

-- 80 of 385 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	65
its relative freedom encourages patients to speak at length. The more
people talk, the more likely they are to reveal emotion-laden information.
This technique, which is really just an extension of free speech,
works in part by suggesting that you care about how the patient perceives
the situation as a whole. On the other hand, closed- ended, short-answer
questions may suggest that you have already decided what is significant,
reducing your patient’s motivation to tell the entire story. Furthermore,
it seems obvious that the less time you spend asking questions, the more
time your patient will have to reveal feelings.
Open-ended questions can also help patients who have trouble sort-
ing out or accepting emotions that conflict with one another. To describe
conflicting emotions, we often use the term ambivalence; most people find
it hard to express ambivalent feelings in just a few words. But a compara-
tively long run of uninterrupted talk may provide the time necessary for
the patient to think about and express such feelings. Here’s an example of
an open-ended question that revealed decidedly mixed feelings:
I ntervIewer: A few minutes ago, you said that your wife was talking
about divorce. Could you tell me more about that?
PatIent: It’s been an awful time for me . . . I know that . . . well, I’ve
always felt that if you’ve failed in your marriage, you’ve failed in
life. At least, that’s what my mother always said.
I ntervIewer: (Nods encouragement.)
PatIent: But when I think about it . . . you know, there’s so much
trouble we’ve had getting along, almost since . . . well, since the
kids were born. Maybe we haven’t really had much of a marriage
at all. Maybe there are some things worse than divorce.
oTher TechniQues
Several situations can make it hard to elicit emotions from patients. Here
are a few of them:
• From childhood, some people— especially males—are discouraged
from revealing their feelings or displaying emotions. When they are
grown up, this “macho” view of appropriate behavior can lead them to
deny their feelings. The most obvious example is when the childhood
admonition “Boys don’t cry” becomes “Men should show that they don’t
care.” The same fate can befall women, too.
• Some patients don’t recognize their own feelings or have difficulty
connecting their feelings to their experiences. Perhaps this, too, develops

-- 81 of 385 --

66 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
from childhood experiences. In extreme cases, people grow up unable to
recognize or describe how they feel—a condition called alexithymia.
• Still others may be reluctant to express themselves, especially to
someone they don’t know well, because it makes them feel vulnerable.
“Show a hard exterior, and no one can hurt you” is how they might put
it. In contrast to those with alexithymia, these people know how they feel
and could put their emotions into words, but the need for self-protection
wins out.
To elicit feelings in these situations may require you to use one of the
techniques mentioned just below.
Expressions of Concern or Sympathy
Controlled studies have shown that any expression of concern or sympathy
by a clinician may encourage a patient to share feelings. This is especially
likely to work if your patient has already begun to share some feelings.
The sympathetic expression you use can be either verbal or behavioral,
such as facial expressions or other body language.
PatIent: I’ve worked for that company for 15 years, but when a super-
visory position opens up, the boss passes me over for his own
nephew. It really burns me!
I ntervIewer: (Frowns sympathetically.) It makes me feel unhappy just
hearing about it! I think that anyone in that situation would feel
hurt and angry.
PatIent: I was beyond that—I was totally blown away. I wanted to
flush myself out of existence! I still feel that way, sometimes.
Reflection of Feelings
Reflection of feelings means explicitly stating the emotion you think the
patient might have felt in a given situation.
PatIent: My daughter has always been a little wild, but last night she
didn’t come home until nearly daybreak.
I ntervIewer: I’ll bet you were nearly frantic.
Of course, this technique runs the risk that your interpretation could be
wrong. But if it is, and your patient says so, you have at least accomplished
your goal of promoting a discussion of feelings.

-- 82 of 385 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	67
Picking Up on Emotional Cues
Picking up on emotional cues means being constantly alert for indica-
tions of high emotional concern. Often these will be nonverbal cues: a
slight frown, moistening of the eyes, or any other idiom of body language.
Your response might be verbal:
“I thought you looked a little sad when you were talking about your
mother. What were you feeling?”
You might also indicate your interest and support with some quiet
action of your own, such as passing a box of facial tissues to someone who
has begun to cry.
Interpretation
With interpretation, you draw parallels between the emotional content of
current and past situations.
PatIent: My husband never listens to my opinion on things.
I ntervIewer: From what you told me before, it sounds like the way
your father treated you when you were a teenager.
The technique of interpretation can be tricky to use. The patient
must be receptive to explanations for behavior; ideally, the patient should
be the one who suggests the connection. If not, offer the interpretation
tentatively: It may be briskly rejected. Generally, I’d tend to stay away
from interpretations during the initial interview; they are a device best
used in later therapy by experienced clinicians.
Studies show that each of the techniques above can encourage a
reticent patient or informant to offer up more emotions and to exam-
ine them at greater depth. However, none of them will discourage a nor-
mally expressive person from revealing emotions. They also require less
in the way of detailed, extensive probing than do techniques that are less
responsive to the needs of patients.
“Name the Feeling”
Just ask about the emotion you think your patient might be having:
“Are you feeling depressed?”
“Have you felt guilt [or regret] about [whatever situation you’ve been
discussing]?”

-- 83 of 385 --

68 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Because it is closed- ended, reserve this technique for those situations where
you have already tried to elicit feelings with more open-ended questions.
Analogy
Finally, for the patient who absolutely cannot identify the feelings that
accompany a given situation, you could ask about times when similar feel-
ings might have been experienced.
“Did you feel anything like this when your mother died?”
“Did you feel this way that time your boss used you as a bad example
in front of the entire staff?”
Following up For deTails
Once you have uncovered some feelings, increase the depth of the inter-
view by asking for more. Probe to elicit examples and to evaluate details.
I ntervIewer: I’d like to hear some more about those rage attacks.
When do you feel that way?
PatIent: For one thing, it’s whenever we go to visit my father-in-law.
I ntervIewer: Have you had some previous unpleasant experiences
with him?
PatIent: I’ll say! He almost ruined my marriage with some of his sly
cracks.
I ntervIewer: I’d like to hear an example of how you felt then.
Be sure to ask follow-up probing questions whenever your patient
gives you the opportunity. Beginners sometimes uncover evidence of sig-
nificant events or pathology, only to ignore it in the subsequent dialogue.
Here is an unfortunate example:
I ntervIewer: Were you ever approached for sex in any way when you
were a child?
PatIent: Well, yes, I was.
I ntervIewer: (Writes down “Yes.”) Where are you employed now?
Perhaps this interviewer felt uncomfortable at pressing ahead for the
details, but the patient was left to deal with the frustration of pent-up
information. Positive information should be followed up until you have
learned who, what, when, where, why, and how.

-- 84 of 385 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	69
deFense mechanisms
When following up, you should also learn what your patient does to cope
with feelings. These strategies for dealing with emotions and behaviors
are called defense mechanisms. They may seem almost endless in their
number and variety; consult standard texts for a more exhaustive listing.
Following are some of the more common ones. Rather than just stating
definitions, I will try to clarify what the terms mean with examples of
defense mechanisms that might be used by an aspiring politician who
feels anxiety and anger about losing a city council election.
Potentially Harmful Defense Mechanisms
In the potentially harmful group, I’ve included those defense mechanisms
that generally allow a person to avoid confronting the effects of feelings
or emotions. When stressed, most of us will occasionally be tempted to
use one of these to shore up our egos.
Acting out. [The politician smashes the camera of a news photogra-
pher who is trying to take a picture.]
Denial. “The recount will show that I actually won.”
Devaluation. “It’s a lousy job anyway—the hours are murder, and you
get nothing but complaints from the taxpayers.”
Displacement. [The politician goes home and kicks the cat.]
Dissociation. [The politician awakens one morning in strange sur-
roundings, unable to recall any events of the past 3 days.]
Fantasy. “Next year I’ll run for Congress—and win!”
Intellectualization. “I view this experience only as an example of
‘democracy in action.’ ”
Projection. [Unconscious thought: “I’d like to kill him.”] “He’s plotting
to kill me.”
Reaction formation. [Thought: “He’s a miserable low-life.”] “I’m proud
to support the honorable council member.”
Repression. [The politician “forgets” to attend a banquet in honor of
the victor.]
Somatization. [The politician develops persistent chest pain of unex-
plained origin.] “ . . . so I couldn’t have served anyway.”
Splitting. “Some politicians are good, some bad; my opponent’s one
of the bad ones.”

-- 85 of 385 --

70 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Effective Defense Mechanisms
Better-integrated adults rely principally on some of the more mature
defense mechanisms.
Altruism. “I’ll support him; he has better qualifications than I do.”
Anticipation. [Before voting begins:] “Of course, I could lose. But I’ve
got other irons in the fire.”
Humor. “In the campaign I said he was honorable; he said I was a jerk.
Perhaps we were both wrong.”
Sublimation. “I’ll write a book about the campaign.”
Suppression. “I’ll put it to the back of my mind, and concentrate on
the business at hand.” [Note the difference— conscious intent—from
repression, above.]
handling excessivelY emoTional paTienTs
Although you will usually want to encourage the expression of emotions,
some patients are so emotional that it impedes their communication with
other people, including therapists. People can experience excessive emo-
tionality for a variety of reasons.
• They may be people who are angry, sometimes without knowing
why.
• Others, such as those with some personality disorders, have
learned that high-volume emotions help them get their way. Drama
becomes a way of life.
• Even some people who don’t have such severe underlying psycho-
pathology may use high emotional output to control their families
or friends.
• Some people have been reared in families where feelings are
expressed loudly and often. By their imitation of others, this behav-
ior becomes habitual.
• Anxiety causes some to behave this way.
• A few cannot stand the loneliness of silence.
• Perhaps your patient, recalling experiences with other clinicians,
fears that you won’t be interested or that there won’t be enough
time to tell the whole story.
Whatever the cause, excessive emotionality can focus too much of
your attention on feelings, leaving insufficient time for gathering facts.
In such a situation, try to adopt a brisk, controlling manner in which you

-- 86 of 385 --

Interviewing about Feelings 	71
firmly direct the course of the interview. Several techniques can help you
accomplish this objective.
1. Acknowledge the emotion. You may be able to turn down the heat
by just putting a label on the emotion. Then the patient, seeing that you
recognize the feeling, will no longer need to attract your attention to it.
PatIent: (Shouting) She’s not going to jerk me around that way,
not ever again!
I ntervIewer: You really feel angry. Frustrated and angry.
PatIent: (More quietly) Well, sure. Who wouldn’t be? Wait’ll you
hear what she did last week.
This technique shows that you understand and accept how your
patient feels, so it is probably the best one to use. Try it first.
2. Talk quietly. If your patient shouts, try lowering your own voice.
Most people have trouble maintaining high-volume output when you are
speaking so softly that you can barely be heard.
3. Explain again what information you are trying to get:
“What I really want at this point is to learn about your family his-
tory. Perhaps later we can talk some more about your husband’s
girlfriend.”
4. Redirect any of the patient’s questions or comments that change
the topic.
I ntervIewer: Now I’d like to hear about your son. You said that
he was living with his mother?
PatIent: That’s right, and she hasn’t let me even talk to him on
the phone for the past 3 months. Don’t you think I should get
a court order?
I ntervIewer: We might be able to talk about that later. Right
now, I really need to know about your relationship with your
son. Have you been close?
5. Switch to a closed- ended style. This style will indicate what sort of
specific answer you would like to hear, as well as discourage further com-
ment by the patient.
I ntervIewer: Could you tell me about your first marriage?
PatIent: It was a disaster! I’ve never forgiven that man! He was a
complete brute! One time I cried for a month without stop-
ping. Why, I couldn’t even—

-- 87 of 385 --

72 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: (Interrupts, recognizing that open-ended questions aren’t
useful.) Was he a drinker?
PatIent: Oh gosh, yes, he drank like a camel. He—
I ntervIewer: (Interrupts.) How long did the marriage last?
PatIent: Until I was 26, about 4 years. He was never—
I ntervIewer: Was the divorce your idea, or his?
This interviewer was prepared to go on interrupting until the patient
learned to stick to the main topic.
6. If you are still having trouble, check to be sure that the patient
understands what you want. Here is how you might phrase this confronta-
tion:
“We seem to be having some trouble here with our communica-
tion. Have I made it clear what I need to know?”
Like other helpful confrontations, this one was expressed so as not to lay
the blame entirely on the patient.
The aim of all these techniques is to reduce the patient’s scope for
excessive verbal and behavioral output. They should help you obtain the
diagnostic information you need without sacrificing rapport. Occasion-
ally, however, even these techniques are insufficient. If an outpouring of
tears or other feelings prevents you from obtaining the information you
need from a hospitalized patient, you may have to break off the interview
long enough for the patient to get a better grip. Say something like this:
“I can see you’re too upset to continue today. Let’s take a rest for now.
I’ll stop back and see you again in the morning, when you’ve had
some sleep.”

-- 88 of 385 --

73
c h a p T e r 	8
Personal and Social History
Health care professionals don’t treat illnesses; they treat people. You
therefore need to know the context in which your patient’s complaints
have occurred. This requires learning all you can about family back-
ground and other aspects of biography. The process not only will help
you get to know your patient, but may reveal material that illuminates
and extends your knowledge of the cause and context of mental disorder.
Some of it may have a direct bearing on the cause of an illness or on its
treatment. Your patient has spent a lifetime accumulating these experi-
ences, so there is almost no limit to the amount and variety of available
information. What you learn will be determined by the purpose of your
interview and the time you can devote to it.
While you are gathering biographical information, maintain a
healthy skepticism about its validity. Human memory is fallible, especially
when the human has an intense personal interest in what is being remem-
bered. Accurate recall is more likely for major historical events such as
births, deaths, and marriages, and for recent events that constitute the
history of the present illness.
On the other hand, some material is especially subject to distortion:
early childhood events, interpersonal disputes, everything reported sec-
ondhand, and any other item that requires interpretation. You should
be constantly evaluating the validity of all interview data against your
own internal standards (“Does this story seem likely? Does it even seem
possible?”). Whenever possible, you should check accuracy with external
sources, such as previous medical records and interviews with relatives
and friends (see Chapter 15).
By the way, I fully realize that you’re not going to collect all of these
data in a single interview; augmentation later is a clinical fact of life.
In this and subsequent chapters, I will use italics to point out some
possible interpretations of the material as we discuss it.

-- 89 of 385 --

74 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
childhood and adolescence
Family of Origin
A logical starting place is with your patient’s birth. In what city/state/
country did it occur? Was the patient an only child? If there were brothers
and sisters, how many were there of each? What was your patient’s posi-
tion in the sibship (first, second, middle, youngest, or only child)? How
well did your patient get along with siblings? Was one sibling favored over
the others? Older children in a sibship tend to receive more attention when they
are young, whereas middle children may be relatively neglected; youngest children
may be babied or spoiled. Genetic disorders that are obvious at birth or shortly
afterwards (such as Down’s syndrome) tend to occur late in a sibship.
If your patient was one of twins, were they identical (one-egg) or fra-
ternal (two-egg) twins? Identical twins have inherited the same genetic mate-
rial; fraternal twins are no more genetically alike than nontwin siblings. Some
mental disorders, including schizophrenia and bipolar disorders, are much more
likely if your patient is the identical twin of someone who has such a disorder.
Did your patient feel wanted as a child? How close was the relation-
ship with the parents? Did this change with adolescence? Was the patient
reared by both parents? If not, was this due to death? Divorce? Military
service? Prison? Absence of a parent (especially the father) has been associated
with antisocial personality disorder. In some studies, early death of a parent cor-
relates with adult-onset depression.
Occasionally a patient will tell you, “I never knew my father.” You
should gently try to learn whether the parents were ever married. (Using
“Is it possible that . . . ” can soften this question considerably.) Even in our
more accepting era, being born “out of wedlock” is a lifelong source of discomfort
and embarrassment for some people.
Whatever the exact nature of your patient’s family of origin, you
should try to learn something about how the parents (or surrogates)
related to one another. Did they communicate well with one another?
Show affection? Did they quarrel often? Fight? Did one physically abuse
the other? How did their relationship affect the emotional climate in the
home while your patient was growing up? People often model their adult
relationships on what they observed as the “norm” during childhood. On the other
hand, some people go to extremes to be different from a parent whose behavior was
perceived as undesirable or unattractive.
If your patient was adopted, at what age did this take place? Can you
learn anything about the biological parents or about the circumstances
leading to adoption? Was the adoption intrafamilial (that is, the adoptive
parents were blood relatives of the patient) or extrafamilial? Many adopted
people, especially adolescents and young adults, feel incomplete because they don’t
know their biological parents. This can result in a quest for roots that drives some

-- 90 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	75
adoptees to extraordinary lengths to discover (and in some cases meet) the birth
parents who gave them up.
Growing Up
What was the age of each parent when your patient was born? Were the
parents mature enough to provide responsible care? Did both work regu-
larly outside the home? What were their jobs? Were they good providers?
Did they have enough time left over to spend with children? What sort
of disciplinary techniques were used? Were these harsh, firm, relaxed, or
inconsistent?
If either parent was absent from home for an extended period of
time, find out why. (Illness? A job far from home? Jail? Was your patient
a “military brat”?) Did the family live in one place, or were there frequent
moves? Did the family ever really put down roots somewhere?
Were there other losses, such as the death of a sibling, grandparent,
or other close relative?
Find out about hobbies, clubs, and other extracurricular interests.
Was your patient sociable? A loner? Many people with schizophrenia have
been isolated or loners for most of their lives.
Try to obtain a general picture of the childhood environment and
your patient’s place in it. Here are some questions that might help you
with this broad task:
“Could you tell me something about your childhood?”
“What was life like for you then?”
“How did you get along with your sibling(s)?”
“Who were your childhood friends?”
“Did you feel different from other kids?”
“How did you spend your free time?”
“Did you belong to organizations such as the Scouts or the Y?”
“Did you participate in organized sports?”
“Where did your family go on vacations?”
“Did your family have pets?”
“What chores or other responsibilities did you have?”
“What summer or after- school jobs did you have?”
“What did you want to be when you grew up?”
“With whom did you identify?”
“Was sex discussed in the home?”

-- 91 of 385 --

76 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“What were your parents’ attitudes toward sex?”
“When did you first become interested in having a romantic relation-
ship?”
Asking about Abuse
Many patients were physically abused as children— an experience that can
significantly affect adult life and personality. This information can be
difficult to obtain; sometimes these patients do not themselves realize
the extent to which they were abused as children. You should nonetheless
make an effort to learn whether your patient’s childhood involved such
experiences. You can lead into these sensitive topics gradually:
“How well do you feel your parents provided for you?”
“What methods of discipline did your parents use?”
“Did you ever feel that you were mistreated as a child?”
Positive replies to questions about abuse must be pursued thoroughly,
if carefully. You will need to develop the following areas of information:
How often did this abuse occur?
Who administered it? Did both parents participate?
If one of them tried to shield the child, who was it?
What form did the abuse take? (Beatings? If so, what with?)
How often did it occur?
What was the provocation, if any?
At the time, did the patient feel that this abuse was deserved? What
about now?
What effect did these experiences have on the patient as a child?
As an adult, how does the patient feel about these experiences now?
You’ll need to ask about sexual abuse, too; we’ll cover that issue in
Chapter 9.
Childhood Health
For adult patients, early developmental milestones (such as the ages at
which a child learns to sit, stand, walk, speak words, and speak sentences)
are usually not worth pursuing. Most of what your patient knows about

-- 92 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	77
milestones has probably been passed along as family mythology, which is
highly subject to distortion. (Who remembers being breast-fed or toilet-
trained?) But if you suspect intellectual disability or other developmental
difficulties (such as a specific learning disorder), these milestones may be
important enough to pursue with an informant.
Try to learn something about overall childhood health. Were there
hospitalizations, operations, frequent visits to doctors, or long absences
from school for health reasons? How did the family deal with illness?
(Overprotection? Rejection?) If your patient was a sickly child, did the
parents and other relatives “reward” illness behavior with a great deal
of attention? Overprotection or rewards for illness may precede what DSM-5
now calls somatic symptom and related disorders (the DSM-IV somatoform dis-
orders).
What was your patient’s temperament and activity level, especially
around ages 5–10? Was this child quiet and withdrawn, or outgoing and
friendly? Temperament characteristics appear in the first few months of life and
tend to persist throughout childhood, even into the adult years. They may corre-
late with adult mental disorders.
Does your patient report any of these relatively common childhood
problems?
Bedwetting
Tics
Stuttering
Obesity
Nightmares
Phobias
If so, what treatment (if any) was attempted? Did it help? How did these
problems affect relations with siblings or schoolmates? Any of these condi-
tions suggests that the patient was under stress as a child. Due to its increasing
frequency, obesity may in recent years have become somewhat more accepted, but
it still suggests a potential source of childhood hazing.
Were there any concerns about masturbation? At what age did
puberty begin? If your patient is female, was she prepared for the onset
of menses? If so, who told her? At what age did they begin? Was she
concerned or teased about breast development? Teens of either sex can be
exquisitely sensitive about being noticed. Developmental delay (or acceleration)
may have caused your patient some degree of embarrassment.
When did dating begin? What feelings were associated with this?
Again, sexual history will be covered in Chapter 9.

-- 93 of 385 --

78 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Education
How well did your patient do academically, and what was the last grade
completed? Did your patient like school? If there were academic prob-
lems, what subjects caused the most trouble? Were there any specific
problems with reading (dyslexia)? With other subjects? Were there behav-
ior problems in school? Truancy? What were the consequences? (Sent to
principal? Paddling? Suspension or expulsion?)
Did your patient repeat grades or have difficulty concentrating on
schoolwork? Short attention span and low school performance suggest attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Some of these patients (boys, especially) were mark-
edly hyperactive as children, and may even have learned to walk early.
Did your patient ever miss school for long periods of time? If so, why?
Was there any history of school refusal? How old was your patient when it
occurred? School refusal (once erroneously called “school phobia”) is fairly com-
mon in young children and does not necessarily predict later pathology.
If your patient quit before graduating from high school, what was
the reason? What did your patient do then? Work? Join the military? You
should also learn whether a GED was attempted or attained. (These ini-
tials can stand for General Equivalency Degree [or Diploma] or General
Educational Development.)
Finally, at what age did your patient make the transition from a life of
dependency on parents or others to one of self- sufficiency?
liFe as an adulT
Work History
Employment history can help you judge both your patient’s underlying
potential and the effect of recent illness on performance. This informa-
tion is also relatively objective: Work history seems to be distorted less
than more personal, perhaps more embarrassing portions of the social
history. You should therefore spend some time inquiring into the details
of your patient’s job history.
What is your patient’s current occupation? Is it stimulating, satisfy-
ing? How does it match earlier ambitions? How long has your patient
worked for the current employer? If the patient was ever unemployed,
why and for how long? If the patient has been employed only briefly, how
many jobs have there been in the last 5 years? Has each job change been
for a better one? How much time is spent working? Investigate any gap,
change of direction, or lack of promotion.
If your patient was ever fired from a job, what were the circumstances?
If the patient is unemployed now, why? When did your patient last work

-- 94 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	79
regularly? If the patient is unemployed, what is the current means of sup-
port? Patients with antisocial personality disorder have often held multiple jobs
of brief duration. No job at all, or none for many years, is commonplace among
patients with chronic schizophrenia.
While you are at it, find out about adult leisure activities. Does your
patient have any hobbies? Belong to any clubs or other organizations?
Have there been efforts at continuing education as an adult? What about
talents? To learn more, you can ask:
“What do you think you’re good at?”
Military History
Has your patient served in the armed forces? (Ask this question of both
male and female patients.) If the answer is “Yes,” ask:
“What branch?”
“Was this a volunteer enlistment, or were you drafted?”
“How long did you serve?”
“What was your job in the military?”
“What was the highest rank you attained?”
“Did you have any disciplinary problems?” (These include courts-
martial, Articles 15, captain’s masts, and lower-grade disciplinary
hearings.)
“What kind of discharge did you receive?” (Honorable? General? Dis-
honorable? Medical?)
“Did you see combat? If so, for how long? What was your role?”
“Were you ever wounded?”
“Do you have a service- connected disability?” (This could be due
either to wounds or to a non- combat-related accident or illness.)
“Were you a prisoner of war?”
“Do you tend to relive your experiences or have bad dreams or anni-
versary reactions?”
Symptoms that persist or recur after combat (or any severe service- related
trauma) can indicate PTSD. This condition has been reported in 10% or more
of Vietnam- era combat veterans, and it is turning up in large numbers among
returnees from Iraq and Afghanistan. It may also occur after civilian calamities,
such as car wrecks and natural disasters.

-- 95 of 385 --

80 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Legal History
Ask about any legal problems. These might include lawsuits over insur-
ance or disability (especially likely in the case of a chronic illness, injury,
or pain), evictions, and feuds with neighbors. In these litigious times,
nearly any sort of dispute seems possible. Legal history can serve as a clue to
personality disorder, as well as illnesses such as bipolar disorders and substance
misuse.
Has your patient ever been arrested? If so, at what age? What were the
circumstances? How many times did this occur? What was the outcome?
(Conviction? Probation? Time in prison?) Was this in local confinement
or in a penitentiary? What was the total duration of time served?
Has there been a continuing pattern of illegal behavior from adoles-
cence throughout adult life? If so, have these criminal activities always
taken place in the context of substance use, or have they also occurred
when the patient was clean and sober? Have there been other illegal
activities for which your patient has never been caught? It may be worth-
while to ask specifically about shoplifting, which is a relatively common
behavior, especially in children and young adults. In antisocial personality
disorder, there is a continuing pattern of illegal acts from at least the teen years
(and often much earlier). Partly because it carries such a poor prognosis, anti-
social personality disorder is a diagnosis you should not make in any patient
whose illegal behavior has occurred entirely while under the influence of drugs
or alcohol.
Religion
To what religion (if any) does your patient belong? Is this different from
any religious affiliation of childhood? How often does your patient attend
services? How does religion (or spirituality) inform your patient’s life? For
several reasons, clinicians increasingly seek to explore patients’ spirituality and
belief in a supreme being. It can provide clues to possible sources of support and
comfort, and may reveal something of your patient’s values and system of ethics.
It may also suggest the degree to which there has been a break with parents, and
the possible presence of support from a community outside the nuclear family. On
a practical level, just showing an interest in something the patient values can
enhance rapport.
Current Living Situation
Where does your patient live now? (House? Apartment? Mobile home?
Rented room? Board and care facility? On the street?) What is the neigh-
borhood like?

-- 96 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	81
Does your patient live alone or with someone? If the latter, with
whom? How well does your patient provide self-care? If there has been
wandering, you might not learn details from the patient; this is material
for which you may have to depend on informants. Wandering is commonly
found in patients with neurocognitive disorders.
From what your patient says, can you characterize the quality of the
home? Does each person who lives there have adequate privacy? Are there
pets? Are there sufficient means of communication, including telephone,
postal service, e-mail? What means of transportation does your patient
use—car? bus? train? foot?
Has your patient ever been homeless? If so, for how long? What were
the circumstances?
What is your patient’s financial situation? What is the source of
income? Is it steady? Be sure to include jobs, disability compensation,
Social Security, annuities, alimony, and investments. Ask:
“Has money been a problem for you?”
Social Network
You can begin to assess the quality of social relationships by asking:
“To whom do you feel close in your family?”
“Who are your best friends?”
“How often do you see these people?”
If your patient is responsible for providing care for another adult,
such as a parent, other relative, or friend, try to elicit feelings about these
duties. Can you tell how well this function is carried out?
How much social support does your patient have? Are there personal
contacts, or is support received principally through electronic social
networks? Try to find out about the quality of relationships with fam-
ily, friends, and co-workers. Are there memberships in any clubs or sup-
port groups? Have any government or private agencies helped out? What
about home food services like Meals on Wheels? If there are grown chil-
dren, how close is their relationship with the patient?
Does the patient pursue leisure interests alone or with other people?
Marital Status
It has become commonplace for couples to live together without
being married. I will use the terms spouse and partner to include any

-- 97 of 385 --

82 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
intimate relationship between two people, without regard to gender or
legal status.
You might start by asking:
“Tell me about your spouse.” (How does what you hear from the
patient square with what you observe?)
“What do you see as the strong points of your relationship?” (Like all
open-ended questions, this one gives enough scope to discuss what-
ever seems important. The report, favorable or not, could indicate
the overall state of the relationship.)
Here are some specific items of information you should learn about:
Is the patient currently married?
Are the patient and spouse currently living together?
Have there been any common-law marriages or other long-term rela-
tionships?
What are the relative ages of patient and spouse?
How long have they been together?
If they are married, how long did they know one another before the
ceremony?
How many marriages has each partner had?
If there have been prior marriages, how old was the patient each
time?
Why did prior marriages or other long-term relationships end?
How have emotional problems affected the patient’s current relation-
ship?
How well does the partner support the patient during periods of ill-
ness or disability?
If the patient is divorced, what were the circumstances of the separa-
tion? Who initiated it? Under what circumstances? Do the former
spouses still maintain a relationship? If so, how amicable is it?
Issues such as money, sex, children, and relatives commonly provide
fodder for contemporary marital disputes. These can develop into mam-
moth feuds between patients and their families; the burden of mental
disorder produces an uncommon variety of arguments, fights, affairs,
separations, and divorces. Expect to invest considerable time in—and gain
extensive information from—inquiries into the quality of your patient’s
marriage or other love relationship. Following are some of the questions

-- 98 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	83
you can ask to elicit the sort of routine problems that produce friction in
any relationship:
“How well do you and your spouse communicate?” (Some couples
almost never have a serious discussion; successful couples take the
time to air their grievances, preferences, and points of view.)
“Does each of you consider the other a best friend?”
“How do you argue?” (Are old issues constantly brought up, or do
they get laid to rest? Do the partners commonly say things they later
regret?)
“What do you argue about?”
If there are children, you should find out:
How many children are there from each marriage?
Are there stepchildren?
What ages and genders are all the children?
Were any children conceived outside marriage?
What is the patient’s relationship with each of the children?
Do patient and spouse agree about sharing responsibility for child
care?
Questions about sexual adjustment and preference logically belong
here. These can be difficult to discuss, so I’ll address them in a separate
chapter on sensitive subjects (Chapter 9).
Avocations and Interests
OK, so it isn’t going to make or break the diagnosis of schizophrenia or
a bipolar disorder; still, you want to know something about how your
patient spends leisure time (or, for many busy people, would like to spend
free time if any became available). What can you infer from hobbies (for
example, solitary pastimes such as stamp collecting or photography, out-
door activities such as bird watching) and interests (TV, movies, reading,
shopping)? About 5% of adults identify themselves as compulsive shoppers; such
a history could tip you off to other pathology, such as depression, gambling, or
binge eating. Are sporting activities participatory, such as dancing, tennis,
or golf, or mainly ones that are viewed from the grandstand (or home
theater couch)? Have there been any recent changes in the type or inten-
sity of leisure interests, or in the patient’s ability to focus attention while
pursuing these interests? If so, can you learn why?

-- 99 of 385 --

84 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
medical hisTorY
Even if you are not a physician, don’t bypass medical history. It is vital for
every practitioner to know about this topic and the next one, the review
of systems, both of which have practical implications for diagnosis, treat-
ment, and prognosis. For example, a 2007 report pointed out that men-
tally ill patients die, on average, 25 years earlier than do people in the
general population. Fatalities come not only from suicide (though that is
a major cause), but from conditions such as heart and lung disease, diabe-
tes, and infectious diseases, including HIV/AIDS. These are all treatable,
but first you have to identify them. Furthermore, some symptoms of men-
tal illness may actually indicate treatable medical conditions as ordinary
as thyroid problems and Lyme disease. I can assure you that the issues
to be covered in these two sections are no more difficult than any of the
other areas we have already discussed.
Has your patient had any previous major illnesses? If so, what were
they? Did they result in hospitalization? Have there been any operations?
If so, what were they? When did they occur? Did the patient ever receive a
blood transfusion? If so, is this patient at risk for HIV? If serious medical
illness or operations occurred during childhood, how did the patient per-
ceive them at the time? What about allergies to pollen, dust, or animals?
While you are taking this history, you might try to ascertain how well
your patient has adhered to recommendations made by physicians and
other therapists. Many people, especially those who don’t know you very
well, may have trouble admitting to poor adherence (which, by the way, we
used to call treatment compliance). Try asking:
“Has it always been easy for you to follow your doctor’s advice?”
“When have you had difficulty?”
You will find more advice on dealing with difficult patient behaviors in
Chapters 16 and 17.
Ask about any obvious physical problems. With sensitive phrasing you
can ask just about anything, so don’t be shy about bringing up stuttering,
an eye patch, a missing limb, or a severe limp. Any of these could have a
bearing on the present problem. They may also have prompted teasing dur-
ing childhood. Even if physical defects are not causing emotional problems
now, they may well have done so at some time in the past. You might say:
“I noticed that you seemed to stammer once or twice while we were
talking. I wonder what sort of problems that might have caused when
you were a child.”
“Children can be pretty cruel about birthmarks. Could you tell me
about yours?”

-- 100 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	85
If this is a patient you’ll be following into the future, obtain the
names of other current health care providers who need to be apprised of
treatment and progress.
Medications
In the history of the present illness, you have already learned about the
medicines prescribed for emotional disorders. Now ask whether your
patient regularly takes any other medications. This information is espe-
cially important when the presenting problems include depression, psy-
chosis, or anxiety. Any of these can be caused or made worse by com-
monly prescribed medications. Pay special attention to birth control pills,
other hormones (such as thyroid or steroids), pain pills, and drugs for
blood pressure. For each, try to learn dose, frequency, and how long your
patient has been taking it. Has the patient recently stopped taking any
other medications? Of course, you are wondering whether withdrawal or side
effects could explain the symptoms you are investigating. Keep reading.
Side Effects
Have there been side effects (unwanted effects) or drug reactions? This topic
is often ignored by beginning interviewers, but it can influence the choice of
therapies. Try to get a description of the side effect or drug reaction:
What happened?
How long after the first dose did it occur?
Was treatment needed?
If the patient ever tried the drug again, did it produce the same reac-
tion? Patients may assume that a drug has caused physical or mental symptoms
when the two events were only coincidental. The question of cause and effect is
sometimes settled when the drug is started again, and the symptoms either reap-
pear or do not.
You are most likely to hear complaints about rashes developing from
sulfa or penicillin, but it is more important to learn about untoward reac-
tions to psychotropic medications. True allergies to these drugs are rare,
but side effects are not. Here are some of the more common ones:
Antidepressants: drowsiness, dry mouth, skin rash, dizziness, nausea,
weight gain, blurred vision, constipation
Antianxiety agents: drowsiness, dizziness, forgetfulness/confusion
Lithium: skin rash, tremor, excessive urination, thirst
Antipsychotics: low blood pressure, extrapyramidal side effects

-- 101 of 385 --

86 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Extrapyramidal side effects are neurological symptoms that can be
caused by taking antipsychotic medications, especially the older ones.
The four types of these symptoms are common enough that every mental
health professional can expect to encounter each of them from time to
time. The first three occur soon after starting medication and can be
treated with antiparkinsonian drugs such as trihexyphenidyl (Artane) or
diphenhydramine (Benadryl).
1. 	Acute dystonia develops within a few hours of the first dose of
some antipsychotic drugs. It is characterized by a sharp, cramping pain
of the neck that may cause the head to turn to the side. Sometimes the
eyeballs roll upward. This side effect can be painful and frightening, and
can constitute a real emergency.
2. 	Akathisia usually begins within a few days of starting one of the
older antipsychotics. Patients experience it as a profound restlessness,
often with an inability to sit still that results in pacing.
3. 	Pseudoparkinsonism also occurs soon after starting medication.
The patient experiences a decreased mobility of facial expression (masked
facies); a tendency to walk with short, shuffling steps; and a back-and-
forth tremor of the hands when they are relaxed, as when resting in the
patient’s lap. This tremor resembles the motion that old-time druggists
would use to form drugs into pills; hence the term pill- rolling tremor.
4. 	Tardive dyskinesia usually does not begin until the patient has
been using one of the older antipsychotics for months or years. Some-
one with tardive dyskinesia typically has uncontrollable motions of the
tongue, jaw, and lips that result in persistent pursing, chewing, or licking
movements. Patients themselves are often almost entirely unaware that
they are doing this; it is not a debilitating disorder, but it is unsightly.
Tardive dyskinesia is all the more important because it has no specific treatment.
Unless the antipsychotic drug is discontinued quickly, this side effect can become
permanent, persisting even after the medication is eventually stopped.
review oF sYsTems
In the review of systems, you ask patients to identify any symptoms they
have had from a list that you recite. This list comprises symptoms from all
the different organ systems of the body. The rationale for using it is that
patients will recognize more symptoms by passive identification than they
will report if you depend upon their spontaneous, active recall.
A complete medical review of systems is long and not especially rel-
evant to the initial mental health examination. However, you should ask
about the following:

-- 102 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	87
Disturbance of appetite (found in severe depression, anorexia nervosa,
and bulimia nervosa; over- or undereating may begin as early as childhood).
Habits. We often forget to inquire about everyday habits such as
tobacco use.
Head injury from sources as diverse as automobile accidents, explo-
sions during military operations, and the cumulative effect of repeti-
tive sporting injuries. The resulting cognitive disorders can range from
relatively brief concussion to the devastation of major neurocognitive disor-
der (dementia).
History of unconsciousness, dizziness, or fainting spells (suggests cog-
nitive disorders or somatic symptom disorders).
Convulsions (seizures). These may be either biological or psycho-
genic in origin. Ask about these symptoms: loss of consciousness,
loss of control of bowels or bladder, tongue biting, and auras (any
premonition or sensation warning the patient that a seizure is about
to begin).
Symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Before the onset of
menses, there may be persistent anger, labile mood, trouble with
sleep, fatigue, tension, trouble concentrating, and physical symptoms
such as weight gain. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is easy to ignore,
especially if you are a male interviewer. But it is fairly common among
women of childbearing age and can cause symptoms of depression.
Conversion Symptoms and Somatization Disorder
In addition to these general-purpose questions, mental health clinicians
(well, actually all health care providers need to consider these issues) can
use a specialized review of systems to diagnose what DSM-5 now calls
somatic symptom and related disorders, which are encountered fairly fre-
quently in mental health populations. These chronic illnesses, which usu-
ally begin in the teens or early 20s, have been given different names and
identified by criteria sets of varying rigor over the past half century. I’ve
discussed one of them further under “Somatization Disorder” in Appen-
dix B (pp. 298–300).
FamilY hisTorY
With the family history, you have the opportunity to accomplish three
tasks: (1) develop a brief biographical sketch of parents, siblings, spouse
(or significant other), and children; (2) learn about the relationships
between patient and relatives, both current and during childhood; and
(3) learn whether any mental disorders occur in your patient’s family,

-- 103 of 385 --

88 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
including distant relatives. (Remember that a familial disorder could be
transmitted through either a genetic or an environmental mechanism.)
You might start with an open-ended request for information about
your patient’s current family at home:
“Tell me how you get along with your [spouse, children].”
“What sort of people are [were] your parents?”
A few additional probing questions along these lines should help you
answer the first two questions about family history. Keep in mind that you
should obtain your patient’s assessment of both the childhood and adult
families.
By this time you have probably already learned such basics as parents’
occupations and ages of siblings, but you might not know how much con-
tact your patient has had with them as an adult. If there have been rup-
tures of these relationships, find out why. The answer could tell you some-
thing about the personalities of the relatives, and also of your patient.
To learn what sort of mental disorders may run in your patient’s fam-
ily, you’ll need to be explicit. Naturally, you’ll want to know whether any
blood relatives had symptoms similar to the patient’s, but to make clear
what you are looking for, carefully define the disorders and the relatives
you are inquiring about:
“I’d like to know whether any of your blood relatives ever had any ner-
vous or mental disorders. By ‘blood relatives,’ I mean your parents,
brothers, sisters, grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins, nieces, neph-
ews, and children. Has any of these people ever had nervousness,
nervous breakdown, psychosis or schizophrenia, depression, prob-
lems from drug or alcohol dependence, suicide or suicide attempts,
delinquency, a lot of medical complaints that no one could find a
reason for, mental hospitalization, or arrests or incarcerations? Any
relatives who were considered odd or eccentric, or who had difficult
personalities?”
This would be a long speech, but you can move through the list of
disorders slowly enough to give your patient time to think, and probe for
details of any positive answers. Just the fact that someone (even a mental
health professional) diagnosed Cousin Louise as having schizophrenia
doesn’t guarantee that this is what’s wrong with her. The relative could
have misunderstood the diagnosis, or the clinician could have made mis-
takes. Try to learn Louise’s age when she fell ill and what her symptoms
were. What sort of treatment did she receive? How did she respond? What
was the ultimate outcome— chronic illness? Complete recovery? Did she
ever have another episode?

-- 104 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	89
personaliTY TraiTs and disorders
We can define personality as the combination of all the mental, emotional,
behavioral, and social aspects that make us individual human beings.
The term character is often used synonymously with personality. The way
individuals perceive, think about, and relate to the environment and to
themselves form patterns of behavior called personality traits that persist
for long periods of time, often throughout life. Personality (or character)
traits can be detected as early as the first few months of life; they shape
behavior forever after and often become even more pronounced with
advancing age. These patterns govern relationships with friends, lovers,
bosses, and colleagues, as well as with more casual social contacts.
Much of one’s personality is under the surface, not readily apparent
to others or even to the individual. Psychological testing can help reveal
aspects of your patient’s personality, but you probably won’t have this sort
of material available during an initial interview. Your own impression will
often depend upon several sources of information:
Your patient’s self-assessment
Interviews with people who know the patient well (covered in Chap-
ter 15)
Information about relationships, attitudes, and behaviors with other
people
Behaviors you observe during your interview session
The Patient’s Self‑Assessment
Try to learn what characterized your patient’s personality prior to the
first episode of mental disorder; this is sometimes called the premorbid
personality. Some of the following open-ended questions may help you
evaluate premorbid personality:
“Describe yourself for me.”
If the response to this open-ended invitation is “What do you mean?” you
could prompt with some of the following questions:
“What sort of a person are you normally?” (Watch especially for
answers indicating self- esteem that is either low or inflated, or for
responses that contradict facts you already know.)
“What do you like best about yourself?”
“What is your mood normally?”
“What were you like as a teenager?”

-- 105 of 385 --

90 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Be especially alert for evidence of lifelong behavior patterns. Your
patient may use certain phrases that will tip you off:
“For as long as I can remember, I’ve made friends easily.”
“All my life I’ve been an ‘up’ sort of person—until my illness.”
The two examples just given suggest behaviors and attitudes that generally
work well for people. Indeed, in assessing personality it is important not
to focus solely on weaknesses, but on strengths as well. For example, how
would you describe your patient’s intelligence? Previous successes? Cop-
ing skills? Support system? Information about hobbies and other interests
(see “Avocations and Interests,” above) may provide additional clues.
Don’t let your quest for psychopathology blind you to the predictive
power of a normal premorbid personality. A preponderance of positive
character traits suggests that your patient will be less inconvenienced by
the current illness, will enjoy better social support while ill and, once the
current siege has lifted, will have a better chance for eventually returning
to complete mental health.
Following is a list of personality characteristics that are generally con-
sidered positive:
Agreeable 	Inquisitive
Charming 	Open
Cheerful 	Optimistic
Confident 	Outgoing
Conscientious 	Punctual
Dependable 	Relaxed
Forgiving 	Steady
Independent 	Trusting
In the initial mental health interview, you’ll often encounter lifelong
patterns of maladjustment or interpersonal conflicts. Here are some typi-
cal self- evaluations from patients:
“I’ve always been an anxious, tense person. Kinda depressed.”
“I’ve been a loner all my life.”
“People are no damn good. I don’t like them; they don’t like me.”
“I’ve never felt comfortable around people—not unless I was drink-
ing.”
“I’ve never been successful the way I’d hoped.”
“As long as I can remember, I have avoided conflict, whatever the cost.”

-- 106 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	91
A list of some of these negative personality traits would include the
following:
Aggressive 	Passive
Anxious 	Perfectionistic
Changeable 	Quarrelsome
Compulsive 	Resentful
Controlling 	Rigid
Fussy 	Self- centered
Gloomy 	Suspicious
Histrionic 	Shy
Introverted 	Tense
Irritable 	Volatile
Jealous 	Worrisome
Neurotic
A few other traits could be read as positive, negative, or neither:
Demonstrative 	Sensitive
Meticulous 	Serious
Reserved
Relationships with Others
If all you have is a single interview, you may have trouble assessing per-
sonality. Some mental health patients give distorted assessments: The pic-
ture you obtain may be either too gloomy or overly optimistic. Still, you
might obtain valuable information by trying to learn how others view
your patient—from the patient’s own perspective:
“What sorts of situations do people think you have trouble handling?”
“How well do you control your temper?”
“Does anyone in your family think you have a problem with [alcohol,
drugs, your temper]?”
What can you learn about your patient’s prejudices and regard for
other people? Ask:
“How do you feel about your boss?”
“Is your spouse always as supportive as you’d like?”

-- 107 of 385 --

92 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“Is there anyone—any type of person—you can’t stand?”
Although I ordinarily try to avoid them, questions beginning with
“Why . . . ” may help sort out your patient’s motivations and style of relat-
ing to other people:
“Why do you think your brother wants your mother to move in with
him?”
“You said you can’t work well with one of your partners. Why is that?”
A more objective indicator of personality traits is the history, as it is
related by the patient and especially by informants. For example, from
the employment history, you could learn something about your patient’s
adherence to the work ethic: Consider the age of first employment, num-
ber of jobs, pattern of employment (intermittent? unbroken?), and his-
tory of moonlighting. From the marital history, you can learn about your
patient’s fidelity and capacity for forming relationships. Throughout the
history, you will have examples of how your patient has responded to vari-
ous stressors.
Rather than taking what you see or hear at face value, try to evalu-
ate all of this information against behavior you already know about. For
example, suppose you have already heard that a sibling was favored by
their father, and that ethnicity gives a co-worker the inside track to pro-
motion. How do these opinions square with your patient’s claim to being
an open and trusting person?
Observed Behaviors
Some of the behaviors you observe during the interview may reveal
important character traits. Watch for actions or comments that seem
to go beyond what you would expect during an interview situation. For
example, your patient:
Yawns, slouches, gazes about the room, and otherwise appears unin-
terested
Invades your personal space by picking things up from your desk
Asks for time out to smoke a cigarette
Repeatedly questions your credentials as a therapist
Criticizes your clothing or hairstyle
Uses strong language to express prejudice against some ethnic or
religious group

-- 108 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	93
Tries to argue about something you have said
Brags about qualities that others might seek to conceal, such as sex-
ual liaisons, physical aggression, illegal activities, or substance use
Diagnosing Personality Disorder
By itself, none of the behaviors I’ve mentioned above can be definitive
for actual character pathology. In aggregate, however, or combined with
your historical information, behaviors such as these may suggest a per-
sonality disorder. This diagnosis is made only when character traits are so
inflexible and poorly adapted to the requirements of life that they cause
considerable distress or impair the person’s functioning in the realms of
social life, work, or other areas.
A personality disorder isn’t so much an illness as a way of life, in
which long- standing behavior causes problems for the patient and for oth-
ers. It often has its roots in childhood and may stem either from environ-
mental influences or from the patient’s inherited genetic material; some-
times both are implicated.
The diagnosis of a personality disorder hinges on problems of func-
tioning within the self (either the person’s identity or ability to provide
self- direction) and with other people (this person’s capacity for empathy or
intimacy). The ensuing pathological character traits continue through a
lifetime and affect both patients and those who interact with them.
To give the flavor of personality disorders, below I’ve included brief
definitions of some that have been recognized for decades. The six aster-
isked examples are generally considered to have better validity than the
rest; I’ve discussed them in greater detail in Appendix B (p. 300).
Antisocial.* The irresponsible, often criminal behavior of these people
begins in childhood or early adolescence. Pathological childhood behav-
ior includes truancy, running away, cruelty, fighting, destructiveness,
lying, stealing, and robbery. As adults, they may also default on debts, fail
to care for dependents, fail to maintain monogamous relationships, and
show no remorse for their behavior.
Avoidant.* These timid people are so easily wounded by criticism that
they hesitate to become involved with others. They may fear the embar-
rassment of showing emotion or of saying things that seem foolish. They
may have no close friends, and they exaggerate the risks of undertaking
pursuits outside their usual routines.
Borderline.* These impulsive people make recurrent suicide threats
or attempts. Affectively unstable, they often show intense, inappropri-
ate anger. They feel empty or bored, and they frantically try to avoid

-- 109 of 385 --

94 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
abandonment. They are uncertain about who they are and unable to
maintain stable interpersonal relationships.
Dependent. These people have trouble starting projects or making
independent decisions, even to the extent of agreeing with others who
may be wrong. Often preoccupied with fears of abandonment, they feel
helpless when alone and miserable when relationships end. They are eas-
ily hurt by criticism and will volunteer for unpleasant tasks to gain peo-
ple’s favor.
Histrionic. Overly emotional, vague, and attention- seeking, these
patients need constant reassurance about their attractiveness. They may
be self- centered and sexually seductive.
Narcissistic.* These people are self-important and often preoccupied
with envy, fantasies of success, or ruminations about the uniqueness of
their own problems. Their sense of entitlement and lack of empathy may
cause them to take advantage of others. They vigorously reject criticism,
and need constant attention and admiration.
Obsessive– compulsive.* Perfectionism and rigidity characterize these
people. Often workaholics, they tend to be indecisive, excessively scrupu-
lous, and preoccupied with detail. They insist that others do things their
way. They have trouble expressing affection, tend to lack generosity, and
may even resist throwing away worthless objects they no longer need.
Paranoid. These people expect to be threatened or humiliated; other
people’s behavior seems to confirm these expectations. They can be
quick to take offense and slow to forgive; often they have few confidants,
question the loyalty of others, and read hidden meaning into innocent
remarks.
Schizoid. These patients care little for social relationships, have a
restricted emotional range, and seem indifferent to criticism or praise.
Tending to be solitary, they avoid close (including sexual) relationships.
Schizotypal.* Such patients have so much difficulty with interpersonal
relationships that they appear peculiar or strange to others. Lacking close
friends, they are uncomfortable in social situations. They may show sus-
piciousness, unusual perceptions or thinking, an eccentric manner of
speaking, and inappropriate affect.
In considering these descriptions, we need to keep some points in
mind. For one, many people, perhaps the majority of our patients, have
distressing social problems that are not caused by a personality disor-
der. A tyrannical boss can create dissension at work; a psychotic spouse
wreaks havoc with a marriage. Chronic psychosis can alienate patients

-- 110 of 385 --

Personal and Social History 	95
from their families. Every day, kids use drugs, and the stock market swal-
lows someone’s savings. What I’m saying is that many problems people
face (and carry to mental health care providers, requesting help) must
be viewed through the lens of everyday experience; they represent a too-
often-ignored common boundary with normality.
We also need to make sure that a behavior pattern hasn’t been caused
by, say, a major health problem such as a mood disorder, substance mis-
use, or a medical condition. We protect against this sort of error by doing
a complete history and asking about other mental and behavior systems
during the information- gathering phase of evaluation.
The last point we must remember has to do with the limitations
inherent in a single interview, no matter how careful and extensive. Espe-
cially with personality disorder, the material we need for diagnosis may
be revealed only as time deepens our experience with each patient.

-- 111 of 385 --

96
C h a p t e r 	9
Sensitive Subjects
Summoning the courage to cover certain subjects can be a challenge.
Though the material itself is pretty straightforward, our society largely
regards these sensitive areas—sex, substance use, violence, and suicidal
behavior—as deeply personal. After all, questions about these topics
potentially threaten an individual’s self- esteem and sense of security. Con-
sequently, the patient may feel guilt or shame, whereas the interviewer
must cast aside a lifetime of habit, personal doubts, and perhaps bias.
I think it helps to realize that in the clinical interview, we essentially
redefine what’s acceptable in human interaction. In the role of patient,
people expect to be queried on topics that are ordinarily private, and
will freely disclose to an unfamiliar clinician information they’d withhold
even from close friends. In turn, we clinicians must steel ourselves to the
task of broaching topics that we might prefer not to explore in other situ-
ations.
Because these topics are critically important to every interview, if
your patient does not mention them spontaneously, you must introduce
them yourself. You may delay until the latter portions of the interview,
after you know the patient a little better, but don’t wait until the very end:
You could run out of time and still have important material yet to cover.
Any interviewer who ignores these areas risks committing serious clinical
errors.
SuiCidal Behavior
Delving into suicidal behavior is an absolute must. This rule holds even if
there has been no hint of death wishes or suicidal ideas at any time during
the interview. To violate the rule risks ignoring potentially life-threatening

-- 112 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	97
ideas and behaviors in a patient who may be too ashamed or too embar-
rassed to mention them spontaneously. Although the vast majority of
mental health patients do not kill themselves, nearly every mental health
diagnosis confers some degree of suicide risk beyond that found in the
general population.
When asking about suicidal behavior, you may feel some discomfort
of your own. Beginning interviewers sometimes worry that mentioning
this topic could plant the idea in a patient’s mind. The truth is that any
patient at serious risk for suicide will have considered it long before any-
one thinks to ask. The real risk lies in not asking soon enough. Then you
might learn only too late how gravely ill your patient really was.
If your patient raises the topic, you can pursue it with a degree of
comfort. If such an opening does not occur, it is vitally important that
you broach the question yourself. Unless your patient seems unusually
uncomfortable, you don’t need to precede these questions with apolo-
gies or explanations. Most patients will feel about as comfortable as you
appear to feel.
In the context of the mental health interview, it is perfectly all right
simply to ask:
“Have you ever had any thoughts of hurting or killing yourself?”
If the answer is “No,” and this seems to jibe with the patient’s mood and
recent behavior, you can accept it as simple fact and move on to another
topic. If the response is equivocal or delivered with telltale body language,
such as a hesitating manner or suddenly downcast gaze, you must pursue
the matter with further questioning. Studies show that more than 10% of
those who have attempted suicide will eventually die by suicide, and that
this risk can persist for decades after the initial attempt.
Of course, you must also be careful not to damage rapport. Should
your questioning seem to cause increasing discomfort (prolonged hesita-
tion, tears), you may need to comment on the distress:
“You look so sad that I hate to pursue this subject, but I really feel that
I must.”
To someone who has attempted suicide or has been otherwise violent, you
might say:
“Your recent experience makes me worry that you might try it again.
Has anything changed that might influence you one way or another?”
Some clinicians believe that patients may respond more truthfully if
you avoid the “S-word,” suicide. This seems a bit far-fetched to me, but if

-- 113 of 385 --

98 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
you wish, you can gradually work toward your goal with a series of increas-
ingly explicit questions:
1. “Have you been having any disturbing or gloomy thoughts?”
2. “Have any of these thoughts been desperate ones?”
3. “Have you ever wished you were dead?”
4. “Have you thought about harming yourself?”
5. “Have you made any plans to take your own life?”
6. “Have you ever made any actual attempts?”
It is important to expand upon a “Yes” answer to any of the questions
above by asking a suitable, open-ended follow-up question:
“Could you tell me some more about that?”
“What happened then?”
If the actual attempts occurred prior to this episode— sometimes in the
distant past—memories may be dim. But you should learn as much as you
can about previous attempts. The information will help you (1) predict
what your patient might do next, and (2) assess what actions you should
take. So get answers to these questions:
• How many previous attempts have there been?
• When did they occur?
• Where was the patient at the time?
• What was the patient’s mood at the time?
• What methods were used for the attempts?
• Was the attempt made under the influence of drugs or alcohol? (If
so, had there been other attempts when the patient was clean and
sober?)
• Did the patient have other mental symptoms at the time? (In addi-
tion to substance use, you especially should learn about depression
and psychosis.)
• What were the stressors that preceded the suicidal behavior? (Look
for such losses as separation or divorce, death of a loved one, job
loss, or retirement. However, any upsetting event in the life of the
patient or of a friend or relative could serve as a precipitant.)
• What kept the person from completing suicide in the past? (Family
considerations? Religious concerns?)
• How serious were the attempts?
Although studies demonstrate that those who actually follow through
and commit suicide are likely to have certain characteristics— classically,

-- 114 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	99
they are old, white, unmarried, jobless, physically ill men who drink and
have depression or psychosis—you cannot rely on the absence of any (or
even all) of these features to protect your patient from self-harm. Neither
can you rely on a “no-suicide” contract with the patient, the principal
effect of which may be to reduce your own anxiety.
Physical and Psychological Seriousness
We can judge the seriousness of a suicide attempt in each of two ways: (1)
How physically harmful was the attempt? (2) How strong was the patient’s
intent to die? An attempt that is serious either physically or psychologi-
cally increases the likelihood that this patient will commit suicide in the
future. When you are assessing a new patient for suicide potential, you
should have these guidelines in mind.
A suicide attempt is physically serious when it results (or could result)
in significant bodily harm. By this standard, a severed jugular vein, a
deep coma, or a gunshot wound to the chest would be a physically serious
attempt. So would be the ingestion of 100 tricyclic antidepressant tablets,
even if the patient’s stomach is pumped before coma sets in. Without
prompt medical attention, fewer than half that number of antidepressants
could be fatal.
At the other extreme are those attempts that are highly unlikely to
cause any serious harm, let alone death. They include such acts as lightly
scratching the wrist or swallowing four or five aspirin tablets. Such behav-
iors, which are sometimes called “gestures,” suggest that the patient had
in mind some purpose other than dying. In making this judgment, you set
aside the physical implications and consider the psychological seriousness
of the attempt, to learn what intention lay behind it. Was there a genuine
wish to die, or was it a cry for help? Here are some of the possible motives
for attempted suicide:
A genuine wish to die
The desire to attract help
Escape from some intolerable situation
Relief from mental distress
An attempt to influence someone’s attitude or behavior
Many patients who have made psychologically serious attempts can
clearly state their feelings:
“I’m sorry I didn’t succeed.”
“I’ll try it again.”

-- 115 of 385 --

100 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Others may be less clear, or perhaps ambivalent. You must ask them:
“What did you think would be the outcome of your overdose [or other
attempt]?”
For some, your best course could be to infer intention from behavior.
The patient who attempts suicide alone in a hotel room under an assumed
name is clearly more bent on self- destruction than is one whose attempt
occurs at home just before the expected return of a spouse.
Here are some other questions that can help you judge the psycho-
logical seriousness of intent:
“Did you impulsively decide to make the attempt, or had you been
planning it for a while?” Planning and preparation are usually associated
with more serious attempts.
“Before the attempt, had you written or revised a will, given away
property, or taken out life insurance?” Any of these behaviors suggests
serious plans.
“Did you write a suicide note?” More evidence of planning.
“Was someone with you when you made the attempt?” A “yes” answer
suggests that the patient had arranged a means of rescue.
“What did you do after you made the attempt?” (Lie down to wait for
the end? Call for help? Phone a suicide hotline?) Inaction should ring
an alarm.
“How did you feel when you were rescued?” “Angry” sounds more serious
than “relieved.”
You must correlate whatever you learn about these previous suicide
ideas and attempts with your patient’s current thinking on the subject.
It is vital to learn about ideas or plans that could prove lethal, especially
within the next few hours or days. Ask:
“Have you felt suicidal recently?”
“What have been your thoughts about it?”
“Have you made any plans?”
(If so:) “What are they?”
“Do you think you are likely to carry them out?”
“What has stopped you in the past?”
“When is it likely to happen?”

-- 116 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	101
“What effect do you think it would have on others?”
“Do you feel you have any reason to live?”
“Could anything make suicide seem less attractive?”
“Do you own a gun? Or have access to one?” (Of suicide attempts
made by firearms, 85% are fatal; only 2% of attempts made with pills
succeed.)
As a general rule, I avoid using the term manipulative in describing a
suicide attempt. For one thing, most patients who attempt (or complete)
suicide are somewhat ambivalent about their actions, so most attempts
are to varying degrees both sincere and cries for help. More important,
manipulative tends to cause clinicians and families alike to relax their
vigilance at a time when they may need it most.
Any current ideas or plans that could prove harmful require rapid
action. If you are a student, this means contacting the treating clinician at
once, to be certain that the patient’s thoughts and plans are fully known.
This action on your part is essential, even if it means violating a confi-
dence or promise of confidentiality you have made previously. Preventing
suicide and other harm to patients and those around them is an absolute duty
of every health care professional. To carry out this duty effectively, all clinicians
must feel confident that everyone who has contact with the patient will share vital
information. If you must break a confidence to ensure safety of a patient or the
public, be assured that the vast majority of patients will not blame you for your
action. In fact, most patients later feel grateful for such a life- saving “betrayal.”
violence and iTs prevenTion
Violence toward others is relatively uncommon, but because of its serious
implications for patients and for intended victims, it’s at least as impor-
tant to learn about as is suicidal behavior. Keep in mind that it is vital to
assess not just current thoughts and ideas, but the history of violent ideas
and behaviors as well. Hence the usual form of these questions is “Have
you ever [had thoughts of harming another person]?”
If your patient admits to legal difficulties such as arrests or time in
confinement, you will have a natural lead-in to questions about violence.
Much violence is domestic, so another good time to inquire is when you
learn that the patient is divorced or has been a partner in a troubled mar-
riage. (Don’t neglect to learn about beatings or other mistreatment that
the patient might have received from a domestic partner.)
If no natural lead-in occurs, you will have to raise the subject. As with
self-harm, you can work up to it gradually:

-- 117 of 385 --

102 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
1. “Have you ever had feelings of uncontrollable rage?”
2. “Have you had any thoughts about harming others?”
3. “Have you ever had trouble controlling your impulses?”
4. “As an adult, have you ever been involved in fights?”
5. “Have you ever brandished a weapon in anger?”
6. “Were you ever arrested for fighting or for other violent behav-
ior?”
Positive answers must be explored:
“What were the circumstances of the violent [thoughts, acts]?”
“When did they occur?”
“Who was involved?”
“How did you feel about this?”
“Did the behavior involve substance use?”
“What was the effect on the other person?”
“What happened to you as a result?”
“Were you arrested?”
“Were you convicted?”
“How much time did you serve?”
Phillip Resnick notes that when interviewing a patient who has per-
secutory ideas, you may get little response from a generic “Have you had
thoughts of harming anyone?” because, under ordinary circumstances,
this person may indeed have no such ideas. But if the person is faced with
the hypothetical prospect of confronting the imagined persecutor, under-
lying feelings may surface. Ask instead, “Suppose [an FBI agent, your
brother-in-law] parked in front of your house and rang the bell. What
would you do then?” The answer may reveal the potential result of your
patient’s antipathy.
In all instances, try to understand what lies behind your patient’s
violent ideas or behavior, and what might be causing these feelings. You
might find, for example:
Anger at a motorist who has damaged the patient’s car
Depression that results from genetic inheritance plus heavy drinking
Envy of a co-worker who has won a coveted promotion to vice-president
Frustration that the Internal Revenue Service continues to send dun-
ning notices for an assessment the patient has already paid

-- 118 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	103
Greed when confronted with the possibility of inheriting a large estate
Hatred for an ex- spouse
Revenge for a sister’s death at the hands of a mugger
A temptation for anyone, including a highly experienced clinician,
who interviews a potentially violent patient is to become immersed in
obtaining the relevant information, to the exclusion of all other consider-
ations. The principal one of these should be personal safety. I don’t mean
to alarm anyone; your risk from any given patient is small. Yet one survey
found that over half of mental health professionals had been threatened
or assaulted by a patient within the previous year. Years ago, I was the tar-
get of a battering patient, and it is something I’ll go a long way to prevent
happening again. In a nutshell, here’s how to set about it.
1. Ensure that you have an unimpeded escape route from the room
where you are working. This means that there should be no one and noth-
ing between you and the exit.
2. Make sure that someone is within earshot or can instantly answer
a warning buzzer or other alarm.
3. Be especially alert when your patient has a prior history of vio-
lence; the recidivism rate for assault is sky-high. The danger is especially
great for a patient who should be taking antipsychotic drugs, but isn’t.
4. Keep alert to the nuances of voice (rising pitch or tempo), words
(threats and insults), and body language (narrowed gaze, agitated pacing,
a clenched fist) that could signal imminent action.
5. As soon as you sense danger, act. You’ll need to put aside your
usual instincts about soothing the patient (no leaning close to provide
comfort, no touching for reassurance). Instead, announce calmly what
you’re about to do—“Mr. Smyth, I’m getting up and walking to the door”—
a verbal warning to avert sudden alarm in a startled patient. Then do just
as you’ve promised.
6. Once you are out of the room, get help from anyone who is avail-
able: other staff, building security, or police.
As for your office, every inpatient or outpatient facility should have
a set of emergency procedures to serve as the basis for drills. The details
will involve deciding who calls 911, who shows up at the door to answer
any sort of alarm, and how to present a show of force in a manner that is
as casual and nonthreatening as possible under the circumstances.

-- 119 of 385 --

104 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
suBsTance misuse
At least 1 of every 13 adult Americans has a problem with substance mis-
use. The figure is even higher among mental health patients, of whom
perhaps 25% misuse substances, and much higher in some specialized
clinics. Some experience with substances that can be misused has become
almost a rite of passage for American teenagers. It is so common— and its
effects upon patient and environment can be so far-reaching—that sub-
stance use must be covered in the initial interview of every mental health
patient, regardless of sex, age, or presenting complaint.
Alcohol
Despite the educational efforts of mental health professionals and Twelve-
Step organizations like Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), many people still
view substance misuse as a moral failing. As a result, patients and inter-
viewers alike find this issue difficult to discuss. Perhaps you can find a
natural lead-in. Some family history might tip you off.
PatIent: So you can see, my childhood was nearly ruined by Mom’s
drinking.
I ntervIewer: Sounds pretty difficult, all right. And what about you—
do you do any drinking yourself?
Just at that moment it might be inconvenient to change course, as this
interviewer did, and pursue a new subject. You might instead decide to
keep on eliciting childhood history and later refer back to what the patient
said about family history:
I ntervIewer: A few minutes ago you mentioned your mother’s drink-
ing. It made me wonder—have you ever been a heavy drinker
yourself?
If your patient doesn’t raise the subject of drug and alcohol use, you
will have to create your own opportunity. Alcohol is more socially accept-
able than other substances, so you can ask about it with less risk of embar-
rassment. Assume that your patient, like most adults, is no teetotaler. You
will be right more often than not, and the assumption of some drinking
may ease the stigma if your patient’s drinking has been excessive. Find out
how often and how much your patient drinks:
“Now I’d like to know about some of your habits. First, in an average
month, on how many days do you have at least one drink of alcohol?”

-- 120 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	105
Note how the form of this question requests a precise answer, framed in
terms of days per month. This discourages vague or evasive answers such
as “Not very much” or “Only on social occasions.” (You can count the
following drinks as having roughly the same alcohol content: a 12-ounce
beer, a 6-ounce glass of wine, and a 1-ounce shot of 80-proof hard liquor.)
Next you might ask:
“On the average day that you have at least one drink, how many drinks
do you usually have?”
These two numbers— drinks per day and days per month—allow you to
calculate your patient’s average number of drinks per month. As you do
more interviews, you will develop a feel for what is usual and what is exces-
sive. More than 60 drinks per month (2 per day, on average) is worrisome;
more than 100 per month is far above the norm. But even a number below
60 can suggest a drinking problem if many of the drinks are consumed
over just a few individual days: Binge drinking is one of the possible pat-
terns of substance misuse.
Even if the patient denies current heavy drinking, learn how much
drinking there has been in the past. Has the patient been a lifelong tee-
totaler, or is this a recent change? (“I don’t touch alcohol” may mean “I
haven’t had a drink since Sunday. For breakfast.”) Ask:
“Was there ever a time in your life when you used alcohol more heavily
than you do now?”
Obtain follow-up information about days per month, drinks per day, and
the reasons for stopping.
Alcoholism (DSM-5 now calls it alcohol use disorder) is a condition
defined by its consequences. The amount a person consumes is an impor-
tant clue, but the diagnosis itself depends on the effects of drinking on
the individual, as well as on the effects the individual then has on other
people. Therefore, unless your patient denies ever having a problem with
drinking, you will need to ask questions about several categories of con-
sequences.
For medical problems, ask:
“Has drinking caused you to have liver trouble, vomiting spells, or
other medical problems?”
“Were you ever told to quit drinking because of your health? And did
you?”
“Have you ever suffered from blackouts? This means that the morning
after drinking, you can’t remember what happened the night before.”

-- 121 of 385 --

106 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
(As demonstrated in this question, be sure to define what you mean
by blackout—some patients won’t know the term.)
One criterion for alcohol (or any substance) use disorder is consum-
ing more than the patient intends. This is sometimes difficult to evaluate—
especially with teenagers, who aren’t known for setting limits, but rather
drink for the effect it provides. Instead, try to ascertain loss of control:
“Have you ever tried to quit drinking?”
“Have you ever set rules about drinking, such as ‘Never drink before
four in the afternoon?’ ”
“Do you ever gulp drinks?”
“Once you take your first drink, do you have trouble stopping?”
For personal and interpersonal problems, ask:
“Do you sometimes feel guilty about how much you drink?”
“Have you ever gotten into fights when drinking?”
“Has drinking ever caused a divorce or other serious domestic prob-
lems?”
“Has it lost you friends?”
For job problems, ask:
“Has drinking ever caused you to be absent from work? Late to work?”
“Have you ever been fired from a job because of drinking?”
For legal problems, ask:
“Have you ever been arrested for alcohol-related behavior?”
“Have you had any arrests for driving while intoxicated?” (If so, find
out what happened in court.)
“Have you ever caused an accident while driving under the influence?”
For financial problems, ask:
“Have you ever spent money on alcohol that should have gone for
necessities like food?”
“Have you had any other financial difficulties because of drinking?”

-- 122 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	107
If a question in any of these categories yields a positive response, ask:
“Have you ever been concerned about your drinking?”
“Have you ever thought that you might be an alcoholic?”
“What has been your longest period of sobriety?”
“How did you achieve that?”
“Were you ever treated for the use of alcohol?”
“What happened as a result of treatment?”
Street Drugs
With street drugs, the procedure is similar. Your questions about alcohol
use will lead naturally into this subject. Ask:
“Have you ever tried street drugs of any sort?”
When you are speaking of substance use, the word tried may carry
less stigma than used. As with alcohol misuse, you will want to learn when
use (it’s hard to avoid that word) began, when it ended (if ever), and why
the patient stopped using. Define the type of drug; the frequency of use;
and the effects of use on the patient, friends, and relatives.
One problem you might encounter is not knowing the slang termi-
nology for drugs commonly misused. If you don’t understand a term,
just ask; patients love to teach their care providers. I’ve listed a few of the
terms you might hear used, but there are hundreds more. You can find
many of them on the Internet (see, for example, www.njlawman.com/fea-
ture%20pieces/drug%20slang.htm).
Hypnotics: downers, ludes, yellow jackets, tranks, reds, rainbows,
Christmas trees
Cocaine: snow, coke, rock, crack
Hallucinogens: LSD, acid, PCP (phencyclidine), mescaline, peyote,
STP
Narcotics: H, horse, smack, junk (heroin); schoolboy (codeine); little
D (Dilaudid [hydromorphone]); Miss Emma (morphine)
Marijuana: pot, grass, tea, hash, joint, reefer, Mary Jane
Central nervous system stimulants: uppers, bennies, black beauties,
crank, speed

-- 123 of 385 --

108 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Special names may be used by various ethnic groups or in diverse parts
of the country, and the terminology is fluid, changing as new cohorts of
users come of age.
Prescribed or Over‑the‑Counter Medications
Don’t forget to inquire into overuse of medicines:
“Have you ever taken more of a prescription medication than your
doctor prescribed?”
“Which over-the- counter drugs do you use?” (Nearly everyone uses
something.)
Again, you need to know when, what, how much, and what the effects
were.
And for any substance, you’d like to know the answer to this ques-
tion: “What does it do for you that causes you to keep using it?”
sexual liFe
As a part of consulting a mental health professional, patients expect ques-
tions about sex. However, this line of questioning makes some people feel
uncomfortable, so you could be better off delaying it until later in the
interview. By then you will be better acquainted with the patient, who may
view these sensitive issues in the context of other necessary psychological,
medical, and social information.
To learn about this important life area, you must be able to discuss
it openly, without showing disapproval or censure. Clinicians in training
often have difficulty questioning patients about their sex lives. Sometimes
this is due to an unfamiliarity with the questions that should be asked, but
it may relate to personal standards of sexual conduct—which in turn are
the results of upbringing and culture. Here it is vital to recognize your
own standards and acknowledge that your patient has the right to a dif-
ferent set. And because a frank discussion of sex can be titillating to both
parties, the sexual history is an area where, more than ever, you need a
firm grip on your professional boundaries.
During the present illness or the personal and social history, you may
have already learned something about the relationship between patient
and partner that provides a natural introduction to the subject of sex. If
this has not happened, or if the patient has no current partner, a straight-
forward request for information is in order. An open-ended question will
provide both comfort for you and scope for the patient to respond:

-- 124 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	109
“Now I would like you to tell me about your sexual functioning.”
The form of this question assumes that most people have sex, and that
this is acceptable and normal.
If the first response is a question of the patient’s own (“How do you
mean?”), you might elaborate as follows:
“I’m trying to learn two things. First, how is your sexual functioning
usually? And second, how has it been affected by the problem that
brought you into treatment?”
Note that this speech, which deliberately breaks the rule about not asking
two questions at once, tells the patient the scope of what you are trying
to learn.
The ensuing discussion should give you the following sorts of infor-
mation:
At what age did the patient first learn about sex?
What was the nature of early sexual experiences?
At what age did they occur?
How did the patient react to them?
Sexual Preference
Some mental health clinicians prefer to start their inquiries about sex
with a straightforward question:
“What is your sexual preference?”
This approach has the virtue of (usually) eliciting a clear answer early, and
therefore avoiding the possibility of embarrassing misunderstandings
later. Be careful not to assume that a patient in a heterosexual relation-
ship has no history of homosexuality.
For anyone with such a history, you should try to learn:
Is the patient bisexual or exclusively homosexual?
If the latter, about what percentage of sexual encounters are hetero-
sexual?
Does the patient find this sexual orientation comfortable (ego-
syntonic) or uncomfortable (ego- dystonic)?

-- 125 of 385 --

110 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
How well has the patient integrated sexual orientation with lifestyle?
Has the patient wanted or attempted to change sexual orientation?
Although reports of dreams are usually not rewarding in an initial inter-
view, the presence of homosexual fantasies can sometimes help in the
evaluation of patients who seem unclear as to their basic orientation.
Sexual Practices
When there is a history of sexual difficulty, a great many questions should
be asked that you wouldn’t routinely explore. Use your common sense;
often questions of this nature can be safely postponed until later. Once
you have assured yourself that the patient and partner are happy together
and function well sexually, you can probably make do with a general ques-
tion:
“Have there been any issues of a sexual nature that we haven’t yet
talked about?”
In the event of sexual dysfunction, however, some of the following
issues will be appropriate for discussion:
• Has the sexual problem been lifelong, or was it recently acquired?
• What are the current sleeping arrangements?
• Have there been problems with intercourse? (Do they necessitate
abstinence?)
• Is sex pleasurable for the patient?
• What about for the partner? (Until sex preference and practices
are known, you are safer using “partner” than a gender- specific
noun.) Women are much more likely than men to report lack of sexual
pleasure.
• If the patient is married or in a long-term relationship, have there
been outside affairs? If so, how many? How often? How recent?
• Does the couple communicate clearly about sex?
• What is the frequency of sexual relations? Has this changed
recently, or with age?
• Who usually initiates sex?
• Are the partners hesitant to approach one another for sex, perhaps
due to other interpersonal problems?
• Does the couple use foreplay? How long does it last? What consti-
tutes foreplay? (Talking? Kissing? Genital touching?) Because many
men do not realize that arousal takes longer for a woman than for a man,

-- 126 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	111
their female partners may report that foreplay is too brief and that inter-
course itself is unsatisfying.
• If oral sex is practiced, are both partners enthusiastic about it?
• How often does the patient achieve climax? Anorgasmia (lack of
climax) is fairly common among women, who may nevertheless experi-
ence strong sex desire. Some can achieve climax only under certain cir-
cumstances, such as with masturbation. As with sexual interest, ability
to achieve climax may be decreased by illness (physical or mental) and
anxiety.
• How often does the patient masturbate? Does this represent a
problem for either the patient or the partner?
• What method of birth control (if any) does the couple use? Do the
partners agree about the timing or prevention of conception?
• Have there been sex partners outside the current relationship?
• Has either partner had any history of sexually transmitted disease?
Common Sexual Issues
Sexual functioning comprises the areas of desire, arousal, and orgasm.
Even if desire seems to have waned, does the patient still have sexual
thoughts or fantasies? Be alert for several relatively common sexual prob-
lems:
Impotence (inability to achieve or maintain erection). How long ago
did it start? Is it total or partial? Does it occur only with specific part-
ners? Has it been medically investigated? Treated? Note that impo-
tence is quite different from lack of sexual desire.
Dyspareunia (pain with intercourse). Common in women, it’s a condi-
tion men rarely report. Its cause can be biological or emotional. Is it
pronounced enough to interfere with sexual functioning or pleasure?
Premature ejaculation. When a man too quickly reaches the stage of
ejaculatory inevitability (to use the Masters and Johnson term), both
partners can experience frustration and lack of pleasure.
Delayed ejaculation. This can be the result of emotional factors, such
as guilt, or of certain medications. The classic example is thioridazine
(Mellaril), which has even been used to treat premature ejaculation.
Concerns about possible homosexuality or bisexuality. Whereas such
behavior may be important for the patient, and so constitute legiti-
mate grounds for investigation by a mental health clinician, it is
important to make patients aware that it is not considered an illness,
rather a variety of normal sexual preference.

-- 127 of 385 --

112 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
When you are learning about the patient’s sexual life, ask for specific
instances in which the problem arose. If technique seems to be the issue,
ask for a description in behavioral terms: “First I . . . then she does . . . but
that usually doesn’t work, so we . . . ” As with a nonsexual problem, find
out when it began, how often and under what circumstances it occurs,
how severe it is (is it getting worse?), what has been done about it, and
what seems to help.
Paraphilias
Relatively less common are the paraphilias, which comprise a number of
behaviors in which the patient is aroused by a stimulus other than a con-
senting adult human, or by the humiliation or suffering of the patient or
sexual partner. The diagnosis of a paraphilic disorder (as distinct from a
paraphilic behavior) is made only when the desire has occurred repeat-
edly for least 6 months and when the patient has acted on the urge or
has been markedly distressed by it. Almost all such patients are men, and
many report having several of these types of urge, which can interfere
with the ability to enjoy normal sexual and love relationships. The specific
paraphilic disorders are as follows:
Exhibitionistic disorder. These patients have fantasies and urges that
involve the sudden exposure of their genitals to an unsuspecting
stranger, usually a female. Patients who act upon these fantasies usu-
ally neither attempt physical contact with the victim nor pose physical
danger.
Fetishistic disorder. Fetishists are sexually aroused by inanimate
objects— often shoes or women’s underwear, which are used by the
patients themselves or are worn by a partner during sexual activity.
Frotteuristic disorder. Frotteurs are aroused by touching or rubbing
against a nonconsenting person. Frottage usually takes place in a
crowd and may involve contact through clothing with hands or geni-
tals.
Pedophilic disorder. These patients have sexual fantasies and urges
about young children (usually age 13 or under). Most pedophiles pre-
fer girls, but some are aroused by boys or by children of either gen-
der. The disorder is usually chronic and may involve various sexual
activities, including looking, undressing, and physical contact.
Sexual masochism disorder. The sexual fantasies and behaviors of
these patients involve being beaten, bound, or otherwise humili-
ated or made to suffer. In extreme cases, death from suffocation can
result.

-- 128 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	113
Sexual sadism disorder. These patients are sexually aroused by inflict-
ing physical or psychological pain on other persons, who may be
either consenting or nonconsenting. Such behavior may increase
over time, sometimes resulting in severe injury and even death.
Transvestic disorder. These patients are sexually aroused by cross-
dressing. Although the DSM-5 criteria are gender-neutral, only males
with transvestic disorder have been reported.
Voyeuristic disorder. Voyeurs (“peeping Toms”) are aroused by watch-
ing an unsuspecting person who is nude, in the act of disrobing, or
having sex.
Other paraphilic disorders. Other paraphilic disorders include sexual
arousal from animals, body excretions, cadavers, and “talking dirty”
on the telephone.
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
For all patients, be alert for a history of sexually transmitted diseases,
including herpes, syphilis, and gonorrhea. Especially ask about risk fac-
tors for HIV/AIDS: multiple sex partners, sex with persons who use drugs
intravenously, or homosexual relationships. If any answer is “Yes,” you’ll
need to ask whether condoms are used. If so, what percentage of the
time? Has the patient ever been tested for HIV? If so, how recently? What
were the results?
sexual aBuse
Childhood Molestation
A history of childhood sexual experience is distressingly common, espe-
cially among mental health patients. Yet this area is often left unexplored,
even by experienced clinicians. Childhood sexual experiences have been linked
to many adult disorders described in DSM-5, including borderline personality
disorder, eating disorders, dissociative identity disorder, and somatic symptom
disorder (or, as I prefer to continue calling it, somatization disorder).
Even if none of these conditions is present, memories of early sexual
behavior may present concerns that require discussion and reassurance.
Therefore, you must ask. But do so in a way that avoids such loaded terms
as molestation and rape:
“When you were a child, were you ever approached for sex by another
child or by an adult?”
“Have you at any time in your life been coerced into having sex?”

-- 129 of 385 --

114 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Any positive answer should be explored thoroughly. In particular, obtain
the following details:
What actually happened?
Was there physical contact?
How old was the patient then?
How many times did the incidents occur?
Who was the perpetrator?
Was there a blood relationship between perpetrator and patient?
How did the patient react to the incident(s)?
Were the parents told?
How did they respond?
How have these incidents affected the patient, either during child-
hood or as an adult?
An occasional patient will give equivocal answers such as “I’m not
sure,” or “I really can’t remember much about my childhood.” Such a
response should alert you that somewhere in your patient’s background
may lie experiences too distressing to be tolerated as conscious memory.
Further probing at this time probably won’t uncover much additional
information, but do try to identify as exactly as possible the interval that
has been forgotten (“ages 6 through 12” or “throughout junior high”). It
may help later with the memory recovery process.
This is one time when you should probably not alert your patient
that you will return to the subject later. A promise to pursue long-buried
traumatic memories may seem threatening and could interfere with the
rapport you are trying to build. Instead, say:
“It sounds as if you have some doubt about this area. That’s all right—
nobody remembers everything from childhood. But if anything
about early sexual experiences comes back to you later, I’d like to
hear about it. It could be important.”
Do make a careful note to return to the subject in a later interview, when
you’re sure your relationship is on solid ground.
Rape and Spouse Abuse
For decades (at least), the crime of rape has been seriously underre-
ported. This fact is probably explained by victims’ feelings of shame and
embarrassment and their fear of notoriety. With the publicity of “celebrity

-- 130 of 385 --

Sensitive Subjects 	115
rape” trials and our enhanced understanding of victim psychology, these
attitudes may have lessened somewhat in recent years. Nonetheless, it
remains all too common that patients (the vast majority of them female)
have as adults suffered rape or other forms of sexual abuse. (The U.S.
military reported that sexual assault increased by 43% in 2012–2013 over
the 12 months before.) Mental health interviewers must be able to draw
forth the information needed to determine the best course of action for
these patients, many of whom have been severely traumatized by their
experiences.
Usually the preferred first approach is a sympathetic, unstructured
invitation to describe the events and their consequences:
“Please tell me about these experiences.”
With gentle, probing questions, you should then try to obtain the follow-
ing information:
What were the circumstances? (Surroundings? Patient’s age?)
Who was the perpetrator? (Relative? Acquaintance? Stranger? Gang?)
How many times did it occur?
Did the patient know the perpetrator?
Were they related?
Was the use of alcohol or drugs involved? If so, by whom?
What emotional reactions did the patient have at the time?
Who has been told?
Has the story been heard sympathetically?
Has legal action been taken? If not, why not?
What have been the lingering effects of the experiences? (Look for
fear, anger, shame, anxiety, depression, and symptoms of posttrau-
matic stress.)
Similar multiple emotions can be evoked by sexual and physical
abuse from spouses. Victims may also be reluctant to report this crime
for fear of reprisals, such as further abuse or abandonment.

-- 131 of 385 --

116
C h a p t e r 	1 0
Control of the Later Interview
During most of the early interview, you have encouraged your patient
to discuss problems freely. By the time you move on to the personal and
social history, you will need to exercise more control over the form of
your interview. This will enable you to use your time efficiently to cover
all the material and probe the important remaining areas. A number of
verbal and nonverbal techniques can help direct the patient’s responses
and maximize the amount of material you obtain.
take Charge
Some patients take direction so well that you can exercise control just by
gently interjecting an occasional guiding question. Patients who are cir-
cumstantial or perhaps just plain talkative will need more active measures
of control. Those with manic pressure of speech or psychotic suspicious-
ness may require frequent redirection.
Of course, you will have to temper your own verbal output. Novice
interviewers must be especially wary: Anxiety sometimes causes them to
speak too often or at excessive length. Remember that the main purpose
of your questions and interventions is to facilitate the flow of information
from the patient. In order to occupy as little time as possible with explana-
tions, state your questions clearly and succinctly.
With the need to cover so much ground, you may not be able to
respond as completely as you would like to issues your patient raises. For
example, on hearing that your patient was teased as a child, your natu-
ral impulse may be to sympathize and ask for examples, effects, and the

-- 132 of 385 --

Control of the Later Interview 	117
patient’s reactions. But perhaps it is late in the session, and you still must
uncover any history of sexual abuse. You may have to defer some of these
natural responses until another session. For now, you could briefly sym-
pathize and then indicate your interest by asking about other childhood
traumas you want to investigate anyway.
PatIent: . . . so I felt that I was the butt of every schoolyard joke and
prank.
I ntervIewer: That sort of experience can really make a kid miser-
able. Did you have other sorts of distressing problems as a child?
For example, did anyone ever approach you about sex?
You should try to avoid abrupt transitions, which can impair rapport.
Instead, try one of these techniques:
• You can change the subject with more grace if you first make an
empathic comment, as did the interviewer in the example above.
• Stop taking notes and put down your pen. If you continue to write,
your patient may feel encouraged to continue talking about the
same subject.
• If you must interrupt, try raising your forefinger (raising an entire
hand seems peremptory) and taking a breath to signal that you
need a turn to speak.
• Try moving quickly to get in a word between two of your patient’s
sentences. Although this requires vigilance and some verbal dex-
terity, it usually works well, especially if you manage to intervene at
the end of a thought.
• If your patient brings up something that you already have covered
sufficiently, indicate the need for a change of direction:
“I’d like to hear more about that later, if we have time. For now,
let’s talk instead about . . . ”
“I think I understand about your insomnia. But has your appe-
tite changed any?” (Notice that asking a “yes–no” question sug-
gests that now you’d like a short answer.)
“I need to interrupt here to ask about something else that’s
important . . . ”
• Nod or smile when you do get the sort of brief answer you want.
This reinforcement will encourage further brevity.
But some patients simply don’t respond well to hints. For some-
one who continues to ramble, you may have to be more direct. A good
approach is to state clearly your needs and your proposed solution:

-- 133 of 385 --

118 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“For me to help you best, it’s important that we cover a lot of ground.
That means we’ll have to move on now to another area.”
“Our time is getting a little short . . . ”
“Let’s stick with the main topic . . . ”
You may have to indicate the new direction more than once before
an especially talkative patient gets the message. But keep at it—you must
obtain all of your diagnostic material.
closed‑ended QuesTions
For the earlier portions of the interview, I’ve recommended open-ended
questions, because they help patients communicate with greater clarity
and scope. Later in the interview, when you know what sort of specific
information may be relevant to diagnosis and therapy, closed- ended ques-
tions work especially well.
Closed-ended questions are those that can be answered “Yes” or
“No,” or that request a specific answer (such as a number, the patient’s
place of birth, or another fact such as a name or the duration of a mar-
riage). They allow you to pin down diagnostic criteria and clarify previous
responses, so you obtain the specifics of your patient’s problems. They
also discourage evasiveness on the part of a patient who would like to
hold back certain information. In addition, they will help you ascertain
significant negatives, such as the absence of sexual problems or psychosis;
from open-ended questions alone, you might not learn that your patient
doesn’t have these symptoms.
Another closed- ended technique is to substitute a multiple- choice
request when your patient can’t answer a question that is less well defined:
I ntervIewer: For about how long have you been using cocaine?
PatIent: Well, I . . . that is . . . uh, I don’t know exactly.
I ntervIewer: Well, has it been 1 week or 2, or more like 6 months,
or perhaps a year or more?
PatIent: Oh, it’s been over a year. Maybe 3 years, anyway.
You should also be aware of the potential drawbacks of closed- ended
questions. Patients who are more verbal may resent closed- ended ques-
tions if they think you care more about the process of getting the informa-
tion than you do about the person who is supplying it. Also, the “yes–no”
format denies patients the chance to give a gradient of response. The
answer you get could mislead rather than educate you. Here is an unfor-
tunate example:

-- 134 of 385 --

Control of the Later Interview 	119
I ntervIewer: Did you have problems relating to your father when
you were a child?
PatIent: (Thinking, “Let’s see, I couldn’t stand the Old Man, so I
never paid any attention to what he said. I guess the answer I can
give is . . . ”) No.
Closed-ended questions can be valuable, but you should avoid sug-
gesting how you would like your patient to answer. Such leading questions
broadly hint that there are certain standards or behaviors you approve of.
A leading question severely limits the scope and validity of the informa-
tion you will obtain. For example, don’t indicate your idea of “average”:
I ntervIewer: How much alcohol do you drink?
PatIent: Oh, I’d say it’s about average.
I ntervIewer: Two or three times a week?
PatIent: Well, sure.
A better response for this interviewer would have been “What is ‘average’
for you?” In fact, beware of any leading formulation that suggests what
you regard as normal. Instead of “Is your relationship with your father a
good one?” try the open-ended “How do you get along with your father?”
Closed-ended questions may actually inhibit some patients from
responding fully. This is why you should mostly use them later in the
interview, after you have built rapport and your patient has developed
the habit of giving full responses. Because they require you to do a larger
share of the talking, closed- ended questions give the patient more time
to screen out replies that are embarrassing or that seem “irrelevant.” In
consequence, the information you gather could prove false or incomplete.
Nevertheless, this highly structured style of requesting information
may be appropriate for someone who isn’t used to the interview process
or who has limited verbal skills. This will apply especially to patients with
severe mental illnesses, such as cognitive disorders or untreated schizo-
phrenia; to some who have subnormal intellectual abilities; and to those
who, for a variety of reasons, are reluctant to be interviewed in the first
place. Such patients may require extensive use of “yes–no” questions.
Regardless of how far you have progressed in the interview, you will
probably succeed best if you continue to use a mixture of open- and closed-
ended questions. For example, after you have obtained a string of rapid-
fire answers that confirm a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, you might
relieve the monotony (and tension) by asking something open-ended:
“That was a lot of questions. Now perhaps you could tell me how you
plan to deal with your drinking in the future.”

-- 135 of 385 --

120 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
By combining styles, you can obtain detailed, structured informa-
tion, as well as encourage your patient to generate important new mate-
rial; the combination of styles should help you obtain material that has
maximum validity.
sensiTiviTY Training
It is important to remember that highly structured questioning needn’t
(and shouldn’t) be abrasive or otherwise unpleasant. You can soften any
question with a sympathetic facial expression or tone of voice. But you
should also phrase your requests so as to help your patient talk about a
variety of sensitive issues:
“I realize that your wife’s death makes it hard for you to talk about her.”
(This comment acknowledges that the topic is important enough to
pursue, despite the patient’s obvious distress.)
“How do you think other people would deal with a daughter who’s
gotten into trouble with the law?” (By asking how others might react
or feel, you may be able to reduce your patient’s sense of personal
involvement and responsibility. This particular expression also sug-
gests that the patient is not alone in suffering from this sort of expe-
rience. The result could be information that you would otherwise
miss.)
“What if the police picked you up for drinking—how would you feel?”
(Using supposition, you can help your patient achieve some distance
from an emotionally charged situation.)
“Have you ever had the opportunity to tell your wife you were sorry
for hitting her?” (Here you soften the question by suggesting that
chance might have prevented some praiseworthy action that your
patient should have taken, but didn’t.)
TransiTions
Effective interviewing isn’t just asking one question after another. You
must also pay attention to the overall coherence of what you and the
patient are saying. The sentence or phrase you use to get from one topic
to the next is called a transition. Because it points the way to where you
are going, a careful transition keeps the patient from feeling herded along
your path. Transitions also help tie the entire story together.
The best transitions are couched in language that flows naturally,
as in a conversation. Try to let each question take off from a portion of

-- 136 of 385 --

Control of the Later Interview 	121
the previous answer. Whenever possible, use the patient’s own words as a
vehicle for exploration:
PatIent: . . . so our finances really changed for the better when my
wife got a full-time job.
I ntervIewer: And what about your relationship— did it change after
your wife got a full-time job?
Interviews can’t always proceed in a linear fashion. If you are discuss-
ing important topic A when B is mentioned, your interview could become
scattered unless you get closure on A before moving on. Later, if you rein-
troduce B by referring to your patient’s earlier statement, you will have
made a smooth transition. For example:
“A few minutes ago you mentioned that the depression seems to get
better when you drink alcohol. Could you tell me some more about
the drinking?”
You can use any common factor—time, place, family relationships, a
job—to smooth the flow of the conversation:
PatIent: . . . so it was just after my brother left for Iraq that my
mother died.
I ntervIewer: And what were you doing at that time?
No one likes to be given the third degree; patients are no exception.
You should therefore try to make your interview feel like a conversation,
not an interrogation. Smooth transitions help to create that feeling. But
when you have to make an abrupt transition, flag it so the patient realizes
that you are changing gears intentionally:
“I think I’ve got a good picture of your drinking. Now I’d like to move
on to something different. Could you tell me whether you’ve ever had
problems with other substances, such as marijuana or cocaine?”
Once you and your patient have become accustomed to one another, you
will probably find that a single word, appropriately emphasized, can sig-
nal a change of topics:
“Now, please tell me what happened when you and your husband were
cooking and selling methamphetamine.”
The one time you may feel tempted to make a fairly abrupt transi-
tion is if your patient becomes angry or anxious. Even then, you should

-- 137 of 385 --

122 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
attempt to smooth the transition by acknowledging the shift—and the
patient’s right to whatever upset feelings you may have inadvertently elic-
ited. For example:
“I can see that it’s pretty upsetting to talk about how your wife ran off
with her lover. I don’t blame you. It’s an area we can easily skip for
now. Instead, let me ask you some more about your new girlfriend.”
And of course, if it is your patient who abruptly changes the subject,
you should try to learn why.

-- 138 of 385 --

123
c h a p T e r 	1 1
Mental Status Exam I:
Behavioral Aspects
whaT is The menTal sTaTus exam?
The mental status exam (MSE) is simply your assessment of the patient’s
current mental functioning. Originally a part of the traditional neuro-
logical exam, now it is a staple of the initial mental health evaluation.
This and the following chapter discuss the complete MSE. The amount
and type of material presented here may seem daunting at first, but once
learned, it becomes automatic and easy to cover in a few minutes.
The MSE is usually divided into several parts. They can be arranged
in many different ways. Arrange your MSE any way you wish, as long as
you cover all the parts. Your best bet is to choose a format, memorize it,
and perform your MSE the same way every time until it has become sec-
ond nature.
The following format has worked well for many professionals. It is
based on the fact that the MSE includes two large areas: behavioral and
cognitive.
Behavioral Aspects
To obtain the behavioral material, you don’t have to ask special questions
or perform tests. Mostly you just observe speech and behavior while you
are talking with your patient (except in the area of mood, which requires
a few questions). The behavioral aspects are as follows:
1. General appearance and behavior
2. Mood
3. Flow of thought

-- 139 of 385 --

124 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Cognitive Aspects
The cognitive portions of the MSE are concerned with what your patient
is thinking (talking) about. Their evaluation demands more activity on
your part. They include the following:
1. Content of thought
2. Perception
3. Cognition
4. Insight and judgment
The cognitive aspects will be described in Chapter 12.
I will define and explain the standard terms you need to know. Italics
will indicate how you might interpret this information. However, remem-
ber these two facts: Many different interpretations may be possible, and
isolated bits of even quite unusual behavior may be completely normal.
Throughout your interview, you should be constantly evaluating what you
observe of your patient’s present behavior against what the history would
lead you to expect.
general appearance and Behavior
You can learn a great deal about a patient just by watching. Most of the
following are characteristics that you should begin to notice first thing in
your interview, even before anyone says a word.
Physical Characteristics
What is your patient’s ethnicity? Various studies suggest that Hispanic
patients report symptoms differently from Anglos. Some diagnoses are more com-
mon among, for example, Native Americans. Any patient may have difficulty
relating to a clinician of a different ethnicity.
How old would you say this person is? Does apparent age jibe with
stated age? Age can suggest certain diagnoses. Eating disorders and schizophre-
nia are more likely in a young patient (late teens to mid-30s), whereas symptoms
of depression with melancholia or Alzheimer’s dementia are more common in
older patients.
Notice your patient’s body build. Is it slender? Stocky? Muscular?
What about posture? (Erect? Slumped?) Are walking and other move-
ments graceful or jerky? Is there a limp? Are there unusual physical
characteristics, such as scars, tattoos, or missing limbs? How would you
assess the patient’s general nutrition and body weight? (Obese? Slender?
Wasted?) Abnormal thinness suggests anorexia nervosa. Poor nutrition may not

-- 140 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam I 	125
be related to mental disorder, but it can indicate a chronic debilitating physical
disease, depression, substance misuse, or homelessness.
When you shake hands during your introductions, notice whether
the patient’s palms are dry or damp. Is the grip firm and hearty, or limp
and halfhearted?
Alertness
Your patient’s alertness can be graded along a continuum.
• Full or normal alertness implies awareness of the environment and
the ability to respond quickly to a variety of sensory stimuli.
• Drowsiness and clouding of consciousness refer somewhat imprecisely
to someone who is awake but less than fully alert. Drowsiness sug-
gests that the patient can be stimulated to full wakefulness. Cloud-
ing of consciousness may be less transient, as in a person who has
taken a drug overdose, and it implies the pathological impairment
of most cognitive functions.
• Coma is a condition from which the patient cannot be aroused at
all, even by stimuli such as deep pain or noxious odors.
Lying outside the continuum above is stupor—a poorly defined term that
can mean unconsciousness, but may instead refer to a state in which the
person, though apparently awake, doesn’t move voluntarily or speak.
It isn’t uncommon to encounter fluctuating consciousness during a
single interview session. Carefully note any alterations in level of con-
sciousness; they can affect your interpretation of tests, as well as your
informal observations of the patient’s behavior.
Some patients will appear more alert than is usually considered nor-
mal. These people may rapidly and repeatedly glance about the room, as
if suspiciously scanning the environment for danger. Such hypervigilance
or hyperalertness is found in paranoid disorders, use of some substances (such
as central nervous system stimulants and hallucinogens), and PTSD. However,
states of heightened awareness can also be found in normal people (lovers, for
example, and religious converts).
Clothing and Hygiene
Is your patient’s clothing clean and well cared for or dirty and tattered?
Is it casual or formal? Contemporary or out of date? Is it appropriate to
the climate and to the circumstances of your meeting? Notice any jewelry.
Bright colors may suggest mania; something as ordinary as a misbuttoned shirt
or coat could indicate dementia. Bizarre dress, such as an adult wearing a Boy
Scout uniform, suggests psychosis.

-- 141 of 385 --

126 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
What is your patient’s hairstyle and hair color? Is there any facial
hair? What about personal hygiene? If the patient is disheveled or malodor-
ous, suspect serious illness such as schizophrenia or a substance use disorder.
Motor Activity
Try to assess dominant body attitude: Is it one of apparent relaxation, or
does the patient sit tensely on the edge of the chair?
Notice the amount of motor activity. As you talk, does your patient sit
quietly? Does this seem to approach immobility at times? Reduced mobility
is encountered in a variety of mental conditions and in frontal lobe brain dys-
function with various physical causes. Complete immobility is rare and can be a
feature of profound depression or catatonia.
Much more common in mental health patients is excessive motion.
Does your patient fidget, jiggle a leg up and down, or frequently arise
from the chair to pace? These behaviors may be due to akathisia, a side effect
of the older (and still used) type of antipsychotic drugs. Sometimes akathisia
can become so severe that a patient literally cannot sit still and spends much
time pacing restlessly around the room. Occasional uneasy shifting of position is
more likely to be the consequence of simple anxiety, or sometimes of restless legs
syndrome.
Mostly, a patient’s gestures will just express spoken feelings or empha-
size verbalized statements (“talking with the hands”). Some gestures, how-
ever, convey unvoiced ideas—such as the circled OK of thumb and forefin-
ger or the not-so-OK raised middle finger. Observe your patient’s hands.
Are they folded at rest, or are fists kept tightly clenched? Are fingernails
dirty, bitten, stained, or carefully manicured? Is there a tremor? This could
be due to anxiety, but tremor of a pill- rolling type is often seen in Parkinson’s
disease and in pseudoparkinsonism (a frequent side effect of older antipsychotic
drugs).
Notice any behavior such as inappropriate scratching, touching, or
rubbing in public. Does this person pick at skin or clothing? A possible
explanation is delirium, which can have a variety of physical or chemical causes.
One type is delirium tremens (DTs), found in severe alcohol use disorder.
It is extremely important, especially in chronically ill mental patients,
to look for the involuntary movements of face and limbs associated with
tardive dyskinesia. Are there any twisting or writhing movements of the
extremities? What about chewing, facial grimacing, puckering of lips, or
protrusions of the tongue? These movements may be gross and unmistak-
able, but more often they will be mild and may be hard to identify. If in
doubt, ask to see your patient’s tongue; worm-like fasciculations may be
the only early sign of tardive dyskinesia.
You may notice other unusual behaviors. Look for any manner-
isms—unnecessary behaviors that are part of a goal- directed activity. (An

-- 142 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam I 	127
example would be the flourish that some people make with a pen before
writing something.) Mannerisms are common and normal; to some degree, we
all have them. On the other hand, stereotypies are behaviors that are not
goal- directed. An example would be a patient who repeatedly and to no
apparent purpose pauses to make the peace sign. Posturing is identified
when a patient strikes and holds a pose (such as a Napoleonic hand tucked
inside a shirt front) that has no apparent purpose. Purposeless negativism
may be shown by persistent silence or by turning away from the examiner.
In waxy flexibility, you can move the patient’s rigidly held limbs only slowly
and with steady force, as though you were bending a rod made of soft
wax. Patients with catalepsy will maintain any odd or unusual posture you
place them in, despite the fact that you urge them to relax. Stereotypies,
posturing, waxy flexibility, negativism, and catalepsy are infrequently encoun-
tered today, and then only in the most seriously ill of hospitalized patients. They
usually signify psychosis—frequently schizophrenia.
Facial Expression
Are there any tics of eyes, mouth, or other body parts? Does the patient
smile and generally show normal mobility of facial expression? A fixed,
motionless expression could indicate senility, the rigidity common in Parkin-
son’s disease, or pseudoparkinsonism from antipsychotic drugs. How well does
this patient make eye contact with you? A psychotic patient may stare fixedly
at you; in depression, the gaze may seem stuck to the floor. As you converse,
does your patient repeatedly glance around the room, as though noticing
something you cannot see or attending to voices no one else can hear?
These apparent responses to an internal stimulus may be encountered in patients
who have psychoses of various types.
You should watch for any other behaviors that contradict the infor-
mation your patient is giving you verbally:
You notice the motor restlessness of akathisia, when your patient
denies taking antipsychotic medication.
Your patient has a sad face and seems about to cry, but claims to feel
cheerful.
Voice
As you converse, notice the volume, pitch, and clarity of the patient’s
voice. Does it have a normal lilt (called prosody), or is it monotonous and
dull? From the use of grammar, can you tell anything about education
or family background? Does an accent identify the country or region in
which the patient was reared? Does the patient stutter, lisp, mumble, or
demonstrate some other speech impediment? Are there mannerisms of

-- 143 of 385 --

128 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
speech, such as words or phrases that are used habitually? How would you
characterize the tone of voice: friendly, angry, bored, sad?
Attitude toward Examiner
There are several continuums along which you could describe your
patient’s apparent relationship to you:
Cooperative → obstructionistic
Friendly → hostile
Open → secretive
Involved → apathetic
How far to the left your patient scores on each of these factors will help
determine the amount of information you can expect to obtain during
the interview, as well as the strength of your rapport. In addition, note
any evidence of seductiveness or evasiveness.
mood
The terms mood and affect have been variously defined. Nowadays, some
clinicians use them interchangeably. I will use mood to mean the way a
person claims to be feeling, and affect to mean how the person appears to
be feeling. Therefore, the term affect signifies not only stated mood, but
facial expression, posture, eye contact (or its lack), and tearfulness as well.
Mood (or affect) is described in several dimensions: type, lability,
appropriateness, and (by some observers) intensity.
Type
What is the patient’s type of mood? This means simply the basic quality
of mood. In Chapter 7 I have presented some 60 expressions of feeling
(see Table 7.1), but they can be boiled down to just a few basic moods.
Trouble is, there isn’t a lot of agreement as to exactly what’s basic. Here’s
my take on the best consensus judgment of a dozen or more experts on
basic emotions:
Anger 	Joy
Anxiety 	Love
Contempt 	Sadness
Disgust 	Shame
Fear 	Surprise
Guilt

-- 144 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam I 	129
One mood will usually predominate. When it doesn’t, normal or about
medium serves as an adequate description.
Your patient’s mood will probably be obvious from what you have
already observed. If not, ask:
“How are you feeling now?”
“What is your mood at this time?”
If you detect sadness, you might inquire:
“Do you feel like crying?”
An occasional patient will burst into tears—a response that can be dis-
tressing for a beginning interviewer, but is sometimes therapeutic for the
patient. Have some facial tissues available for this situation, and try to
learn what feelings lie behind the cloudburst.
You can also infer a good deal from your patient’s body language.
Here are a few nonverbal cues to feelings:
Anger: clenched jaw, knotted fists, flushing of face or neck, drum-
ming fingers, extended neck veins, fixed stare
Anxiety: jiggling foot, twisting fingers, affected casualness (such as
toothpicking)
Sadness: moistening of eyes, drooping shoulders, slowed movements
Shame: poor eye contact, blushing, shrugging
Some patients have difficulty describing, or even recognizing, how
they feel. A few cannot seem to do it at all. I’ll mention again the term
alexithymia, which is sometimes used to describe the inability to recognize
or describe one’s own feelings.
Lability
Even normal people will sometimes show two or more moods within a
brief time span. For example, at a funny yet tender moment in a movie
or play, anyone might laugh and weep almost simultaneously. But wide
swings of mood are often abnormal and should be watched for in a mental
health interview. Such mood swings are termed increased lability of mood.
Some patients with personality disorders may show dramatic swings of mood from
ecstasy to tears, all within a matter of minutes. A patient with manic euphoria
may suddenly burst into bitter tears, then rapidly return to bubbling high spirits
(the term microdepression is sometimes used to describe this phenomenon). In

-- 145 of 385 --

130 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
the cognitive disorders, rapid mood swings can be so severe as to earn the term
affective incontinence.
The opposite picture occurs when the patient shows reduced varia-
tion of mood. This lack of response to environmental stimuli is called flat-
tening of mood. The term blunting has been used as a synonym, although
some writers use flattening to mean a compressed range of mood and
reserve blunting for a lack of emotional sensitivity. However the terms are
defined, these patients seem unable to relate to other people’s emotions. Though
classically identified as indicating schizophrenia, relative immobility of mood is
also found in severe depression and in Parkinson’s disease and other neurological
conditions. Blandness of affect, in which nothing much ever seems to ruffle the
patient, classically occurs in dementia.
Appropriateness
Appropriateness of mood is your estimate of how well the patient’s mood
matches the situation and the content of thought. Your judgment will
be affected by two cultures: your own and the patient’s. Although most
people show inappropriate emotional reactions from time to time, a pro-
nounced inappropriateness may suggest certain diagnostic groups. A per-
son who giggles or laughs while, for example, describing something sad (such as
the death of a close relative) may be suffering from schizophrenia. Pathological
affect (either inappropriate laughing or weeping) may be encountered in pseudo-
bulbar palsy, which can have a variety of causes, including multiple sclerosis and
strokes. Patients with DSM-5 somatic symptom disorders (DSM-IV somatoform
disorders) will sometimes talk about their physical complaints, such as paralysis
or blindness, with a nonchalance more appropriate to a weather report. This
special type of inappropriate mood is called la belle indifferénce (French for
“lofty indifference”).
Although you should be continually alert for these and other signs
of otherwise unexpressed feeling, it is important not to overinterpret.
Try instead to relate what you observe to what you hear and to what you
yourself might feel under similar circumstances. Are tears warranted by
the topic being discussed, or does your patient appear to be unnaturally
sad? Does the smile seem genuine, or is it forced, perhaps hiding other
feelings?
Intensity
Although the designation is subjective and therefore somewhat arbitrary,
you can grade intensity of mood as mild, moderate, or severe (think of
the progression from dysthymia through major depression without and
with psychosis). You might also want to note the reactivity of a mood: Is it
fleeting, prolonged, or somewhere in between?

-- 146 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam I 	131
Flow oF ThoughT
The term flow of thought is a slight misnomer. What we are interested in
is the thought, but what we actually perceive is the flow of speech. We
assume that the speech we hear reflects the patient’s thoughts.
Most of the problems described here are usually apparent only dur-
ing the acute phase of illness. They can be grouped into two overall cat-
egories: (1) defects of association (the way words are joined together to
make phrases and sentences), and (2) abnormal rate and rhythm.
Unhappily, mental health clinicians don’t always agree about these
definitions, so I’ve tried to adopt a consensus view. However, you will be
safest if you record in quotes actual examples of your patient’s speech.
This will remind you later exactly what the patient said, will help any-
one who reads your write-up to understand what you mean by the terms
you use, and will provide a recorded basis for judging future change in
thought patterns that may occur with treatment.
Be careful not to attribute undue pathological significance to your
patient’s manner of speaking. Speech patterns different from yours can
be shaped by neurological or other medical disorders, by cultural and
educational influences, or by growing up speaking a different primary
language.
Association
First, notice whether speech is spontaneous or occurs only in response to
questions. If the latter, you should take some pains to induce the patient
to talk spontaneously:
“I’m grateful for all the answers you’ve given me. But now I think it
would help if you’ll just talk for a while about your problems. That
way, I’ll get a better feeling for what is bothering you.”
If you don’t succeed with this, the amount of information you can
obtain about speech patterns will obviously be somewhat limited. Record
examples of what speech there is, and note the attempts you made to
obtain more.
• Derailment. Sometimes called loose associations, derailment is a
breakdown of thought association in which one idea seems to run into
another. The two ideas may be related in a tenuous way or not related at
all. You can understand the sequence of words, but their general direc-
tion seems to be governed not by logic but by rhymes, puns, or other rules
that might not be apparent to an observer. What comes out is speech that
seems to mean something to the patient but not to you:

-- 147 of 385 --

132 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“She tells me something in one morning and out the other.”
“Half a loaf is better than the whole enchilada.”
“I’ll never go back to that store again. I don’t have enough sand
for my shoes.”
• A special type of loose association is flight of ideas, in which a word
or phrase from one thought stimulates the patient to take off in another
direction. Although the patient (and you) might be able to define the
relationship between two consecutive ideas, the entire thought process
appears to have no ultimate goal, and the patient will usually lose the
thread of the original question.
I ntervIewer: When did you enter the hospital?
PatIent: I came in on a Monday. Monday is wash day. That’s what
I’m gonna do—wash that man right outta my hair. He’s the
tortoise and I’m the hare.
Patients with mania often have flight of ideas associated with push of
speech (described later in this chapter).
• Tangentiality (tangential speech). These terms describe an answer
that seems irrelevant to the question asked. If there is some relationship
between question and answer, it is hard to discern.
I ntervIewer: How long did you live in Wichita?
PatIent: Even anteaters like to French-kiss.
Derailments and tangentiality are classically encountered in psychosis, often
schizophrenia, but patients with mania can also exhibit these symptoms.
• Poverty of speech. This is a marked reduction from normal in the
amount of spontaneous speech. The patient answers briefly when you
expect elaboration and, unless prompted, may say nothing for long peri-
ods. When this behavior is carried to the extreme of muteness, there is
little or no speech at all. Patients with depression may show poverty of speech.
Muteness is more characteristic of schizophrenia, but it is sometimes found in
somatic symptom disorders. It must be distinguished from aphonia of neurologi-
cal origin.
The following terms designate speech abnormalities that are sel-
dom found in clinical interviews. I will define them briefly, but unless
you work on the back ward of a large psychiatric hospital, you may never
encounter any of these behaviors. Most occur classically in schizophrenia,
but any may be found in psychoses of neurocognitive origin. When you
do encounter an example, be sure to record it and try to learn why the
patient has responded that way.

-- 148 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam I 	133
• Thought blocking. The train of thought stops suddenly, before it
arrives at the station. The patient can usually give no explanation more
adequate than that the thought has been “forgotten.”
• Alliteration. A phrase or sentence intentionally contains multiple
repetitions of the same or similar sounds: “I ran the risk, Doctor dear, of
recognizing revolting rabbits racing in the roadster.”
• Clang associations. The choice of individual words is governed by
rhyming or other similarity of sound, not by the requirements of com-
munication.
I ntervIewer: Who brought you to the hospital?
PatIent: My wife, she’s the wife of my life, no strife.
• Echolalia. In answering a question, the patient unnecessarily
repeats words or phrases of the interviewer. This can be fairly subtle, to
the point that you may recognize it only after several repetitions.
I ntervIewer: How long were you in the hospital that time?
PatIent: How long were you in the hospital? I was in the hospital a
long, long time, that’s how long I was in the hospital.
• Verbigeration. The patient continues to repeat a word or phrase
without obvious purpose: “It was deathly still. Deathly. Deathly still.
Deathly. Still deathly.”
• Incoherence. Speech is so disorganized that even individual words
or phrases appear to have no logical connection: “ A bery heavy burta-
tion tonight, we had a very dareson bite let’s go head . . . ” (In this case,
reporter Serene Branson knew she was talking nonsense on live TV in
2011. Although she was at first thought to be having a stroke, it turned out
to be the aura of a migraine.) Sometimes incoherence is more colorfully
termed word salad.
• Neologisms. In the absence of artistic intent (such as in Lewis Car-
roll’s “Jabberwocky”—“ ’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves/Did gyre and
gimble in the wabe . . . ”)—the patient makes up words, often from parts
of dictionary words. The resulting structure may sound quite authentic:
“I didn’t want him spinning cobwebs all over, so I hit him with my arach-
nosquisher [a shoe].”
• Perseveration. The patient repeats words or phrases, or repeatedly
returns to a point that has already been covered or mentioned.
I ntervIewer: And what was your girlfriend like?
PatIent: Oh, she had long blonde hair and she wore it in a ponytail.

-- 149 of 385 --

134 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: Did you feel she supported you when you had that
trouble with your ex-wife?
PatIent: But she wasn’t very tall. Just a bit over 5 feet.
I ntervIewer: What I’d really like is to hear about your relation-
ship with her.
PatIent: She was pretty, really pretty.
Perseveration, which can also occur as repeated motor behavior, usually
occurs in the context of a memory defect and indicates organic disease
involving the brain.
• 	Stilted speech. Accent, phraseology, or choice of words gives speech
an unnatural or quaint flavor, as if the patient were someone else entirely.
An American who affects a British accent or who frequently uses British
idioms might be said to have stilted speech.
Rate and Rhythm of Speech
Patients who speak rapidly, and often at considerable length, are said to
show push of speech (or pressured speech). Because these patients are often
loud and hard to interrupt, they can pose a real challenge for interview-
ers. Push of speech is usually associated with decreased latency of response,
in which the period of time between your question and the patient’s
response is markedly reduced. Sometimes the response seems to come
almost before you have asked your question. Push of speech and decreased
latency of response are classically found in patients with mania, who may tell you
that their words cannot keep up with their rapid thoughts.
On the other hand, a patient with increased latency of response takes
far longer than normal to answer or interjects long pauses between sen-
tences. When the statement is finally offered, it may be brief and deliv-
ered with excruciating slowness. Often reflecting more general psychomotor
slowing, increased latency of response can be found in severe depression and
neurological disorders.
When the timing of syllables deviates from normal, disorders of
speech rhythm occur. Stuttering is one such disorder. In cluttering, the
patient speaks rapidly and becomes tangle-tongued and disorganized.
Patients with cerebellar lesions may utter each syllable at the same pace as
the last, yielding a rate that is too precisely even. Those with some forms
of muscular dystrophy may speak in clusters or have difficulty uttering
syllables.
Other speech patterns occur that usually have no pathological sig-
nificance at all. Whereas they may be quite noticeable to the listener, the
individual who uses them can remain totally unaware of how often they
occur.

-- 150 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam I 	135
The term circumstantial speech means that much extraneous material
is included with the principal message. In this common speech pattern,
the speaker eventually comes to the point, although often at considerable
cost to the listener’s time and patience.
In distractible speech, the speaker’s attention is diverted by stimuli that
are extraneous to the conversation. Noise in the corridor or a moth flut-
tering against a window may send the conversation off in a new (though
usually temporary) direction. Distractible speech is usually normal, but
you may encounter it in a patient with mania.
Verbal tics are conventional expressions that many people overuse
from time to time, usually without realizing it. Such time fillers are almost
always normal, if boring.
“You know”
“I go” (for “I said”)
“Basically”
“Really”
“Awesome”
Many of the terms we use to label speech patterns are confusing, and
various experts will use them differently. Once again, I strongly recom-
mend that you make your record as clear as possible by writing down
verbatim examples of any speech you consider to be pathological.

-- 151 of 385 --

136
C h a p t e r 	1 2
Mental Status Exam II:
Cognitive Aspects
Nearly all of the findings mentioned in Chapter 11 are typically made by
passive observation alone. In contrast, you must use active questioning to
elicit most of the material presented in this chapter.
Should You do a Formal mental StatuS exam?
Some clinicians still fail to assess— or to report—the cognitive aspects of
the MSE, despite the critical importance of this information to the overall
evaluation of any patient. Others feel it’s insulting to ask a well-functioning
adult obvious, routine questions: “What is the date?” or “Who is the presi-
dent?” They choose not to do formal testing without a positive indication,
such as a complaint by relatives that the patient has seemed forgetful.
In most cases, you probably wouldn’t jump right in and ask about
hearing voices. But unless you ask eventually, you can never be sure that
any patient is unimpaired. This is why I strongly recommend, especially
if you are just starting out, that you do a formal MSE on all patients. You
can take some steps to reduce the likelihood of resentment for the patient
and embarrassment for you.
•	• Start by explaining what you are about to do. Stress the fact that
these questions are the norm and are not occasioned by something the
patient has said or done:
“Now I’d like to ask some routine questions that will help me assess
how you think about things. It will only take a few minutes.”

-- 152 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	137
Words such as routine and normal help pull the sting from questions that
might otherwise be taken amiss.
• Use whatever degree of positive feedback seems warranted, as long
as you speak no more than the truth:
“That’s excellent! This is the best I’ve seen anyone do calculations
all week.”
• Respond attentively to any distress these questions seem to cause.
If necessary, take a break and return later to any aspect that is trouble-
some:
“Subtracting sevens in your head is tough. Let’s give it a rest and try
presidents instead.”
• In any case, it’s a good idea to get this portion of your evaluation
out of the way during your first interview. If you delay asking until treat-
ment is well underway, you increase the possibility of embarrassment for
you and your patient.
Anyone who observes seasoned professionals doing the formal por-
tions of the MSE will notice that they don’t ask every question of every
patient. With time and experience, clinicians learn which tests can be
omitted for certain patients and which must be performed every time.
While you are still learning, I recommend that you do the entire proce-
dure each time, without exception. That way you will learn it all; you will
also develop your own sense of what responses are normal for each test.
Once you’re experienced (after your first several hundred exams), you
can decide which tests to omit and when.
The MSE properly concerns only current behaviors, experiences, and
emotions. However, it is often convenient to cover related historical data
at the same time. This is the reason why so many of the screening ques-
tions begin with “Have you ever . . . ”
One further thought: Some of the experiences covered in the fol-
lowing pages are unusual enough that your patient might feel reluctant
to respond frankly. To address such reluctance, you can point out that
people can have all types of strange experiences when they are stressed or
ill or taking medications. Framing your inquiry this way can help reduce
anxiety and encourage your patient to reveal what you need to know.
conTenT oF ThoughT
Whatever the speaker is focused on at the moment constitutes the content
of thought. During the history of the present illness, this will usually con-
cern the problems that caused the patient to seek treatment.

-- 153 of 385 --

138 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
However, there are several items of thought content that you must
cover with every exam you do. The patient may spontaneously mention
some of these , but mostly these major thought abnormalities will require
screening questions.
Whenever you are investigating abnormalities of thought, probe gen-
tly enough that the patient continues to view you as someone who is sym-
pathetic and friendly. Don’t make snap judgments, and try not to show
surprise at the responses you hear. Remember that bizarre ideas such as
flying saucers or talking fish may seem as normal to the patient as do your
own closest-held convictions (even including religion and politics) to you.
Delusions
A delusion is a fixed, false belief that the patient’s culture and education
cannot account for. All portions of this definition must be fulfilled. Oth-
ers of the same culture must consider the belief or idea to be obviously
false; it must be unshakable, despite evidence that it is wrong.
“I’ve been sent to guard the president.” At age 73, this patient had
chronic alcoholism and hadn’t worked in years.
“My husband goes secretly to have sex with the woman across the street.
He signals her with the venetian blinds.” With a sigh, her husband
volunteered that he had been impotent since his prostate operation.
“My initials are J. C. That means I’m Jesus Christ!” Six brothers and
sisters testified that he had been ill for years.
You can test the strength of your patient’s beliefs by asking:
“Is it possible that this feeling is due to some sort of nervous or emo-
tional problem?”
If the patient replies, “No,” and perhaps claims instead that the hospital
staff has just joined the conspiracy, score the idea as delusional.
Some patients, when similarly challenged, will agree that another
explanation is possible; for them, you would not diagnose a delusion.
“It only seemed as if there was some sort of plot.”
“Perhaps it was imaginary, after all!”
“My nerves have been bad lately.”
Call it a delusion only when the patient maintains an obviously false expla-
nation despite clear evidence to the contrary.

-- 154 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	139
Because the cultural/educational criterion must also be satisfied, a
traditional Navajo should not be called delusional for believing in witches,
nor should children who write letters to Santa Claus.
Screen for delusions by asking questions such as the following (with
appropriate pauses for responses):
“Have you ever had any thoughts or feelings that people were spying
on you, talking about you, or trying to harm you in some way?”
“Have you ever gotten unusual messages?”
“Have you ever had any other thoughts or ideas that others might
consider unusual?”
Because they are so improbable, you can easily determine that
some claims are false (such as the prototypical bizarre delusion of being
abducted in a rocket ship by space aliens). Others carry a whiff of plausi-
bility that should make you consider, “Could this story actually be true?”
I’ve had this sort of reflection when confronted by patients who have told
me of efforts to avoid pursuit by ex-spouses or lawsuits from former busi-
ness partners. Occasionally in-laws really are trying to break up a mar-
riage. Although such narratives sometimes crumple under the pressure
of internal inconsistency, you may need third-party verification to deter-
mine where the truth lies.
Patients often realize that other people think their delusional ideas
are unusual or strange; they may go to some lengths to hide these delu-
sions. Usually a sympathetic, interested, nonjudgmental manner will relax
tension enough for a free discussion of these problems. You may be able
to get your patient to elaborate on a delusion, perhaps to volunteer others
by asking the noncommittal question:
“How do you know that this [the delusion] is the case?”
You may have to walk a fine line: If you challenge delusions, you
could upset the patient; if you accept them, you risk further confirming
false ideas in the patient’s mind. You’ll be safer to show neither disbelief
nor credulity, if indeed you can avoid stating any opinion at all. If pressed
for your view, you can truthfully say:
“Many people would consider it [the delusion] unusual.”
Because this is something the patient already realizes, it comes as no
shock; the answer often seems to satisfy. If further pressed, you may have
to respond more fully:

-- 155 of 385 --

140 	The FirsT inTerview
“I think that other explanations might be able to account for your
discomfort. You could be mistaken, or it might be some form of ner-
vousness.”
Because you offer it tentatively, this sort of statement might not provoke
much argument. If it does, perhaps you and the patient can amicably
agree to disagree.
Once you have detected a delusion, learn all you can about it—
especially, the extent to which it affects different aspects of the patient’s
life. The following questions should help:
“How long have you felt this way?”
“What actions have you taken as a result?”
“What other actions do you plan to take?”
“How do you feel about [these beliefs]?”
“Why do you think this is happening?”
More specific “Why . . . ” questions—“Why do you think you were fired?”—
are another way that you may be able to elicit delusions.
Finally, is the delusion mood- congruent? In other words, is the content
of the delusion in keeping with the patient’s mood? Here is an example of
a mood- congruent delusion:
A middle-aged man hospitalized for a depression believed that he
had literally gone to hell. He thought that the medical personnel clus-
tered around his bedside were devils who had gathered to administer
well- deserved punishment for his sins.
And an example of a mood-incongruent delusion:
An elderly woman, for many years chronically ill with psychosis, also
had ankle swelling due to heart failure. She rather blandly explained
that her body fluids were being pulled into her legs by gravity
machines installed in her basement by Nazis.
The presence of mood- congruent delusions should make you suspect a mood disor-
der; mood- incongruent delusions are more typical of schizophrenia.
Delusion Types
In the course of interviewing many patients, you will probably encounter
a wide variety of delusions. Here are some of the best known:

-- 156 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	141
• Death. Also called nihilistic delusions, these rare symptoms are
extreme cases of delusions of ill health.
• Grandeur. The false belief is that the patient is someone of exalted
station (God, Beyoncé) or has powers or gifts not possessed by other
people (immense wealth, virtuoso musical ability, eternal life). Be sure
to distinguish these ideas from joking references: Presidents, kings, and
captains of industry sometimes assume the mantle of prescience or invin-
cibility. To them, “I am God” may be a partly realized figure of speech
that doesn’t signify mental pathology. Delusions of grandeur are typically
found in mania, but may also occur in schizophrenia.
• Guilt. These patients believe they have committed some grave
error or sin, for which they may claim to deserve punishment. Delusions of
guilt are found especially in severe depression and in delusional disorder.
• Ill health or bodily change. These patients believe they are afflicted
by some terrible disease: Their insides have rotted; their bowels have
turned to cement. Delusions of ill health and somatic delusions are occasion-
ally found in severe depression or schizophrenia.
• Jealousy. The patient’s spouse or partner “has been unfaithful.”
Delusional jealousy is classically seen in alcoholic paranoia, but is also encoun-
tered in schizophrenia and delusional disorder. It can lead to spousal abuse and
even domestic homicide.
• Misidentification. The patient believes that someone, usually a
close relative, has been replaced by an exact double (this belief is known
as Capgras syndrome), or that a stranger is actually someone the patient
knows. Such delusional perceptions are often rooted in brain pathology, though
they are also found in patients with schizophrenia.
• Passivity or influence. Such patients believe that they are being
controlled in unusual ways by outside influences, such as television, radio,
or microwaves. As a result, they can deny responsibility for their behavior.
By contrast, some may feel that they can control the environment: What
they have for breakfast has influenced the secretary of state to mention
Iran in a speech, or their thought waves cause rivers to rise. Such delusions
suggest schizophrenia.
• Persecution. Patients believe that they are being threatened, ridi-
culed, discriminated against, or otherwise interfered with. These are typi-
cally found in schizophrenia.
• Poverty. Despite evidence to the contrary (money in the bank, a
regular disability check), these patients believe that destitution will force
them to sell the house and auction their property. These delusions some-
times occur in severe depression.

-- 157 of 385 --

142 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• Reference. People are spying upon patients, slandering them, or
working against them in some other way. These patients “observe” that
people whisper about them as they walk past; print or broadcast media
contain messages that are intended specifically for them. For example,
“On The NewsHour last night, Judy Woodruff said that a settlement was
imminent. This means that I should agree to the property settlement with
my former wife.” Delusions of reference are especially common in schizophrenia,
but may be found in other psychoses as well.
• Thought broadcasting. The patient’s thoughts seem to be transmit-
ted locally or across the continent. Thought broadcasting is found in schizo-
phrenia.
• Thought control. Thoughts, feelings, or ideas are put into the
patient’s mind or are withdrawn from it. Closely related to passivity feelings,
these delusions have similar import.
percepTion
Hallucinations
Hallucinations are false sensory perceptions that occur in the absence of a
related sensory stimulus. For example, the patient hears voices speaking
from a vacant closet or sees purple snakes floating in the clear bathwater.
Hallucinations are typically experienced as occurring in real space (that
is, not imagined, as in the mind’s eye) and can involve any of the five
senses. Among mental health patients, auditory hallucinations are by far
the most common; visual hallucinations are next.
Screen for hallucinations by asking:
“Do you ever hear voices or other sounds when there is no one around
to produce them?”
“Do you ever see things other people cannot see?”
Some patients mistakenly respond “Yes” to questions about auditory
hallucinations, when they mean only that they hear a voice right now (the
interviewer’s) or that they “hear” their own thoughts—though not spoken
aloud as in audible thoughts, which I’ve described below. With careful
questioning, you can usually distinguish these false positives from genu-
ine hallucinations.
For example, when someone claims to hear noises or spoken words,
ask:
“Could this be something coming from you, like your conscience or
your own thoughts?”

-- 158 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	143
An admission that it could be “my imagination” or “sounds from out in
the hall” doesn’t fit with the sort of true auditory hallucination I expect
from a person who has a serious psychosis. I’ll sometimes ask a patient
whether the voice is “as clear as mine is now,” and whether it speaks in
complete sentences, again discounting the seriousness of “no” answers.
However, even some patients with schizophrenia report that their auditory
hallucinations seem more like inner thoughts than like actual, external
voices. Hallucinations that occur only when a patient is reliving trauma
also suggest something other than schizophrenia—PTSD, perhaps. I may
reassure such a patient that this sort of experience is not likely to mean
actual psychosis.
Hallucinations should be characterized as to severity. Auditory hal-
lucinations, for example, can be located on a continuum: Vague noises →
mumbling → understandable words → phrases → complete sentences.
Here are some additional questions that can help you learn more
about auditory hallucinations:
“How often do you hear this sort of voice?”
“Is it as clear as my voice is now?”
“Where is it coming from?” (The patient’s head or body? The micro-
wave oven? The hallway?)
“Whose voice is it?”
“Is there more than one?”
“Do they talk about you?”
“What do they say?”
“Do they hold conversations with one another?”
“What do you think the cause is?”
“Can other people hear these voices?”
“How do you react?” (Many patients are frightened by their hallucina-
tions; some are only bemused.)
“Do the voices order you to do things?” (If so, does the patient obey
them?) This is an important point: Patients will sometimes obey command
hallucinations, and have been known to inflict harm on other people as a
result.
Audible thoughts constitute a special form of auditory hallucination, in
which patients hear their own thoughts spoken so loudly that others can
hear them. Audible thoughts, voices that make a running commentary on the
patient’s actions, and multiple voices talking to one another especially suggest
schizophrenia.

-- 159 of 385 --

144 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Visual hallucinations can also be graded: Points of light → blurred
images → formed people (what size?) → scenes or tableaus. Some of the
questions recommended for auditory hallucinations, appropriately modi-
fied, should be asked of patients who admit to visual hallucinations. You
especially want to know when they occur (only when the patient is using
drugs or alcohol, or at other times?) and what the content is. How does
the patient respond to these hallucinations? (It can be extremely frighten-
ing to perceive faces changing color or form; one woman looked into the
mirror and saw that she had become a mushroom!)
Visual hallucinations are especially characteristic of psychoses that occur
with substance use or general medical conditions. For example, small animals or
Lilliputian people are commonly reported by patients who experience DTs when
withdrawing from heavy, prolonged alcohol use. Trailing phenomena, in which
images appear to linger on the patient’s retina, sometimes accompany psychedelic
drug use. Although most of the visual phenomena that occur in schizophrenia are
illusions or transformations of actual stimuli (such as intensification of color,
changes in the size of objects), patients with schizophrenia sometimes experience
true visual hallucinations, too.
Tactile (touch), olfactory (smell), and gustatory (taste) hallucinations
are uncommon in mental health patients. These symptoms usually suggest
psychosis due to such disorders as brain tumor, toxicity, or a seizure disorder,
though hallucinations of body sensation sometimes occur in schizophrenia.
Visual, auditory, and tactile experiences may also occur in normal people when
they are falling asleep or awakening. They are easily discerned from actual hal-
lucinations by their exclusive time of occurrence.
A woman once told me, “You’re going to think I’m crazy. Early one
morning last year, I saw the Devil standing over me in my bed. I was
completely paralyzed—I couldn’t move my arms or legs, but I was
totally awake! I was so frightened, I shook for an hour afterwards.” It
pleased me to tell her that she was sane—that she had experienced a
combination of hypnopompic imagery (experiences, which can instead
be auditory or tactile, that occur upon awakening) with sleep paraly-
sis, which also sometimes occurs when awakening.
One of the joys of mental health practice is being able to offer the reassur-
ance that someone’s experience is within the normal range.
Anxiety Symptoms
Anxiety is fear that’s neither directed at nor caused by anything specific
the patient can identify. It is usually accompanied by various unpleas-
ant bodily sensations. Other mental symptoms may include irritability,
poor concentration, mental tension, worrying, and an exaggerated startle
response.

-- 160 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	145
Screen for anxiety symptoms by asking:
“Do you think you worry about things excessively or out of proportion
to their real danger to you?”
“Does your family tell you that you’re a worry-wart?”
“Do you feel anxious or tense much of the time?”
If any answer is “Yes,” follow up with some of the questions covered in the
section on anxiety in Chapter 13.
A panic attack is a discrete episode during which a patient suddenly
experiences intense anxiety with bodily sensations such as rapid heart-
beat, shortness of breath, tremor, and sweating—plus a long list of other
possible physical symptoms. Patients often report fearing disaster, mad-
ness, or impending death. The episode usually peaks within a few min-
utes and wanes within half an hour.
Screen for panic attacks by asking:
“Have you ever had a panic attack—a time when you suddenly felt over-
whelmingly frightened or anxious?”
Follow up with the same sort of questions you would ask for other
anxiety disorders (Chapter 13 and Appendix D). Complaints of inner ten-
sion, sometimes accompanied by marked restlessness, are typical of akathisia,
found in patients who have used antipsychotic medications.
Phobias
A phobia is an unreasonable and intense fear associated with some object
or situation. Common specific phobias are fears of various animals, air
travel, heights (acrophobia), and being closed in (claustrophobia). Common
types of social phobia (now called social anxiety disorder in DSM-5) include
fears of public speaking, eating in public, using a public urinal, or writing
when others might see the patient’s hand tremble. Agoraphobia is fear of
being away from home or of being in public places.
Some might think that a phobia seems every bit as unreasonable as
a delusion. The difference is that whereas the phobic patient recognizes
how unreasonable these feelings are, the delusional patient does not.
Screen for phobias by asking:
“Have you ever had fears that seemed unreasonable or out of propor-
tion to you, but that you just couldn’t shake?”
“Have you ever been afraid of leaving home alone, or being in crowds,
or in public places such as stores or on bridges?”

-- 161 of 385 --

146 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
In the case of social anxiety, such as a fear of public speaking, be sure
to ask about the development of anticipatory anxiety. In this condition,
anxiety that is often intense and incapacitating occurs prior to perform-
ing the act that the patient dreads.
Dysmorphophobia is a term that’s been used to describe excessive con-
cern about slight (or imagined) defects in body appearance. Usually these
flaws are facial (wrinkles, shape of nose), but they have been reported for
nearly every imaginable body part. Of course, the patient cannot avoid
the body part in question, so the condition is not really a phobia at all.
It is now called body dysmorphic disorder and, in DSM-5, is classified with
obsessions and compulsions.
Obsessions and Compulsions
An obsession is a belief, idea, or thought that dominates the patient’s
thought content and persists, despite the fact that the patient recognizes
its unreality and may try to resist it. For example, a middle-aged man had
the persistent thought of doing something embarrassing, such as stand-
ing up and screaming during a church service. Obsessions often involve
dirt, time, or money.
Compulsions are acts performed repeatedly in a way that the patient
realizes is neither useful nor appropriate. Often they are performed in
response to (or to cope with) an obsession. Some examples:
Counting things repeatedly
Heeding groundless superstitions
Following rituals (such as a set bedtime routine that, if not followed
to the letter, must be started all over again)
A key aspect of obsessions and compulsions is the fact that the patient
usually realizes these ideas or behaviors are senseless and often tries to
resist them.
Screen for obsessions and compulsions by asking:
“Have you ever had obsessional thoughts or ideas? I mean, thoughts
that may seem senseless to you, but keep coming back anyway?”
“Have you ever had compulsions, such as rituals or routines that you
feel you must perform over and over, even though you try to resist?”
(Be ready to cite examples, should the patient ask.)
Some people do not realize that their behaviors— excessive neatness,
for example—are at all unusual. Careful questioning may be required to
draw them out:

-- 162 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	147
“How tidy is your home? Your personal belongings?”
“Have you ever gone to bed and left dirty dishes in the sink?”
“If someone sits on your bed after you’ve made it, do you feel the need
to straighten it again?”
A minor degree of obsessional thinking is quite common, so it’s
important to judge severity. As with phobias, this is best measured in
terms of the effects on activities such as school, work, and family life. In
severe cases, patients may spend many hours a day occupied in pointless
handwashing, dressing, or bathroom rituals. As with phobias, ask about
onset, duration, and treatment, as well as severity.
Thoughts of Violence
Whether or not there have been previous suicide attempts or violence
directed at others, you must learn what the patient is thinking now. Screen
for suicidal ideas by asking:
“Have you any ideas or thoughts of harming yourself in any way or of
killing yourself?”
Because most of us have had such a thought at one time or another, a
positive answer could reflect merely a fleeting reaction to stress or an
overwhelming life situation. But it would be an unwarranted, potentially
tragic leap of faith to ignore any answer that is even equivocal. You must
thoroughly investigate any such ideas you uncover.
Review all the material you have already obtained about past suicide
attempts (see Chapter 9). Learn whether the patient has current plans
and the means to carry them out. You should ask:
“What would it take to make suicide seems less attractive?”
Regard as serious and ominous any equivalent to the answer “Nothing
could.” If you encounter this sort of thinking, especially if it is bolstered
with evidence of current drinking or depression (feelings of worthless-
ness, hopelessness, trouble with thinking, loss of energy, guilt feelings),
you may be facing a situation that demands hospitalization—possibly even
before the hour is up.
Ideas of homicide or other violence present a similar urgent call to
action. The terror of violent ideas is mitigated only by the fact that they
are encountered much less frequently than are suicidal ideas. Screen for
thoughts of homicide or violence toward others by asking:

-- 163 of 385 --

148 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
“Have you ever felt so angry or upset that you thought about harming
someone else?”
“Have you ever had trouble resisting the urge?”
Any positive answer must be followed up immediately and compared with
the historical information you have already obtained. Are there plans or
only ideas? Does your patient have the means (firearms, lethal drugs) to
carry out this plan? Is there a timetable? A threat is more likely to be car-
ried out if made against a specific person, especially an intimate partner,
and if made face-to-face. However, I caution you to regard seriously any
threat at all. (Be sure to review the detailed material on violence covered
in Chapter 9.)
Experiences That Can Be Worrisome, but Are Usually Normal
There are a few experiences* you don’t ordinarily have to ask about: Either
they are normal or they have no diagnostic import. However, like my lady
with the hypnopompic imagery on page 144, patients sometimes worry
about them and bring them up during interview sessions. You should
have explanations ready.
Illusions are misinterpretations of actual sensory stimuli. Usually
visual, they most often occur when there is decreased sensory input (such
as in dim light). Their benign nature is readily acknowledged as soon as
the patient becomes aware of the mistake. You’ve probably had the expe-
rience yourself: A crack on the wall looks like a frightening snake; once
you put on the light, you feel immediate relief. To distinguish illusions
from hallucinations, obtain details about such matters as environmental
circumstances and timing (perhaps only when going to sleep). Although
usually normal, illusions can be encountered in patients with dementia
or delirium.
Déjà vu, French for “already seen,” is the commonplace sensation that
a person has previously experienced a situation or locale when that is
probably not the case. Most normal people have had this feeling at times,
although déjà vu can occur in temporal lobe epilepsy.
Overvalued ideas are beliefs that we continue to hold despite lack
of proof as to their worth. Like delusions, they cannot usually be chal-
lenged by argument or logic; unlike delusions, they are not obviously
false. Examples include the superiority of one’s own gender, race, political
party, or religion. Overvalued ideas are sometimes pursued to the point
where they interfere with an individual’s functioning, causing suffering
to that person or to those around. A common example is racial hatred.
* If they are normal, they’re not really symptoms.

-- 164 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	149
The dividing line can be hard to draw: Overvalued religious ideas can
shade into religious preoccupation, and from there into delusion. Note
the patient’s exact words as a baseline for later review.
Depersonalization is an alteration in one’s own perception of self. Peo-
ple usually experience it as an uncomfortable feeling of being detached
from body or mind; they may have a strange sensation of viewing them-
selves or of being in a dream. Though insight remains intact, they may
worry about going crazy or losing control. In its close relative, derealiza-
tion, people feel that it’s the environment that is unreal. Screen for these
(often coincident) experiences by asking:
“Have you ever felt unreal? As if you were a robot?”
“Have you ever felt that things around you are unreal?”
Derealization and depersonalization are reasonably common and often nor-
mal; they sometimes develop during a period of profound distress or with sleep
deprivation. Episodes may last only seconds, but when protracted or repeated
and severe enough to cause distress, the individual may be diagnosed as hav-
ing depersonalization/derealization disorder. These experiences can also occur
during bouts of PTSD and with brain pathology. Depression or anxiety often
accompanies these symptoms.
consciousness and cogniTion
In the next section of the MSE, you evaluate your patient’s ability to
absorb, process, and communicate information. The clinical tests we com-
monly use are only approximate, but they can serve as a useful guide.
To introduce these tasks, you might want again to offer reassur-
ance that you often ask these routine questions of new patients. I hope
you’ll avoid one common mistake of beginning clinicians who, perhaps
embarrassed at having to ask such questions, so frequently describe them
as “silly.” (The logical patient thinks, “If they’re silly, why ask them?”)
Devaluing these tasks can diminish motivation to answer thoughtfully. To
someone who wants to know why you’re asking, the correct answer is “To
help evaluate you.” Neither should you refer to them as “simple,” which
will only increase the discomfort of patients who have difficulty answer-
ing. Remember that any test of mental functioning can be traumatic,
especially when there is fear of failure. Doing poorly is always stressful,
and the patient who stumbles may need some support:
“People can’t perform at their best when they feel under pressure.”
“Most patients have some difficulty with that task.”

-- 165 of 385 --

150 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
In any case, try to emphasize what the patient is able to do:
“You did well on those serial sevens.”
“You’re doing better than many others have on this test.”
(Of course, you should never make this sort of supportive comment unless
it is true.)
Attention and Concentration
At this point in the interview, you will already have a good idea of your
patient’s attention (which we’ll define as the ability to focus on a current
task or topic) and concentration (the ability over a period of time to sustain
that focus while rejecting other, competing demands). You can get at these
qualities in a more formal way from calculations, which assess the abil-
ity to focus on a stimulus. Ask your patient to subtract 7 from 100. Once
that is done, request another subtraction of 7 from the result, and so on
toward 0. Most adults will finish in less than a minute with fewer than four
errors. Remember to consider the patient’s age, education level, culture,
and degree of depression and anxiety when you assess the performance.
Personally, whenever possible, I prefer to evaluate attention during
the body of my interview. This possibility can arise, for example, when a
patient mentions a date that is years in the past. “Let’s see,” I’ll say, “how
old were you then?” I probably won’t pursue this sort of testing any fur-
ther if the patient can come up with the correct age and seems to focus
well during our (perhaps prolonged) conversation.
If subtractions prove too difficult—they do assume some education
and facility with math—ask your patient to count backward by ones from,
say, 87 and to stop at 63. This test of attention is less culture-bound than
serial subtractions. We so often ask patients to spell world backward that
some patients can rattle it off without thinking. Try a different word, such
as strap or watch, but first make sure your patient can spell the word for-
ward. Recalling a series of five to seven digits forward, then backward,
accomplishes the same task and is less educationally dependent. Reduced
attention is found in patients with conditions such as epilepsy and cognitive dis-
orders, as well as in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorders. Because
so much of mental processing hinges on the ability to focus, you should interpret
cautiously the rest of your MSE findings when attention is impaired.
Orientation
To check that your patient is oriented to place, ask:
“Where are we now [city, state, name of the facility]?”

-- 166 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	151
If this draws a blank, ask what type of a facility you are in. An answer such
as “A library” or “Ground Zero” suggests severe pathology, though you should
beware of overinterpreting what you hear from a facetious or otherwise uncoop-
erative patient.
“What is the date?”
Not infrequently, patients will give the correct date and month, but miss
the year. Be sure to ask for all components of orientation to time. Patients
will often miss the date by a day or two. This is usually without significance,
especially for hospitalized patients who, divorced from their usual routines, tend
to lose track of time.
Whether patients know their own names (orientation to person)
should be evident from the earlier portions of an interview. If you detect
confusion about time or place, ask about orientation to person:
“Would you tell me your full name again?”
Language
Language refers to the means whereby we understand and express mean-
ing through words and symbols. The areas of language that are usually
assessed include comprehension, fluency, naming, repetition, reading,
and writing. Their routine assessment can be quickly done; it is especially
important in older patients and in those who are physically ill. It is not
uncommon for somatization disorder, cognitive disorders, and other men-
tal conditions to be misdiagnosed when a patient actually has a disorder
of language.
• The degree of comprehension of language should already be evident
from the way your patient has responded to conversation during the inter-
view. As a simple test, request some complex behavior, such as this: “Pick
up this pen, put it into your pocket, then return it to the table top.”
• Fluency of language should also be obvious from the patient’s use
of normal vocabulary and prosody to produce sentences of normal length.
Be alert for hesitation, mumbling, stammering, and unusual emphasis.
• Problems with naming may be evident if, instead of their names,
your patient uses circumlocutions to describe everyday objects. Examples
of such a naming aphasia:
Watch band: “The thing that holds it on your wrist.”
Pen: “A whatsis for writing.”
Screen for aphasias by asking your patient to name the parts of a ballpoint
pen: point (or tip), clip, barrel.

-- 167 of 385 --

152 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• To test repetition, ask your patient to repeat a standard, simple
phrase, such as “Tomorrow will be sunny.”
• Reading is quickly tested by asking the patient to read a sentence
or two. Note that even in advanced societies, a small percentage of adults
are functionally illiterate. You will need to evaluate the results of this
and other tests against what you already know about your patient’s educa-
tional background. Be prepared to offer support for the embarrassment
of the occasional patient who has trouble with this task.
• Test writing by asking your patient to write a sentence (you can dic-
tate something if the patient has trouble thinking of one).
• Asking for the names of a pencil and watch tests the patient for
expressive dysphasia. So does the request to write out a sentence of the
patient’s choice.
• Test for apraxia (the inability to perform a voluntary act, despite
intact motor pathways) by asking your patient to copy a simple geometric
figure, such as this one:
Inability to reproduce the basic elements of this figure (ignore shakiness
and rotation) could indicate an ideomotor apraxia. Apraxias can stem from
a lesion on the right side of the brain.
If you encounter problems with any of these screening tests, your
patient’s mental condition may be complicated by a significant neurologi-
cal dysfunction. You should ask for a neurological evaluation.
Memory
Memory is usually divided into three or four parts. For convenience, let’s
discuss three: immediate, short-term, and long-term. If you feel uncom-
fortable with asking any of these questions, you can lead into them:
“Have you had any problems with your memory? I’d like to test it.”
Immediate memory (the ability to register and reproduce information
after 5 or 10 seconds) is actually more of a test of attention, which you may
have already accomplished with serial sevens, counting backward, or just

-- 168 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	153
the way the patient focuses on the interview. But you can assess it again
on your way to testing short-term memory. Name several unrelated items,
such as a name, a color, and a street address. Then ask the patient for
a repetition of these items. This repetition not only assesses immediate
memory, but also provides assurance that the patient has understood you.
Should you warn patients that you plan to ask for a repetition later?
There are two schools of thought. One advises you to give a heads-up,
though I don’t think I’ve ever read the reason why. The other cautions you
that such a warning invites cognitive rehearsal, which could mean that
some patients benefit from practicing while perhaps paying insufficient
attention to the questions you ask in the meantime. Although I’ve always
matriculated in the latter school, perhaps the issue isn’t cosmic, only cos-
metic; that is, either method may be OK, as long as you are consistent.
What you want is to gain a feeling for normal responses to the way you
ask your questions.
Five minutes later, test short-term (recent) memory by asking your
patient to recall the three items. At 5 minutes, most people should be able
to repeat the name, the color, and at least part of the address. When you
are interpreting the results of this test, be sure to consider your patient’s
apparent degree of motivation. Failure on all three parts suggests inattention
due to a serious cognitive disorder or to severe stress from depression, psychosis,
or anxiety.
You can best assess long-term (remote) memory from the ability to orga-
nize the information necessary to relate the history of the present illness.
You will also have a good idea from your patient’s facility with sequence of
events, births of children, and so forth—material that you will have elicited
in the course of obtaining the historical information already described.
Experts differ as to where the dividing line lies between short-term and
long-term memory. Most agree that some sort of consolidation takes place
between 12 and 18 months, so that memories stored long-term are not easily
forgotten. Although patients with severe dementias such as Alzheimer’s typically
retain long-term memories better than short-term memories, even long- retained
information will eventually be lost once the disease has progressed far enough.
Amnesia, that temporary loss of memory often due to physical or psy-
chological trauma, is very different from dementia. It can be encountered
in head trauma of all severities, alcohol-related blackouts, PTSD, and dis-
sociative disorders. Amnesia can be hard to ascertain, since the natural
answer to “Have you ever suffered from amnesia?” is the unhelpful “I
don’t remember.” You might try:
“Have there been periods of time that you cannot remember at all?”
“Have others ever commented that you have trouble with your mem-
ory?”

-- 169 of 385 --

154 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
If you encounter amnesia, try to determine whether it is fragmentary
(the patient can remember isolated bits from the affected periods of time)
or en bloc (there is complete loss of memory for that time). You might
try to bracket the memory hole with the memories on either side of it
(“What’s the last thing you can recall just before the period of amnesia
begins? What’s the first thing you can recall afterward?”). You could also
inquire: “Have you asked friends or relatives to try to help you reconstruct
what happened then?”
Don’t assume that a memory hole means that something bad happened.
Clinicians have come to grief through persuading patients that amnesia
implies assault or molestation—the so- called “false memory” syndrome.
Occasionally you will encounter a patient who not only is disoriented,
but also tries to hide defects of memory by making up responses that
sound logical. This unconscious memory creation is called confabulation,
and it does not signify lying; patients seem truly to believe these stories
they tell, which are mostly about themselves. If asked whether you have
met previously, such a patient might agree, even though it is the first
time you have ever laid eyes on one another. Confabulation is characteristic
of patients whose ability to remember is severely impaired by such disorders as
chronic alcoholism with thiamine deficiency.
A student once asked me the difference between a delusion and a
confabulation. Good question, that! A delusional person may misinter-
pret an actual memory, whereas when someone confabulates, it is to com-
pensate for a memory that should be there, but isn’t.
Cultural Information
Some texts no longer even mention cultural information tasks, which
mainly assess the patient’s remote memory and general intelligence. How-
ever, these are a traditional part of the MSE, so you should have some
familiarity with the classical questions.
“Name the five most recent presidents [or prime ministers or other
heads of state], beginning with the current one.”
Most patients can name four or five presidents (or the like), working
backward. Ask them one at a time. Understandably, many patients find it
daunting to be asked to “name the last five presidents in reverse chrono-
logical order.” If a patient misses one, it’s fair to try to jog memory: “Let’s
see, did you leave out anyone?” or “He’s hiding between two Bushes.”
“Who is the governor of this state?”
“Name five large cities.”
“Name five rivers.”

-- 170 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	155
Cautions about interpretation are the same as for counting and serial
subtractions, mentioned previously. Alternatively, you might get quite an
accurate picture of your patient’s interest, intelligence, and memory by
asking about current events: outcomes of major sports events, the names
of persons running in the next election, and other items of popular cul-
tural significance.
Abstract Thinking
The ability to abstract a principle from a specific example is another tra-
ditional test that depends heavily on culture, intelligence, and education.
This ability has nothing to do with sanity, contrary to what we were taught
half a century ago. Commonly asked abstractions include the interpreta-
tion of proverbs, likenesses, and differences. Here are some typical prov-
erbs to interpret:
“What does it mean when someone says that people who live in glass
houses shouldn’t throw stones?”
“Can you tell me what this means: A rolling stone gathers no moss?”
Note that some proverbs have more than one interpretation (for instance,
gathering moss could be judged as either desirable or not). I accept any
logical interpretation.
Similarities and differences are somewhat less culture-bound than
proverbs, so you are probably better off asking some of these:
“How are an apple and an orange alike?” (They are both fruit; both
are spherical; both have seeds.)
“What is the difference between a child and a dwarf?” (A child will
grow.)
Tests of Cognitive Ability
The Mini-Mental State Exam (or MMSE—not to be confused with the
MSE) is sometimes called the Folstein test to honor two of its develop-
ers. Requiring just a few minutes to administer and score, it extends and
quantifies tests of cognition. A result below 24 (of a possible 30) suggests
dementia, though a highly educated, intelligent patient may score higher
and require formal neuropsychological testing to reveal mild neurocogni-
tive disorder. A good use for the MMSE is to follow the cognitive changes
in a patient with dementia.
For years the MMSE was freely available and so became a staple of
routine mental health evaluations. Alas, it can no longer be reproduced in
its entirety, as it is sold through Psychological Assessment Resources (see

-- 171 of 385 --

156 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
www.minimental.com). Or you can find the criteria in the original article;
I’ve included the reference in Appendix F.
Another test of cognitive ability, the Montreal Cognitive Assess-
ment (MoCA), is more sensitive to mild impairment than the MMSE.
Furthermore, it is available for free online (see www.mocatest.org). It also
has a maximum possible score of 30; a score under 26 suggests cognitive
impairment.
Either of these exams yields only an approximation of a person’s cog-
nitive abilities. For greater precision yet, you can request formal neuro-
psychological testing by a qualified psychologist.
Special Note Concerning Intelligence
Precise estimates (there’s an oxymoron!) of intelligence are beyond the
scope of any initial interview—indeed, of any interaction other than for-
mal testing. Most texts ignore this topic, which would seem important at
least to consider because it can so strongly affect aspects of your assess-
ment, especially cognitive state and personality.
In 1983, the psychologist Howard Gardner proposed that there are
many types of intelligence. Besides linguistic and logical- mathematical intel-
ligence (the two spheres that constitute the majority of what gets measured
in standard tests), he would include spatial, bodily- kinesthetic, musical, inter-
personal, intrapersonal, naturalistic, and existential intelligence. Although
some writers have suggested that this formulation conflates intelligence
with ability, multiple aspects of intelligence encourage the comforting
notion that everyone’s good at something.
Nonetheless, considered opinion still embraces some sort of general
intelligence factor. More than just a number on the page, it can inform
your assessment of a person’s ability to cope with changes in the environ-
ment in the pursuance of life goals. Of course, intelligence can only be
measured accurately by means of standardized testing, but as a part of
your initial evaluation, you’d like to have at least a rough estimate.
You can probably tell enough about your patient’s intelligence (supe-
rior, average, low) from historical information— education, occupation—
plus your impressions from the interview itself, taking into consideration
age, cultural background, and degrees of alertness, cooperation, depres-
sion, and psychosis. However, if you’d like yet one more data point on
which to hang your hat, you can make a quick estimate of overall IQ with
a test published nearly half a century ago by Ian Wilson (the reference is
in Appendix F). Ask the patient to multiply 2 × 3, then 2 × 6, 2 × 12, and
so on. A correct answer at 2 × 48 yields an 85% probability that the patient
will score in the normal range or better on that standard test of intelli-
gence, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale or WAIS (now in its fourth
edition, the WAIS-IV).

-- 172 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	157
insighT and JudgmenT
In the context of the mental health evaluation, insight refers to the valid-
ity of your patient’s ideas about whatever problem you’re evaluating. The
insightful patient recognizes that (1) something is amiss; (2) it can have
implications for future well-being; (3) the cause could be biological, psy-
chological, or social (as opposed to the influence of demons or aliens);
and (4) some form of treatment is needed. The capacity to participate in
psychotherapy or to understand psychodynamics doesn’t usually figure
into this assessment.
Insight that’s deficient has important implications. It can suggest the
need for hospitalization or for appointment of a guardian or fiduciary, or
for depot medication or another treatment the patient prefers to reject.
On the other hand, good insight can increase your confidence that a
patient will cooperate with treatment planning, faithfully take medica-
tion, and show up for appointments.
To ascertain insight, you can ask:
“Do you think there is something wrong with you?”
“Could the voices you hear be due to illness?”
“What do you think has caused it?”
“What sorts of problems do people have who come here?”
“Do you think you are impaired in any way?”
“Do you think treatment might be in order?”
Insight may be full, partial, or nil. For example, a patient with par-
tial insight may realize that something is wrong but blame others for it.
Insight also tends to be fluid—to deteriorate with worsening illness and to
improve during remission. Poor insight is typical of neurocognitive disorders,
severe depression, and any of the psychoses (especially schizophrenia and bipolar
I disorder with psychotic features).
You should also try to get a feeling for your patient’s self-image by
asking:
“What strengths do you think you have?”
“What do you like about yourself?”
“How do you think other people see you?”
Patients’ assessment of their own strengths— what they think they are good at—can
be important for recommending treatment and estimating prognosis.

-- 173 of 385 --

158 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Aside from its role in the acceptance of recommended treatment, we
may think of judgment as the ability to decide upon an appropriate course
of action in the pursuit of realistic goals. Some clinicians still assess judg-
ment by asking hypothetical questions such as “What would you do if you
found a letter with a stamp on it?” or “How would you react if a fire broke
out in a theater when you were attending a performance?” Such abstract
questions probably have little bearing on one’s ability to get along in the
world; you are better off avoiding them. Instead, ask practical questions
to assess your patient’s judgment:
“What do you expect from treatment?”
“What are your plans for the future?”
In the final analysis, your best appraisal of judgment will probably come
from material you have just obtained in an hour or more of interviewing.
When you are reporting the patient’s insight and judgment, be sure
to give particulars: state the aspects of insight that appear deficient, and
give examples of why you think so. Too often, we are content to assign a
value judgment (“The patient’s insight was limited”) and let it go at that—a
practice that lacks rigor and, well, good judgment.
when can You omiT The Formal menTal sTaTus exam?
The obvious answer to the question posed in this heading remains “Never.”
The reason is that unless all your information comes from printed records,
you make a great number of mental status observations every time you
have a conversation. The question we are really posing is this: When can
you safely avoid asking the questions contained in the cognitive portion of
the MSE (that is, the questions covered in much of this chapter)?
It is seldom risk-free to leave out any test; whenever you do so, it
must be with the idea of balancing benefits (saving your time and the
patient’s possible embarrassment) versus disadvantages (obtaining less in
the way of diagnostic information). The disadvantages of testing are usu-
ally inconsequential: Most tests are quick, and most patients will accept
with reasonably good grace whatever questions you pose. Nonetheless,
here are a few situations in which you could abbreviate your MSE by omit-
ting some formal tests of orientation, knowledge, attention, and memory:
Your patient has given a detailed, well- organized history. For exam-
ple, an outpatient who consults you for a relatively nonthreatening
problem (life stress or marital difficulties, perhaps) clearly relates a
story that is coherent and devoid of gaps or inconsistencies.

-- 174 of 385 --

Mental Status Exam II 	159
Test results are available. You have a report of recent psychological
testing, which will be far more precise than your approximate tests.
The patient is already distressed. If the patient has been quizzed
recently by other examiners and is embarrassed or angered by
repeated requests, you may want to abbreviate your exam. This may
be especially true of patients who have trouble with certain of the
tests.
You should not omit any portion of the formal MSE under the follow-
ing circumstances:
Any forensic exam. Such reports may be scrutinized in a court of law;
leave no stone unturned.
Other legal requirements. Commitment proceedings, competency
evaluations, and examinations mandated for certain procedures
(such as electroconvulsive therapy) almost always require a complete
report.
A benchmark record. For example, if you know you’ll need to evalu-
ate the results of treatment later, you’d better have an exact record of
what the patient was like “before.”
Any hint of suicidal ideation or threats of violence. Personal conse-
quences for the patient and potential legal fallout in general mandate
the complete exam.
Major diagnoses. Any major condition (especially psychotic, mood,
anxiety, neurocognitive, and substance use disorders) must be thor-
oughly investigated.
Inpatient status. Any patient sick enough to be hospitalized deserves
a complete workup.
Possible brain injury. Always do a complete MSE when there is a his-
tory of head injury or neurological illness.
A beginning examiner. Performing the complete evaluation over and
over will give you both familiarity and facility with it.

-- 175 of 385 --

160
C h a p t e r 	1 3
Signs and Symptoms in Areas
of Clinical Interest
The areas of clinical interest are simply a way of thinking about historical
and mental status information. The eight groups I’ll discuss here include
most of the signs and symptoms a mental health professional can expect
to encounter. The areas of clinical interest should help you focus your
inquiry on the information you will need to devise a differential diagno-
sis.
Your job is to obtain the facts necessary to assess the importance of
any of these areas you encounter to the overall evaluation. Remember
that each of them comprises a number of clinical diagnoses that have
symptoms in common. In order to decide which diagnosis fits best, you
must inquire about symptoms of each of the disorders you have in mind.
As an example of how this process works, consider a patient who
has complained of feeling depressed, blue, or “bummed out.” You would
expect to find some of these additional symptoms of a mood disorder:
crying spells, hopelessness, change in appetite and sleep patterns, feeling
worse at certain times of the day, low energy, poor concentration, pessi-
mistic outlook, and suicidal ideas or behaviors. Most patients won’t have
all of these symptoms, but even a couple of them would suggest that your
patient could suffer from some kind of a depressive condition. In that
case, you should learn whether the symptoms and course of the illness
will support one of the mood disorder diagnoses. In other words, first
get the data. Later, when all the facts are in, you can decide which of the
diagnoses best fits the facts.
In discussing each area of clinical interest, I will present these fea-
tures:

-- 176 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	161
1. Tip-offs, or the “red flag” symptoms that should alert you to
explore further.
2. The main diagnoses. This section covers the most important dis-
orders covered by that area of clinical interest, plus the principal
differential diagnoses. I’ve marked with an asterisk (*) those that
I’ve included in the Appendix B description of diagnoses.
3. Historical information. Here, I briefly explain the importance of
each bit of historical data you should ask about.
4. Typical features from the MSE. The current mental status is usu-
ally not as helpful as history in sorting out the differential diagno-
sis, so I have just listed the typical symptoms.
At times it is hard to know where history ends and the mental status
begins. For that reason, you might find that some features mentioned
under one section seem to belong in another. For example, a patient
might report some moods that are not observed during the interview.
In Appendix D, you’ll find a semistructured interview that covers the
major mental health diagnoses. It gives readers who want it a way to ensure
that they’ve touched all the bases in their interview. I do want to warn you,
however, to be careful about interviewing for a particular diagnosis. The
purpose of the initial interview is to determine what’s wrong, not merely to
find evidence that will reaffirm your preconceptions— or what another cli-
nician has already claimed. In other words, don’t bait a hook to catch a par-
ticular kind of fish; rather, you should cast a net to see what you bring up.
psYchosis
Psychosis means simply that the patient is out of touch with reality, as
judged by the presence of hallucinations, delusions, or markedly loosened
thought associations. This condition may be either transient or chronic,
although with today’s treatment methods it is unusual for a person to
remain psychotic for extended periods.
Tip‑Offs
Symptoms that would make you consider psychosis as an area of clinical
interest include the following:
Affect that is flat or inappropriate
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Delusions

-- 177 of 385 --

162 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Fantasies or illogical ideas
Hallucinations (of any of the senses)
Insight or judgment that is disturbed
Muteness
Perceptual distortions or misinterpretations
Social withdrawal
Speech that is incoherent or hard to follow
Main Diagnoses
A patient who presents with psychosis is likely to have one of three prin-
cipal diagnoses: an organic psychosis (that is, one due to a medical ill-
ness or to substance use), schizophrenia, or some sort of mood episode—a
major depressive episode with psychosis (which could signal either major
depressive disorder or bipolar I disorder) or severe mania (bipolar I).
Of those, you’ll encounter mood episodes and schizophrenia most fre-
quently. However, here is a more complete list:
Schizophrenia*
Major depressive episode*
Manic episode*
Neurocognitive disorders, such as delirium* due to a variety of causes
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder* (e.g., due to alcohol)
Brief psychotic disorder
Schizophreniform disorder*
Schizoaffective disorder*
Delusional disorder*
Historical Information
Age at onset. Schizophrenia tends to begin early (late teens or 20s);
delusional disorder starts in middle to late life.
Alcohol or drugs. Many psychotic patients use substances. Check the
chronology. If the psychosis began first, schizophrenia with secondary
substance misuse is more likely. If substance use began first, the psychosis
could be a secondary diagnosis; schizophrenia is less likely.
Depression. If there is a past or present severe depression, consider
the diagnosis of a mood disorder with psychosis.

-- 178 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	163
Environmental stress. Severe stress that precedes the onset of psycho-
sis suggests a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder.
Family history. Schizophrenia and mood disorders tend to run in fam-
ilies; having a relative with either condition increases the likelihood of
that diagnosis for the patient.
Length of illness. The longer a psychosis has lasted, the more likely
schizophrenia is to be the final diagnosis.
Loss of drive, volition, interest. These symptoms are typical of the later
phases of schizophrenia.
Onset. Sudden onset (a few days to a few weeks) suggests a cogni-
tive or mood disorder with psychosis. The longer and more gradual the
onset—up to several years in some cases—the more likely this psychosis is
to be schizophrenia.
Physical illness. Cognitive psychoses are associated with a number
of health risk factors: endocrine or metabolic disorders, tumors, toxic
substance exposure, trauma, and a variety of neurological and medical
diseases.
Previous episode with recovery. Mood disorders tend to be episodic ill-
nesses; these patients are more likely to recover completely than are those
with schizophrenia.
Schizoid or schizotypal premorbid personality. Long- standing character
traits such as aloofness, emotional withdrawal, few friends, or odd beliefs
or behaviors sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
Unemployment or reduced job level. If unemployment or underemploy-
ment has been present for years, and especially if the reduced job level con-
tinues after recovery from an acute episode, schizophrenia is more likely
than if the patient worked at a high-grade, demanding job until just recently.
Note on first-rank symptoms. A much- discussed set of hallucinations
and delusions is that of Kurt Schneider’s first-rank symptoms, any one of
which he believed was diagnostic of schizophrenia. Although subsequent
research has shown that patients with other disorders may also report
these symptoms, you will encounter the concept of first-rank symptoms
often enough to warrant a brief listing:
Audible thoughts
Delusional perception, in which a normal observation has abnor-
mal significance for a patient; for example, when a patient was
served a grilled cheese sandwich for lunch, he “knew” that his aunt
was about to die
Delusions of influence

-- 179 of 385 --

164 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Delusions of thought control
More than one voice talking about the patient
Voices commenting on the patient’s actions
Somatic hallucinations (body sensations produced by outside influ-
ence)
Thought broadcasting
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Hallucinations (cont.)
Abnormalities of motion 	Auditory
Reduced activity 	Voices?
Pacing 	If so, whose?
Posturing 	Audible thoughts?
Rigidity 	Visual
Negativism 	Tactile
Grimacing 	Taste
Stereotypies 	Smell
Clothing eccentric or
disheveled
Delusions
Death
Hyperalertness 	Erotomania
Neglect of hygiene 	Grandeur
Mood 	Guilt
Flat or silly 	Ill health or bodily change
Perplexity about identity 	Jealousy
Flow of thought 	Passivity
Speech restricted in amount 	Persecution
Mute 	Poverty
Incoherent 	Reference
Loosened associations 	Language usually not impaired
Illogical ideas 	Cognition generally preserved
Preoccupied with fantasies 	Insight often absent
Content of thought 	Judgment may be impaired in
the acute phase	Hallucinations: When? Where?
mood disTurBance: depression
Depression means a mood that is variously described as “blue,” “low,” or
“melancholy”—as well as “depressed.” This low mood must be persistent,
usually lasting at least a week or two. It is often described as a marked
change from the patient’s normal mood. Some people will tell you that
they don’t feel depressed; they just don’t experience pleasure (this state is

-- 180 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	165
called anhedonia). The information needed for the history of the present
illness addresses both cause of depression (see later) and severity.
Tip‑Offs
You should investigate depression if your patient presents with any of
these symptoms:
Activity level that is either markedly decreased or increased (agitated)
Anxiety symptoms
Appetite changes
Concentration poor
Death wishes
Depressed mood
Interest decreased for usual activities (including sex)
Sleeplessness or excessive sleepiness
Suicidal ideas
Tearfulness
Use of drugs or alcohol
Weight loss or gain
Worthlessness
Main Diagnoses
Many of the same physical diseases that produce psychosis can also lead
to depression. However, the principal problem with diagnosis is differen-
tiating primary depression (or depression that is chronologically the first
disorder to appear) from secondary depression (or depression that begins
after and is caused by another mental or personality disorder). Principal
diagnoses to consider are these:
Major depressive episode* (as part of either major depressive disor-
der or bipolar I or bipolar II disorder)
Melancholia*
Dysthymia (now called persistent depressive disorder in DSM-5)*
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Seasonal pattern in mood disorder
Secondary depression

-- 181 of 385 --

166 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Historical Information
Alcohol and drugs. Substance use is a principal finding preceding the
onset of secondary depression.
Anhedonia. The patient cannot feel pleasure. In some patients, this
feeling may occur as an alternative to the mood of depression.
Atypical features. Stress-related depression may have symptoms of
excessive sleep (hypersomnia), increased appetite, and weight gain;
patients may feel better in the mornings and when they are with people
they like. These features are called atypical because depressed patients
more usually have insomnia, feel better in the evenings, complain of
decreased appetite and weight, and don’t feel better with pleasant society.
Change from usual self. Patients who have severe bipolar depressed
episodes or unipolar depression often report that the way they feel is a
“complete change from the way I used to feel.”
Environmental stress. Any severe environmental stressor can be asso-
ciated with depressed mood. A depression that remits as soon as the
stressor lifts is sometimes called reactive. Non- stress-related depressions
are sometimes referred to as endogenous (springing from within); people
sometimes describe them as “coming out of nowhere.” Reactive depres-
sions are usually less severe than those of the endogenous type, and are
less likely to require treatment.
Episodic illness. Has there been a previous episode of depression? Did
the patient recover completely? “Yes” answers suggest bipolar depressed
episodes, unipolar depression, or a mood disorder with seasonal pattern
(see below). A chronic, low-intensity depression that has been present for
years is typical of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia).
Family history of mood disorder. This is a classical finding in severe
mood disorder, which is often at least partly inherited.
Indecisiveness. Inability to make up one’s mind, even regarding minor
details, is emblematic of severe depression.
Isolation. Withdrawal from friends or family suggests a severe depres-
sion such as melancholia.
Mania ever. The distinction between a bipolar depressed episode and
major depressive disorder is easily made with the finding of previous epi-
sodes of mania.
Neglect of hobbies, activities. Loss of interest in usual activities accom-
panies severe depression.
Premenstrual pattern. Women whose depressive symptoms occur mainly
before their periods begin may have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.

-- 182 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	167
Recent loss (bereavement). This is another common environmental
stressor that can precede depression.
Seasonal pattern. Some patients report regular onset of depression at
a particular season of the year (typically fall or winter), with full remission
later (typically springtime). Such patients may be diagnosed as having a
mood disorder with seasonal pattern.
Sex interest decreased. Loss of libido is a classical symptom of moder-
ate to severe depression.
Suicide ideas, attempts. For any depression, ask about psychological
and physical seriousness of previous attempts. Are there current ideas
about suicide? Does the patient have a plan, and the means, to act upon
these ideas?
Trouble thinking or concentrating. These symptoms are usually found
in moderate to severe depression.
Vegetative symptoms. Classical for severe depression with melancholia
are terminal insomnia (the patient awakens early and cannot return to
sleep), decreased appetite, weight loss, and low energy or fatigue. Patients
tend to feel better in evenings than mornings, and don’t improve much
when with people whose company they normally enjoy.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Content of thought (cont.)
Tearful 	“Better off dead”
Decreased attention to
appearance
Death wishes
Suicide ideas, plans
Decreased interest in usual
activities
Mood- congruent delusions
Guilt
Slowed actions 	Sin
Agitation 	Worthlessness
Mood 	Ill health
Sad face 	Poverty
Anxiety 	Language not usually affected
Flow of thought 	Cognition
Slowing 	Usually intact
Content of thought 	May have “pseudodementia”
Guilt feelings 	Insight and judgment
Ruminations 	May deny feeling depressed
Hopelessness 	May deny possibility of
improvement	Worthlessness
Loss of pleasure

-- 183 of 385 --

168 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
mood disTurBance: mania
Manic patients describe their moods as “high,” “hyper,” “exalted,”
“excited,” or “euphoric”; sometimes they are mainly irritable. Although
the condition of mania has been recognized for more than 100 years,
these patients are often misdiagnosed as having schizophrenia. Cognitive
disorders can sometimes present with symptoms of mania.
Tip‑Offs
Consider mania when you are confronted with any of the following symp-
toms:
Activity level increased
Distractibility
Grandiose sense of self-worth
Judgment deteriorating
Mood euphoric or irritable
Planning many activities
Sleep decreased (reduced need for sleep)
Speech rapid, loud, hard to interrupt
Substance use recently begun or increased
Thoughts moving rapidly from one idea to another
Main Diagnoses
Most manic patients also have episodes of (often severe) depression.
Cyclothymia, a milder condition in which high moods that are not psy-
chotic alternate with depressed ones, is the other principal possibility to
consider. Differential diagnoses includes the following:
Mania* (bipolar I disorder, manic episode)
Bipolar II disorder
Cyclothymia
Organic mood disorder
Historical Information
Alcohol misuse. Sometimes this can be an attempt to lessen the
uncomfortable feelings of being speeded up.
Concentration decreased. Manic patients often start projects that they
do not complete.

-- 184 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	169
Episodic illness. A previous episode of mania or depression with com-
plete recovery usually clinches the diagnosis. If so, look especially for
rapid cycling (four or more switches between highs and lows in the course
of a year). These episodes, which may be as brief as a few days, have impli-
cations for the type of treatment that may be effective.
Insomnia. This is often experienced as decreased need for sleep.
Judgment poor. This appears as a history of spending sprees, legal
troubles, or sexual indiscretions.
Libido increased. Manic exuberance can lead to promiscuity, preg-
nancy, and the risk of sexually transmitted disease.
Personality change. At the extreme, a normally quiet, unassuming
person abruptly becomes boisterous, argumentative, or ill-tempered.
Physical conditions. Disinhibition similar to mania can be encoun-
tered after head trauma and in various conditions such as brain tumors
and endocrine disorders.
Relationships disrupted. Friends and family have difficulty coping with
markedly changed behavior.
Sociability increased. Manic patients may excessively enjoy parties and
other social gatherings.
Work-related problems. Loss of concentration and preoccupation with
grandiose plans contribute to decreased performance on the job or in
school.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Flow of thought (cont.)
Excited, agitated 	Wordplay, jokes
Hyperactive 	Distractible
Increased energy 	Content of thought
Loud speech 	Self- confident
Flamboyant or bizarre dress 	Increased religiosity
May be threatening or
assaultive
Full of schemes and plans
Grandiosity that may be
delusional	Mood
Euphoric 	Language usually not affected
Irritable 	Cognition usually intact
Rapidly changing moods 	Insight and judgment
Flow of thought 	Lack of insight into the fact of
being ill	Racing thoughts
Flight of ideas 	Poor judgment (refuses
hospitalization, treatment)	Pressured speech

-- 185 of 385 --

170 	The FirsT inTerview
SubStance uSe DiSorDerS
Substance misuse is defined by the culture in which it occurs. In most
segments of our culture (some religions, such as the Mormons, for exam-
ple, are significant exceptions), the majority of adults use substances—if
only caffeine. Whether we consider a person to be misusing a substance
depends not simply on the amount or frequency of use, but also on the
consequences of this behavior. These consequences may be behavioral,
cognitive, legal, financial, and physical. Many of them also affect society
as a whole.
Tip‑Offs
The following symptoms should lead you to consider a diagnosis of a sub-
stance use disorder:
Alcohol use greater than one or two drinks per day
Arrests or other legal problems
Financial problems: the patient spends money needed for other pur-
poses
Health problems: blackouts, cirrhosis, abdominal pain, vomiting
Illegal substance use
Job loss, tardiness, demotions
Memory impairment (blackouts from drinking or drug use)
Social problems: fights, loss of friends
Main Diagnoses
In DSM-5, these disorders are called [substance] use disorders and [sub-
stance/medication]-induced [mood, psychotic, etc.] disorders. Substance-
induced neurocognitive disorders, the brain syndromes that many people
who heavily use substances also have at one time or another, will be con-
sidered in the “Difficulty Thinking (Cognitive Problems)” section.
The classes of substances that are recognized as subject to misuse
are given below. Many substance users will use more than one of these
classes.
Alcohol
Amphetamines
Cannabis
Cocaine

-- 186 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	171
Hallucinogens (including phencyclidine [PCP])
Inhalants
Nicotine
Opioids
Sedatives, hypnotics, anxiolytics
Substance use can occur as a solitary diagnosis, but it is often associ-
ated with another major mental health diagnosis or personality disorder.
Those you should especially look for include the following:
Mood disorders (depression and mania)
Schizophrenia
Somatization disorder (somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5)
Antisocial personality disorder
Historical Information
Abuse. Formerly used to denote those who had problems resulting
from use but were not actually dependent, this term should now be under-
stood simply to mean use of any substance, including prescription medi-
cations, that’s greater than is good for the individual.
Activities used to obtain supply. These include drug sales, theft, rob-
bery, and prostitution.
Age at onset. How old was the patient when substance use began? For
alcohol use, women may have a much later age of onset than men.
Chronology. If there is an associated mental disorder, which came
first? For example, if alcoholism chronologically precedes depression, the
depression is regarded as secondary.
Dependence. Dependence means, in essence, that behavior changes
because of the person’s use of the substance. The following symptoms are
the sorts of behavioral alterations that DSM-5 uses to define a substance
use disorder. (The first two don’t usually apply to cannabis or the hallu-
cinogens.)
1. Tolerance (the patient needs more of the substance to produce
the same effect or obtains less effect with the same dose).
2. Withdrawal (the patient experiences withdrawal symptoms
typical for the substance or takes more of it to avoid with-
drawal).
3. More of the substance is used than the patient intends.
4. The patient tries without success to control substance use.

-- 187 of 385 --

172 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
5. The patient spends much time obtaining or using the sub-
stance or recovering from its effects.
6. Substance use causes the patient to give up important work/
educational, social, or recreational activities.
7. Despite awareness that it has caused physical or psychological
problems, the patient continues to use the substance.
8. The patient repeatedly uses substances even when it is physi-
cally dangerous to do so (such as driving while intoxicated).
9. Because of repeated use, the patient fails to carry out major
obligations at home or work/school (repeated absences,
neglect of children or house, poor work performance).
10. The patient keeps using the substance despite knowing that
it has caused or worsened social or interpersonal problems
(fights, arguments).
11. Finally, the patient craves the substance. Of course, this
intense desire is not itself a behavior, but rather the driving
force behind the above-listed behavioral symptoms.
Emotional/behavioral 	disorders. 	Especially 	frequent 	complications
include psychosis, mood syndromes, anxiety syndromes, delusional disor-
der, and delirium on withdrawal.
Frequency of use. How often has each substance been used? Has the
pattern changed with the current episode?
Health problems. Has deteriorating health been suggested by evidence
such as cirrhosis, stomach disorders, wasting, tuberculosis, or respiratory
problems?
Legal problems. Has the patient been arrested or jailed for possession,
sales, or for criminal activities to finance supply? A history of criminal
activity occasioned by the need to obtain money for drugs must be distin-
guished from antisocial personality disorder (which may be the correct
diagnosis if illegal activities have been undertaken when the patient was
clean and sober).
Needle sharing. If intravenous usage is reported, has the patient ever
used dirty needles? Had hepatitis? How recently has there been a test for
HIV?
Pattern of use. Has there been continuous, episodic, or binge usage?
If more than one drug is involved, what is the pattern for each?
Personality change. How has drug use affected the way the patient
relates to others? Has there been a general loss of motivation (especially
likely with long-term use of cannabis or hallucinogens)?

-- 188 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	173
Relationship problems. These include divorces, separations, and fight-
ing. Some couples stay together only because of a common interest in
drug use.
Route of administration. Any of the following means can be used: swal-
lowing, snorting, smoking, subcutaneous, intravenous, rectal, vaginal.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance 	Language
Red-faced 	Fluency reduced (mumbling,
slurred speech)	Tremor
Disheveled 	Cognitive
Mood 	May show cognitive signs if
there is a concomitant
neurocognitive disorder
Depressed
Anxious
Belligerent 	Insight and judgment
Flow of thought 	May reject the diagnosis
Often talkative 	Patients often refuse treatment
or sign out against advice	Content of thought
Maudlin
Demanding
Hallucinations
More often visual
May be auditory
social and personaliTY proBlems
Personality traits are patterns of behavior or thought that persist through-
out adult life. To be diagnosable as personality disorders, traits must be
pronounced enough to cause the patient functional impairment (work/
educational, social, or emotional) or personal distress.
Tip‑Offs
You should consider social and personality problems whenever your
patient has any of the following characteristics:
Anxiety
Behaviors that seem odd or bizarre
Dramatic presentation
Drug or alcohol misuse

-- 189 of 385 --

174 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Interpersonal conflict
Job problems
Legal difficulties
Marital conflicts
Personality disorders must be distinguished from ordinary problems
of living that are not mental disorders. The latter can include borderline
intellectual functioning, academic problems, marital and other family
problems, job problems, and uncomplicated bereavement.
Main Diagnoses
Although many personality disorders have been proposed over the years,
only the 10 given below currently enjoy official diagnostic blessing. Adult
patients who do not fully meet criteria for one of these diagnoses but have
long- standing impairments of self (that is, identity or self- direction) and
impairments of an interpersonal nature (empathy or intimacy) may be
diagnosed as having unspecified personality disorder.
Antisocial*
Avoidant*
Borderline*
Dependent
Histrionic
Narcissistic*
Obsessive–compulsive (personality disorder)*
Paranoid
Schizoid
Schizotypal*
Important differential diagnoses for any personality disorder, includ-
ing those other than the officially recognized 10 listed above, include
these mental disorders:
Bipolar I disorder*
Major depressive disorder*
Dysthymia (persistent depressive disorder)*
Schizophrenia*
Delusional disorder*

-- 190 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	175
Substance use disorders
Obsessive–compulsive disorder*
Personality change due to another medical condition
Historical Information
Many traits have been linked to personality disorders. For purposes of
description, I have used several common headings. This list makes no
pretense of completeness; it does present traits that clinicians consider
important in defining currently recognized personality disorders. This is
some of the information you should pursue in the quest of a personality
disorder diagnosis.
Callousness. Forces sexual activity on others; takes advantage of oth-
ers for personal gain; humiliates others publicly; uses harsh discipline;
takes pleasure in suffering of others.
Carries grudges.
Childhood delinquency. Truancy; starts fights; fights with weapons;
runs away; is cruel to animals or people; destroys property; sets fires.
Compliance is excessive. Volunteers for unpleasant tasks so as to be
liked by others; agrees with people to avoid rejection.
Concern for others is lacking. Self- centered; unable to recognize how
others feel.
Criticism is rejected. Resents useful suggestions; easily hurt by others.
Dishonesty. History of frequent lying; history of stealing, robbery, or
conning others.
Impulsivity. Wanders without a fixed abode; sexual indiscretions;
shoplifts; reckless disregard for personal safety.
Indecisiveness. Avoids making decisions or depends on others to
make them; vague about goals.
Indifferent to praise.
Inflexibility. Reluctant to do things that differ from routine; perfec-
tionism that interferes with task completion; preoccupation with rules,
lists, order; misses the forest for the trees; resists letting others have their
way; rigid about morality, ethics.
Insecurity. Feels uncomfortable when alone; won’t get involved unless
sure of being liked; fearful of self- embarrassment in social situations;

-- 191 of 385 --

176 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
exaggerates risks of doing something outside the routine; afraid of being
abandoned; feels helpless or uncomfortable, so avoids being alone.
Irresponsibility. Defaults on financial obligations such as family sup-
port or debts; unable to hold a job; fails to do a reasonable share of the
work; “forgets” obligations; puts things off.
Mood instability. Mood fluctuates more rapidly or more widely than is
usually considered normal for the circumstances. May be quick to show
anger; “hair-trigger temper.”
Physical aggression. Fighting or assaults.
Saves objects of no value.
Sex drive is low.
Sociability is low. Is a loner (prefers solitary activities); uncomfortable
in social situations or with strangers; avoids close relationships.
Stinginess. Shows lack of generosity with money or time.
Suicidal ideas or behavior; nonsuicidal self-harm.
Suspiciousness. Reluctance to confide in others; easily slighted;
reads hidden meaning into innocent remarks or situations; expects to be
exploited or harmed by others; questions loyalty of friends or fidelity of
spouse/partner.
Trusts others excessively. Chronically chooses associates or situations
that lead to disappointment.
Unstable interpersonal relationships.
Workaholism.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Mood
Lacks sense of humor 	Hostile or defensive
Hypervigilant 	Temper; inappropriate,
intense anger	Argumentative
Appears tense 	Exaggeratedly emotional
speech, behavior	Reluctant to confide
Sexual seductiveness that is
inappropriate
Denies experiencing strong
emotions
Overly concerned with
appearance,
attractiveness
Feels empty or bored
Lacks remorse for hurting
others

-- 192 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	177
Mood (cont.) 	Content of thought (cont.)
Shallow, shifting emotions 	Frequently requests
reassurance or approval;
fishes for compliments
Apathy
Restricted or inappropriate
affect 	Fears being embarrassed
Cool, aloof, or silly 	Judgmental of self and/or
others	Flow of thought
Vague speech 	Unreasonably devalues
authority figures	Odd speech (vague, digressive,
impoverished) 	Language: no abnormalities
are typical	Content of thought
Expects to be exploited 	Cognition: no abnormalities
are typical	Questions loyalty of friends
Suspects hidden meanings 	Insight and judgment
Fantasies of success, power 	Exaggerates
accomplishments	Ideas of reference (e.g., “as
if” strangers talk about
patient)
Lacks remorse for behavior
Feels others make
unreasonable demands	Odd beliefs, superstitions or
magical thinking, illusions 	Overvalues own work;
self-important; feels
problems are unique;
sense of entitlement
Uncertainty about identity
(self-image, sexual
orientation, long-term
goals, values)
diFFiculTY Thinking (cogniTive proBlems)
A wide variety of physical and chemical insults can interfere with think-
ing. These causes include the following:
Brain tumors
Head trauma
Hypertension
Infections
Metabolic disorders
Postoperative complications
Seizure disorders
Toxic substances or withdrawal from psychoactive substances
Vitamin deficiency

-- 193 of 385 --

178 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Tip‑Offs
Any of the following should stimulate further investigation of cognitive
problems:
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Decreased judgment
Delusions
Hallucinations
Memory defects
Mood fluctuations
History of ingesting toxins
Main Diagnoses
Physical or chemical brain dysfunction produces abnormalities of behav-
ior or thinking that can be either temporary or permanent. The types of
problems include these:
Amnestic syndrome
Anxiety disorders
Delirium*
Delusional syndrome
Dementia (DSM-5 calls it major neurocognitive disorder)*
Dissociative disorders
Intoxication and withdrawal
Psychosis of intoxication or withdrawal
Mood syndrome
Personality change due to another medical condition
The important differential diagnoses include the starred diagnoses/syn-
dromes in the previous group, plus these:
Depression*
Schizophrenia*
Substance use disorders*
Note that delirium and dementia may coexist.

-- 194 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	179
Historical Information
Age at onset. Dementia is most commonly encountered in elderly per-
sons; delirium is common in children and in older people. Either can
occur across the age spectrum.
Course. May be stable, fluctuating, deteriorating, or improving. If
the damage is structural (such as following massive brain trauma), there
tends to be some permanent dysfunction, even though improvement may
occur. Patients with dementia (such as due to Alzheimer’s disease) tend to
deteriorate progressively.
Depressive disorder. It is especially important to know about a history
of depression and current depressive features, because pseudodementia,
one of the possible presentations of severe depression, is a completely
treatable mood disorder that isn’t a neurocognitive disorder at all.
Difficulty providing self-care. Often this is what drives family members
to bring demented patients for care.
Fluctuating symptoms and mental status. Such fluctuations are espe-
cially characteristic of delirium.
Head trauma. Trauma can produce a subdural hematoma, which
causes symptoms days to weeks later. Bleeding inside the skull can also
cause an epidural hematoma, producing symptoms within hours or days.
Also be alert for loss of memory that can result from concussion.
Impulsivity. Demented patients lose the ability to judge what is accept-
able behavior; consequently, they act on impulses they previously would
have suppressed. As a reaction to either fear or confusion, delirious or
demented patients may run away. Demented patients may spend money
heedlessly, though this behavior occurs without the grandiose quality it
has in mania.
Laboratory testing. This should be consistent with the suspected cause
of any cognitive syndrome.
Memory loss. Defective memory is characteristic of the dementias.
Recent memory is affected most often, though long-term memory can
also be involved in severe dementia. Some patients consciously try to com-
pensate for defects in memory by confabulating—making up stories.
Onset. The development of symptoms may be rapid or insidious,
depending on the cause and nature of the disorder. Rapid onset is charac-
teristic of disorders caused by strokes, infections, or trauma; defects from
vitamin deficiencies and brain tumors may develop gradually.
Personality change. Many symptoms of cognitive syndromes involve a
change from the patient’s previous personality. These include outbursts of
rage or combativeness, social withdrawal, coarsening of behavior (crude

-- 195 of 385 --

180 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
jokes), and neglect of grooming or hygiene. One patient with Alzheim-
er’s dementia who had always welcomed racial diversity shouted racist
comments. Excessive neatness (sometimes called organic orderliness) can
develop.
Psychotic symptoms. Delusions, usually persecutory, can occur in
dementia (patients with Alzheimer’s often believe that people steal from
them). Delusions may be indistinguishable from those of schizophrenia.
Hallucinations commonly occur in delirium, but they are usually visual.
Sleep–wake cycle changes. Delirious patients are typically drowsy,
although some have trouble falling asleep; vivid dreams or nightmares
occur.
Suicide attempts. The presence of suicidal behavior should cause you
to consider the diagnosis of major depression, although attempts (and
completions) can occur in the dementias.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Language
Disheveled 	Comprehension decreases
with advancing dementia	Tremor
Restlessness 	Fluency is often preserved,
even with moderate
dementia
Picking at bedclothes, clothing
Mood
Affect bland or shallow 	Naming: aphasias
Anger 	Cognition
Anxiety 	Drowsy, hard to stay awake
Apathy 	Disorientation
Depression 	Not knowing the date may
be an early symptom of
delirium
Euphoria
Fear
Irritability 	Disorientation to place,
person are later
symptoms (especially
dementia)
Flow of thought
Slurred speech
Perseveration
Rambling, incoherent 	Impaired abstract thinking
(similarities)	Loosening of associations
Content of thought 	Low attention span (easily
distractible) is found
especially in delirium
Suspiciousness
Current suicidal ideas
Illusions 	Impaired memory
Psychotic features 	Insight and judgment
Delusions 	Impaired judgment
Hallucinations (especially visual)

-- 196 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	181
anxieTY, avoidance Behavior, and arousal
Conditions in this area of clinical interest have in common anxiety symp-
toms that can result in attempts to avoid the stimulus.
Tip‑Offs
Symptoms that would cause you to explore this area include any expres-
sion of anxiety or fear, as well as somatic symptoms that suggest breathing
or heartbeat problems when there is no known basis for concern.
Anxiety
Chest complaints (pain, heaviness, trouble breathing, palpitations)
Compulsive behavior
Fear of objects, situations, dying, impending doom, going crazy
Nervousness
Obsessional ideas
Panic
Trauma (history of severe emotional or physical experience)
Worries
Main Diagnoses
The principal disorders covered by this area of clinical interest include:
Panic disorder*
Generalized anxiety disorder*
Specific phobia*
Agoraphobia*
Obsessive–compulsive disorder*
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)*
Although anxiety symptoms are found in nearly every mental disorder,
the important differential diagnoses include the following:
Depression (various specific diagnoses)*
Substance-induced disorders
Schizophrenia*
Somatization disorder (somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5)*

-- 197 of 385 --

182 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Historical Information
Age at onset. Most of these conditions begin when the patient is rela-
tively young. Animal phobias begin in childhood; situational phobias usu-
ally begin in the 30s.
Agoraphobia. May occur with or without panic disorder. Occurs in
situations from which escape is difficult or embarrassing, such as being
away from home, in a crowd, in a car, or on a bridge.
Alcohol or drug use. This could be either a cause or an effect of anxiety
symptoms.
Anticipatory anxiety. Common in phobias, this sensation of dread is
experienced for minutes to hours before the arrival of a feared stimulus
(such as speaking in public).
Caffeine intake. Excessive coffee (or tea) drinking can cause anxiety
symptoms.
Circumstances of panic attacks. How many attacks have there been,
and in what period of time? Were they unexpected? (Attacks in panic
disorder tend to arise spontaneously.)
Compulsions. The most common compulsions are handwashing,
checking, counting, and routines that must be followed (such as at bed-
time). They may occur as rituals (rules) or as “antidotes” or responses to
obsessions.
Depressive symptoms. Determine whether these came before the anxi-
ety syndrome, (suggesting primary depression) or after (suggesting that
the depression is secondary).
Duration of panic attacks. Individual panic attacks last only a few min-
utes, but they may recur over a period of weeks, months, or years.
Frequency of panic attacks. They usually occur several times a week.
Lifestyle constriction. As a result of anxiety, does the patient stay at
home or avoid specific situations or objects? This may be true for specific
phobia, obsessive–compulsive disorder, PTSD, agoraphobia, and panic
disorder.
Mental content of panic attacks. Patients may fear that they are going
to die, lose control, or lose their minds.
Obsessions. Most common are ideas of (1) harming or killing and (2)
swearing (blaspheming). These ideas persist despite the patient’s recogni-
tion that the ideas are senseless and alien.

-- 198 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	183
Physical symptoms of anxiety. Most of the same physical sensations
occur in panic attacks and in anxiety and related disorders:
Breathlessness 	Heart palpitations
Chest pain 	Lump in throat
Chills or flushes 	Muscle tension
Dizziness 	Nausea
Dry mouth 	Restlessness
Fatigability 	Sweating
Frequent urination 	Tremor
Prescription medication use. Clinicians often prescribe, and patients
with anxiety often resort to, drugs in an attempt to keep symptoms in
check.
Social anxiety disorder. This typically involves fear of performing,
speaking, or eating in public; of using a public toilet; or of trying to write
when someone is watching.
Specific phobias. The most common are fears of air travel, animals,
blood, closed-in places, heights, and injury.
Stressors. A severely traumatic physical or emotional experience is a
required precipitant for PTSD.
Worry. Unwarranted or excessive concern about multiple real-life cir-
cumstances is characteristic of generalized anxiety disorder. Examples
would include losing the house to the bank just months before the mort-
gage is paid off, and being fired when one is the favorite of the company
president.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Insight and judgment
Hypervigilance (scanning the
environment)
Insight usually retained that
the fear or behavior is
unreasonable	Mood
Depression 	Tries to resist
Anxiety
Content of thought
Obsessional ideas
Killing
Blasphemy

-- 199 of 385 --

184 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
phYsical complainTs
Physical illness (anatomically demonstrable heart attacks, asthma, ulcers,
allergies, and the like) must always be a prime concern of any clinician
whose patient voices somatic complaints. But many patients come to men-
tal health care complaining of physical symptoms for which inadequate
basis in physiology, chemistry, or anatomy can be found. Such symptoms
have historically been called hypochondriacal or psychosomatic. Often, by the
time such a patient finally seeks help from a mental health clinician, there
has already been a full range of medical tests and evaluations. Because
certain demographic and symptom features are held in common, I have
included anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa in this group.
Tip‑Offs
Consider this area of clinical interest if your patient presents any of the
following problems:
Appetite disturbance
Depression that is chronic
History that is complicated
Multiple complaints
Physical symptoms unexplained by known illness (especially neuro-
logical symptoms such as pain, convulsions, sensory loss)
Sexual or physical abuse in childhood
Substance misuse in a woman
Treatment failures that are repeated
Vague history
Weakness that is chronic
Weight changes (up or down)
Main Diagnoses
The principal diagnoses in this area include the following:
Anorexia nervosa*
Body dysmorphic disorder
Bulimia nervosa
Hypochondriasis (illness anxiety disorder in DSM-5)

-- 200 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	185
Pain disorder or chronic pain syndrome (somatic symptom disorder
with predominant pain in DSM-5)
Somatization disorder (somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5)*
Other disorders that should be considered in patients who complain of
physical symptoms are these:
Depression*
Panic disorder*
Physical illness
Substance-related disorders*
Historical Information
Age at onset. Most of the mental disorders in this group begin early
(childhood or adolescence). Hypochondriasis usually begins in the 20s,
and pain disorder in the 30s or 40s.
Childhood physical or sexual abuse. You should always ask about abuse,
which is common in patients with somatization disorder.
Chronic pain. In pain disorder, there is no known basis for pain, or the
pain is out of keeping with a known physical cause.
Doctor shopping. A relentless search for a cure frequently accompa-
nies the DSM-IV somatoform disorders (DSM-5 somatic symptom and
related disorders). It may lead to repeated, fruitless medical evaluations.
Environmental stress. Social problems (marital, job, interpersonal)
may impel patients to seek mental health treatment for what they perceive
as physical problems.
Fear of medical illness that the patient doesn’t have. The nondelusional
idea that the person is ill persists despite (often repeated) reassurances to
the contrary. This is the cardinal symptom of hypochondriasis (DSM-5
illness anxiety disorder).
Operations. Patients with somatoform disorders (somatic symptom
and related disorders) often have a history of multiple surgical proce-
dures.
Medical illness in childhood. Did the patient receive attention for being
ill as a child? In some cases this factor may underlie the somatization.
Physical defect (imagined or exaggerated). The essential symptom in
body dysmorphic disorder, this idea is not usually of delusional intensity.

-- 201 of 385 --

186 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Patients with anorexia nervosa typically regard themselves as appearing
overweight, even when they are obviously emaciated.
Secondary gain. This occurs when a person receives attention or
support for being ill; it is classical for somatization disorder and other
somatic symptom disorders.
Suicidal ideas, behavior. These patients often threaten or attempt sui-
cide; occasionally, they succeed.
Substance use. Misuse of alcohol or drugs frequently complicates the
disorders in this group.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Content of thought
Dramatic presentation 	Centers on physical
(sometimes imagined)
mental illness
Flashy dress
Ingratiating manner
Exaggerated mannerisms 	Language: no abnormalities are
typical	Marked wasting
Mood 	Cognition: no abnormalities are
typical	Indifference toward symptom
(la belle indifférence) 	Insight and judgment
Anxiety 	Overinterprets physical
symptoms	Depression
Flow of thought: no
abnormalities are typical

-- 202 of 385 --

187
c h a p T e r 	1 4
Closure
An hour usually provides enough time to explore the reasons for seeking
treatment and to obtain a great deal of personal background information
about your patient. During this time, you should also have conducted a
formal MSE. Even though there is still much you would like to know, you
probably shouldn’t push the interview too much further. You’re conduct-
ing an interview, not a test of endurance, and you need to be fresh enough
to keep evaluating what you hear and see. Perhaps the arrival of another
patient indicates that you will have to finish next week, or the time of day
could suggest that you return tomorrow. Or, if both you and your patient
still have time and the inclination, just take a break before continuing.
The arT oF closing
Closing an initial interview is a minor art form that requires some care.
A good closing doesn’t just summarize the interview; it also prepares the
patient (and you or another clinician) for the sessions that lie ahead. Your
patient, who has just invested considerable hope and confidence in the
time you have spent together, quite reasonably expects some informa-
tion to carry away from the encounter. The content of that message will
depend in part upon the nature of your relationship.
If you are a practicing clinician responsible for this patient’s care, you
will probably follow these steps: (1) Summarize your findings; (2) with the
patient’s collaboration, develop a plan for future management; and (3) set
a time for your next meeting. Whenever it is justified, you should also
(4) include a message of hope for the future. Here is an example:
“From what you’ve told me, it seems that both you and your husband
have had a lot of trouble adjusting to the death of your daughter. It’s

-- 203 of 385 --

188 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
something you haven’t talked much about, and you’re suffering from
the lack of communication. I think I can help, but before we decide
on a plan of action, I’d like to talk with your husband. You said you
thought he’d be willing to come in. Could you ask him to make an
appointment for next week?”
If you are a trainee, the closing phase of your initial interview might
go something like this:
“Thank you for spending so much time with me. You really helped me
understand about your type of depression. It sounds as though your
therapist is doing everything possible to help. Tomorrow I’d like to ask
you more about your family background, if that’s all right with you.”
You shouldn’t expect to anticipate everything the patient needs to
hear. In any session as intense as a typical initial interview, you are likely
to leave unspoken something that is important to the patient. Therefore,
it is usually a good idea to learn whether you’ve omitted anything that
should be covered right away. Before you stop, say something that invites
comments or questions about your interview:
“What questions do you have about what we’ve said so far?” (Note: By
assuming that the patient does have questions, you encourage their
expression. For some patients, the alternative “Do you have any ques-
tions?” might shut down this avenue of communication.)
“Are there any important issues we haven’t covered?”
You may find that something you’ve left out needs action now—such as
additional information about proposed treatment, uncertainty as to the
time of the next appointment, or reassurance about prognosis. Try to
respond factually to any substantive issues.
Of course, you won’t be able to cover everything in a single interview
session. Most patients will accept this and will be content to delay other
concerns, questions, and items of historical information until a subse-
quent appointment.
Occasionally something comes up right at the end of an interview
that would require considerable time to cover adequately. Examples:
“What does the future hold for someone like me?”
“What do you think I should do about my son’s alcoholism?”
If neither you nor the patient has any time constraints, you can deal with
these questions when they arise. But scheduling conflicts often require
that you delay further inquiry until your next interview.

-- 204 of 385 --

Closure 	189
In either case, consider the possible reasons for this new question so
late in the interview. Some patients habitually save important information
for closing time. Perhaps it takes an entire session to muster the courage
to discuss important problems—are they afraid of what you might sug-
gest? Others may find their sessions so valuable that they unconsciously
try to prolong them.
You can deal with most of these last-minute items by expressing inter-
est and promising to discuss them during your next session:
“I’m glad you mentioned that. It’s something I want to learn more
about. Let’s make it our first order of business next time.”
If the last-minute information is of life-threatening proportions (sui-
cidal or homicidal ideas), you have no choice but to run overtime. If this
happens habitually to you, you should resolve to raise these sensitive top-
ics earlier in your interviews.
QuiTTing earlY
A rare patient may try to break off the interview before you’ve finished.
Usually this will be someone who is exhibiting a personality disorder, a
psychosis, intoxication, or extreme stress (perhaps from sleep deprivation
or physical illness). Sometimes all of the above apply! Whatever the cause,
you suddenly find yourself trying to get information from someone who
is putting on a coat to leave. How should you react?
If it is close to the end of the session, point out that you will need just
a few more minutes to finish. Then try to accommodate your patient’s agi-
tation by selecting only the most important remaining questions to ask.
With a new patient, you don’t have much leverage, so try to avoid
direct confrontation. If it is early in the interview, especially right at the
beginning, the patient may not fully understand the reasons for the inter-
view. Try explaining again. At the same time, you can offer some empathy:
“I can see that you have been pretty upset. I’m sorry to be adding to
your discomfort, but we do need to talk. It’s the only way I can get the
information I need to help you.”
Your appeal to reason may succeed about half the time. If it doesn’t, try
switching gears to a discussion of the feelings that have blocked coopera-
tion. As before, lead with an empathic statement:
“You seem pretty uncomfortable. Could you tell me what you are feel-
ing?”

-- 205 of 385 --

190 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
You may learn quite a lot about your patient’s fear, anger, or discom-
fort. By pursuing what you have just heard, you may be able to ease back
into the interview.
I ntervIewer: I can see this has upset you. Could you tell me what
you’re feeling right now?
PatIent: (Rising to leave) I can’t stand it. It’s just like the last time!
I ntervIewer: Were you pretty upset then, too?
PatIent: You bet I was! You’d be, too, if your therapist treated you
the way mine treated me.
I ntervIewer: It must have made you terribly uncomfortable.
PatIent: (Sitting down again) I was humiliated. And scared.
As in this example, you may hear a good deal about previous attempts
at therapy that have gone awry. Be prepared to spend considerable time
(both in the initial interview and later) exploring the previous treatment,
even though it may have little or nothing to do with the reasons for the
current evaluation. (Take care not to criticize or otherwise disparage the
previous clinician; your information so far may be pretty one-sided.)
If all your best efforts fail, respect the comfort and privacy of your
patient. Specifically, don’t plead, threaten, or imply shame or guilt. If
your patient gets up to leave the room, avoid physical restraint. Instead,
acknowledge the patient’s right to make this decision and your intention
to respect it. But promise to have another try soon at this important task
of gathering information:
“I can see that we’ll have to break it off for now. That’s OK—you have
a right not to be bothered when you’re feeling this bad. But it’s really
important that we figure out what difficulties brought you into the
hospital. I can come back this afternoon, after you’ve had a chance
to rest up.”
Occasionally you may decide to quit early, well short of an hour. This
alternative will seem especially attractive when:
• It is late at night, your patient has just been admitted to the hospi-
tal, and both of you are exhausted.
• Because of severe psychosis or depression, your patient cannot
focus on the interview situation for longer than a few minutes at
a time.
• Anger renders your patient unwilling to cooperate.
• You have squeezed a brief interview into an already hectic day. By
agreement, you will talk just long enough to discover the major
issues and to decide how soon you should meet again.

-- 206 of 385 --

191
c h a p T e r 	1 5
Interviewing Informants
Most patients can tell you nearly everything you need to know, but you
can often enrich your database with third-party information. However,
some situations demand that you seek additional information or verifica-
tion of data from informants. Here are a few of them:
• Children and adolescents often lack adequate perspective on their
own behavior.
• Even some adults don’t know certain important items of family
history.
• Patients with intellectual disability often require help in relating
their own information.
• Patients of any age who feel ashamed of past behavior may conceal
historical information that you can learn from family or friends.
Examples include sexual indiscretions, substance use, suicide
attempts, violence, and criminal behavior of any type.
• Patients with psychosis may present delusional interpretations of
facts, rather than the facts themselves.
• Childhood health history, often unknown to the patient, can be
relevant to intellectual disability or specific learning disorders. For
example, there may be a history of obstetrical complications during
the birth of patients who have a sporadic form of schizophrenia.
• Patients with cognitive disorders such as Alzheimer’s dementia
may be unable to give a good history.
• Informants can tell you about cultural norms. This may be the only
way to learn that it is normal in your patient’s family to believe in
astrology or to speak in tongues in church.
• Some patients with personality disorders (especially antisocial per-
sonality disorder) do not reliably tell the truth.

-- 207 of 385 --

192 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• Some personality disorders don’t much bother the patients; it’s
their families and friends who suffer.
• For some, safeguarding a family secret may even be more impor-
tant than giving you information that could help with diagnosis or
treatment.
• Family patterns of interaction can be revealing. For example, high
levels of expressed emotion (frequent, shouted arguments) in rela-
tives may predict relapse in a patient with schizophrenia who lives
with these relatives.
• For obvious reasons, it is unwise to rely solely on self-report in
forensic situations.
So whenever possible, I like to obtain information about a patient’s
present illness from other sources, such as relatives, friends, previous clin-
ical records, and other clinicians. By verifying existing information and
providing new facts, you can obtain a clear, comprehensive, balanced view
of both patient and milieu.
You will almost always interview the patient first. The only significant
exceptions, besides children and younger adolescents who are brought
in by their parents, are adults who lack the capacity to speak for them-
selves. These include regressed patients with schizophrenia, patients with
dementia, some individuals with intellectual disability, and persons with
whom you do not share a common language. But even when you and your
patient communicate well with one another, a little time spent with rela-
tives will usually improve your perspective on the patient’s disorder. This
is especially true when a relative comes along for the first visit—often a
sign of the relative’s fear that, without help, the entire story may not be
told. Sometimes an insecure patient needs the support of a relative while
telling you the reasons for the appointment.
oBTaining permission FirsT
Before you talk to friends or relatives, you must usually ask permission
from the patient. Most will consent readily. The few who demur may worry
that you will let slip something they have been trying to keep secret. You
can often quiet these fears by pointing out that your main job is to seek
information, not to disperse it, and that to help the most you need another
person’s perspective. Here’s how you might phrase your reassurance:
“What you’ve told me is confidential, and I’ll respect that confidence.
You have that right. But you also have a right to the best help I can
give. For that I need to know more about you. That’s why I’d like to
talk with your wife. She’ll naturally want to know what’s wrong and

-- 208 of 385 --

Interviewing Informants 	193
what we plan to do about it. I think we should tell her, but I’ll only say
what you and I have already agreed upon. I won’t tell her about any-
thing else we’ve discussed, unless you give me permission in advance.”
Once you have reached such an agreement, be scrupulously careful
not to divulge additional information. Revealed secrets have an uncanny
way of identifying their source. On the rare occasion when you are denied
permission, you might suggest that the patient sit in when you talk to the
friend or relative. This will address any fears that you might use the meet-
ing to hatch some sort of plot behind the patient’s back.
As a rule, though, you should try to interview the informant when the
patient is not present. The privacy will improve your chances for obtain-
ing complete, accurate information, and both you and the informant will
feel more comfortable.
There are only a few significant exceptions to the requirement to
obtain the patient’s consent first. These include patients who are:
Minors (though you should strive for their consent, too)
On conservatorship or unable to give consent
Violent
Mute
Acutely suicidal
Experiencing any other acute medical or mental health emergency
Then, when it is clear that a patient does not have the judgment to exer-
cise autonomy, it is your duty to step in and make a decision as to the best
course of action. To accomplish this, you will usually obtain information
in any way you can.
What about the friend or relative who calls with information and
requests that you withhold it from the patient, or at least that you not
reveal its source? To give such a promise makes you complicit in weav-
ing a tangled web—a situation I would try to avoid. To be sure, there’s no
point in creating problems by blabbing stuff needlessly. But you can drive
yourself nuts trying to keep straight whom you’ve promised to keep what
secret from whom.
choosing an inFormanT
Because your goal is to obtain as much pertinent material as you can,
you will naturally choose an informant who knows your patient well. A
spouse or partner usually has the most up-to-date information, so if the
patient is married or has an intimate relationship of long standing, this is

-- 209 of 385 --

194 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
the person you will probably speak with first. But the sort of information
you need may dictate a different choice. For example, if you want to know
about childhood hyperactivity, you should interview a parent. Another
consideration: Studies show that relatives who have had an illness simi-
lar to the patient’s are better able to recognize its symptoms—probably
because they’ve been sensitized to the symptoms and course of illness.
Finally, as we’ll discuss later, yours could end up being a group interview
with several relatives, friends, and even co-workers or spiritual counselors.
whaT do You ask?
You should start by briefly explaining the purpose of this interview. Rela-
tives will readily accept that you need to verify history or to give them
information. But they may worry that as a clinician you have another
agenda, such as blaming them or asking them to assume increased
responsibility for the patient.
Your earlier interview with the patient should have netted a rich
knowledge base, so your discussion with informants can usually be com-
paratively brief—perhaps just a few minutes to half an hour. Even if you
think you know exactly what questions you want answered, you could be
surprised with new information about a problem you hadn’t recognized
before. So, to learn what the informant knows, begin with a brief fishing
expedition. Use an open-ended question as bait.
In the example that follows, the patient had spent much of the initial
interview talking about her previous episodes of depression. So when her
husband came in, the interviewer was ready with questions about depres-
sive symptoms, treatment, and response. Fortunately, the first question
was open-ended.
I ntervIewer: What can you tell me about your wife’s difficulty?
PatIent ’s Husband: Well, I just hope you can do something about
her drinking. She’s drunk nearly every afternoon when I get
home from work, but she refuses to admit she’s got a problem.
Once you’ve determined that the patient and informant(s) identify
the same set of problems, you can get down to the business of obtaining
the additional specific information you need. It will be of two sorts: (1)
questions the patient was unable to answer; and (2) items about which
there is some confusion in your mind, often due to inconsistency in the
patient’s story. Here are a few examples of each:
History of mental illness in a parent
The patient’s own developmental history

-- 210 of 385 --

Interviewing Informants 	195
A reappraisal of your patient’s substance use history
The patient’s symptoms during a psychotic illness
The ability of a patient to provide self-care
Relatives’ willingness to provide support after discharge from hospi-
tal
A spouse’s view of the reasons behind marital discord
Behavior that suggests a possible criminal career
An appraisal of the patient’s personality characteristics
The patient’s adherence to treatment
Effects on the family of any change in behavior
Even if you don’t learn much that is new about the patient, an open-
ended session with an informant may help you learn the answers to these
questions:
How well does the family understand the illness?
What has the patient told the informant about the symptoms?
How is this person now, as compared to when last fully functioning?
How has your patient interpreted the facts?
Has the patient distorted what you have said?
If the information from an informant conflicts with what you have
obtained from your patient, you must decide which story to believe (if
either). You are by no means safe if you automatically accept the infor-
mant’s version; status as a mental health patient shouldn’t automatically
discredit anyone’s testimony. Rather, when you evaluate conflicting sto-
ries, weigh the following factors for each informant, including the patient:
How much contact has the informant had with the patient?
How much does the informant appear to remember?
Does the informant seem to be protecting someone (self, patient, or
others)?
Does family taboo appear to prevent the informant from discussing
sensitive material?
How much is the story being distorted by wishful thinking (for exam-
ple, the imagined happiness of a faltering marriage)?
Is there evidence of a “halo effect” that puts a spin (positive or nega-
tive) on all the patient’s behavior?
Does your informant seem motivated to give you a complete and
accurate story?

-- 211 of 385 --

196 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Afterward, it’s a good idea to discuss the session with your patient.
You should relate some idea of what was said, so as to provide reassurance
that you have broken no confidences, but how specific or general you will
be depends on your patient’s needs and your own taste. You should also
take care not to break any confidences from the relatives.
Here is an example of the sort of feedback you might give your patient:
“I had a very good talk with your wife, Mr. Crenshaw. Her informa-
tion confirmed what you told me last week about your depression,
and I think we all see eye to eye on the need for treatment. As you
requested, I didn’t say anything to her about the cocaine use, but I
do think you’ll feel better once you’ve gotten up the nerve to discuss
it with her yourself.”
group inTerviews
If the patient’s family is large and many members live nearby, you may
find yourself interviewing the whole clan. Some clinicians find this diffi-
cult, especially when the family members are unhappy and express them-
selves forcefully. Although it can be difficult to manage a large group of
relatives, there are advantages to this approach.
• It is far more efficient than trying to talk with them individually.
Although you might sometimes get the family to agree on one spokesper-
son with whom you will meet, information can be lost or distorted as it is
passed down the line.
• The family is an important part of your patient’s environment. A
group interview gives you the chance to observe how the relatives interact
with one another and, by logical inference, with the patient. Do they treat
one another considerately? Do you detect accusations, scapegoating, or
guilt in one or more of your informants? Is their concern generally for the
patient or for their own comfort?
• In some cases, you may elect to interview family and patient
together. This obviates all problems with confidentiality, because all hear
what each person says. It also gives you the chance to observe directly
how the patient and family interact. Do relatives ignore or answer for the
patient? Do they disagree a lot? Shout? Fight?
• If you determine that family dynamics contribute in part to your
patient’s difficulties, meeting with everyone can help lay the groundwork
for eventual change in the home milieu, as an adjunct to therapy.
• You could establish the basis for later family therapy, if it seems
that this might be a useful approach to your patient’s difficulties.

-- 212 of 385 --

Interviewing Informants 	197
When you are meeting with more than one informant at a time, be
sure to encourage all relatives to have their say. Often someone will be
passive and silent; this is the individual you should try to draw out. It is
better to have everyone’s input at the beginning, rather than leaving them
to sort out their perspectives later, when you’re not around to help. You
shouldn’t make decisions for them, and you shouldn’t take sides. Your
goal should be to facilitate the discussion so that all family members can
understand the patient and their common problems. But above all, you
must keep to yourself information that the patient would wish to keep
private.
oTher inTerview seTTings
Telephone Calls
Several studies have shown that you can obtain good- quality information
from telephone interviews—perhaps not quite as robust as data from inter-
views conducted face-to-face, but far better than written questionnaires.
Especially if there’s no other way to speak with a relative, it is certainly
better than nothing. But it can be a challenge to interview someone for
the first time without face-to-face contact. If you must rely on words and
tone of voice alone, you can’t extract the nuances of meaning that body
language so readily conveys. Furthermore, unless you are participating
in a video conference call, on the telephone relatives cannot size you up.
In recent years, Internet-based services such as Skype and FaceTime
have made video calling much more common. Even so, a personal inter-
view can so much better convey the warm feelings that allow relatives to
know that you are someone they can trust with secret or sensitive infor-
mation. Finally, consider confidentiality laws. Without visual contact, it
is more difficult to be sure whom you are speaking with. If you give out
information to someone you think is a spouse, but is actually an employer,
you could harm both your patient’s career and your own reputation.
House Calls
Although the house call has generally gone the way of insulin coma ther-
apy, it can still be a useful tool for the clinician who wants maximum
information about all aspects of a patient’s milieu. There you can get
a feeling for the environment (type of dwelling, neighborhood) and the
family members, who, when relaxed at home, may behave more “nor-
mally” than in an office or hospital setting.

-- 213 of 385 --

198
C h a p t e r 	1 6
Meeting Resistance
In most interviews, two individuals work together to achieve a common
understanding. The vast majority of patients will be cooperative, knowl-
edgeable, and (to one degree or other) insightful. But all patients have
personal agendas, and sometimes these conflict with the usual goals of
the initial interview. That’s why many patients will in some manner resist
giving complete information. The result can be behavior that frustrates
your attempts to obtain a complete database while building rapport.
Resistance is any conscious or unconscious attempt to avoid a topic of
discussion. Because nearly everyone feels uncomfortable with certain top-
ics, resistance is perhaps the most frequent problem behavior clinicians
must learn to deal with. For a number of reasons, then, it is important to
address resistance when it appears, rather than simply moving on without
trying to determine (and remedy) its causes.
reCognizing resistanCe
To counter resistance, you must first recognize it. Sometimes this is easy,
especially if it takes the form of such an obvious statement as “I’d rather
not talk about that.” But many patients feel uncomfortable with open defi-
ance; they may resist you in ways so subtle that you will be hard-pressed
to detect them. Watch for any of these behaviors that could indicate that
your interview may be in trouble:
Tardiness. Being late for the interview is a classic sign of resistance.
It is perhaps less common during an initial interview than during
subsequent ones.

-- 214 of 385 --

Meeting Resistance 	199
Voluntary behaviors. Poor eye contact, glancing at the clock, answering
a cell phone or pager, or shifting uneasily while seated suggests that
your patient may feel uncomfortable with the topic currently under
discussion.
Involuntary behaviors. Flushing, yawning, or swallowing can imply dis-
comfort. The blank stare of a patient with PTSD experiencing a flash-
back falls somewhere between voluntary and involuntary behavior.
Forgetfulness. Some patients develop a “convenient” poor memory and
respond to certain questions with “I don’t know” or “I can’t remem-
ber.”
Omissions. The patient leaves out certain information. Unless reliable
informants are consulted, even experienced clinicians have trouble
detecting this sort of resistance. “I don’t have any problems” may be
an overt attempt to bury issues that should be exhumed.
Contradictions. Information that contradicts what you thought you
learned earlier is relatively easy to spot but may be difficult to rec-
oncile.
Changing the subject. Shifting to another topic of conversation may be
an attempt to draw you away from a subject the patient would like
to avoid. For example, you ask Mr. Blocker how he feels about his
impending divorce; he responds by telling you that his wife’s attorney
has been bleeding him dry.
Exaggerations. Puffing up their own accomplishments is one way
some people avoid facing the truth about themselves. Perhaps you
can’t detect an individual exaggeration, but with time you may begin
to discern a pattern of improbable claims.
Diversionary tactics. These include telling jokes and asking to get a
drink or to use the bathroom. Some patients may try to control the
interview by asking about the interviewer’s personal life.
Silence. This can be a major indicator of resistance. It should not be
confused with the time some patients need to think before respond-
ing to a complicated question.
A slight hesitation. Most subtle of all may be just a slight hesitation
before answering certain questions.
whY do paTienTs resisT?
Patients may resist telling the whole story to a clinician for a variety of
reasons. Understanding these reasons can provide the key to breaking up
the resistance.

-- 215 of 385 --

200 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• Probably one of the most common reasons is preventing embar-
rassment, which may operate especially during an initial interview. This
is certainly understandable: Baring your soul to a total stranger is the
unnatural antithesis of self-protection. It can be especially hard to reveal
sensitive material about sex, illegal activities, and any behavior that dem-
onstrates a lapse of judgment.
• Some patients (or their families) fear criticism or worry that you
may be shocked by their stories. They have learned to avoid disapproval
simply by not risking it: They keep private material they consider blame-
worthy.
• Some patients may withhold information because they are too
afraid of its implications for diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment. The
stigma of mental illness—perhaps being thought “crazy”—is one example.
• Your new patient might not yet feel enough trust to communicate
fully with you, especially about thoughts or behavior that could damage
an intimate relationship or jeopardize a job or legal status. Unhappily,
a previous experience may have instigated the fear that a mental health
professional might violate confidentiality.
• Altruism may motivate a patient to protect a friend or loved one
from any of the consequences mentioned previously.
• Some incidents or thoughts may seem too trivial to relate.
• The patient could be testing you (consciously or not) to see whether
you are smart enough or persistent enough (do you care enough?) to dig
out the information that is being withheld.
• Patients may withhold information out of conscious or uncon-
scious anger—an emotion that could have any of a number of causes. You
may have unintentionally said something upsetting, or the patient may
be reenacting with you feelings held for someone else in the past; such
behavior is called transference. Of course, transference is by no means lim-
ited to feelings of anger.
Whatever the cause, you must not allow resistance to persist unex-
plored and unchallenged. You must try to determine the cause and to
remedy it. It can be a serious error to skip important topics or just pas-
sively to follow the patient’s lead.
how To cope wiTh resisTance
Above all else, it is most important that you try to understand (and rem-
edy, if you can) the reasons behind the behavior. The first step should be

-- 216 of 385 --

Meeting Resistance 	201
to consider whether you have done anything to provoke the resistance.
There may be something obvious that you can deal with directly.
I ntervIewer: I notice that you seem to have grown quiet all of a sud-
den. What seems to be the problem?
PatIent: Oh, I don’t know.
I ntervIewer: I’m wondering if you’re upset that I said I wanted to
talk to your husband.
PatIent: (Long pause) Well, I don’t understand why you want to.
I ntervIewer: Could you tell me what you’re afraid of?
PatIent: He wouldn’t understand about that affair I told you about.
He isn’t a bit broad-minded.
I ntervIewer: Ah, I can see why you’re unhappy. I think anyone
would be, who was worried that her therapist might break a con-
fidence like that one. But that wasn’t what I had in mind. The
reason I want to talk to him is to learn how he views the marital
problems you two are having. I think it would help me to under-
stand the whole picture better. Do you think that you could ask
him to join you during your next appointment?
This clinician’s explanation told the patient several things: (1) that the
clinician understood her, (2) that she had a right to her feelings, (3) that
her fears were groundless, and (4) that she would be present during the
interview with her husband.
All too often, however, you will be unable to identify anything specific
that can be quickly corrected. Then the approach you take will depend on
several features of the resistance itself:
Its cause
Its severity
The form it takes
The importance of the information you are seeking
Managing Silence
A common example of mild resistance is the embarrassed silence. You
may encounter this reaction to questions about sex (see Chapter 9), but
it could occur in nearly any interview situation. Your best first response
may be a little silence of your own. You might try glancing away for a few
seconds to emphasize your willingness to wait. By saying nothing for a few
moments, you give your patient some extra thinking time. Maybe that’s all

-- 217 of 385 --

202 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
the silence signified in the first place. But if instead it’s early resistance,
you allow the patient time to try to resolve the conflict.
However, a prolonged lack of response may establish a precedent for
withholding further information later in the interview, and that is not in
the patient’s best interests. If a decent interval (no more than 10–15 sec-
onds) fails to elicit a response, you should probably intervene.
During the brief silence, your patient’s thoughts may have wandered,
so your next step should be to refocus the question by asking it again in a
slightly different form. From the top, here’s a brief example:
I ntervIewer: How has your sexual adjustment been?
PatIent: (Silently looks at the floor for 15 seconds.)
I ntervIewer: I was wondering whether there had been any problems
with your sex life.
If the question seems important (the patient’s inability to answer sug-
gests that it might be), you should probably persevere. Start by giving the
patient control over what will be said and by offering reassurance.
I ntervIewer: Tell me what you feel comfortable saying about your
sex life.
PatIent: This is really hard for me.
I ntervIewer: I understand that. But it’s important, and it’s safe to
talk about it here.
Another tactic combines multiple approaches. You might word it
something like this:
“A lot of people have difficulty with sensitive issues like this one. I’m
really sorry that I have to put you through this, but to help you most,
I need all the information I can possibly get. Please try to help me.”
In this single speech you have (1) expressed sympathy, (2) underscored
the normality of your patient’s feelings, (3) reemphasized the importance
of obtaining a complete database, and (4) issued a personal appeal for the
patient’s assistance.
Yet another approach is to try to name the emotions your patient
might be having. If you do so correctly, you will enhance your image as an
empathetic, perceptive interviewer who can be trusted with secrets. You
will maximize your chances of success if you name several possible emo-
tions, as in this example:

-- 218 of 385 --

Meeting Resistance 	203
“I can see you are having a real problem with that question. Some-
times people have trouble with questions when they feel ashamed. Or
sometimes it’s anxiety or fear. Are you having any of those feelings
now?”
Although you have now asked something that is different from your origi-
nal question, the two are related. Your patient may be able to respond
more readily to the second one. And notice that you’ve greatly increased
your chances of guessing the right emotion by offering up several possible
negative emotions.
You want to reinforce in your patient the habit of responding to you,
and even a gesture is better than nothing at all. Once you have obtained
any response, even a silent shrug or frown, you can often parlay it into a
renewal of speech.
I ntervIewer: You must be feeling pretty upset about this. Am I right?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: I think maybe we should move on and talk about your
education instead. Does that seem like a good idea to you?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: Is that something you think you can talk about?
PatIent: Yes . . . I think so.
I ntervIewer: That other subject is pretty important, but this clearly
isn’t the time to talk about it. We’ll come back to it later.
Delaying the discussion of difficult material, as in the example just
given, is probably one of the most often used methods of dealing with
moderate to severe resistance. The technique sacrifices information for
the sake of rapport and the integrity of the interview, so you should use
it sparingly. It is important for the patient to understand that the mat-
ter isn’t closed, only postponed. That was the intent of this interviewer’s
promise to revisit the question later.
An answer of “I don’t know” gives you no more information than
does dead silence; if repeated often, it can cause an interview to grind
to a halt. Occasionally, you might succeed in getting the patient off dead
center by responding:
“Well, what do you think about it?”
Unfortunately, often this only elicits the obvious (and maddening) rejoin-
der, “I don’t know.”

-- 219 of 385 --

204 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
If you’re not getting much information anyway, you won’t take a big
risk by forcing a rare confrontation. You may get some clues as to the
reason for the resistance. In this example the patient confronted is Julie,
a 16-year-old girl:
I ntervIewer: (Leans forward and smiles.) Several times when you’ve
said, “I don’t know,” it’s been about questions that I think you
do know the answer to. What do you think might happen if you
didn’t hold back?
JulIe: I don’t know.
I ntervIewer: A lot of people don’t like to talk because they’re upset
about something. Have you been feeling upset?
JulIe: Maybe.
I ntervIewer: (Smiles.) Maybe we should try to understand that.
What were you feeling just a moment ago?
JulIe: My dumb mother made me come. (Pauses.)
I ntervIewer: So it was your mom’s idea to come?
This example demonstrates confrontation and naming of feelings,
which have already been mentioned. It also suggests several other tech-
niques that can help break through resistance:
• Focus on describing the symptoms; just for now, don’t worry about
what they might mean.
• Switch from facts to feelings. Resistance usually has an emotional
basis. This interviewer recognized that feelings had to be explored before
getting on with the history taking.
• Emphasize the normal. Patients sometimes conclude that they
must be pretty bizarre, just to be under the care of a mental health clini-
cian. Julie may have felt better once she learned that her clinician had
encountered this behavior before and didn’t find it strange.
• Reject the behavior; accept the person. By leaning forward and
using warm words and a friendly tone of voice, Julie’s interviewer clearly
indicated both (1) unconditional acceptance of the patient as a person
and (2) the desirability of a different response.
• Use both verbal and nonverbal encouragements. Once the patient
began to speak, the interviewer encouraged further efforts with a smile
and by making a suggestion that took off from her “Maybe.”
• Praise the patient for giving a response. Other encouragements
(nods, paraphrasing) have been discussed in Chapter 4.

-- 220 of 385 --

Meeting Resistance 	205
• Focus on the patient’s interests. As soon as it became clear that this
patient resented being forced to come, the interviewer shifted the focus to
her relationship with her mother. Subsequently, the session became much
more productive.
• Still another technique is to look for a less affect-laden model of
the behavior or feelings in question, and discuss the model first. Often
this is a similar episode that happened to the patient long ago, but it could
be one that affected a friend or relative. Here’s how the process works:
I ntervIewer: Have you been feeling so bad you’ve thought about
harming yourself?
PatIent: I—I can’t say.
I ntervIewer: It’s a pretty upsetting subject, isn’t it?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: Didn’t you say you made a suicide attempt several
years ago?
PatIent: Yes. (Long pause)
I ntervIewer: What happened then?
PatIent: I overdosed on my wife’s heart tablets. But I threw them
all up.
I ntervIewer: You must have been feeling pretty desperate.
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: Are you feeling that way now?
PatIent: I guess so. But I don’t like to talk about it. It scares my wife.
With variations, this technique can sometimes ease you into a fruitful
discussion after a more direct approach has failed. But if the only result
is more resistance, you should probably change topics completely—as long
as the delay doesn’t pose possible danger to the patient.
Sometimes patients themselves will spontaneously adopt this tech-
nique of changing to a less affect-laden model. When that happens, hear
out the past example, then ask:
“Can you see any connection between what happened then and the
way you have been behaving just recently?”
Most patients will see the point. For those who do not, you can gently
draw the parallel yourself.
Tardiness
With only one incident in your sample, you don’t know whether lateness is
going to be a chronic problem. If the patient is late to the first interview,

-- 221 of 385 --

206 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
and if you have more time available, it wouldn’t be amiss to run long and
complete your evaluation. If not, your best option is to say, “Let’s make
the best use of the time we have,” and get right to work.
But the patient who is often late to appointments is the bane of many
a mental health practice. If it only happened once or twice, you could per-
haps ignore it. Some people are habitually late everywhere, but it isn’t espe-
cially useful to accept that as a reason; chronic tardiness gets in the way of
more than just mental health care. I don’t recommend giving additional
time to someone who is always late: It sends the message that it’s OK not to
fulfill personal obligations, and it unfairly penalizes the patient who has
the next appointment. Here is behavior you have to deal with as resistance.
First, make sure the patient doesn’t think that you are offended. And
you shouldn’t be: It isn’t about you; it’s about your patient’s problem (per-
haps the very one that prompted treatment in the first place). Rather,
your words and your demeanor should say, “I’m concerned that you aren’t
getting the help you need.” Invite the patient to explore with you the pos-
sible reasons—“What are you afraid might come up during our session?”—
but then focus your efforts on correcting the behavior: “What can you
think of to help get yourself here on time?” You’ll probably find yourself
discussing the use of alarm clocks and reminders the patient can get from
dozens of free apps for smart phones.
Special Techniques
Several other interview techniques are sometimes useful in countering
resistance. For the most part, these strategies apply in specific situations
or to particular types of patients. Novice interviewers will rarely use these
specialized techniques.
• Offer an excuse for unfavorable information. By helping out with
plausible reasons, you may encourage your patient to be frank about
embarrassing or distressing problems.
I ntervIewer: How much have you been drinking just recently?
PatIent: Not much. I really don’t keep track.
I ntervIewer: What with all the stress surrounding your husband’s
death, I thought you might have started drinking heavily again,
like what happened several years ago when your mother died.
PatIent: You’re right. I’ve been so overwhelmed. If I didn’t have
three or four doubles every evening, I wouldn’t be able to get
to sleep at all.
• Exaggerate negative consequences that didn’t happen. By empha-
sizing the worst possible outcome of a behavior, you diminish the patient’s
anxiety about what actually did happen.

-- 222 of 385 --

Meeting Resistance 	207
I ntervIewer: During that fight, did you really hurt your wife?
PatIent: Well . . . (Silence)
I ntervIewer: Well, did you kill her?
PatIent: Nah, I just knocked her around a little bit.
• Induce your patient to brag. Rarely, a patient withholds informa-
tion about an exploit but seems secretly proud of it. Some interviewers try
to encourage frankness by subtly implying admiration for some aspect of
the behavior in question.
I ntervIewer: How much were you drinking then?
PatIent: Gee, that’s hard to say.
I ntervIewer: You’re a pretty good-sized man. You look like you
could really put it away.
PatIent: I’ve hoisted a few in my day.
I ntervIewer: I’ll bet you could drink them all under the table!
PatIent: Yeah, I suppose I’ve won my share of chug-a-lug contests.
This technique can build rapport while it obtains information. Although
it is probably innocuous enough when applied to substance use, I worry
that it might send a message of approval to a patient with a personality
disorder whose activities include sexual misconduct, fighting, or criminal
behavior. If you ever use this technique, be careful not to condone or
encourage the behavior itself. Quite frankly, I’ve hardly ever used it.
prevenTion
As with any other problem, no remedy for resistance is as satisfactory as
preventing it in the first place. The following strategies should help you
avoid having to use the more devious techniques we have just discussed.
• If before the interview begins you can obtain information about
your patient’s character or style of interacting, you may be better able
to modify your approach to difficult topics. Resources include word-of-
mouth information from referring clinicians and records from previous
hospitalizations.
• Sometimes you can tell right away that your patient is reluctant to
talk. A scowl, a sigh, or an upturned gaze may tip you off, even before you
begin to speak. If so, perhaps this is the time to break my Chapter 1 rule
and start with small talk. A few moments of conversation about some-
thing you share (the weather or sporting interests) might help identify
you as “friendly” and reduce your patient’s antagonism. The purpose of

-- 223 of 385 --

208 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
small talk—to grease the skids for productive conversation with a poten-
tially difficult patient— suggests two warnings: (1) Politics and religion are
never “small” topics; shun them like a dirty needle. (2) For any subject,
avoid taking a position that might be considered strong or controversial.
It could throw you into confrontation that your already challenging inter-
view hardly needs.
• Carefully monitor your reactions to the information you obtain. If
your speech or facial expression hints of surprise or disapproval, you may
seriously damage rapport and limit both the quantity and quality of your
information.
• Answer questions as completely and honestly as you can. Of course,
this is the obvious approach to take with any patient, but your open, care-
ful discussions of your intentions and the possible benefits of cooperation
might especially help reduce the suspicions of someone who is paranoid
or even psychotic.
• Individualize your history-taking technique. Some patients simply
won’t be hurried. They aren’t psychotic or demented; they simply have to
tell their stories in their own way. When you encounter such a patient, you
might as well forget about your time schedule, relax, and enjoy the ride.
You’ll get your history—a little at a time—and you’ll preserve rapport.
• Preface your MSE questions about delusions, hallucinations, and
orientation with the remark that these “routine questions” are part of
your usual thorough evaluation. This should help to defuse any concern
that you suspect your patient of being mentally slow or psychotic.
• If you encounter psychotic material such as delusions or hallucina-
tions, don’t argue. You won’t win points by refuting what your patient
“knows” to be true. But neither should you agree with something you
know is false: You don’t want to reinforce the psychosis. Instead, ask how
long the patient has felt that way, or emphasize your concern for the
accompanying discomfort. For example, the patient may be frightened by
the content of the hallucination.
Your aTTiTude
As noted earlier, with every patient it is important to understand your
own feelings. If you find you are feeling bored, angry, or disgusted, ask
yourself, “Why?” Is there someone this patient reminds you of, such as a
supervisor, parent, or spouse? (When a therapist’s feelings toward patients
are carried over from personal relationships, we call it countertransference.)
Perhaps some features of this patient’s personality remind you of some

-- 224 of 385 --

Meeting Resistance 	209
of your own less admirable traits. Do you have anxiety about your own
health, marriage, or family? These feelings are ubiquitous, so even expe-
rienced clinicians must work to prevent their intrusion into therapeutic
relationships.
A patient who is uncooperative or difficult in other ways creates
a special challenge. As a clinician, you must not let passive–aggressive
behavior, sarcasm, or anger precipitate an outburst from you. Such nega-
tive affect, especially when it comes early in the relationship, can imperil
an interview and seriously damage future rapport. If you find yourself
feeling uncomfortable during an interview, ask yourself:
“Why am I feeling so upset?”
“What message am I missing?”
“Whom does this patient remind me of?”
The answers to these questions should help you determine what correc-
tive action to take.

-- 225 of 385 --

210
C h a p t e r 	1 7
Special or Challenging Patient
Behaviors and Issues
All patients are special, and each is unique. But the behaviors of some
can be especially challenging: They may be vague, hostile, untruthful,
confused, or even violent. And other than behaviors, certain patient char-
acteristics (for example, physical attributes) may also require thoughtful
attention. Challenging behaviors and issues offer us the opportunity to
hone our skills of accommodation and persuasion, and to practice the
virtues of patience and tolerance.
Vagueness
Instead of information, a patient may give you only empty words. Here
are a few examples:
The unfocused chief complaint. A variety of concerns may be stated,
but none of them seems an adequate reason for seeking treatment.
Overgeneralization. A single episode of illness may be treated as typi-
cal when it is not; one example of a friend’s behavior is labeled as “usual.”
The words always and never may tip you off to overgeneralization.
Approximate answers. Often this means that the patient gives you
adjectives when you want numbers.

-- 226 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	211
I ntervIewer: How long have you been drinking?
PatIent: A long time.
I ntervIewer: Can you give me an idea of how long?
PatIent: Well, quite a while.
Sometimes a patient simply seems unable to give precise descriptors.
I ntervIewer: How did you feel when your stepdaughter arrived
for that long visit?
PatIent: Lousy.
I ntervIewer: Well, can you describe your feelings then?
PatIent: I felt terrible.
Dealing with Vagueness
Try first to determine why the patient is being vague. In some cases, it
may be a function of the patient’s particular mental disorder: Vague
speech is especially characteristic of patients who have intellectual dis-
ability, psychosis, or personality disorders. However, you could encounter
it in almost anyone who is unaccustomed to thinking in precise terms.
Perhaps this is the first time your patient has tried to express troubling
feelings. It may also indicate resistance to the interview—is this person
trying to hide something?
As you might imagine, it won’t help to point out that the patient is
being “unclear.” If you have to label the behavior, try “overgeneralizing.”
You can ask, “Help me to understand.” You can also deal with vagueness
by providing structure: Indicate clearly what type of answer or degree of
precision you expect.
I ntervIewer: How much time did you serve in the penitentiary?
PatIent: Oh, quite a while.
I ntervIewer: How long was that in months or years?
To the patient who persists in using a general description such as ter-
rible, you might respond:
“What is your interpretation of terrible?”
“Could you give me an example of what you mean by terrible?”
You may have to pin down some patients with specific questions, perhaps
based on the areas of clinical interest (see Chapter 13) or on what you
know about specific mental disorders.

-- 227 of 385 --

212 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: What do you mean by terrible?
PatIent: I don’t know. I just felt bad.
I ntervIewer: Can you give me an example?
PatIent: (Pauses.) Just really awful.
I ntervIewer: Well, were you depressed?
PatIent: Sometimes.
I ntervIewer: Did you feel anxiety?
PatIent: Yeah, that’s it! I was wound up like a clock!
Whatever technique you use, once you have clarified your patient’s
meaning, summarize to be sure you have understood:
“So when you said you ‘felt terrible’ when your stepdaughter arrived
for a visit, you were a little depressed, but mainly you felt this sense
of overwhelming anxiety.”
It may require a lot of prompting to teach the habit of precision to a
patient who prefers approximate answers. You could find yourself resort-
ing to multiple- choice questions. Early in the interview, an unfocused,
rambling patient may require you to use focused, short-answer questions.
If the vagueness persists despite your best efforts, suspect some source
of underlying resistance. To explore the reasons for this resistance, you
might have to risk a confrontation. Try:
“In order to help you, I really need a more definite answer. Is there
some reason you are having trouble answering my questions?”
Inability to Generalize
A problem related to vagueness is that some patients cannot generalize
experiences. When you ask them to give you a broad picture, they respond
with specific examples and tiny vignettes.
You can try to deal with this by redefining what it is you are after.
Using words like common, often, and usually may help you teach your
patient what you want.
I ntervIewer: Do you have a lot of trouble dealing with anger?
PatIent: Last week I got really burned at my mother-in-law. I threw
a fit.
I ntervIewer: Here’s what I’d like to know: Is this pretty common
for you?

-- 228 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	213
If your patient simply cannot generalize, you may have to make do
with several examples from which you distill the generalization yourself.
Then summarize aloud to make sure that you’ve got it right.
lYing
As a part of the therapeutic contract implicit in any clinical relationship,
the patient agrees to tell the truth. At the beginning of your work with any
patient, you should assume that this will be the case. Unfortunately, for a
variety of reasons, it doesn’t always turn out this way.
Patients may lie when they are frightened, ashamed, worried, or
angry. These emotions probably apply to most people who seek the help
of mental health professionals; heck, don’t they actually affect each of
us to a degree? Other patients may lie for social gain—to get or keep a
job, to avoid punishment, or to feel more respected. Some may just have
trouble resolving the inherent conflict between reporting accurately and
saving face. Those who habitually lie without discernible cause or benefit,
popularly termed “pathological [or compulsive] liars,” probably constitute
a small minority.
A variety of clues could warn you that your patient might not be tell-
ing the truth:
• The history is inconsistent with the known course of the disorder
you suspect. For example, your patient denies ever being hospitalized,
despite a long history of severe manic symptoms.
• You ask about any behavior that would make most people feel
ashamed or guilty. Common examples include drug use, sexual issues,
suicidal behavior, and violence—any of which could provide an incentive
for shading the truth.
• The patient tells a story that is internally inconsistent. An extreme
example: Someone who never graduated from the eighth grade claims to
have held high-level executive positions.
• You notice some of the behaviors that have been associated with
lying. These can include shifting gaze with poor eye contact, yawning,
stammering, sweating, hyperventilating, motor restlessness or fidgeting,
flushing, raised vocal pitch, rapid speech, and a delay during which the
patient seems to be trying to determine what answer sounds best. Because
any of these behaviors can have other causes, you shouldn’t leap to conclu-
sions. Rather, try to confirm your suspicions with further observation or
from informants.

-- 229 of 385 --

214 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• You suspect a severe personality disorder. For example, a child-
hood history of delinquency progressing to adult criminality would make
you suspect antisocial personality disorder. These patients often display
little regard for the truth.
• Despite ample opportunity and objective justification, your patient
denies all negative personal attributes. For example:
An embittered 40-year-old woman is a college graduate stuck in
a dull secretarial position. Her life has apparently been loveless
and friendless. But when you ask her what she would change
about herself if she had it to do over again, she replies, “Noth-
ing.”
• Your patient seems to exaggerate lifetime accomplishments.
Dealing with Lying
As with other problematic behaviors, dealing with suspected lying requires
a delicate touch. You need accurate information to make a diagnosis, but
open confrontation risks early rupture of the relationship. (In ongoing
therapy, you would eventually have to discuss the need for trust in your
relationship. Although treatment is not the principal goal of the initial
interview, neither do you want to say anything that will impede your later
ability to work constructively with your patient.)
Before settling on any course of action, it is often worthwhile to ask
for a restatement of what your patient just said:
“Could you run that by me again?”
Perhaps you misunderstood; perhaps the patient misspoke; in any case,
added details could clarify the issue.
Another obvious approach is to ignore the lie and seek the truth
elsewhere—from records or informants, for example. You may be able to
arrive at the truth by piecing together a careful, year-by-year history of
work, education, and social activities. Although it takes time, I’ve always
found life history detective work to be interesting and rewarding.
Should you conclude that a confrontation over the issue of misin-
formation is warranted, formulate your questions in a way that avoids
making accusations. Rather, couch them in terms of resolving a misun-
derstanding or clearing up your own confusion:
“Something puzzles me. You just said that you hadn’t had any prob-
lems with drinking, but your health care record here mentions two
emergency room visits in the past year for intoxication. Can you help
me out with that?”

-- 230 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	215
To someone whose response indicates a willingness to fight (“You
calling me a liar?”), you can answer that your problem isn’t with the
patient but with the story:
“Help me to understand some of the contradictions.”
Something of the same approach—a gentle request to help you
understand—may successfully address the related behaviors of exaggera-
tion and minimizing symptoms.
And, always, if you suspect that the patient is being deceitful or is (to
use a word I try to avoid) malingering, be extra careful not to ask leading
questions. It is bad enough when a patient introduces false notes into the
conversation. It is far worse when the interviewer assists in the deceit.
hosTiliTY
Of all the problem behaviors, hostility—anger or antagonism, usually
directed toward someone—may be the easiest to spot. The patient’s feelings
are clearly shown in a scowl, clenched fist, angry tone of voice, or sarcastic
content of speech. Even those patients who resolutely smile despite their
negative emotions may betray their underlying feelings by a set of the jaw or
by vocal tension. Whatever its manifestations, hostility must be dealt with
immediately and effectively. To do less jeopardizes your entire interview.
The possible causes of hostility are numerous. Here are a few, some of
which have already been mentioned as causing other problem behaviors:
Fear of illness. These patients reject the notion that they are ill by
rejecting their need for a caregiver.
Displaced emotion. Perhaps it isn’t you or the present situation, but a
boss, spouse, or previous mental health professional who lies behind the
hostility. You become the innocent target of negative transference.
Fear of intimacy. This reason may be especially relevant in a mental
health interview, where hostility serves to “protect” the patient from mak-
ing unwanted revelations.
Hidden feelings. A person who vents anger may do it to cover up
another emotion that is even more frightening— anxiety, perhaps, or
depression.
Fear of dependence. Some patients resent having to seek help for any
problem. For them, hostility may be a mechanism for keeping a safe dis-
tance from people they view as wielding power. Perhaps this stems from
long experience of feeling socially inferior.

-- 231 of 385 --

216 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Habit. Whatever the initial cause, some people have become habitu-
ally aggressive and hostile, which helps them maintain control over oth-
ers.
Apparent lack of interviewer empathy. In addition to the foregoing
“patient- centered” causes, consider the effect of an interviewer who
appears uninvolved or uninterested. Most mental health patients already
bear a considerable burden of negative emotions. If they must also cope
with someone who is supposed to behave therapeutically, yet comes across
as cold or unempathic, the natural reaction might well be added hostility.
You might consider this last possibility if hostility frequently affects
your relationships with patients. In such a case, you should probably obtain
diagnostic help, perhaps from a supervisor or faculty member where you
trained. Ask this person to review video sessions of you interviewing
patients. A pattern of recurring anger or hostility should be apparent to
anyone expert in the art of the interview. It would require more remedia-
tion than can be found in any book.
Handling Hostility
Negative emotions usually make their owners feel uncomfortable; hos-
tility makes friends and acquaintances feel that way, too. Because this
reactive discomfort also applies to mental health interviewers, your first
impulse may be to change the subject quickly. That strategy could succeed
if the problem is anger or resentment stirred up by your line of question-
ing. But true hostility tends to be generalized more than anger; you’re
unlikely to deal with it successfully by ignoring it.
Any evidence of hostility warns you that before continuing, you must
confront your patient’s feelings. To advance your interview effectively, you
must make the confrontation nonthreatening and nonjudgmental. Here’s
how you might accomplish it:
I ntervIewer: Why did you come here?
PatIent [a tall, heavy-set, 28-year-old man]: Why was I brought here,
you mean? And why should I tell you? You’re the third one I’ve
talked with this afternoon!
I ntervIewer: I’ll bet you’re getting sick of talking about it. I don’t
blame you.
PatIent: You don’t blame me; you just bug me.
I ntervIewer: I don’t mean to bother you. I can see that anyone as
upset as you are must have a lot on his mind.
PatIent: You’ve got that right.

-- 232 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	217
I ntervIewer: What is it? It must be pretty awful to get you this
stirred up.
PatIent: It’s that, all right. (Pauses.) My wife left me.
Although this patient’s angry words were directed toward the interviewer,
the underlying reason for the hostility was much more personal. By excus-
ing the behavior and sympathizing with the feelings, the interviewer
could side with the patient and break through to the core of his hostility.
Responding to the fear behind the hostility is often an excellent counter
to hostility. Notice how this interviewer also drew the patient away from
invective and into conversation by requesting details.
Different reactions from the interviewer would probably only have
produced additional negative feelings:
“Look, I’m only trying to help you.” (Guilt)
“If you don’t talk about it, you’ll never get over it.” (Anxiety)
“Don’t bark at me! I haven’t done anything to you.” (More hostility)
This last response brings up a point that we sometimes forget. Hos-
tility is contagious; if you aren’t wary, it can infect even you. However
natural under the circumstances a sharp retort might feel, it could ruin
your interview—perhaps the outcome your patient was trying to provoke
all along. It could help you maintain your composure if you remember
that you have known your patient too short a time to have provoked any
personal animosity. Any verbal attack must therefore be the product of
your patient’s own problems.
If you are talking to a voluntary patient who demands to leave, it is pos-
sible that you will never complete the interview. But if your patient is being
held involuntarily on a closed hospital ward, time will be on your side.
A 20-year-old man was admitted against his will. In the following
dialogue, notice how the interviewer didn’t argue, but instead agreed with
the patient’s every statement, giving each request a twist that required the
patient’s cooperation:
PatIent: Look, I don’t want to talk to you or any other shrink. Just
get me the hell out of here!
I ntervIewer: That’s what I’m trying to do. My job is to help you get
out of here. But the law says that I can’t let you go until I know
it’s safe. And I—
PatIent: Don’t give me any of that crap. I want out of here now!
I ntervIewer: (Gets up to leave.) I’ll be glad to start working on it as
soon as I get the information I need from you.

-- 233 of 385 --

218 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
PatIent: You mean I’ve got to stay here all night?
I ntervIewer: (Moves toward the door.) Well, it could be several days.
PatIent: Wait a minute! You can’t just leave me here!
I ntervIewer: I’ll be glad to come back when you’re ready to talk.
PatIent: I’m going to sue you for every nickel you’ve got!
I ntervIewer: We’ll help you get legal representation tomorrow. But
it would be quicker if you’d just decide to cooperate.
This interviewer left the room but returned 20 minutes later at the request
of the patient, who subsequently did cooperate fully—and was released
a few hours later. The confrontation was defused when the interviewer
adopted an attitude of being on the same side as the patient, who could
only get what he wanted by changing his behavior.
Defusing hostility can be a supreme test of any interviewer’s profes-
sionalism. To pass it, you must continually monitor your own feelings and
respond in ways that address your patient’s emotional needs, not your
own.
poTenTial violence
Patients are only infrequently hostile to the point of violence. Although
it’s uncommon that a mental health worker is severely injured by a patient,
many of us have been shaken up or struck at least once during our careers.
At best, this is an unsettling experience— one that we must keep alert to
prevent.
Unfortunately, predicting who will become violent is pretty hard.
Although the vast majority of seriously mentally ill patients present no
danger to others whatsoever, they do account for about 5% of homicides
in the United States. In addition to psychoses due to schizophrenia and
mood disorders, you could encounter violence in those with cognitive
disorders, personality disorders (especially antisocial personality disor-
der), and acute substance intoxication. You should be especially vigilant
when you are interviewing either a male or a female who has any of these
diagnoses.
Regardless of diagnosis, an actuarial approach uses the presence or
absence of several factors to help predict who will become violent. These
factors include relative youth, previous history of violence, a history of
being physically abused in childhood, and command hallucinations that
order the person to commit violent acts (other types of hallucinations
do not predict violence). When any of these factors obtains for a given
patient, I tend to be extra vigilant.

-- 234 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	219
During any interview, keep in mind several safety principles. They
apply to any clinician but are especially relevant for female interviewers,
whom some patients will regard as vulnerable targets. Remember that
no one cares as much about your safety as you do. Here are some of the
preventive measures you should adopt:
• Review any documentation before you interview your new patient.
Be especially wary of someone who has a history of past violence or who
seems to have a condition suggesting poor impulse control. Again, psy-
chosis, current intoxication, and antisocial behavior are obvious candi-
dates.
• Ideally, an interview room in a mental health emergency facility
will have two doors, both of which open outward. Even if this is not the
case, arrange the seating in any room you use so that the patient is never
between you and your potential escape route, as I have noted in Chapter
1.
• When you are meeting a new patient for the first time, try to have
a security guard available, especially if it is late at night and there are few
other people around.
• Many clinics have panic buttons installed under the desks in their
offices. If your setting is one of those, be sure to familiarize yourself with
its workings and the expected response.
• In doubtful circumstances, leaving the door to the interview room
open will also provide you a sense of security and give the patient an
added reason for restraint.
• Watch carefully for these signs of heightened tension: clenched
fists, loud or quavering voice, angry words, narrowed gaze, or sudden
bursts of activity.
• If your patient becomes agitated or otherwise intimidating, remain
calm. “Please, just take your seat,” you might say quietly. Although some
situations can only be met with a show of force, evidence of your own
quiet competence may keep the lid on a cauldron threatening to boil
over.
You must be prepared to cope with potential harm to person or prop-
erty. Some people get through life by bullying others; often their threats
succeed without their ever having to follow through on them, but it is
hard to know in advance just who will follow through with actual bodily
harm, or in what circumstances. It is therefore vital to have a three-part
plan:

-- 235 of 385 --

220 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
1. With the principles listed just above and the strength of a backup
force, ensure your own safety and that of those around you.
2. Maintain your composure as you inform the patient about the
consequences of further threats or actual acting- out behavior.
3. Be fully prepared to follow through with the limits you’ve set,
should the need arise.
Suppose that despite your best efforts at forming rapport, your
patient displays evidence of unremitting hostility. Then you may have to
break off the interview, but try to do it in such a way that you preserve
some basis for a future relationship. You might say something along these
lines:
“I’m sorry. I’d really like to work with you, but right now you seem to
be pretty upset. Perhaps we can get together again later.”
Then leave the room quickly and notify the security staff and colleagues.
Remember that it is nobody’s job to face single-handedly a hostile, possi-
bly violent patient. “Security in numbers” is trite but true, and it is always
your responsibility as a mental health clinician to promote safety—your
patients’, your co-workers’, and your own.
conFusion
Patients with confusion* resulting from dementia or delirium present
an unusually vexing challenge to the interviewer. They may think and
speak slowly, mix up the chronology of events, forget important facts, and
have difficulty following your instructions. Frustration with their own
poor performance sometimes precipitates hostility. Because the data you
obtain from them are unreliable and sparse, it is hard to make a valid
diagnosis. Sometimes you will conclude your interview with little to show
for your efforts.
The best solution to this frustrating experience is prevention. Before
the interview, obtain all the information you can from collateral sources
(such as relatives, physicians, other mental health workers, and previous
hospital records). According to a recent study, for some disorders such as
a long- standing psychosis, medical records may provide the vast bulk of
the information you need. Then you can concentrate on your thorough
evaluation of the patient’s mental status.
* Confusion isn’t a proper medical term, but it is convenient label for people whose
thinking appears to be clouded or who describe themselves as being, well, confused.

-- 236 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	221
Even without collateral information, you can take several steps to
facilitate your interview with a patient who is confused:
Introduce yourself slowly and distinctly. Before you begin your ques-
tions, make sure the patient understands who you are and why you
are there.
Try not to rush. You’re better off with a few reliable facts than a
jumble of inaccuracies.
Use short sentences. Long speeches only compound the confusion.
Choose your words carefully. Jargon and slang may be especially
treacherous for the confused patient.
Avoid shorthand phrases. For instance, a confused patient may take
your question “Have you been hearing voices?” in its most literal
sense.
Ask for repetition. If your patient can repeat the question, it was
probably understood.
Ask about the events of a single day. If you aren’t having much success
with your usual questions, request an account of activities that day, or
a typical day’s schedule.
You may want to conduct your interview with a knowledgeable infor-
mant present. Especially for a patient with moderate dementia, it can
increase the reliability of your information and provide support for
the patient. Ask permission first.
Don’t move too quickly to the formal MSE; some patients with mild
cognitive symptoms may notice the jump and take offense.
Keep smiling. At a time when you lack information, you don’t want
the appearance of irritation to rob you of rapport.
older paTienTs
Being old does not by itself constitute a disability. Too often, interview-
ers forget this and assume that patients who are older are also confused,
deaf, or feeble. Although you should always try to show appropriate con-
cern, older patients justifiably resent being patronized, physically moved
around, or shouted at. Don’t let their advanced age deter you from asking
questions about activities usually associated with youth. These people are
old, not extinct. Many of them still misuse drugs or alcohol, enjoy sex,
and even worry about caring for their own parents.
However, there are a number of special considerations to keep in
mind when you interview older patients:

-- 237 of 385 --

222 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• You will probably need more interview time just to get through the
sheer volume of material. During a lifetime that spans many decades, the
average older patient has accumulated more experiences, both good and
bad, than has someone younger. You’ll especially need to allow additional
time for your older patient’s personal and social histories. And because
the mental health problems of senior citizens are more likely to be compli-
cated by medical disorders, you’ll also need to spend extra time obtaining
general health information.
• A stylistic change seems to take place somewhere during the sev-
enth or eighth decade of life: Personality traits become accentuated. In
addition, older patients tend to reminisce a lot; perhaps they feel better
when they review earlier periods of their lives. Young interviewers should
try to accommodate themselves to this slower pace. Speak distinctly, allow
more response time, and suggest additional interview sessions if you need
them to finish gathering data.
• Older patients have some unique problems that young interview-
ers may have difficulty relating to. Trying to fill many leisure hours, for
example, is a problem with which many young clinicians have had no
personal experience; the stress of a low income that carries no promise
of future augmentation may be another. Even such ordinary activities as
meal preparation and arranging for transportation can burden someone
who has become isolated or withdrawn.
• Watch out for instances of elder abuse. This problem, which can
include neglect, exploitation, and rights violations, as well as physical and
psychological abuse, probably affects more than a million Americans over
the age of 65 each year. It is especially likely to occur when an older per-
son has recently become more dependent on a caregiver (who is often the
one who administers the abuse). You can screen for instances of elder
abuse by asking the following questions:
“Are you afraid of anyone at home?”
“Has anyone at home ever harmed you?”
“Has anyone made you do things you didn’t want to do?”
Abuse should be reported to the appropriate adult protective service for
your state or jurisdiction. In some states, failure of health care practi-
tioners to report the physical abuse of older patients is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine or jail term.
• Older patients have suffered a variety of losses, which multiply
with the passing years. These include loss of health, job, income, status,
friends, and family members. Children have moved away; homes of many
years have been sold when the owners move to retirement communities.

-- 238 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	223
Perhaps there is no telephone and they don’t use the Internet, producing
loss of contact with others. Each of these losses demands special sensitiv-
ity. This means not only being sympathetic, but also keeping alert to the
possibility of denial. Some patients will have difficulty admitting, even to
themselves, the waning of their capabilities and prospects. The result may
be overgeneralization or vagueness that you must counter with careful
requests for more complete information. Here is an example:
I ntervIewer: How often do you see members of your family?
PatIent: Oh, pretty often.
I ntervIewer: For example, when did you last see your son? I
understand he lives just across town.
PatIent: Well, it’s been about 6 months, actually.
Younger paTienTs
Interviewing young people is a pretty big subject (I’ve written an entire
book about it). Because it’s often a pediatric mental health specialist who
will evaluate a younger child, I won’t try to cover interviews that occur on
the playroom floor or through a forest of finger puppets. But almost any
mental health practitioner might evaluate teens and early adolescents, for
whom special issues arise. Most of my comments here just reemphasize
some of what I’ve already said.
First, whereas most adults and a few older adolescents will be seen
because they think it is a good idea, children and the majority of adoles-
cents rarely present themselves voluntarily for evaluation. And because
it’s almost always someone else’s idea, you must persuade them that coop-
eration is a good idea. You must therefore place even more than your
usual emphasis on establishing great rapport. In this instance, small talk
at the beginning might help your young patient ease into a relationship
with you.
Many teenagers will be able to state the reason behind the appoint-
ment, so you’ll want to speak with them first. Younger children—the exact
age range is a bit fluid, depending on the individual child, the family, and
the nature of the presenting problem—won’t know why they are there, so
you’ll probably speak first with a parent. For all, it’s a good idea to have at
least one joint interview; it serves as an opportunity to watch a child inter-
act with at least one parent, preferably both. (During a joint interview, be
careful to protect the child from potentially harmful information, such as
a parental love affair or an impending job loss.)
A couple of issues in particular could cause a young person to skirt
the truth. These include intensely personal questions about drugs or sex,

-- 239 of 385 --

224 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
and the fear that confidences will be breached. To encourage candor,
children often need more of an introduction to interview and therapeutic
situations than do adults. I might say something like this:
“Now I need to ask you questions about [sex, drugs]. Sometimes, those
subjects cause [kids, young people] to feel so uncomfortable that they
just can’t talk about them. If you feel you can’t tell me the truth, just
say that you’d rather move on to something else. OK?”
Most of the time, your patient will steam right ahead with the answers,
but when one demurs, you’ll have a clearly marked area to which you can
return later.
As to confidentiality, deal with that right from the top. I start with
something like this:
“We’re here to talk about you and any problems you are having. I’m
here for you, and that means that what we say stays in the room.
Now there’s only a couple of times that I could ever tell something
you don’t want shared. That’s if I think that you are in danger, or if I
think that someone else will be. Otherwise, I’m not going to blab to
your folks. But in any case, if I ever had to say anything, I’d always
warn you in advance.”
Most kids will readily accept these statements at face value, as they
should. If ever an issue does come to light that you think should be shared,
give fair warning and pose a choice:
“Do you want to tell your folks about this, or should I?”
oTher issues and Behaviors
A variety of situations, attitudes, and behaviors can affect the success of
your initial interview. Although you probably won’t often encounter these
characteristics, the response you make can modulate the effect of those
that do occur. My overall approach is to regard any issue or behavior that
threatens to come between me and the patient as something we should
face together. In effect, I frame each situation so as to place the problem
on one side, with the patient and me on the other side, working as a team.
Patient Demands
Whether due to narcissism or some other issue—anxiety about loss of sta-
tus, anger at a spouse or boss—some patients feel they deserve special

-- 240 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	225
treatment. This can take the form of demanding a different hospital
room, the privilege to smoke, the right to take notes on (or to record) the
interview, or a special appointment time. Because such demands tend to
go against the grain, clinicians may feel the urge to push back. I would try
to evaluate each situation individually and, as long as it seemed unlikely
to usher in a spiraling round of entitlements, make a reasonable accom-
modation to increase the patient’s level of comfort.
Rodney brought an audio recorder to his initial interview, so he
could include excerpts in a biography he was writing. His clinician
explained that he did not record interviews, because it could lead to
discomfort and possibly loss of information. Rodney put away the
recorder, and the interview unfolded normally.
Elaine asked if she could take notes during her initial interview. She
said that one of her concerns was that she couldn’t remember things
as well as she used to; she was afraid that she would later forget some
vital concept they had discussed. Her clinician said it would be OK,
as long as it didn’t interfere with their discussion. By the end of the
hour, she had accumulated only a few lines of notes, and her clinician
had a good grasp of her emotional issues.
You would apply a similar rational approach to patients demanding
VIP treatment on account of wealth, social prominence, or positions of
influence or power. Whereas you might acknowledge their special status,
you should also emphasize that the opinion they will get from you will be
every bit as honest and thoughtful as for any “regular” patient.
Blindness/Major Visual Impairment
Patients with blindness or marked visual impairment can communicate
their thoughts, feelings, and experiences just as well as people who can
see normally. What they can’t do is read the body language all people
normally use to help convey concern and requests. With blind patients,
you will have to use your tone of voice to indicate that you care, and take
extra care with the words you use to say what you want them to do. If you
get up, rummage in a drawer, or open a folder, describe your movements.
This will help answer questions before they are asked and tell the patient
that you are a considerate interviewer who is sensitive to special needs.
Deafness/Major Hearing Impairment
Most patients with deafness or seriously impaired hearing will commu-
nicate quite well if you speak distinctly and slowly, while looking right at
them to facilitate lip reading. Take care not to hide your mouth behind

-- 241 of 385 --

226 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
your hand or a piece of paper. Of course, you wouldn’t ordinarily eat or
drink anything during any interview, but here is one more reason not to.
In addition, don’t shout: Most patients with a significant hearing impair-
ment use hearing aids, and loud noises only distort the sound. Whether
or not deaf patients have any residual hearing at all, it is vital not to talk
down to them; they may be deaf, but they are not children.
Also keep in mind that many of these people bridle at the medical
model of deafness, which implies that they suffer from pathology. These
people adhere with pride to the cultural definition of deafness— that is,
a community bringing people together through a common physical char-
acteristic and a common language (in the United States and Canada, it’s
American Sign Language, or ASL). You should ascertain which point of
view your patient holds; many deaf individuals vigorously deny that they
have a disability at all, and may bitterly resent any implication to the con-
trary. You could ask for information this way:
“I understand that many people regard impaired hearing as a cultural
issue. Is this something you can tell me about?”
A Background Different from Yours
We are all united by our humanity, but countless features can set human
beings apart. Although our training and interests as mental health profes-
sionals help us value the variety of life’s conditions, we must constantly
remain alert for modes of living other than our own.
Aside from obvious features such as age, gender, ethnicity, and lan-
guage, the search for defining attributes can also apply to a wide variety
of other factors. Was your patient reared in a country or an urban setting?
Is this patient a college graduate or a high school dropout? A vegetarian
or meat eater? We’re a country of sports buffs, environmentalists, cre-
ationists, evolutionists, wine aficionados, teetotalers, and political junk-
ies. Each of these characteristics, plus countless others, adds to the diver-
sity of life that conscientious clinicians will acknowledge and celebrate.
Some patients will reject you for your own views. I can recall feeling
upset when a family of patients I liked told me they were decamping to a
clinician whose religious views were more like their own. Only a minor-
ity will take steps that drastic, but there will be others who may not fully
invest you with their trust—until you earn it—because you are different in
some way.
To bridge the cultural divide, perhaps you can exploit your patient’s
history. For example, in the current era of voluntary military service, most
Americans under the age of 60 have had little personal experience with
war. A patient’s military history serves as a gift to a clinician, who can
derive much information about that individual’s approach to the world by

-- 242 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	227
asking for details about wartime experiences as a way both to gain infor-
mation and to solidify rapport.
In fact, the general approach of asking a patient to teach you about
any issue involving custom, ethnicity, language, ritual, and more has
much to recommend it. It shows your interest in the patient, who will also
benefit from a sense of enhanced competence and worth. For patients
who were not born in the country where you practice, you might find out
how recently they immigrated and what they have experienced, both posi-
tive and negative. You might feel some reluctance to delve directly into
issues concerning sexual preference, but you can express interest in hear-
ing more information from a patient who spontaneously raises the matter.
Other opportunities are afforded by the innumerable varieties of human
experience, only a few of which have I mentioned above.
Using an Interpreter
Surveys indicate that nearly one-fifth of U.S. residents speak a language
other than English; of these, nearly half aren’t fluent in English. This
situation is also common in Canada (which is a bilingual nation to begin
with). This creates a challenge for most of us who are native speakers of
English: To understand patients who do not speak our language, and to
help them appreciate their need for treatment, we must communicate
through a third person.
For reasons of convenience and cost, it’s tempting to rely on an accom-
panying friend or family member, but that can create problems. Amateur
interpreters make more errors than trained professionals do, and embar-
rassment over delicate matters can result in information that someone
close to the patient incompletely transmits, or perhaps withholds com-
pletely. Patients themselves may hesitate to reveal sensitive material to
relatives or to burden children with issues that are beyond their years of
maturity. All in all, ad hoc interpreting yields poorer- quality information
and lower patient satisfaction.
Professional interpreters who understand medical/psychological
problems are more likely to satisfy. Because they often come from the
same culture as the patient, they may have special insight into the pres-
sures the patient faces. If you have a choice, the qualities of warmth and
authenticity are more valuable in an interpreter than is a background
in science or health care. (An Internet search can help you locate inter-
preter services in your area.) Even with professionals, take a moment at
the beginning to emphasize the importance of complete confidentiality
for the material revealed during the session.
Be sure to speak to and maintain eye contact with the patient. For
example, you wouldn’t look at the interpreter and say, “Ask her if she . . . ”
Rather, direct your question to the patient, and then let the translator

-- 243 of 385 --

228 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
speak. Some authors recommend sitting in a triangle, so each participant
can see the others, but at least one experienced clinician recommends
that the interpreter sit beside and slightly behind the patient. This puts
the focus of the encounter on the patient–clinician communication and
tends to discourage extended dialogues between patient and interpreter.
Because humor and metaphors often don’t translate well, it’s better to
avoid them.
If no professional is available, you’ll have to make due with available
resources. After your caution about confidentiality, ask your ad hoc inter-
preter not to explain your meaning—but rather to repeat what you have
said as exactly as possible, right down to the same feeling tone. Of course,
it’s even more important than ever to use questions that are brief, clear,
and open-ended.
Some patients may resist revealing sensitive information to an inter-
preter. They may not want someone of the same culture to know about, for
example, an instance of rape or spousal abuse. Patients with at least some
proficiency in your own language may ask the interpreter to leave the room
when such material arises. I’d comply with any such request, if I felt that
with our limited ability to communicate, I could at least understand the
gist of the story. But the reverse situation sometimes occurs, in which you
might want to use an interpreter even when the patient has some capacity
to understand you. This is because some patients find it hard to explain
trauma and other complicated issues in other than their native language.
Crying
Beginners sometimes worry that they’ll have trouble coping if a patient
cries. To be sure, tears can slow things down for a while, but in the long
run they may even facilitate the flow of information about emotions.
A quick touch on the arm (one of the few instances of physical contact
other than a handshake I’d suggest between patient and clinician) lets
the patient know of your concern. Offering a fresh facial tissue serves
the same purpose. A few moments of silence may be enough to allow the
patient to regain composure with dignity. If the patient cries too much to
perceive your concern, be sure to voice it:
“I can see that this upsets you. Would you like to have a couple of min-
utes to collect yourself?”
Humor
Jokes can go a long way toward reducing tension, but patients will some-
times cloak their concerns in humor so that a clinician won’t give it seri-
ous (and therefore potentially threatening) consideration. In any case,

-- 244 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	229
listen carefully when your patient treats sensitive material with a light
touch: You may find more cause for concern than is first apparent. And of
course, always be extremely chary of uttering witticisms of your own. The
initial interview especially, when you don’t know one another well, is no
time to give your new patient the false impression that you are a jokester
who cannot be trusted to take sensitive issues seriously.
Excessive Talking or Rambling
Some patients can be remarkably circumstantial. Left to their own devices,
they will tell you far more than you want to know. Sometimes, especially
if your patient isn’t usually overtalkative, this can be an attempt to avoid
confronting unacceptable feelings or revealing sensitive material; much
of the time, however, it’s just habit. Although circumstantial speech is not
usually pathological, it sweeps up way too much chaff for the amount of
wheat it provides. Rapport may also suffer when you endure talking that
has no purpose, so you should probably intervene if your patient rambles.
To attempt a graceful intervention, try to let it take off from something
your patient has said. For example, in response to a question about drug
usage, this patient spent several minutes discussing the drinking habits
of a cousin:
PatIent: . . . So I don’t think I’ve ever seen her after 6 P.M. when she
wasn’t in the bag. Another thing—
I ntervIewer: (Interrupting) But what about your drinking?
The clinician had to intervene and restate the desired responses several
times before this patient could finally stick to the point.
Even if it isn’t their intent, patients who are overtalkative seem to
dominate an interview. (Those with mania are notorious in this respect.)
You may be able to handle irrelevant comments by only smiling an
acknowledgment as you continue with your line of questioning. A more
explicit gesture, such as a finger to your lips, may encourage even a bois-
terously manic patient to talk less. Sometimes you may have to set firm
limits, perhaps in the form of a direct confrontation:
“You have a lot to say that is very interesting. But our time is short, and
we still have a lot of work to do. Let’s try hard to stick to the subject.”
“These details are remarkable, but our first job should be to under-
stand the broad outline.”
Suppose the patient harps on one theme, even when you try to
change the subject. In this case, you’ll need to reevaluate the importance

-- 245 of 385 --

230 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
of this theme to the patient. Confrontation is the most direct method, but
it should be phrased diplomatically:
“It seems to me that the subject of sex preoccupies you. Am I right?”
“We seem to be stuck on the issue of your son’s accident. What else
about it is important to you?”
For a patient who is extremely garrulous, you may be forced to ask
only “yes–no” questions and to resist vigorously any attempt at amplifica-
tion.
Somatic Concerns
Some patients, even those who do not have a somatic symptom disorder,
firmly believe that their symptoms are physical in nature. Despite what
physicians have told them, they cling to the idea that their problems can
be solved by medications or surgery. There is little value in explaining the
probable emotional origin of these complaints: Even after repeated fail-
ures, such a patient may continue to search for medicines and operations
that will produce relief. Without arguing— one of your goals, remember,
is to become the patient’s ally—you can point out that physical approaches
haven’t helped (not enough, at any rate), and that talking about the
patient’s feelings may relieve some of the anxiety that inevitably accom-
panies illness. Also, you’ll want to work with the patient’s medical care
provider to ensure that neither physical nor emotional/behavioral issues
are overlooked.
Psychosis
In emergency rooms and admitting wards of hospitals, you will some-
times encounter patients with such severe psychosis that they cannot com-
municate well. Their thinking is tangential or otherwise disordered, and
the connections they make between ideas are so illogical that you cannot
make much sense of them. You should certainly ask such patients to try
to explain their thinking, but the answers may be of interest more for
the psychopathology they show than for any historical information they
contain. For history that is accurate and relevant, rely on informants or
a chart from a previous admission. You can also interview the patients
again later, after the psychosis has abated.
Of course, it is important not to buy into such a patient’s false beliefs;
among other issues, you always want to avoid even the appearance of
deceit. When talking with someone who is extremely psychotic, you can
focus on behaviors and feelings without agreeing with the patient’s suspi-
cions or convictions:

-- 246 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	231
“I can understand how frightening it would be to feel you were being
followed. Can you tell me what went through your mind at the time?”
You can also offer reassurance that you believe the patient is being
truthful in reporting experiences just as perceived:
“I know you’ve done your best to tell me exactly what happened. I
wonder if there is any other possible interpretation as to the cause.”
Some patients, though not psychotic, may have antisocial personality
disorder or another personality disorder that interferes with insight; oth-
ers may be in denial about heavy substance use. Patients without insight
may feel no compelling reason to be interviewed. Unless you have some
leverage such as a legal mandate or family pressure, you probably won’t
obtain much in the way of useful information from them. Here is another
instance where collateral information may be the only reliable informa-
tion you can expect.
Muteness
Like deafness, blindness, and other physical attributes, muteness can exist
to varying degrees and can have a number of possible causes.
Neurological. A number of neurological problems can cause patients
to be mute. Be sure that the patient is fully conscious and alert.
Depression. A patient with severe depression may not be completely
mute, but just showing a long latency of response.
Conversion. A patient with mutism as a conversion symptom may be
able (willing) to produce a grunt or throat- clearing sound. With patience,
coaxing, and praise for progress, you might eventually parlay these sounds
into syllables, words, phrases, and sentences.
Psychosis. Someone with severe psychosis may heed voices that
threaten reprisals for talking with real people. Head nods and shakes in
answer to your “yes–no” questions could help you make this diagnosis.
Given pencil and paper, this same patient might be willing to answer your
questions in writing.
Gain. Could this patient have a practical reason to appear mute,
either completely or partially? Motives such as avoiding punishment and
achieving financial gain (insurance, workers’ compensation) are the most
obvious. If your patient has been overheard speaking normally with other
patients or staff, this would tip you off that the muteness is voluntary—I
hesitate to use the word malingering, because it is pejorative and hard to

-- 247 of 385 --

232 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
prove. To assess muteness, ask any friends or relatives present to leave
before you continue your interview. In private, patients sometimes reveal
secrets that they could never bear to share with their families. You might
coax some people to talk by pointing out:
“I can get information about you from records, previous caregivers,
or from friends or relatives. But I thought you might like me to hear
your version.”
A relative paucity of speech that is less than total muteness may indi-
cate fear, shame, confusion, lack of understanding, or perhaps a reluc-
tance to contradict an authority figure (that’s you). I’d probably try this
approach:
“You seem pretty quiet in a situation where most people have a whole
lot to say. I wonder if you can tell me why?”
A somewhat related difficulty is a patient who speaks extremely
slowly. Often this is due to depression, in which case you have to strike
a balance: Allow enough time to formulate an answer, but don’t let the
patient twist in the wind with a sense of helpless embarrassment. In such
a case, I might ask whether the patient would prefer that I ask some “yes–
no” questions. Otherwise, prepare to make a long afternoon of it.
Rarely, you may encounter a patient who sits not only speechless but
with a fixed facial expression—possibly one of perplexity. Later, there may
be amnesia for the incident. This behavior would put me in mind of two
main possibilities: some sort of seizure disorder, such as temporal lobe
epilepsy, or a dissociative state. Such patients have probably had other epi-
sodes of the behavior, but these may not be accessible through an inter-
view. Try asking:
“Do you sometimes become absorbed in your own thoughts or day-
dreams? If you do, can you tell me about it?”
Any such episodes require thorough investigation, perhaps with a neu-
rological consultation. And certainly you should seek confirmation from
informants.
Seductive Behavior and Other Inappropriate Conduct
Seductive behavior is less likely to be a problem during the initial inter-
view than during subsequent therapy sessions. However, the potential for
seduction is always there, especially when the interviewer is male and the
patient is female. (Studies have shown that the vast majority of health care

-- 248 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	233
workers who become involved with their patients are male, though female
clinicians are by no means immune.)
If you find that seductive behavior is being directed toward you, ask
yourself the usual question: Why is this patient behaving this way? Is it a
need to feel attractive? To be loved? Over the years, has aggressive sex-
ual behavior been reinforced with material or emotional rewards? The
answers could be buried beneath memories too remote to uncover in a
year, let alone in a single interview. Sometimes it’s a matter of personality
disorder, which can challenge even experienced interviewers.
Seductive behavior may be as subtle as a sideways glance, as sug-
gestive as provocative clothing, or as direct as a request to be held or
kissed. Regardless of its form, the meaning of seductive behavior is always
the same: danger for the interviewer and danger for the patient. This is
because the overt message of seductive behavior (“Embrace me”) is often
quite different from what the patient really feels (“Help me; protect me”).
If a health care professional responds to the literal request for physical
contact, the patient may ultimately feel outraged and retaliate accord-
ingly. At best, the relationship and therapy will both be compromised.
The best preventive approach to seductive behavior is to maintain
appropriate distance at all times. Address each patient by title and last
name, and expect your patients to do the same for you. You can also dis-
courage excessive familiarity if you stick to business and avoid discussing
matters personal to you. If you are a male who does physical exams as a
part of your job, be sure that a female attendant is always in the room
when you are examining a female patient of any age. If you are a female
examining a male, have a male attendant with you.
Other inappropriate behaviors may occasionally intrude—a patient
who asks to use the telephone, opens books from your shelf, sits in your
chair, or brings in lunch. Often the patient’s evident diagnosis (I know,
that’s what you’re trying to figure out) and the nature of the infraction
will determine your response. For example, I’d try to redirect a patient
with mania, repeatedly if needed—perhaps even by using a gentle hand
on the shoulder. To someone you already believe may have a personal-
ity disorder, I would probably request (perhaps a little sharply), “Please
don’t do that.” In most cases, you would strive to be directive; early in
your fact-finding phase with the patient is not a good time to be making
interpretations.
Intellectual Disability
Even without formal testing, you can often pick out the patient who is
operating on the lower fringes of what is often called general intelligence.
Research has shown that open-ended questions can lead such patients
to errors in what they report, whereas many will show a bias toward

-- 249 of 385 --

234 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
answering a “yes–no” questions in the affirmative. It is often better to
phrase your questions in a multiple- choice sort of way (“Was the voice
you heard that of a stranger, or someone you know?”). Even then, it’s
more important than ever to check the facts with someone who knows the
patient well. As you might expect, higher-functioning people with intel-
lectual disability are more reliable interviewees.
Patients with intellectual disability (or what used to be called mental
retardation) can often communicate better about events than about feel-
ings. They may interpret speech literally, so (without talking down as to
a child) you’ll want to speak clearly and avoid using metaphor. It’s best
to focus on the present: Such patients may have relative difficulty talk-
ing about the past or future plans. When their emotions do come to the
fore, you may also need to cut them some slack; for a lifetime, these indi-
viduals have watched siblings, schoolmates, and nearly everyone else they
know enjoy more autonomy than they themselves can lay claim to. Small
wonder if they have feelings of resentment that lie not too far beneath
the surface—feelings that can pop out in unexpected ways. For example,
a woman with intellectual disability who refused to attend her younger
sister’s wedding was painfully aware that she herself might never enjoy a
significant romantic relationship.
Persons with intellectual disability may also copy gestures they
have witnessed in others and bring them out at inopportune times—an
attempted “high-five” at a moment of general sorrow, for example. One
young man of my acquaintance attended a game played by his favor-
ite baseball team, though in the opposing team’s stadium. Becoming
incensed when fans cheered wildly as his team fell behind, he stood and
yelled at those around him, “Hey! What’s the matter with you?”
Still another risk is that people with intellectual disability may report
as fact that which they themselves cannot verify. For example, a patient
was thought by a clinician to be psychotic when he reported that an angel
had touched him on the head and blessed him during one long winter
night. He clung persistently to that belief; only with prolonged effort was
it finally revealed that his mischievous roommate had originated the story.
“Well, I didn’t actually see it happen; that was Jeremy [the roommate] who
told me,” he eventually admitted. In the same vein, not all self-injury is
evidence of a suicide attempt; it may be self-punishment, an attempt at
controlling others, or an instance of stereotypic movement disorder.
Impending Death
Patients who expect to die soon, either immediately or in the near future,
are often angry or depressed; sometimes they may deny what is happen-
ing to them. It is sad if friends and relatives begin to shun them; it is a
tragedy if their therapists also refuse to talk frankly about death and the

-- 250 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	235
future. Mood disorder in dying patients isn’t hard to learn about. A study
of terminally ill patients found that the most valid way of ascertaining
depression was by asking a single question: “Are you depressed?”
Always invite a patient who is dying to verbalize feelings and reactions
to this universal experience. Besides a full range of (often conflicting)
emotions, you will also find a full range of everyday emotions, including
fear, envy, love, hope, and joy. Such patients may have many regrets; some
feel lonely. And each has a lifetime of memories and emotions, which
must be sorted out as carefully as if this person were going to live forever.
how To respond when The paTienT asks . . .
Patients are forever asking questions, which is all to the good. Questions
offer rich opportunities to provide reassurance, relieve anxieties, and
reinforce sound resolutions. Some questions also offer you a chance to
put your foot in it, if you don’t think carefully.
• “How do you feel about me?” This question is usually a request to
be reassured that you like or accept the patient. You can give it, but try to
throw in some information or instruction that might provide more sub-
stantive help. Here are two examples:
“I think you’re a very nice person who is having a terrible problem
with her marriage. It’s going to be very important to get your hus-
band to come in for some sessions.”
“I think it took a lot of courage to sign yourself into the hospital.
Now let’s work together hard on that drinking problem.”
• “Do you think I’m crazy?” The answer to this can be hard or easy,
depending upon whether the patient does or does not have psychosis. If
there is no psychosis, say so. If there is, try to avoid a direct confrontation
(your claim that this is psychosis would probably only be rejected, any-
way). Instead, you could respond with a question of your own:
“Why do you ask that?”
“Are you afraid of that?”
Or you could give an answer that sidesteps the question:
“I think you are clearly troubled by what has happened to you.”
“You are having some unusual experiences, but we can help this.”
If pushed to the wall (“Look, do you think I’m psychotic?”), I’ll opt for
the truth, but with the statement that I realize this may be hard for the
patient to accept.

-- 251 of 385 --

236 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• “What should I do about [any concern the patient has]?” If this
question can be answered simply, then do so. However, it may be a request
for more help than any clinician can reasonably provide during an initial
interview session. In that case, try to define what will be necessary (more
information, more time) and when you might be able to provide it.
• “What’s wrong with me?” (and you don’t know). First of all, try
not to feel insecure. No firm diagnosis can be made in about 20% of
initial interviews, and even experienced clinicians are sometimes initially
baffled. If you think there are some good possibilities that won’t frighten
or threaten the patient, state them. If you need more data, say so. A good
generic response would go something like this:
“It’s clear you’re having a serious problem with [patient’s chief com-
plaint]. We need to get more information, so that together we can
work out the best plan for you.”
• “Can you help me?” The response should be some variation on “I
hope so, but first we need more information.”
• “Why don’t people like me?” Sometimes the answer seems clear to
you, even on first acquaintance: The patient is self- centered, overbearing,
prejudiced, hateful, or harboring a host of other attitudes and behaviors
that you find off-putting. That’s exactly the time not to venture an unvar-
nished opinion. For one thing, first impressions are often wrong; you may
have sampled the behavior on an especially bad day, and you are definitely
dealing with someone who is under stress. For another, remember your
two main goals of the first interview—to get information and to form a
relationship. Rather than answering the question directly, you can instead
express sympathy for the unhappiness and offer hope for the future:
“I can imagine how much it would hurt to feel that way, but I don’t
know whether it’s true or not. Together let’s try to find out whether
we have a real problem.” (Notice how this answer puts you and the
patient on the same side of the problem.)
• “Have you ever experienced anything like this yourself?” Most
patients are interested in their therapists’ personal lives, and sometimes
you may feel tempted to share something of yourself with your patient.
That temptation may increase after the first few interviews, when you
have come to know one another better. Although I am not one of those
who believes that a clinician should reveal nothing personal under any
circumstances, I do agree that self-revelation can be fraught with diffi-
culty, especially for the beginner. Certainly in an initial interview, you
will progress further and feel more comfortable if your own life and per-
sonality are not at issue. You can answer any personal question by gently

-- 252 of 385 --

Special or Challenging Patient Behaviors and Issues 	237
redefining the purpose of the interview. At the same time, be careful to
show that you are not upset that your patient has asked the question:
“A lot of patients wonder about the people who interview them. It’s
perfectly normal to be curious. But we should concentrate on get-
ting the information we need to help you with your problem.”
• “Don’t you agree with me that I’m right?” (and you don’t). You’ll
get this question from patients who are experiencing all sorts of issues—
psychosis, substance use, illegal activity, even arguments with a spouse. In
a first interview, you’d like to avoid a quarrel, but if you buy into the prof-
fered assertion, you set yourself up for complications later. All you need
do in such a circumstance is to agree that your patient is having a problem
or is uncomfortable:
“I can see that this is something that [hurts, bothers, troubles] you
a lot. We’ll want to delve into it more, later on.”
If the patient persists in requiring your agreement, you might try:
“I doubt that you’d want me to jump in before we’ve established all
the facts. So let’s move on and get some more information.”
• Occasionally patients will emphasize the degree of their illness by
asking, “Would you want someone as sick as I am for [a lawyer, a physi-
cian, an accountant]?” Trainees can wrestle with the answer to this ques-
tion, trying to balance their true feelings against what might be good to
tell a patient. The best approach is not to answer it directly, but—as politi-
cians sometimes do when confronted with a question they don’t want to
answer—to reframe the issue: “If I had this much on my plate, I don’t know
how I’d manage to deal with someone else’s problems.”
• And for any other question to which you don’t know the best
answer, here’s a workable response that I use: “I can’t tell you that right
now, but here’s how I plan to find out.” I will then sketch out an Internet
search, discussion with colleagues, further fact-finding efforts, or what-
ever other approach seems reasonable.
Once again, the take-home point is the importance of figuring out
how to work with, not against, the patient. Usually that’s easy, but some-
times it requires generous helpings of ingenuity, flexibility, and patience.

-- 253 of 385 --

238
C h a p t e r 	1 8
Diagnosis and Recommendations
With all interviews completed, you face the task of evaluating your infor-
mation. It should be organized in a form that is useful for making recom-
mendations and for communicating with patients and other profession-
als. These tasks will be our concern in the final chapters of this book.
Diagnosis anD Differential Diagnosis
In the past, some writers have derided diagnosis as “pigeonholing,” claim-
ing that it denies the individuality of each patient. Such views now appear
to have receded in favor of the majority opinion, which recognizes diag-
nosis as the essential foundation for these clinical activities: recommend-
ing treatment, predicting the course of illness, advising relatives, and
communicating with other mental health professionals. Whether or not
this opinion is consistent with your usual way of thinking, current men-
tal health practice—hospital record rooms, third-party payers, and some-
times patients themselves—will often require you to make a diagnosis.
Regardless of your professional discipline, it will pay you to learn to make
the best diagnosis possible.
The importance of accurate diagnosis can hardly be overstated. At
best, an incorrect diagnosis delays effective treatment; at worst, it may
usher in treatment that is ineffective or even dangerous. Inaccurate diag-
nosis also risks giving a prognosis that is either too gloomy or too optimis-
tic for the individual patient. Planning then will suffer—planning about
marriage, jobs, childbearing, buying insurance, and the myriad other
tasks that mental illness can interfere with.
Once made, diagnostic errors can be difficult to reverse. Diagnosis
is passed along from one clinician to another, from one chart to the next;

-- 254 of 385 --

Diagnosis and Recommendations 	239
errors are abetted by patients and their families, who carry them along
(sometimes for decades) as family mythology. It may be many years before
a clinician with fresh perspective takes the time to review a chronic men-
tal patient’s history. Yet you can often avoid all of these difficulties if you
take the care to make the right diagnosis in the first place.
Making an accurate diagnosis isn’t usually all that difficult. Most
patients clearly fulfill criteria for a diagnosis with which the majority of
professionals would agree, and most don’t meet criteria for other, con-
founding diagnoses. But about 20% of the time, the situation isn’t so obvi-
ous. You may have insufficient information to make any diagnosis at all,
or your patient may seem to meet criteria for several diagnoses at once.
And occasionally the facts you think you’ve determined at the outset dis-
appear or change in the light of further experience with the patient.
That’s why most health care professionals state their impressions in
terms of a differential diagnosis—a list of the possible diagnoses that should
be considered for a given patient. You should include in your differential
diagnosis every disorder you consider even remotely possible. This is all
the more true if you are in some doubt as to the correct diagnosis. You
will have a better chance of ultimately selecting the right diagnosis if your
working list is broad and inclusive.
In constructing your differential diagnosis, you’ll need to consider
two principles. Because at times they conflict, they require some discus-
sion.
1. The first principle is to list the most likely diagnoses first, and the
rest in decreasing order of probability. Sometimes we call the most likely
one the best diagnosis, because it most satisfactorily explains all of the
historical data, signs, and symptoms of illness. Ideally, all elements of the
history and the MSE should support your best diagnosis. But even if you
think there is only a small chance that your best diagnosis is incorrect,
you should list other diagnoses to be ruled out, or disproved. That list,
with your reasoning for the order in which you have placed the various
possible diagnoses, constitutes the differential.
2. The second one I call the safety principle. This means that there
are always some possibilities in the differential list with potential con-
sequences so dire that it’s just plain unsafe to ignore them. They are
the ones that should be placed at the very top of the differential, to be
ruled out first, whether or not you think that they actually caused the
symptoms. Usually these safety considerations are the substance-related
illnesses and general medical (physical) illnesses that could explain the
symptoms you’ve identified. OK, so they certainly aren’t always your best
diagnosis. But whenever one does turn out to be correct, a patient will
suffer if it wasn’t considered first.

-- 255 of 385 --

240 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I resolve the apparent conflict between these two principles by, basi-
cally, superimposing principle 2 on principle 1. Consider this example:
Some time ago, some students and I interviewed Amanda. At age
37, she believed that she and her partner were being set up by the
FBI as a lure for “drug warlords and kingpins.” She was absolutely
sure of her grounds—no other interpretation was possible. She was
showing some push of speech and occasionally repeating thoughts
and words; her thoughts seemed to jump around, and she was a little
hard to follow. She admitted to “puffing a little marijuana, but not
much.” Her physical health had been good. She’d been feeling “a
little depressed,” but she hadn’t felt suicidal.
We developed a list of diagnoses we thought possible for Amanda
and arranged them in descending order of probability, but notice
what we put at the very top:
Alcohol-induced psychosis
Paranoid psychosis due to an as yet undetermined physical dis-
order
Paranoid schizophrenia [this one was our best diagnosis]
Mood disorder [bipolar I or major depressive] with psychotic
features
Delusional disorder
None of us had much confidence in those first two diagnoses, but
they seemed at least on the fringe of possibility, so we cited the safety
principle and stuck them at the top of our differential list—to be ruled
out first. In our heart of hearts, we thought she’d probably turn out
to have schizophrenia.
I’ve written a great deal more about the structure of the diagnostic
process in my book Diagnosis Made Easier, now in its second edition.
choosing TreaTmenT
Fortunately, mental health patients and their therapists today can draw
upon a variety of effective biological, psychological, and social treatments.
Most of these are not specific for any one diagnostic category; rather, they
can be applied across a spectrum of diagnoses. Some of the available
physical (somatic) and nonphysical treatments are listed in Table 18.1. For
most diagnoses, there are one or two treatments that are more effective
than others. Current textbooks will spell out which treatments are most
likely to help in specific diagnoses.
Let me underscore how important I feel it is to have a well- organized
plan for approaching each patient’s problems and issues. For one thing,

-- 256 of 385 --

Diagnosis and Recommendations 	241
it will help the patient understand what you think is the problem and
how you are going to proceed. For another, it will help you keep these
same issues in mind. Furthermore, having a treatment plan that you can
refer to from time to time offers you and the patient a set of benchmarks
to gauge progress, or, alternatively, to help you recognize when to try a
different approach. Following are a number of questions to assist you in
formulating a treatment plan:
• First, is any treatment likely to reverse the course of this disorder?
Unhappily, the answer is sometimes “no.” That may be the case for disor-
ders such as dementia due to Huntington’s disease. Although many such
patients can be made more comfortable, and the social consequences of
their symptoms can be lessened, there is no specific treatment to stay
the ultimate outcome of disease. On the other hand, using one of the
cholinesterase-inhibiting medications such as donepezil can slow the pro-
gression of Alzheimer’s dementia—for a time. In antisocial personality
disorder, a chronic disorder of character that affects perhaps 1% of young
men (and far fewer young women), no treatment has yet proved superior
to the passing of time.
• How certain is the diagnosis? Treatment has the greatest chance
for success when it is based on clinical studies of reliably diagnosed
patients. Your confidence in any treatment program will rise in propor-
tion to the certainty that you have made the correct diagnosis. In gen-
eral, treatments that are risky, complicated, expensive, or time-intensive
should be reserved for well- diagnosed patients who have not responded
to simpler measures.
What about the use of experimental treatments? Here’s my rule, which
you may find useful: It is acceptable to use proven treatments in uncertain
diagnoses, and experimental treatments when diagnosis is certain. How-
ever, it is rarely acceptable to use unproven treatments when the diagnosis
is uncertain. In such a case, you are gambling with two unknowns, and
the payoff may be disaster. At the very least, if you ever violate this rule, it
should be done with full disclosure to the patient and family.
Diagnosis is important in deciding treatment, but it is by no means
the only determining factor. Some patients are so ill that treatment must
be started even without a definite diagnosis. Acute psychoses provide the
most frequent examples: Even while clinicians argue about bipolar I dis-
order versus schizophrenia, antipsychotic drugs must be started for the
patient’s safety and comfort. Some problems may merit intervention, even
though no well- defined diagnosis is likely ever to be made. Marital dis-
cord is an example.
• How urgent is treatment? For most hospitalized patients, the
answer is “urgent enough to begin at once.” For outpatients, the need

-- 257 of 385 --

242 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
TABLE 18.1. Outline of Mental Health Treatment Modalities
Psychological
Individual
Cognitive or cognitive-behavioral
Insight-oriented
Analysis
Short-term
Group
Disease-oriented (Alcoholics Anonymous, lithium clinics)
General medication clinics
Family therapy
General support groups
Behavioral
Simple reassurance
Systematic desensitization with reciprocal inhibition
Mass practice
Ward token economies
Thought stopping
Biological
Medications
Electroconvulsive therapy
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
Vagus nerve stimulation
Light therapy
Psychosurgery
Social interventions
Vocational rehabilitation
Social skills training
Education of family
Placement in a facility for acute, intermediate, or chronic care
Involuntary commitment
Conservatorship
Note. Adapted from Boarding Time: A Psychiatry Candidate’s New
Guide to Part II of the ABPN Examination (4th ed., p. 110) by J. Mor-
rison and R. A. Muñoz, 2009, Washington, DC: American Psychi-
atric Press. Copyright 2009 by the American Psychiatric Press, Inc.
Adapted by permission.

-- 258 of 385 --

Diagnosis and Recommendations 	243
may be less immediate. In general, the urgency for treatment will increase
under any of the following three conditions:
1. The symptoms are increasing in number. For example, the
patient, who has had anxiety attacks for years, has recently also
complained of depression, loss of appetite, and trouble sleep-
ing.
2. The symptoms are getting worse. Let’s say that in the last few
days, this same patient has begun to have recurrent thoughts of
suicide.
3. The symptoms lead to alarming consequences. And just this
past week, this same patient has felt unable to work and has now
resigned after 13 years with the firm.
The three rules just cited can also help you decide which disorder to treat
first, in the event that your patient has multiple concurrent diagnoses.
• How costly is the treatment? Unhappily, even in the 21st century,
we must still consider the patient’s ability to pay. You wouldn’t recom-
mend prolonged psychotherapy for a self- supporting student who has no
medical insurance. Someone who is fully covered by a health maintenance
organization (HMO) or a private or government insurance program may
be able to afford the latest in antidepressant medication, whereas a self-
pay patient may request an older, generic drug. It remains to be seen what
effect the Affordable Care Act will have on this sort of problem.
You will probably have insurance information in hand even before
you meet the patient. HMOs, as well as the VA and other government
agencies, set their rates in terms that patients are already familiar with.
And if you are a private practitioner, your office will probably have
included information about fees and other “housekeeping” matters in an
initial packet of information sent to the patient in advance of the first
appointment. If not, toward the end of the initial interview is an excellent
time to go over this information, so as to forestall unpleasant surprises
down the road.
When selecting treatment, you must also assure yourself that the
desired effects of the treatment outweigh its unwanted effects. This warn-
ing applies especially to prescription medications: Will rapid heartbeat or
wakefulness cause your patient to “forget” the evening dose? Can some
other side effect result in injury or even death? What about interactions
with other medications?
• What are the relative contraindications of the therapy you are con-
sidering? These are problems that might make you reluctant to use a treat-
ment, but that do not absolutely prohibit it. Common examples are drug
allergy, the possibility of interaction with another medicine, and the use of
electroconvulsive therapy for patients with known heart disease. You would

-- 259 of 385 --

244 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
also be reluctant to recommend intensive psychotherapy for patients who
have a low capacity for insight or who are unreliable about keeping appoint-
ments. In fact, a history of nonadherence to treatment reduces still further
the desirability of any treatment that is risky or complicated.
• Have you considered all feasible treatment modalities? Therapists
of all professions feel most comfortable recommending those approaches
they themselves use. Although this is understandable, it breeds the dan-
ger that a patient might not be offered an effective treatment with which
a therapist has had little experience. The best prophylaxis against the
therapeutic rut is an attitude of flexibility.
Psychiatrists expert in psychopharmacology must ever be alert to
the possibility that family therapy might prove quicker, safer, and
more effective than drugs.
Social workers, psychologists, and others who provide psychother-
apy should keep in mind the indications for which drug treatment
can be effective.
The fact that most mental disorders probably have multiple causes
should encourage all clinicians to consider using more than one thera-
peutic modality for any given patient.
assessing prognosis
The term prognosis has Greek roots meaning “to know in advance,” which
is, of course, impossible. But scientific progress over the past few decades
has greatly improved our ability to predict likely outcome for individual
patients. We’ll discuss this in a few moments, after first defining what it is
we are trying to predict.
Areas Defined by the Term Prognosis
The term prognosis implies a number of meanings:
Symptoms. Will they be relieved partly or completely, if at all?
Course of illness. Will it be chronic or episodic? If the latter, will there
be one episode or many?
Response to treatment. How rapidly will this occur? Will it be complete,
moderate, slight, or nil?
Degree of recovery. Once the acute episode has been arrested (either
by treatment or by the passing of time), will the patient’s previous
personality be completely restored, or will there be residual deficits?

-- 260 of 385 --

Diagnosis and Recommendations 	245
Time course of illness. How long will recovery take? If the illness is epi-
sodic, how long is the patient likely to remain well between episodes?
Social consequences of the illness. What will be the effects on the
patient’s job performance? Family life? Independence? Will finan-
cial support be needed? If so, for how long? Does this illness imply
the need for conservatorship or other special legal proceedings?
How will it affect the patient’s ability to vote, to drive a car, to enter
into contracts?
Are other family members at risk for this illness? If it is hereditary, what
degree of risk do you predict for first- degree relatives? How should
you advise the patient who asks about having children?
Factors Affecting Prognosis
A number of factors help us make accurate predictions. Unfortunately, no
one knows how strongly any one factor will influence the outcome in any
given case. Because each can be important, I have simply tried to list them
all, in no particular order.
• Principal diagnosis. Diagnoses with major effects (such as mood dis-
orders, dementia, and schizophrenia) usually have more predictive power
than those with less wide-ranging effects (disorders of eating, elimina-
tion, sleep, and sex). Personality disorders may be especially important
for prognosis if no major diagnosis exists or if none can be made with
certainty. If your patient has more than one diagnosis, you must keep
them all in mind when discussing the various aspects of prognosis.
• Availability of treatment for the primary disorder. If effective treatments
exist, are they likely to be used? Geography can be an important factor:
Does the patient live close enough to a center where effective treatment
is offered? Another factor is the patient’s financial condition, as dem-
onstrated by this widely discussed example: Clozapine, a drug effective
for schizophrenia, was introduced in the early 1990s at a cost of nearly
$10,000 per patient per year (enormous for the era). Many patients could
not afford it until heavy pressure was brought to bear on the manufac-
turer to reduce the cost of laboratory monitoring.
• Duration and course of illness. Past behavior predicts future behavior.
If the patient has had previous episodes of illness (such as a mood
disorder), you can predict with some confidence that there will be
future episodes.
Barring correction of a previous misdiagnosis, a patient who has
been ill for many years stands scant chance of complete recovery.

-- 261 of 385 --

246 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• Previous response to treatment. As a predictor, previous treatment
response is only as good as the previous treatment. If in the past your
patient has been treated for mania only with antipsychotics, you can
upgrade your prognosis by an order of magnitude once mood stabilizer
therapy is begun.
• Adherence to treatment. Even highly effective treatment is worthless
if the patient refuses to accept it. Be sure to consider both major mental
diagnoses and personality disorders, as well as treatment history, in evalu-
ating treatment adherence.
• Available social supports. Prognosis varies directly with the number
of bridges the patient has left unburned. Consider all of these resources
for help: family of origin, spouse/partner, children, friends, support
groups, social agencies, physicians, and religious organizations. Besides
providing comfort, they can help to ensure that the patient continues in
treatment and avoids harmful influences such as substance use.
• Premorbid personality. Prognosis is directly related to how well the
patient functioned before falling ill. Once patients recover from an acute
episode of mental disorder, they tend to resume premorbid levels of func-
tioning. Those who have maintained friendships, worked well at their
jobs, and provided adequately for their families will probably do so again.
All else being equal, parallel predictions are usually warranted for those
who previously functioned at lower levels.
• Highest recent level of functioning. If productively engaged in work
or school during the past year, your patient will probably regain that sta-
tus once the current episode of illness has been resolved. Of course, this
assumes that a deteriorating or chronically debilitating illness has not
supervened. The Global Assessment of Functioning provides a convenient
scale for evaluating a given patient’s progress. You can find it in my book
DSM-5 Made Easy or by searching online.
• Other factors. Within diagnostic categories, individual factors can
often affect the outlook for a particular patient. For example, here are
a few features that suggest a relatively good prognosis for a patient with
schizophrenia: relatively late onset (30s or later), being married, female
gender, education beyond high school, brief duration of untreated symp-
toms, and good previous response to treatment.
recommending FurTher invesTigaTion
Further study may be necessary to confirm or rule out specific diagnoses.
Resources for this information include the following:

-- 262 of 385 --

Diagnosis and Recommendations 	247
A review of prior hospital and other records
Laboratory tests, including radiographic studies
Formal neuropsychological testing
Interviews with relatives
Further interviews and study of existing records usually cost nothing.
They often provide new or corroborative information that can rapidly
advance your understanding of your patient. Because testing costs both
time and money, its use should be justified by the facts of each individual
case. Tests ordered as a part of an admission routine and not in response
to a perceived need are only rarely cost- effective.
When laboratory or psychological testing is involved, it should be
justified on the basis of these factors:
• Cost of the test. The range is enormous, from nothing at all to thou-
sands of dollars.
• Risk of the test. Pencil-and-paper psychological tests have essentially
no risk; some invasive procedures can imperil health and even life
itself.
• Value of the test. How strongly confirmatory will the results be? A
costly lab procedure that has a good chance of nailing down a dif-
ficult diagnosis may well be worth the expense; a routine urinalysis
that has no bearing on the diagnosis is far too expensive .
• Prevalence of the disorder. Routine testing for rare disorders is not
cost- effective. However, this does not mean that you should avoid
ordering confirmatory tests for uncommon disorders that seem
possible on the basis of history or physical exam.
• Complexity of the question to be answered. If the patient’s illness is
relatively simple and straightforward, you may well be able to omit
laboratory testing completely.
• Will the procedure facilitate treatment? It is well and good to know
what’s wrong; it is better to learn how to fix it.
making reFerrals
You are likely to recommend mental health therapy that is directed
specifically at your patient’s complaints. You should also keep in mind
the range of other treatments and referrals that may be needed, either
to help manage the presenting complaints or to deal with social, psy-
chological, and biological problems that are incidental to the main prob-
lems.

-- 263 of 385 --

248 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Many organizations and individuals can help you manage nearly any
problem you might encounter. This is fortunate, because no clinician has
the training and experience to do it all alone. It is vital that you know the
limits of your own capabilities and refer for outside help those aspects of
each patient’s difficulties that can be better treated by others.
How much outside help will be needed will depend on these factors:
Type of problem. A clinician whose training neglected behavior ther-
apy techniques may need some assistance with a patient who presents
with obsessions or phobias.
Severity of the problem. Mild depression may respond to cognitive ther-
apy; severe depression may require the services of a clinician skilled
in psychopharmacology.
Strength and extent of support network. To give an obvious example, a
homeless patient will require more social services than one who lives
with relatives.
Patient’s motivation and cooperation. Obviously, a patient’s refusal to be
hospitalized limits the scope of services that can be brought to bear.
The clinician’s training, experience, and available time. I strongly recom-
mend that students try to gain familiarity and experience with as
many types of treatment as possible.
Although many of the resources mentioned in this chapter have tra-
ditionally been provided or arranged by social workers, all mental health
professionals should be aware of the types of services available in the
geographic area where they work. Too, clinicians in private practice will
often find that they must arrange for their own referrals. Of course, you
can use only the services you know about; hence this listing.
Other Therapists
No one can know everything; wise clinicians know their own limitations. If
you practice group therapy and your patient needs olanzapine, of course
you will refer the patient to a physician for medication. If drug therapy is
your strength and you do not provide cognitive-behavioral therapy, it is
important to refer your patient for such therapy when it is indicated.
Mental Hospital
Although laypeople often consider hospitalization to be a last resort,
in several situations the modern mental hospital is the most sensible
recourse:

-- 264 of 385 --

Diagnosis and Recommendations 	249
When patients are dangerous to themselves
When patients are dangerous to others
When patients are unable to care for themselves
When the desired treatment is only available to inpatients
When the patient must be removed from the environment
When intensive evaluation is required for medical or legal purposes
Clinicians tend to be conservative when it comes to protecting their
patients’ lives. At least regarding suicidal ideas, which are probably the
most frequently cited reason for hospitalization, most clinicians would
agree that it is better to err on the side of overhospitalization.
Shelters
Shelters are vital resources for patients who do not need to be hospital-
ized, but who for various reasons cannot live at home. Specialized shelters
are operated for the protection of abused children, battered women, run-
away adolescents, and homeless men, women, and families.
Legal Assistance
Legal help may be needed for problems that might either cause or grow
out of a mental disorder; sometimes the legal problems may be unrelated.
If your patient has inadequate resources and needs services as varied
as drawing up a will or fighting criminal charges, referral to a legal aid
professional may be necessary. If the problem concerns elder abuse or
child abuse, refer to adult protective services or child protective services,
respectively. Contact information for these agencies can usually be found
through an online search or in the county government listings in the tele-
phone books of most major cities.
Support Groups
Many support groups are modeled after the famous Alcoholics Anony-
mous Twelve Steps. Most groups cost nothing to join, and many are nearly
ubiquitous, having chapters throughout the country (and in some cases
throughout the world). The name of a group usually describes its func-
tion. Although a complete listing of support groups is impractical (their
name is legion), here are a representative few:
Adult Children of Alcoholics
Adults Molested as Children United

-- 265 of 385 --

250 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Al-Anon (for families)
Alateen
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
Batterers Anonymous
Gamblers Anonymous
Narcotics Anonymous (NA)
Overeaters Anonymous
Parents Anonymous (for parents who have abused their children)
Parents Without Partners
Recovery Inc. (for those with emotional problems)
Other Resources
Acute substance use treatment. Detoxification services are usually avail-
able through referral from county mental health centers.
Medical evaluation. Available at county, state, city, and private hospi-
tals for evaluation of rape, trauma, HIV status, and diseases of any
type.
Vocational services. Including evaluation for disability, job training,
and unemployment compensation, these services can be accessed
through state and county employment offices.

-- 266 of 385 --

251
c h a p T e r 	1 9
Sharing Your Findings
with the Patient
Clinical findings and recommendations become far more useful when
they are shared with others. The most important instance of this sharing
is with the patient, but it often extends to the family as well.
conFerring wiTh The paTienT
Whether or not you see an outward indication of nervousness, your
patient will probably be feeling apprehensive about the results of your
findings. This is why you should plan to discuss them just as soon as you
can. Many clinicians do this at the end of each initial interview. Compli-
cated problems may require more interviews or time to review materials.
Even so, some sort of interim report will be appreciated, even if it is only
a few sentences.
What you say will be governed to some extent by the patient’s capac-
ity to comprehend; this in turn may be heavily influenced by the disorder
itself. But most patients can understand and appreciate the truth, which is
what you should always strive to communicate. Early in my career, I’d feel
reluctant to tell a patient that my diagnosis was schizophrenia, because it
so often carries an ominous prognosis. But after a few such encounters,
I discovered that patients tended to accept this diagnosis about as well as
any other, and I stopped worrying—as long as I was sure I was right.
If you follow a few simple rules when communicating your findings,
your message will stand a better chance of being both heard and accepted.

-- 267 of 385 --

252 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Summarize the problems. By doing so, you give assurance that you
really do understand why the patient has come for help. In the event that
you don’t understand as completely as you thought, the patient has the
opportunity to educate you further.
Give a diagnosis. State your best diagnosis in terms appropriate to the
patient’s education and sophistication. If you are unsure of the diagnosis,
say so—and then lay out your plan for resolving your uncertainty (more
tests? a therapeutic trial?).
Keep it simple. Bear in mind what the patient really needs to know,
and convey that. This is no time to teach a graduate seminar in diagnos-
tics.
Don’t use jargon. The information should be transmitted in plain lan-
guage. If you use a lot of four- dollar words, you risk obscuring part of
your message while the patient tries to decipher the code.
Keep asking for feedback. You’ll get better compliance with recom-
mendations and greater patient satisfaction when you assure through
questions that the patient understands your explanation of the problems
and the proposed approach:
“How do you feel about this?”
“Do you have any questions so far?”
Emphasize the positive. With the many therapeutic approaches mental
health professionals have at their disposal, even gravely serious problems
such as schizophrenia and bipolar I disorder can be helped.
Show your compassion. Watch for changes in the patient’s affect as
you provide information. Acknowledge the patient’s feelings, and offer
sympathy and suggestions as to how things might improve. Remember
that everyone needs the feeling of hope.
Discussing Treatment
The treatment plan you arrive at should be structured as a collaborative
effort between clinician and patient. Although this approach to treatment
planning requires more initial effort, in the long run everyone will ben-
efit. A plan shared with the patient is an important part of the initial
interview.
What do patients want from their clinicians? I tend to answer this
important question with another question: Exactly what would I want if
I were the patient? I would want a sensible plan that linked diagnosis to
rational treatment. I would also want a clear explanation of the treatment

-- 268 of 385 --

Sharing Your Findings with the Patient 	253
process, its possible pitfalls, the alternatives to treatment, and an honest
appraisal of its chances for success.
A concrete plan for further investigations, as well as treatment,
would help me feel hopeful for the future. Because it would put me back
in control, I’d be more enthusiastic about it and less likely to drag my feet
about implementation. (I’ll say it again: A patient who buys into the plan
is more likely to cooperate with it.) I’d also want a clinician who was so
keen to ensure my understanding that, if I asked questions, they would be
treated not as challenges to authority but as opportunities to engage me
in the treatment process. My treatment adherence would be enhanced: I’d
probably remember my appointments, try to do assigned exercises, and
seldom skip a dose of medicine. My improvement wouldn’t be delayed,
and I’d avoid treatment failures and dropouts from therapy. If something
went awry and treatment didn’t work, I’d be far less likely to lay blame on
my clinician than if I hadn’t signed on to the plan in the first place.
In the negotiated approach to treatment, patient and clinician
together formulate the plan. This doesn’t mean that the patient gets every-
thing that’s wanted, but that the clinician does listen to the patient. You
can encourage your patient to “want” or choose the plan that you think
would be best, but you must listen and react appropriately if the choice
is different from what you recommend. I’ve sometimes felt, for example,
that a teenager chose wrong when rejecting medication for depression.
“I want to do it myself” is the typical response. But I’ve always accepted
the decision with the best grace I could muster— and very often, several
appointments down the road, the patient volunteers the opinion that “this
isn’t going as well as I’d hoped, and maybe I should try your pills after all.”
When you are drawing up the treatment plan together, here are sev-
eral points to consider:
• Discuss the options. It is human nature to feel more in control when
there are choices; therefore, you should run through a complete list of the
possible treatment options. One obvious choice that is seldom mentioned
is no treatment at all. I often start with this one, because it allows me to
discuss in concrete terms what I foresee as the outcome of no (or inad-
equate) treatment. This serves as a useful benchmark against which to
measure the potential drawbacks and benefits of the other choices.
• Mention the drawbacks. No treatment is free of them: Medicines have
side effects, psychotherapy takes time, group therapy involves other peo-
ple, and behavior modification requires effort and anxiety. All of them
are expensive. Negative aspects of treatment are unpleasant to contem-
plate, but patients need to know these things so they can make rational
choices. Some states have laws that require patients to be told about alter-
natives to drugs, electroconvulsive therapy, and other somatic treatments.

-- 269 of 385 --

254 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• You can favor one option. Most of the time you will probably convey
your opinions directly. But for patients who feel the need to defy author-
ity or who strongly desire a particular form of therapy, you may want to
exert your influence more subtly. For example, you can find good news
about drug therapy for the patient who needs it:
“You won’t have to wait forever to gain control of your symptoms.”
You can also find good news for the patient, perhaps one with a per-
sonality disorder, who doesn’t need drugs:
“You won’t have to give up control of your own body.”
Neither of these statements is untrue, and each can promote one of
the goals of mental health professionals: to encourage patients to accept
what will help them.
• Make sure the patient understands the options. Most patients will
understand, but under stress people can have difficulty focusing their full
attention on what they are being told. If you have any doubts that your
instructions about treatment were heard, ask the patient to repeat what
you have said—“to see if I’ve been as clear as I should be.” Providing a brief
written summary of your recommendations is another way to help your
patient understand you.
• Avoid making promises, other than that you will do all in your power to
help. Of course, you cannot see into the future, and on some level patients
know this. But patients (and families) are also often so worried about
the future that they invest us mental health clinicians with powers we
don’t possess. Clinicians have gotten themselves into serious difficulties
by painting a view of the future that is rosier than the data and the experi-
ence of others will support. When you offer hope, it should be in the con-
text of a realistic view of the situation and a rational plan for the future.
It should emphasize the importance of the patient’s cooperation with all
aspects of treatment—including questioning any of your conclusions or
directions that might not be understood.
Motivating the Patient
Of course, without implementation, the best treatment plan in the world
will accomplish precisely nothing. And far too often, that’s the outcome
of a mental health consultation. Despite the best efforts of the clinician, a
patient may forget to take medication, neglect behavioral exercises, or go
ahead and drink or use drugs anyway.
Why do so many patients appear unwilling to improve? Often it can
be traced to a lack of hope, perhaps based on long experience with the
mental health system. Or disorders of personality or substance use may

-- 270 of 385 --

Sharing Your Findings with the Patient 	255
motivate people in ways that compete with the therapeutic plan. Although
greater knowledge about mental disorder may illuminate the source of
the problem, it doesn’t necessarily give the individual a sense of control,
and studies have shown that education alone doesn’t go far toward moti-
vating change. (It may already have been tried, perhaps cloaked—and
choked—in exhortation.)
Enter motivational interviewing (MI), a client- centered approach first
used for patients with substance use disorders. MI attempts to persuade
people to adopt new behaviors they need for health care or other reasons.
Instead of confrontation, it emphasizes collaboration; for education, it
substitutes evocation, which means unlocking resources for change that
a patient already possesses. MI helps get people off the dime and past
ambivalence, to identify their own inner motivation. In controlled stud-
ies, MI has been repeatedly demonstrated useful— even in the vast major-
ity of patients with schizophrenia.
MI is based on the principle that it’s easier to get people to do some-
thing positive than it is to prevent them from doing something negative.
It’s the “catch more flies with honey than with vinegar” approach. A
patient doesn’t have to commit to global change, only to some specific
behaviors. Although whole manuals have been written about MI, it can be
summarized in four basic steps:
1. Empathize. Without criticizing, you help the patient express feel-
ings and viewpoints. Note that you don’t have to agree with the patient’s
point of view, just facilitate its expression. Practitioners of MI call this step
“Express Empathy.”
2. Help the patient recognize how current behavior is frustrating long-term
wishes. The perception of that discrepancy is what motivates the patient to
seek behavioral change. “Develop Discrepancy” is its name.
3. Don’t argue with resistance. Instead, use it as an opportunity to
explore the patient’s feelings further. In MI, resistance means that the
clinician needs to adopt a different approach. This step is called “Roll
with Resistance.”
4. Provide hope by showing you believe the patient can succeed. Give the
patient the confidence that change is possible. “Support Self-Efficacy,”
this step’s called.
Here, somewhat condensed, is a conversation with a young woman
who has mild intellectual disability, lives with a roommate, and has a job
stocking shelves at a local grocery store. A long-time client, Misty has once
again been having difficulties with her budget. The comments in italics
highlight the use of the four MI steps.

-- 271 of 385 --

256 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
C lInICIan: I understand that you’ve had a letter from your bank.
MIsty: Right, they said I was overdrawn again. And Janice [the resi-
dent manager at Seaview, the patient’s independent living facil-
ity] says I could lose my account.
C lInICIan: That would be too bad.
MIsty: Yeah, I’m bummed.
C lInICIan: I can imagine. Anyone would be. What happened to get
you overdrawn?
A classic expression of empathy— step 1.
MIsty: I guess I wrote too many checks.
C lInICIan: What were they for?
MIsty: You know—my cable, bottled water, rent, telephone. That’s all.
C lInICIan: That doesn’t seem like a lot.
MIsty: It isn’t. I always pay them on time.
C lInICIan: I know, you’ve done a wonderful job with those responsi-
bilities. I’m always so proud of you.
With praise for Misty’s previous success, the clinician reaffirms their past
connections and expresses confidence in her abilities. Step 4—support—
shouldn’t wait for new actions from the patient.
MIsty: And I bought some stuffed animals. I have a collection.
Misty and her clinician further list income and expenses; the clinician
learns that since the holidays, Misty has been working fewer hours, so her
paychecks have been reduced.
C lInICIan: So you have less money right now.
MIsty: Right.
C lInICIan: What do you think you can do?
MIsty: I could ask my mom for money.
C lInICIan: And would she help? What happened last time?
MIsty: She said no, I’d have to spend less.
C lInICIan: How would that work?
MIsty: Well, I have to pay rent.
C lInICIan: Of course. What about the other items on this list?
They talk about the other bills, and agree that the telephone is essential. The
clinician wonders about Misty’s bottled water.
MIsty: It’s crystal pure.

-- 272 of 385 --

Sharing Your Findings with the Patient 	257
C lInICIan: Do others at Seaview have bottled water?
MIsty: No, just me and Arlene [her roommate, whose finances are, if
anything, even more straitened than Misty’s].
C lInICIan: And what would happen if you didn’t have it?
MIsty: We’d have to drink tap.
C lInICIan: Like the others.
MIsty: Yeah.
The clinician interprets the ensuing prolonged silence as evidence of signifi-
cant resistance, and decides to approach it obliquely (step 3).
C lInICIan: I guess you’d rather not change, right?
MIsty: Right.
C lInICIan: Bottled water is nice, and you’re used to it.
MIsty: Right. We use it for cooking, too.
C lInICIan: You’re used to your cable TV, too.
MIsty: Well, sure. We both like the cooking shows a lot.
C lInICIan: You’re lucky; you both like cooking and the cooking
shows.
MIsty: We like to eat.
C lInICIan: You’d like to keep them both.
MIsty: Yeah, we need them.
It develops that Misty and Arlene subscribe to every premium service their
cable TV company provides, including full sports, HBO, and Showtime.
The discrepancy between what Misty would like and what she can afford
(step 2) is implicit, but perhaps should have been brought out more clearly.
C lInICIan: You know, I used to have HBO and Showtime, too, but I
cancelled one of them. I thought I didn’t need both.
MIsty: Mm-hmm.
C lInICIan: What do you think?
MIsty: I think people who live in a house have money. They can
choose if they want.
C lInICIan: I see, and you feel that you don’t have much of a choice,
is that it?
MIsty: Right!
Misty has made her point—a perhaps surprisingly insightful one that
describes and explains her resistance to having a choice forced upon her.
Realizing that Misty recognizes the discrepancy between what she can afford

-- 273 of 385 --

258 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
and what she wants, but needs time to work out what to do, the clinician
backs off and says that they can work some more next time on solving the
problem. This expression of support leaves Misty with the feeling of being
heard and of having some hope for the future. Later in the week, she calls
to say that she and Arlene have decided to get by on tap water for a while.
Although MI itself is relatively new, clinicians have negotiated with
patients for generations; the technique was advocated by psychiatrist
Adolf Meyer over 80 years ago. Clinicians who avoid parentalism and
empower their patients in pretreatment decision making often find that
they promote greater patient satisfaction. Furthermore, patients who have
positive relationships with their clinicians are more likely to be happy
with treatment and to find it helpful, even in the case of electroconvulsive
therapy. Other research has demonstrated that patients accept treatment
and follow through with it better when clinicians express empathy, are
willing to explain and share information, and are accessible to patients
on their own terms.
Obviously, the benefits of MI will not hold in the face of advanced
dementia, blatant psychosis, acute suicide plans, or life-threatening
anorexia nervosa. But as the story of Misty and her clinician demon-
strates, it can work even in patients with intellectual impairment.
discussion wiTh The FamilY
A close-knit family will want to know all that can be done for the patient.
Many relatives have had considerable experience in dealing with mental
health professionals; for some, this involvement hasn’t always been satis-
factory. The quality of their experience this time will usually be in direct
proportion to the following:
The amount of contact they have with you
The degree to which they feel they have input
How caring you appear to be
The patient’s opinion of you and of the treatment plan
You can avoid problems of confidentiality if you meet with the fam-
ily while the patient is present. Of course, if you need more information
than your patient has provided, a portion of your family session may have
to take place with the patient absent. If you do meet separately, be sure to
tell your patient—who, you can point out, has had plenty of opportunity
for confidential sessions. No matter how or where this meeting occurs,

-- 274 of 385 --

Sharing Your Findings with the Patient 	259
you must carefully withhold the details of any privileged communication
with the patient.
If this is your first conference with family members, you might begin
by learning what they already know about the disorder. This will help you
judge their prior assumptions, and so you could avoid discomfiting them
with information that directly contradicts what they may have been told
earlier. For example, if a previous therapist has diagnosed schizophrenia
and you believe that the diagnosis should be bipolar I disorder, you could
emphasize the psychotic symptoms that both clinicians have regarded as
key. Mention any diagnostic concerns you might still have, especially if
relatives could provide information that might help; whether the patient
started drinking before or after becoming depressed is a good example.
Early in this meeting is also a great chance to help convey any positive
messages your patient has expressed to you, such as a concern for the
effects of illness on relatives.
Once you’ve obtained whatever information you need, you could out-
line the treatment plan—including its strong and weak points, so as to
forestall later recriminations if problems should develop later. Emphasize
aspects where relatives and friends might be able to help. For example,
changes in behavior or emotional state may be more evident to relatives
than to the patient. The emergence of side effects would be one such
issue; here, in the case of a patient with a current depressive episode of
bipolar I disorder, would be a place for “manic alert” instructions.
Even if you can’t provide much effective treatment, as for a patient
who is rapidly sliding into dementia, you can discuss resources that may
help the family cope. Just about any family trying to cope with a rela-
tive’s mental illness can benefit from some degree of social support; find
out what’s needed and what resources they’ve been using. They may even
mention some you didn’t previously know about.
In closing, be sure to tell relatives how to get in touch with you, and
emphasize that you want all three groups—the patient, relatives, and you—
to work together as partners in problem solving.
whaT iF The plan is reJecTed?
With the stress of mental illness in the family, it is not uncommon for
someone—usually the patient, but sometimes a relative—to object to the
treatment plan. If it is a relative or friend, and you and the patient agree
about how to proceed, move ahead with the plan. But say something to
the relative that shows you have considered the dissenting point of view:
“I’m glad you told me that you don’t want your brother hospitalized.
But he and I both feel it is the safest thing to do right now, so I think

-- 275 of 385 --

260 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
we should go ahead with it. I hope you’ll visit him. You know him
better than just about anybody, so I’ll need your eyes and ears to help
me judge his progress.”
If your patient is the one who balks at treatment, proceed with a
series of steps that might resolve your impasse:
1. Try to discover what about the plan is not acceptable, and then
offer reassurance. For example, side effects of treatment may be tolerable
if the patient can be reassured that they are likely to be short-term.
2. Identify the areas that you do agree about. If it is the need for
some treatment, proceed with the next step.
3. Learn what therapeutic measure the patient will accept. If it is
something you feel will not be harmful, just not helpful (such as psycho-
therapy alone for moderately severe depression), you may agree to try it
for a specified period. At the end of that time, the patient may agree to
proceed with your original recommendation.
4. You may agree to an experimental trial, with the proviso that you
will monitor the results carefully and stop or change treatment if the
patient feels dissatisfied.
5. Offer to arrange for a second opinion. This may be especially use-
ful if a trusted friend or relative is influencing the patient to reject your
recommendation. But keep an open mind: Your consultant may recom-
mend something that is different from what you had in mind.
6. Finally, it is possible that either the patient or the family may reject
treatment you consider to be essential. Here’s my rule: I may proceed with
a course of treatment that I believe is fully warranted against the wishes
of either the family or the patient (in the case of a patient who is involun-
tarily hospitalized). But if both patient and family reject my advice, I will
usually feel unable to work effectively with this patient. In such a case, I
will try to help the patient find another clinician.

-- 276 of 385 --

261
c h a p T e r 	2 0
Communicating Your Findings
to Others
Somewhere, sometime, a mental health clinician might conceivably do
an evaluation and provide a complete course of treatment without say-
ing a word to anyone but the patient. If ever it happened, this rare event
would probably take place in the office of an isolated private practitioner.
But the demands of insurance carriers, HMOs, and government agencies
make it increasingly likely that, regardless of where you work or who your
patient may be, you will have to communicate your findings to someone.
The wriTTen reporT
Even the most expert of clinicians collect their data somewhat haphaz-
ardly. It is therefore necessary to organize your findings before reporting
them. For written and oral reports, the organization of material will be
about the same. Written reports are usually the more complete, so I’ll dis-
cuss them first and in far greater detail. Appendix C provides an example
of a complete interview and written report.
Identifying Data
The identifying data provide the reader with a framework upon which to
construct a mental image of the patient whose history you are reporting.
In the first line or two of the report, you state the basic demographic data,
including the patient’s name, age, sex, marital status, religion, and any

-- 277 of 385 --

262 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
other item that seems relevant. In the military services, identifying data
also include the patient’s rank; in a VA hospital, you might note whether
the patient has a service- connected disability.
In any case, you should note that the patient either is new to your
facility or has been seen there before.
The Chief Complaint
As described in Chapter 2, the chief complaint is the patient’s stated rea-
son for coming to treatment. It is often written as a direct quote, but
sometimes you’ll want to paraphrase or summarize it— especially if it is
vague, long-winded, or multifaceted. Occasionally a clinician cites two
chief complaints: one from the patient, and another from a (suitably iden-
tified) relative, friend, or other informant. This double reporting is espe-
cially useful for patients who are uncooperative or are too confused (or
too young) to respond appropriately when you request the information.
Informants
Briefly state the names of those from whom you have obtained your infor-
mation, and estimate the reliability of each. Besides the patient, mention
relatives, friends, other health care workers, and old charts—anyone or
anything you have used to help round out your picture of the patient.
History of the Present Illness
The history of the present illness is the most important section of the
entire report. When you are writing up this history, keep in mind several
rules.
• It should be a chronological history. Like all good stories, this one
should have a beginning, some development, and an ending. In most
cases, it will begin with the onset of the first episode of illness. Some
clinicians carefully mark that point with an opening phrase something
like this:
Mr. Turner was well until age 32, when he suffered the first of several
episodes of depression.
Note that in this single economical sentence, the reader is alerted
to (1) the principal area of clinical interest (mood disorder: depression),
(2) the age of onset, (3) the fact that Mr. Turner’s problem is not a new
one, and (4) the patient’s good health during the decade of his adult
life prior to the onset of this illness. Once your narrative is underway, it

-- 278 of 385 --

Communicating Your Findings to Others 	263
should proceed more or less chronologically, ending with the reasons that
prompted your patient to enter treatment at this time.
For patients who have been repeatedly admitted to one facility for
the same condition, you might choose instead an interval note—one that’s
abbreviated to avoid needless, lengthy repetition from one chart to the
next:
Since age 32 Mr. Turner has had five admissions to this medical cen-
ter for severe depression, each of which has been successfully treated
with electroconvulsive therapy. Following his most recent discharge
2 years ago, he had been living independently and working at his
trade of commercial illustrator. Two weeks ago he noted the lethargy
and loss of interest in work that usually herald the onset of a depres-
sive episode.
• Support your best diagnosis. This means that the material you
feature should reflect the current diagnostic criteria (DSM-5 in North
America) for the diagnosis you think most likely. Let’s say, for example,
that your patient has symptoms of both depression and psychosis. You
believe that the most likely diagnosis is melancholia with psychosis (in
DSM terms, major depressive episode, severe, with psychotic features and
with melancholic features), so the history of the present illness should
emphasize the finding that your patient never has psychotic symptoms
except during a profound depression. Of course, I don’t mean that you
should try to hide ambiguities or evidence of competing diagnoses. But
your write-up should, insofar as is consistent with the data, form a picture
in which history, mental status, and diagnosis are mutually supportive
portions of a consistent whole.
• If the story is complicated, try to disentangle it. One way to accom-
plish this is to leave until later details that don’t support your best diag-
nosis. Perhaps this less relevant information can be included later in the
personal and social history. You could also present distinct (though pos-
sibly intersecting) themes as separate paragraphs in your history of the
present illness. After describing your patient’s depressive illness, which
was the actual cause of his hospitalization, you might continue as follows:
In addition to his depression, Mr. Turner has also had a tendency to
cross-dress. This began at about the age of 6 . . .
• Edit your material. If you have just sat through an hour-long inter-
view and read an old chart as thick as the U.S. federal budget, you may
have learned far more than most readers will need to know. To boil down
your material, you can summarize previous treatment in a line or two;
enumerate hospitalizations (so many for mania, so many more for depres-
sion); and list symptoms of a typical episode. This saves your reader from
multiple repetitions of essentially identical information.

-- 279 of 385 --

264 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
At that time [of his first episode of depression] he first noticed leth-
argy and lack of interest in his work as a commercial illustrator. Over
the next few weeks he became increasingly anorectic, lost 10 pounds,
and suffered insomnia that caused him to get up and pace the floor
early each morning. This symptom pattern has been repeated during
subsequent episodes.
As Platt and McMath (1979) have noted, “The present illness should be an
elaboration of these primary data, not a saga of medical care.”
• 	Include significant negatives. When investigating various areas of
clinical interest, you asked many questions to rule in or out certain dis-
orders. Some of the negative answers helped you choose the most likely
diagnosis on a differential list. Such answers are called significant (or per-
tinent) negatives; they should be reported in your history of the present
illness, along with the important positive answers:
Although Mr. Leeborg said that he felt severely depressed in the
week since he lost his job, he denied insomnia, loss of appetite, and
lack of interest in sex.
• Report your findings in plain language. Your readers may include
people who are unaccustomed to the sometimes perplexing jargon of the
mental health field. Avoid abbreviations other than those commonly used
in professional journals. Short sentences and active verbs will demon-
strate the clarity of your thinking.
• The patient is a person, not a “case.” Many clinicians consider it
bad form to refer to patients as “this manic” or “a schizophrenic.” Always
strive to refer to your patient as “a person with mania” or “a patient with
schizophrenia.” Such wording helps to preserve the reader’s feeling for
the humanity of your patient.
Personal and Social History
Childhood through Adult Life
When you present your information, keep things orderly by adhering as
closely as you can to chronological sequence. Begin with birth and early
childhood, and proceed through education, military experience (if any),
sexuality, marriage, work history, legal history, and religion. You can use
either a paragraph or outline style; the former will be more convenient
if you dictate, the latter if you handwrite or keyboard your information.
In this section, strive to present a reasonably complete picture of your
patient’s background. Even so, you should generally omit data already
covered in the history of the present illness. Edit out the anecdotes and
trivial details with which patients invariably illustrate their life stories.

-- 280 of 385 --

Communicating Your Findings to Others 	265
You should, however, include pertinent negatives— such as the absence of
childhood sexual abuse in a patient with a possible dissociative disorder,
or perfect school attendance in a patient with possible antisocial personal-
ity disorder. Also include important past positives, such as previous drug
or alcohol misuse, that you might have omitted from the history of the
present illness because they no longer affect your patient’s life.
Family History
Although it is properly a part of the patient’s own life story, family history
is traditionally reported in a separate paragraph. Perhaps we do this to
emphasize the biological and environmental effects families can have on
the developing individual. Include the data you have obtained for physical
as well as mental disorders. When reporting the latter, be sure to include
not just the diagnosis, but also whatever information you have obtained
that would substantiate (or refute) that diagnosis. For example:
Although Mrs. Garwaith’s father had been diagnosed as having schizo-
phrenia, he had twice been treated in hospital and released, apparently
recovered and able to resume the demanding occupation of singing
waiter.
Later, in the summary, you might conclude that the father’s history sounds
more like a mood disorder.
If the patient was adopted or if the family history is completely nega-
tive, say so and move on.
Medical History
Mention any operations, major medical illnesses, current and recent med-
ications, and hospitalizations for reasons not related to mental health.
List any allergies, especially to drugs. If there are none, say so; this infor-
mation may assume importance, should drug therapy become an issue for
your patient. If you have not already done so, mention any habits such as
the use of tobacco, marijuana, or alcohol.
Review of Systems
Mention any positive responses to your questioning about past or present
physical problems. If somatization (somatic symptom) disorder has been
a consideration in the differential diagnosis, list the symptoms you scored
positive in that disorder’s specialized review of systems (see Appendix B
for details).

-- 281 of 385 --

266 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Mental Status Examination
For many patients, much of the MSE will be normal and can therefore be
covered briefly. The order in which you report the various areas is not as
important as the fact that you mention each, if only to show that you have
considered them all. In describing your patient’s mental status, keep in
mind which details would be needed to support or refute the diagnoses
included in your differential diagnosis. Include not only positive informa-
tion, but also the important negatives that allow you to place diagnoses
higher or lower in your differential listing.
Describe the patient’s general appearance and clothing; contrast
apparent age with stated age. Be sure to mention all aspects of affect.
If type of affect is unremarkable, “about medium” will do as a descrip-
tor, but also mention lability and appropriateness. When you are try-
ing to describe abnormalities, don’t use general terms such as “bizarre”
or “peculiar,” which lack precision and carry none of the flavor of the
patient’s behavior or appearance. Instead, take the trouble to choose
words and phrases that are truly descriptive: Instead of “The patient’s
clothing was strange,” you might say, “The patient was dressed in a tutu
and body stocking hand- stitched from old flour sacking.”
Remember that written mental health records are legal documents.
They can be subpoenaed by attorneys and requested by patients them-
selves, so make sure that your tone and wording will withstand scrutiny.
Avoid jokes, complaints, and any other comments that should be kept
private. If you need to express an opinion that could be considered pejo-
rative, qualify the statement by admitting that this is your inference:
He appeared to be intoxicated . . .
Her manner seemed seductive . . .
Under flow of thought, be sure to mention any abnormalities of asso-
ciation, as well as rate and rhythm of speech. Use examples with direct
quotes, both to show the flavor of the patient’s speech and to provide a
baseline for judging later change.
The findings you report under content of thought will generally
reflect what you have already mentioned in the history of the present
illness. You should also mention other possible contents of thought that
were not present. Whereas many patients have no content of thought that
is psychopathological, all (except those who are completely mute) do say
something. Whatever it is, you should describe it briefly:
The patient’s content of thought largely concerned his past infidelities
and the fact that his wife was about to leave him. He expressed no delu-
sions, hallucinations, obsessions, or phobias.

-- 282 of 385 --

Communicating Your Findings to Others 	267
When your patient has language deficits, state what they are, but also
give an example of what you mean:
Although Mrs. Treat was able to comprehend simple instructions and
spoke with good fluency, she demonstrated a naming aphasia: She
could not name the clip and point of a ballpoint pen, and she called my
wristwatch “a time thingy.”
In reporting cognitive abilities, it isn’t sufficient simply to mention
that the patient was “normal” or “intact.” You should note what tests you
made, what responses were given, and how you interpret the responses.
How far off were any incorrect responses? Do circumstances mitigate the
errors? For example, if your patient could not recall a name, a color, and
a street address after 5 minutes, can this be explained on the basis of
poor concentration due to depression? Was abstracting ability impaired?
If so, what was the test you used, and what was the response? In reporting
serial sevens, note the number of mistakes and the rapidity with which
the calculations were done. Did the patient use finger counting as an aid
to calculation?
In reporting insight and judgment, you will usually have to make an
interpretation (such as excellent, good, fair, or poor), but be sure to cite
your reasoning:
Miss Rafael’s insight seemed poor in that, despite her clearly manic
symptoms, she denied ever being ill a day in her life. However, her judg-
ment was fairly good: She did agree to remain in hospital “for tests.”
She even said that she might resume taking her lithium.
recording Your diagnosis
In North America, the standard for psychiatric diagnosis has been each
successive edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Dis-
orders (DSM) of the American Psychiatric Association. Much of the rest
of the world uses the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) in one
of its many iterations; it is similarly grounded in research and the opin-
ions of experts. The DSM, devised by committees of experts and strongly
grounded in empirical research, specifies that each patient be assessed in
several areas.
• The first includes the major clinical syndromes; most mental
health patients will have at least one of these diagnoses. These syndromes
include the depressions, psychoses, anxiety disorders, substance use dis-
orders, and other clinical entities that mental health clinicians diagnose

-- 283 of 385 --

268 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
and treat, as well as intellectual disability and the personality disorders. If
more than one diagnosis is appropriate, include them all, but list first that
which was mainly responsible for the current evaluation.
• A statement of any physical diagnoses that contribute to your
understanding of the patient—for example, asthma, diabetes, obesity, and
temporal lobe epilepsy—helps the reader understand all of this patient’s
medical problems.
• The psychosocial stressors that during the past year may have
caused or affected the patient’s mental condition, or might materially
affect treatment, come next. Table 5.1 in Chapter 5 of this book lists
the types of stressors that may be noted. Write down the exact stressor
responsible, not the category.
• The Global Assessment of Functioning (which was included in
DSMs up through DSM-IV-TR, and which I still recommend even though
it has been omitted from DSM-5) rates the patient’s overall functioning.
Two ratings can be made: one that is current, and one that describes the
highest level of functioning during the past year. The scale runs from 100
(superior) to 1 (lowest). You can find it in my book DSM-5 Made Easy or by
searching the Internet.
FormulaTion
In the case formulation, you attempt to synthesize all that has been
learned about the patient’s past, so as to point the way to a better future.
There are several reasons for preparing a formulation:
To focus your thinking about the patient
To summarize the logic behind your diagnoses
To identify future needs for information and treatment
To present a brief summary of the patient
A number of formats can be used; some of them are so involved that
they risk presenting again all the material you have just covered. The
method presented here combines the advantages of brevity, complete-
ness, and simplicity.
Of the various sections of the formulation, the two most important
are the differential diagnosis and the contributing factors. They contain
the original thinking you will do in putting together all the material you
have gathered.
A sample formulation, presented piecemeal, follows.

-- 284 of 385 --

Communicating Your Findings to Others 	269
Brief Recapitulation
Following some minimal identifying data, state the symptoms and course
of the patient’s present illness as based on the facts in the history of the
present illness and the mental status examination. Draw from all parts of
your report as needed:
Mrs. Juneau is a 27-year-old married woman with two previous hospital-
izations for a psychosis that has been previously called schizophrenia.
For 3 weeks she has stayed in her room, fasting and “preparing for the
end of the world,” which she says she has caused. Her husband brought
her to the hospital when he became concerned about her weight loss.
Differential Diagnosis
Each of the possible diagnoses in your differential listing is presented
with the principal arguments for and against it. Mention all possible diag-
noses, including personality disorders.
Neurocognitive disorder with psychosis (delusions). History of head trauma
8 years ago.
Substance use. She drank heavily during her two psychotic episodes, but
has never continued drinking once the psychosis has resolved.
Depression. Mrs. Juneau feels sad, hopeless, and guilty for some unspeci-
fied sin she committed before she was married. She is anorectic, has
been nearly sleepless, and has had a 10-pound weight loss.
Schizophrenia. She is delusional now; during a previous episode she
believed that she was put on earth to save the Jews.
Best Diagnosis
State the diagnosis you favor, why you have chosen it, and the authority
(the current edition of either DSM or ICD). Note that your best diagnosis
may not appear highest in the hierarchy. The most notable example of
this is that a neurocognitive disorder, if one is possible, must always be
ruled out first, but it frequently is not the most likely diagnosis:
Mrs. Juneau is probably in the depressed phase of bipolar I disorder
(DSM-5). Her previous episodes of psychosis resolved completely; her
husband reports that even without maintenance medication, she was
well between episodes. All of her psychotic symptoms appear to be
congruent with her mood at the time. Head trauma was 8 years ago
and without sequel, and there are no other indications of organicity.
Her misuse of alcohol appears to have occurred only in response to
her psychotic episodes, which in retrospect were probably mania with
psychosis.

-- 285 of 385 --

270 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Contributing Factors
Here you describe how the various factors you have identified contributed
to the development of your patient’s main problems. Where applicable,
mention biological, dynamic, psychological, and social factors. Depend-
ing on the material you have identified, this section could be long or
short:
A biological basis for Mrs. Juneau’s illness may be seen in the family
history: Her mother suffered from recurrent depressions. A psychologi-
cal precipitant may be the death of her father 2 months ago. Medical
expenses from previous episodes may be contributing to the depth of
her current depression.
Further Information Needed
Briefly cover the interviews, tests, and records you may need to firm up
the diagnosis:
Records will be requested from Mrs. Juneau’s previous admissions to
see whether the symptoms she had then could be those of mania. Con-
sider MRI to rule out sequelae of old head injury.
Treatment Plan
Outline your recommendations for treatment. For Mrs. Juneau, they
would be as follows:
Biological
Lithium 900 mg/day to prevent recurrence of mania
Fluoxetine 20 mg/day for depression
Olanzapine as needed to control psychosis
Psychological
Psychotherapy, focused on feelings of guilt and grief
Social
Assistance with financial planning
(?) Referral to Alcoholics Anonymous
Education of Juneau family regarding bipolar I disorder
Prognosis
What is the likely outcome for this patient?
I expect Mrs. Juneau to recover completely. Prophylactic use of a mood
stabilizer may prevent subsequent episodes.

-- 286 of 385 --

Communicating Your Findings to Others 	271
The oral presenTaTion
An oral presentation of your interview material generally follows the same
pattern as the written report. Usually it is briefer; in fact, any oral presen-
tation longer than 5–6 minutes risks boredom and inattention. However,
you should present a complete, rounded portrait that demonstrates how
well you understand the patient.
You can also demonstrate how well organized you are. For a formal
presentation, outline your findings on a small note card. This will speed
you through your presentation, jog your memory when needed, and save
you the discomfort of flipping back and forth through your patient’s chart
as you search for items of information.
When you are making an oral presentation, be prepared with your
diagnosis and differential diagnosis. You should have clearly in mind the
reasons for choosing your best diagnosis; some instructors will ask you to
defend it with data and logic.

-- 287 of 385 --

272
C h a p t e r 	2 1
Troubleshooting Your Interview
To some degree, every interview has flaws, and every interviewer has
faults. The art of the expert interview lies in compensating for the former
and minimizing the effects of the latter. In this chapter, we’ll look at some
of the problems beginning interviewers often face—or should face, once
they become aware of them.
Of course, an initial evaluation can go awry in many ways, but the
outcome can be affected in only a couple of ways. Rapport with the patient
probably least often falls victim to problematic interviewing; if there is
one area in which most clinicians succeed, it is forming a good working
relationship with their patients. Still, missteps in the interview process do
occasionally lead patients to withdraw from treatment.
The other effect of an interview that’s run aground involves the data
we seek. That is, we clinicians sometimes obtain information that we
think is accurate and complete, when it is not. The initial interview is
the time when we consciously try to learn the pertinent facts about a new
patient. Regardless how much we may think we have learned, we tend to
form an impression after that first information- gathering phase, whether
it lasts just an hour or extends over several sessions. Once we’ve formed a
diagnostic impression, we may find it difficult to revise our first impres-
sions, even in the face of compelling later information.
reCognizing the troubled interview
The good news: Most interview situations can be retrieved, once you’ve
figured out what’s wrong. The bad news: It can be hard to know what’s
wrong. Here are some signals that could tip you off.

-- 288 of 385 --

Troubleshooting Your Interview 	273
During the Interview
Even while you are talking with the patient, you should be alert for behav-
iors signaling that an interview is in trouble.
• The patient becomes quiet, quarrelsome, or critical. Most interac-
tions with patients start out well enough; along the way, though, some-
thing occasionally happens to sour a patient on the process. A change
in the patient’s manner provides the evidence. Someone who was at first
cooperative and talkative begins to argue about your seemingly noncon-
troversial statements. Another, initially loquacious, stops offering spon-
taneous comments or responds to open-ended questions with single syl-
lables or grunts.
• Although a patient who glances around the room may be attend-
ing to hallucinations, it is more likely that this patient has lost interest
in the conversation and would like to be doing something different. I’ve
even known patients who bolted from the room, leaving the interview
unfinished. Any signal of inattention is important: Without the patient’s
active participation, what information you obtain isn’t likely to be robust,
let alone accurate.
• You get contradictory answers to repetitions of essentially the same
question.
• You find that you cannot think of questions to ask that will pin
down an important part of the differential diagnosis.
• Your patient continually asks you to repeat your questions.
• You want to get up and leave the room.
After the Interview
Once your patient has departed, other evidence may tell you that some-
thing is awry.
• You find that you have omitted important data points.
• The patient declines to make another appointment.
• Information you’ve just gathered contradicts data from old charts
or collateral sources.
• Your information speaks only to one item in the differential diag-
nosis.
• You’ve learned a lot about baseball, but little about the patient’s
history.

-- 289 of 385 --

274 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• You haven’t learned enough about the patient’s feelings.
• You haven’t raised one of these issues critical to every interview:
sex, substance use, suicidal ideas.
how To deTermine whaT’s wrong
The following diagnostic steps can help you determine what’s wrong with
your interview. Even if you haven’t encountered any of the issues I’ve men-
tioned above, I recommend taking the fearless first step once in a while,
anyway. After all, the most insidious error of all is the one that isn’t called
to your attention.
Make a Recording
Of course, you can only record an interview with your patient’s express
permission, but this seldom presents a barrier. You can explain that you
are trying to learn more about the interviewing process, and that record-
ing an interview will give you a better feel for your patients’ needs. I
wouldn’t feel at all backward about admitting—at your level of experience
or at mine—that you would like to learn what you need to learn. In my
experience, only a small minority of patients will decline permission to
be recorded.
A small recorder placed unobtrusively between the two of you on
your desk will do the job nicely. If the room is relatively quiet (there are no
loud sounds from the hallway and the heating system behaves itself), you
should be able to pick up both voices without difficulty. In the event that
there is too much ambient noise, a pair of clip-on microphones joined by
a “Y” connector should yield instant clarity.
A video recording would be even better—if you can mount the camera
so that it shows both your patient and you. (For sound clarity, you’ll also
need microphones not mounted on the camera.) You will be interested
not only in the patient’s appearance, but in your own facial expressions
and other elements of body language. Do you frown, squint, look bored,
or roll your eyes? Or just fail to smile an occasional encouragement? Do
you maintain eye contact, or do you spend all your time scribbling notes?
The tool in Appendix E can give some additional structure to your self-
assessment.
Do Some Witnessed Interviews
As powerful as your own audio or video recording can be, you can
multiply its effectiveness with a little outside help. For generations, the

-- 290 of 385 --

Troubleshooting Your Interview 	275
witnessed interview has been a standard means of validating a psychia-
trist’s fitness for board certification. By begging an hour or more of a
colleague’s time, you can get the same benefits for yourself—without the
live-or-die trauma that board candidates suffer. Of course, you could have
your consultant sit in while you interview a patient new to you, but that
would entail coordinating the schedules of three people, not to mention
the problem for your patient of having someone else physically present in
the room while you are doing an evaluation. It’s generally more efficient
to use one of the recordings we have just talked about as the basis for a
discussion with your local expert on interviewing. (Be sure your patient
agrees that another clinician can have access to the material.)
However, finding an appropriate consultant presents one or two
problems of its own. A good choice would be someone you know well
enough to ask a favor of—but not too well. You need a clinician who will be
willing to tell you exactly what’s wrong, without worrying too much about
offending you. (Candor has much to recommend it in a consultant, so try
to find one you know will be frank.) Ask someone with a lot of interview-
ing experience—perhaps a teacher from your training program, even if
you have already graduated. You really need someone who will take the
time to listen to (or watch) an entire interview and give you a half-hour
or so of feedback on your style. It might even be a clinician of a discipline
different from your own; the experience and the perspective are what
you’re after, not some theoretical stance. Such a person is worth a lot to
you, especially if you have been experiencing difficulty with many of your
interviews.
whaT You’ll learn (and whaT To do aBouT iT)
Besides forcing you to confront your verbal tics (it’s painful, trust me), the
methods described above can reveal difficulties across the spectrum of
interview behaviors we’ve discussed. Here are a few that could show up;
the page numbers will take you to the sections of this book that discuss
the behaviors you should be practicing.
• Scope of interview too limited. It is easy to focus on one or two central
questions— severe mood disorder and psychosis come to mind—and leave
unexplored issues that might seem more peripheral, but are important
anyway. Two examples are marital/family problems resulting from sub-
stance use, and personality issues, which can complicate just about any
major diagnosis. Free speech is one way to ensure wide coverage. Page 200.
• Insufficient follow- up of clues. You risk error if you don’t explore
clues dropped along the way. Let’s say that your patient says, “I was pretty

-- 291 of 385 --

276 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
much running wild those years Dad was gone from the family.” You might
well pursue what the patient means by “running wild,” thereby obtaining
a lot of information pertinent to conduct disorder and childhood learn-
ing difficulties. But did you remember to ask why Dad was out of the fam-
ily? Whatever you learn— divorce, a jail sentence, admission to a mental
hospital, running away with the babysitter— could be important for your
diagnosis. Page 54.
• Inadequate use of open-ended questions. When you do identify an area
for further exploration, the questions you use can prove critical to the
amount and quality of the information you obtain. If you hear about being
“abused as a child,” you might ask a dozen questions about who hit your
patient, when, and under what circumstances, and never learn that your
patient was suffering from sexual abuse too. As your expert consultant
could tell you, a better approach would be first to ask some open-ended
question, on the order of “Please tell me more about that.” That way, you’d
avoid prematurely closing off an important area of inquiry. As a bonus,
open-ended questions would be more likely to reveal something about the
emotional consequences of these experiences. It is a common fault for
interviewers to become so intent on nailing down certain information that
they neglect utterly to give patients enough scope to freely divulge their
foremost concerns. I especially find this early in interviews, when there
isn’t enough (or any) time allotted for free speech. Pages 55 and 64.
• Inappropriate probing. However, once you’ve gotten to know what’s
foremost in your patient’s mind, you’ll need specific information about
these areas of concern. With poorly chosen probes (questions that are
too long, too vague, or phrased in the negative), you could bog down in a
mire of trivia or get lost down a rhetorical dead end. “Why . . . ” questions
invite speculation that may get you exactly nowhere. Instead, focus on
probes that encourage precision, brevity, and accuracy. Page 57.
• Inadequate control of the interview. A loquacious or hostile patient
can reduce your rapport and the amount of information you obtain. Of
course, this won’t often be a problem; most patients try to cooperate. But
your recorded interview could make you instantly appreciate how some
patients with certain character or behavior quirks will fight you for the
driver’s seat. If you lose that battle, you may find yourself at a destination
miles from where you need to be—knowing, perhaps, quite a lot about
the patient’s disrespectful son-in-law or a spouse’s drinking, and too little
about the patient’s own symptoms and personality. Page 116.
• Poor rapport. By the end of your recording, you should have a pretty
good grasp of how well you’ve connected with your patient. You’ll know
whether you sound warm, whether you respond with interest to features
of the story, and whether you express concern when you hear about issues

-- 292 of 385 --

Troubleshooting Your Interview 	277
that especially trouble your patient. If you have any doubts, ask your con-
sultant, whose objectivity can inform you about a sensitive issue such as
this one. Pages 26 and 120.
• Ignoring the patient. OK, maybe ignoring is too strong a term. But
an initial interview may come to grief because the clinician, so intent on
obtaining the needed information, pays too little attention to the patient’s
needs. The result: As time wears on, the patient becomes more and more
restive, and finally bolts from the room before the interview can be com-
pleted. Then the bottom line might be no further chance at an interview
with this—or perhaps any other— clinician. How much more satisfactory
it is to watch for the little signs of increasing concern: jiggling of a leg,
twisting of fingers, decreasing eye contact, or increasing hesitation before
replying. A timely “It looks to me like you are feeling uncomfortable; how
would you like to proceed?” could save the interview, and probably your
relationship with this patient. Page 198.
• No real plan for the interview. Early in my career, a clinician who had
just failed his boards approached me for help. A single practice interview
told me that this psychiatrist had gotten though training without ever
learning how to obtain the data necessary to support a diagnosis. This
clinician needed to use a semistructured interview like that in Appendix
D, at least until he was familiar enough with the routine to discard the
training wheels. (I hasten to point out that even today, I sometimes use
parts of a semistructured interview, as a reminder to inquire into the fine
points of a diagnosis or details of a social history.) Page 327.
• Your own excessive talking. If your recording reveals that you spend
a lot of time talking—perhaps asking complicated questions and then hav-
ing to explain what you mean—you aren’t getting the maximum informa-
tion out of your interview. Nonverbal encouragements can help; so can
carefully formulating your questions. Pages 37 and 57.
• Negative countertransference. Sometimes you just won’t like a par-
ticular patient (or type of patient). Your recorded interview can reveal
(perhaps better to your consultant than to you) how much rejection your
speech and body language project. Personal preferences can affect any
interviewer, even one who has been at it a long time. However, most expe-
rienced clinicians learn to put aside their feelings long enough to get the
diagnostic information they need; later, if necessary, they can refer such
a patient for continuing care. It might help you get past some of your
feelings if you practice with a colleague who plays the role of this sort of
patient. Even recognizing your attitude can go a long way toward helping
you disguise feelings that, though perhaps perfectly normal and under-
standable, are unacceptable in the context of a mental health evaluation.
Page 28.

-- 293 of 385 --

278 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
• A matter of misunderstanding. Perhaps the patient just isn’t paying
attention, but could it be instead that your use of clinical jargon creates
confusion? Or maybe you and the patient come from different cultures
or speak with different accents. The problem of cultural influence, which
nearly every clinician faces at least occasionally, can often be dealt with by
frankly discussing your differences and working hard to lower the fences
between you. Even when one of you speaks the other’s language relatively
well, an interpreter may sometimes be useful. Pages 31 and 227.
• Time running out. I almost wrote, “Not managing your time well,”
but that may not be the case. Sometimes the story is too complex, the
patient arrives late, or the time allotted is too brief to cover completely all
the major areas of a complicated mental health history. Then you’ll just
have to schedule additional evaluation time; getting on with treatment
recommendations without as complete a database as possible has, well,
little to recommend it. Page 7.
• Playing favorites with diagnoses. Here’s a typical example, too often
repeated: Based on information from the patient’s internist, a clinician
decides on a diagnosis of major depression and begins antidepressant
therapy— drug therapy happens to be this clinician’s special area of exper-
tise. Later, when a consultant suggests that this patient could have a
form of somatization (somatic symptom) disorder, the treatment doesn’t
change. The pattern of the patient’s actual symptoms, not your expecta-
tions, should determine your diagnosis. Pages 87 and 238.
• Leaping to conclusions. There are innumerable areas where this can
be a problem, but let’s mention one specifically: making a family history
diagnosis. The questions you do or don’t ask about a relative who was
diagnosed with schizophrenia—At what age? What were the symptoms?
How long did they last? Did the relative ever recover?—can turn your
thinking in the wrong direction about your patient. It’s an even slipperier
slope if you simply accept a previous clinician’s diagnosis of your new
patient. Your recorded interview may reveal that you haven’t indepen-
dently verified conclusions relayed to you from patients, relatives, or old
records. Page 87.
• Neglected differential diagnosis. Your differential diagnosis didn’t
encompass all the possibilities, no matter how unlikely. As a result, you
risked treating the patient’s depression conventionally, without consider-
ing the possibility that an endocrine disorder is what’s responsible. Page
238.
• Unfamiliarity with diagnostic criteria. To nail a diagnosis, the first
thing you need is nails. In the case of a mental health diagnosis, that
means having more than a nodding acquaintance with the essential
features of the various psychoses, anxiety disorders, mood disorders,

-- 294 of 385 --

Troubleshooting Your Interview 	279
substance use disorders, and other likely major mental conditions. That
way, you don’t forget to ask questions that will allow a firm, accurate diag-
nosis. Page 288.
• Slighting personal and social history. It’s a mistake when general phy-
sicians and surgeons don’t obtain information pertaining to a patient’s
personal background; when a mental health professional commits such
an error, it carries the potential for calamity. Sure, in the chase for symp-
toms of mania or anxiety disorders, it’s easy to forget the quiet issues such
as childhood relationships or success in school. Nevertheless, this mate-
rial can have consequences for diagnosis and treatment, and it is always a
part of getting to know the patient as a whole person. Page 78.
• Ignoring red flags. The varied signs and symptoms that could tip
you off to a diagnosis may include something that fairly screams at you: a
whiff of childhood abuse, a parent with mania, or an arrest for drug pos-
session. Of course, red flags sometimes become red herrings that don’t
provide material important to a diagnosis, but you’d hate to be the clini-
cian who overlooks one that proves decisive. Page 160.
• Forgetting about feelings. Of course it shouldn’t ever happen, but of
course it sometimes does. In the rush to obtain all the facts of the history,
you forget to ask how the patient feels about a given situation, or even
about that person’s current emotional state. This is especially likely in the
case of a patient who doesn’t like to talk about feelings or isn’t in touch
with them much at all. Page 62.
• Tolerating vagueness. A vague patient is a frustrating patient, as long
experience has made me all too aware. Confronted with someone whose
speech wanders, it is tempting to relax and let it wash over you. If that’s
been your reaction to some patients, you’ve probably come away with less
in hand than you need for an accurate diagnosis. Closed-ended questions
and repeated requests for precision can help. Pages 118 and 210.
• Neglecting collateral sources. A good 10% o f the time, I learn some-
thing about a patient that makes me wonder, “Is the impression I’m receiv-
ing correct?” But so often, the press of time seduces us into accepting
what appears to be the case, without making use of the simple expedient
of collateral information to check it out. Quite frankly, that’s where the
couple and family therapists have the advantage: They always obtain their
information from more than one source—a self- correcting process that
other clinicians can but envy. Page 191.
The many other difficulties you could encounter are limited only by
the number of patients you evaluate. By one of the methods described
earlier, you should be able to learn the source of the problem and, using
material from this book, figure out an appropriate remedy.

-- 295 of 385 --



-- 296 of 385 --

281
a p p e n d i x 	a
Summary of the Initial Interview
Information 	Process
Openings and Introductions
Introduce yourself
Explain your role in patient’s care
Outline time, goals of interview
Your initial goals
Teach respondent role to patient
Help patient feel comfortable
Chief Complaint
Ask why patient came for treatment 	Request for chief complaint is
directive but open-ended
Free Speech
Allow several minutes for patient to
amplify reasons for coming
Listen for areas of clinical interest
Difficulty thinking (cognitive
problems)
Substance use
Psychosis
Mood disorders (depression and
mania)
Anxiety, avoidance behavior, and
arousal
Physical complaints
Social and personality problems
Summarize presenting problems
before moving on
Early part of interview is nondirect-
ive
Establish rapport
Adjust your demeanor to patient’s
needs
Monitor your feelings
Show your positive affect clearly
Use language patient can
comprehend
Don’t criticize patient or others
Maintain appropriate distance
Don’t talk about yourself
Call patient by title and last name
Encourage flow with silent
encouragements
Maintain eye contact
Nod or smile when appropriate

-- 297 of 385 --

282 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Verbal encouragements
“Yes” or “Mm-hmm”
Repeat patient’s own word or
words
Ask for more information
Re-request information if patient
doesn’t respond at first
Briefly summarize
Reassure patient when indicated
Must be factual, believable
Use body language
Correct any misconceptions about
physical, mental symptoms
History of the Present Illness
Describe symptoms
Type
Onset
Severity
Frequency
Duration
Context
Stressors
Vegetative symptoms
Sleep
Appetite and weight
Diurnal variation
Previous episodes
When
What symptoms?
Recovery complete?
Previous treatment
Type
Compliance
Wanted effects
Side effects
Hospitalizations
Consequences of illness
Marital and sexual
Social
Legal
Job (disability payments?)
Interests
Discomfort
Feelings about symptoms, behavior
Negative and positive
Establish the need for truth
It’s for patient’s benefit and for
yours
Reassure about confidentiality: “If
you can’t discuss something,
don’t lie; just ask to talk about
something else”
General principles
Restate what patient says to be
sure you understand
Don’t phrase questions in the
negative
Avoid asking double questions
Encourage precision
Keep questions brief
Watch for new leads
Use terms patient can understand
Probe for details
Use direct questions
Avoid “Why . . . ” questions, as a
rule
Limit to one or two confrontations,
late in session: “Help me to
understand”
Mix open- and closed- ended requests
Open-ended increase validity
Closed-ended increase information
Elicit feelings best with:
Uninterrupted speech
Open-ended questions—“Could
you tell me more about that?”
Information 	Process

-- 298 of 385 --

Appendix A 	283
How does patient cope with
feelings?
Defense mechanisms
Acting out
Denial
Devaluation
Displacement
Dissociation
Fantasy
Intellectualization
Projection
Repression
Splitting
Reaction formation
Somatization
Explore areas of clinical interest
Direct requests for feelings—“Tell
me about your depression”
Also obtain feelings with:
Express concern or sympathy—“I’d
feel angry, too”
Reflection of feelings—“You must
have felt frantic”
Watch for emotional cues in voice,
body language—“You looked
sad just now”
Interpretations—“Sounds like the
way you felt as a child”
Analogy—“Did you feel this way
when your mother died?”
Reduce excessive emotionality:
Speak softly yourself
Use closed- ended questions
Redirect comments that change
topic
Re- explain what information you
need
Ask whether patient understands
what you want to know
Break off interview only as last resort
Personal and Social History
CHIldHood and growIng uP
Where was the patient born?
Number of siblings and sibship
position
Reared by both parents?
How did parents get along?
Did patient feel wanted as a child?
If adopted
What circumstances?
Extrafamilial?
Health as a child?
Education
Last grade completed
Scholastic problems?
Activity level?
School refusal?
Behavior problems in school?
Suspensions or expulsions?
Sociable as child?
Take charge of interview
Encourage shorter answers with
nods and smiles
Directly state when you need
to know about something
different, but . . .
Make an empathic comment first
Raise a finger to interrupt
Stop taking notes
If above steps don’t work:
Be direct: “We’ll have to move on”
Use more closed- ended questions
Use multiple- choice questions
Transition to new topics
Use patient’s own words
Acknowledge an abrupt transition:
“Let me change the subject,
now”
Watch for distortion
Information 	Process

-- 299 of 385 --

284 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Age dating began?
Sexual development
Hobbies, interests
lIfe as an adult
Living situation
Currently with whom?
Where?
Finances
Ever homeless?
Support network
Family ties
Agencies help out?
Marital
Number of marriages
Age at each
Problems with spouse?
Number of children, age, and sex
Stepchildren?
Work history
Current occupation
Number of jobs lifetime
Reasons for job changes
Ever fired? Why?
Military
Branch, years of service
Highest rank attained
Disciplinary problems?
Combat experience?
Legal problems ever?
Civil
History of violent behavior
Arrests
Religion: Which? Different from
childhood?
How religious now?
Leisure activities
Clubs, organizations
Hobbies, interests
Record significant negatives
dealIng wItH resIstanCe
Do not allow yourself to become
angry
Switch from discussing facts to
feelings
Reject the behavior, accept the
person
Use verbal and nonverbal
encouragements
Focus on patient’s interests
Express sympathy
Reassure patient: Feelings are
normal
Emphasize need for complete
database
Name the emotion you suspect
patient is having
If patient is silent, obtain nonverbal
response first
Focus on less affect-laden model of
patient’s behavior
If confrontation is used:
nonjudgmental, nonthreatening
Last resort: Delay the question
rIskIer teCHnIques
Offer an excuse for unfavorable
information: “All that stress
probably made you want to
drink”
Exaggerate negative consequences
that didn’t happen: “Nobody
died, did they?”
Induce patient to brag “Any activities
for which you could have been
arrested, but weren’t?”
Sexual preference and adjustment
Learning about sex: details
First sexual experiences
Nature
Age
Patient’s reaction
Current sexual preference
“Please tell me about your sexual
functioning”
Information 	Process

-- 300 of 385 --

Appendix A 	285
Current practices: details
Pleasures
Problems
Birth control methods
Extramarital partners?
Paraphilias?
Sexually transmitted diseases?
Abuse?
Childhood molestation
Rape
Spouse abuse
Lead into questions of abuse
carefully: “Were you ever
approached for sex?”
Avoid terms abuse and molestation
Substance misuse
Types of substances
Years of use
Quantity
Consequences
Medical problems
Loss of control
Personal and interpersonal
Job
Legal
Financial
Misuse of prescription
medications?
Assume that all adults will drink
some
Ask about past as well as current use
Suicide attempts
Methods
Consequences
Drug- or alcohol-associated?
Psychological seriousness
Physical seriousness
You can work up to this gradually:
“Have you ever had any desperate
thoughts? Any ideas of harming
yourself?
Personality traits
Evidence of lifelong behavior
patterns
Assess personality by
Patient’s self-report
Informants
History of interaction with others
Your direct observation
faMIly HIstory
Mental disorder in close relatives
Describe parents, siblings, and
patient’s relationship with them
Other adults, children in childhood
home
“Has any blood relative—parent,
brother, sister, grandparent,
child, aunt or uncle, cousin,
niece or nephew— ever had
any mental illness, including
depression, mania, psychosis,
mental hospitalization, severe
nervousness, substance use,
suicide or suicide attempts,
criminality?”
Information 	Process

-- 301 of 385 --

286 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
MedICal HIstory
Major illnesses
Operations
Medications for nonmental problems
Dose
Frequency
Side effects
Allergies
To environment
To medications
Nonmental hospitalizations
Childhood physical, sexual abuse?
Risk factors for HIV/AIDS?
Physical impairments
Important for all mental health
workers to obtain
revIew of systeMs
Disorders of appetite
Head injury
Convulsions
Unconsciousness
Premenstrual syndrome
Positive responses in these areas
have especial relevance to mental
health diagnoses
Specialized review for somatization
disorder
See Chapter 13
Mental Status Exam
Appearance
Apparent age
Ethnicity
Body build, posture
Nutrition
Clothing: Neat? Clean? Style?
Hygiene
Hairstyle
Body adornments, jewelry?
Alertness: Full? Drowsy? Stupor?
Coma?
General behavior
Activity level
Tremors?
Mannerisms and stereotypies
Facial expressions
Eye contact
Voice
Attitude toward examiner
Mood
Type
Observed while taking history
Information 	Process

-- 302 of 385 --

Appendix A 	287
Lability
Appropriateness
Intensity
Flow of thought
Word associations
Rate and rhythm of speech
Content of thought
Delusions
Hallucinations
Anxiety
Phobias
Obsessions and compulsions
Suicide and violence
Observed while taking history
Orientation: Person? Place? Time?
Language: Comprehension, fluency,
naming, repetition, reading,
writing
“Now I’d like to ask some routine
questions . . . ”
Memory: Immediate? Short-term?
Long-term?
Attention and concentration
Serial events
Count backwards
Cultural information
Current events
Five presidents (prime ministers)
Abstract thinking
Proverbs
Similarities and differences
Insight
Judgment
“How has your memory been? Do
you mind if I test it?”
Closure
Summarize findings
Set next appointment
“Do you have any questions for
me?”
Information 	Process

-- 303 of 385 --

288
A p p e n d i x 	B
Descriptions of
Selected Disorders
In this appendix, I give brief descriptions of the typical symptoms and course for
those mental disorders that are relatively common and reasonably well studied.
It is always important to rule out both substance use and general medical condi-
tions as the cause, and to determine that the patient suffers distress or impaired
functioning at work or school or getting along with other people.
Please remember that these paragraphs are meant to be descriptive, not
diagnostic, of the various disorders. If you need criteria, see appropriate texts (or
consult Dr. Google).
Mood disorders
Depression is an altered mood in which the patient feels abnormally low in spir-
its, sometimes melancholic. The patient experiences great distress, feels a loss of
control over mood, and often has suicidal ideas. Depression can take a number of
forms, each of which has been given a name—and sometimes several alternative
names. These forms of depression are often overlapping, so that a given patient
could actually be classifiable as belonging to more than one category. Here I give
prominent features of the more important varieties of depression.
Major Depressive Disorder
• Major depressive disorder involves discrete episodes during which
patients usually describe themselves as feeling depressed, though some-
times all they can identify is a feeling of irritability or a loss of enjoyment
or interest in activities they usually like. In any case, there is a definite
change from the patients’ previous level of functioning.

-- 304 of 385 --

Appendix B 	289
• They also have a number of associated symptoms, including increased
or decreased appetite, often with consequent gain or loss of weight;
increased or decreased sleep; psychomotor speeding or slowing; fatigue
or decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; trouble concen-
trating; and thoughts of death, death wishes, and suicidal ideas.
• These symptoms may be mild, perhaps resulting in only minor inconve-
nience, though still enough that the patient feels distressed or experi-
ences impaired functioning. When severe, depression can even involve
psychosis— serious impairment, indeed.
• A major rule-out is depression due to medical disease or substance use.
Perhaps 25% of depressed patients also have episodes of mania or hypo-
mania, in which case the diagnosis would be bipolar I or bipolar II disorder (see
“Bipolar Disorders,” below). With no history of mood upswings, a major depres-
sive episode would be diagnosed as unipolar depression (major depressive disor-
der, either single episode or recurrent).
There’s another problem here, one that diagnostic manuals don’t do much
to clarify. That’s the fact that many depressed patients have other major disorders
that ought to outrank the depression when it comes to treatment, yet don’t. Here’s
an example: A patient with what I still prefer to call somatization disorder (see
“Somatization Disorder,” below) may very well also be depressed, and would at
one time have been diagnosed with secondary depression. It’s good to know about
this sort of depression because, over the long term, it tends to respond poorly to
physical methods such as drugs and electroconvulsive therapy. Another example
would be a depression that dogs the heels of substance use.
Melancholia
Officially termed major depressive episode with melancholic features, the form of
depression traditionally known as melancholia has sometimes been called
endogenous depression because we cannot identify a precipitating stressor. These
patients may have multiple episodes of depression from which they recover
completely; they are likely to have relatives who have also suffered from depres-
sion.
• When ill, the patients take little pleasure from usual activities and may
not cheer up when with people whose company they normally enjoy. They
typically awaken early in the morning, well before it is time to arise—and,
that’s the time of day when they feel worst. Often they eat little; weight
loss can be profound. They may demonstrate psychomotor slowing or
speeding.
• They will admit that they feel worse than they have felt at the death of a
spouse or other relative. They may have little insight into the fact that they
are ill: Even if they have recovered completely from previous episodes,
they may strenuously deny that recovery is a likely outcome.
• Partly due to feelings of profound guilt, they are at severe risk for suicide
attempts; untreated, perhaps 15% ultimately kill themselves.

-- 305 of 385 --

290 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Atypical Depression
Patients with atypical depression have a major depressive episode—with a twist.
Their symptoms are rather the opposite of what you expect from a typical, severe
depression.
• Rather than insomnia, they tend to sleep too much (hypersomnia).
• Rather than having anorexia, they eat more than usual (for them) and
may gain weight.
• If their mood varies during the day, it is one in which they feel better in
the morning, worse at night.
• Depressed or not, these people tend to be especially sensitive to criticism.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)
• Compared with episodes of major depression, dysthymia is less severe but
lasts longer (at least 2 years). Some dysthymic patients seem depressed
virtually lifelong.
• They have some of the same symptoms found in “basic” major depression
and in melancholia, but the symptoms are fewer and less severe (they have
neither psychotic symptoms nor suicidal ideas/behaviors). Although they
typically remain able to work and to take care of themselves and their
families, they don’t much enjoy life. They seldom require hospitalization,
unless a major depressive episode supervenes.
• As usual, there must be no question of causation by a general medical
disorder or by substance use.
Bipolar Disorders
• The mania of bipolar I disorder usually begins suddenly, with euphoric or
irritable mood that is accompanied by overactivity and excessive speech.
• Manic patients are easily distractible, need little sleep, and become
involved in grandiose plans and schemes.
• As they become sicker, patients lose insight; judgment deteriorates. They
say or do things they later regret, such as becoming sexually promiscuous,
spending money they don’t have, or making other problematic decisions.
• They may feel abnormally strong or powerful. Some become deluded that
they have special powers or have a special religious purpose.
• Many drink excessively; perhaps they’re trying to apply chemical brakes
to their own behavior.
Most manic patients also have episodes of major depression, which may
alternate regularly with the high phases in the pattern known as bipolar I dis-
order. Some bipolar patients don’t have full-blown manias; their “rather highs”
comprise somewhat attenuated symptoms that don’t lead to psychosis or require
hospitalization. This less- serious condition is termed bipolar II disorder. Even
without treatment, both types of patients usually recover completely.

-- 306 of 385 --

Appendix B 	291
psYchoTic disorders
The Schizophrenias
Although schizophrenia is usually referred to as a single disease, in reality this
category probably includes several different disorders. Some patients seem per-
fectly normal before the onset of the actual schizophrenia symptoms, but many
spend childhood as introverted loners. Some qualify for a diagnosis of schizo-
typal personality disorder.
• There is usually a prodrome during which an individual may become inter-
ested in philosophy, religion, or witchcraft; anxiety or perplexity may be
the predominant affect. Isolation may increase, and relatives or friends
may note various behaviors that are peculiar, although not exactly psy-
chotic.
• As preoccupation with inner feelings and experiences increases, the
patient’s functioning at work or school falls off. It may be only at this stage
that relatives notice a change. Although orientation is usually retained,
insight is typically lost, and judgment is severely impaired. Patients can
lose impulse control and, when markedly agitated, sometimes become
violent toward self or others.
• Active symptoms usually begin early in life—late teens or early 20s—and
increase slowly, over a period of many months. Gradually the hallucina-
tions (most often auditory) begin, becoming ever more insistent. Delusions
(especially persecutory) usually develop. Negative symptoms (such as apathy
or affect that is blunted, silly, or inconsequential) may appear. Thought
associations in speech are often loose. Only a few patients develop disordered
behavior such as catatonic symptoms. From these five classes of symptoms,
you need two or more symptoms (and at least one of these must be delu-
sions, hallucinations, or disordered thought/speech) to make the diag-
nosis.
• The disorder is chronic. A patient must be ill for at least 6 months to
receive the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the first place. Then, though
treatment with antipsychotic medicine can reduce or eliminate psychotic
symptoms, few patients recover to their premorbid levels of functioning.
Patients with schizophrenia were formerly given subtype diagnoses: para-
noid, catatonic, disorganized, undifferentiated, or residual. DSM-5 has done away
with these divisions, partly because they don’t remain constant in an individual.
However, it is still sometimes useful to note that patients whose symptoms are
pretty much limited to persecutory delusions and auditory hallucinations—which
we used to call paranoid schizophrenia— often have affect that is well preserved
and don’t begin to have symptoms until they are in their 30s, or even beyond.
Warning: Schizophrenia today has carefully delineated symptoms, so be
careful not to overdiagnose it. Until a few years ago it was common to see patients
with severe depression, mania, personality disorders, or neurocognitive disorders
misdiagnosed as having schizophrenia. Even today, it still sometimes happens.
Patients who for many years have carried the diagnosis of schizophrenia should

-- 307 of 385 --

292 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
be periodically reassessed. Be especially on the lookout for situations were psy-
chotic symptoms are only present when the patient is experiencing a depressive
or manic episode: Such a patient should not receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Schizoaffective Disorder
The confusing diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder was introduced in 1933 by
Jacob Kasanin, a well-meaning doctor who used it to describe nine patients who
had both psychotic and mood symptoms. Because this description could fit so
many people (patients with schizophrenia often feel depressed at some time or
other), the term took off. In the intervening 80+ years, it has only grown more
popular. Now it is used loosely by some clinicians, and very loosely by others: A
few years ago, one psychiatrist famously wrote that he gave this diagnosis to most
of his patients! Historically, however, the concept is important, in that it helped
us understand that not all psychosis is schizophrenia.
• Patients with schizoaffective disorder simultaneously have two of the five
major psychotic features of schizophrenia (as above, delusions, hallucina-
tions, disordered thinking/speech, disorganized behavior, and negative
symptoms) and also have a major depressive or manic episode (or a mood
episode with mixed features) during most of the episode.
• For at least 2 weeks, the individual must have had delusions or hallucina-
tions without prominent mood symptoms. You can specify a subtype—
bipolar or depressive.
In recent years, numerous reviews have failed to substantiate schizoaffec-
tive disorder as a separate, discrete diagnosis. (Indeed, few of Kasanin’s original
patients would qualify by today’s standards.) Both the interrater reliability and
diagnostic stability for schizoaffective disorder appear to be low.
Schizophreniform Disorder
No difficulties with criteria present themselves with schizophreniform disorder.
That’s because this term is really just a place holder—an acknowledgment that a
clinician isn’t sure enough to make a definitive diagnosis.
• Schizophreniform disorder is defined exactly like schizophrenia, except
that its total duration must be less than 6 months. This time frame reflects
the findings from study after study that patients who have had psychotic
symptoms for briefer periods of time may recover completely.
• Once 6 months have passed, a patient must be rediagnosed. If the symp-
toms persist, you will probably diagnose actual schizophrenia. If they
have remitted, you may change the diagnosis to something different, such
as a mood disorder with psychosis or a psychosis caused by a medical ill-
ness or by substance use.
If we do use the diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder, we are encouraged
to assign prognosis, based on several factors. A patient will be relatively likely to

-- 308 of 385 --

Appendix B 	293
recover (that is, likely not to progress to a chronic course of illness) if any two of
the following features are present: (1) Actual psychotic symptoms begin within 4
weeks of the first observable change in the patient’s functioning or behavior. (2)
When most psychotic, the patient seems baffled or confused. (3) Job and social
functioning were good before the illness. (4) Affect is not constricted.
Delusional Disorder
• Patients with delusional disorder have delusions that are not bizarre (that
is, the delusions are not impossible, such as being abducted by aliens).
However, delusions are the only symptoms they typically have, so they
don’t qualify for other psychotic diagnoses such as schizophrenia (except
that hallucinations of touch or smell may be present if they are related to
the theme of the delusions).
• Once this illness develops, it tends to be chronic.
• There is good preservation of mood and ability to communicate; if
employed, these people remain able to work. They do have trouble in the
social sphere, however, and members of their families often instigate the
referral for treatment.
Several types of delusional disorder have been described, based on the
nature of the delusions themselves:
Erotomanic. Someone (often one who is famous or of high social station) is
in love with the patient. These patients sometimes make the news for fol-
lowing or otherwise harassing public figures.
Grandiose. These people believe that they have some special ability or
insight. Some claim to have invented something of great value, and so
may haunt government agencies (patent office, police) in pursuit of their
plans.
Persecutory. The patient (or a close associate) is being intentionally cheated,
drugged, followed, slandered, or otherwise mistreated.
Jealousy. Most often, these individuals believe that a spouse is being unfaith-
ful; a patient may follow a spouse or confront a supposed lover.
Somatic. These patients often seek medical help, convinced that they have a
foul body odor, parasites, or infestation of insects on or under the skin,
or that some body part is misshapen.
Mixed. The patient has two or more of the themes above in roughly equal
portions.
Unspecified.
Psychotic Disorder Due to Substance/Medication Use or to Another
Medical Condition
The category of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder includes all
psychoses caused by substances, including prescription medications. The pre-
dominant symptoms (hallucinations or delusions) can occur during withdrawal

-- 309 of 385 --

294 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
or acute intoxication, depending on the substance. The course is usually brief
and self-limited.
Classic examples of this disorder are alcoholic auditory hallucinosis and the
delusional state that sometimes accompanies chronic amphetamine use. The psy-
chotic symptoms may be indistinguishable from those of paranoid schizophre-
nia. Marijuana, cocaine, inhalants, opioids, phencyclidine and other hallucino-
gens, and sedatives/hypnotics have also been implicated in these conditions. Be
careful not to make this diagnosis if the patient is having an acute delirium.
For medical conditions, the drill is much the same. A great variety of medi-
cal illnesses can produce a substantial variety of psychotic symptoms, including
a full spectrum of delusions and hallucinations, as well as abnormalities of move-
ment (such as catatonic symptoms) and negative symptoms.
By the way, similar categories (and arguments) hold for mood and anxiety
disorders.
suBsTance‑relaTed disorders
The terminology keeps changing, but the disorders themselves remain the same:
alcohol and drug misuse. The 21st century presents an ever-widening variety of
substances that can lead to a form of dependence DSM-5 now calls substance use
disorder.
Identification of this dependence is based on the presence of some of
these behaviors: tolerance to the drug (the drug has less effect with continued
use, or the person must use more of it to achieve the same effect); withdrawal
symptoms when the dose is decreased; using more than intended; unsuccess-
ful attempts to control usage; spending much time obtaining or using the sub-
stance; reducing important activities because of substance use; failing to follow
through on important obligations at work/school or home (such as repeated
absences, neglect of children or house, or poor work performances); ongoing
use despite knowing that the substance has probably caused physical or psycho-
logical problems; use of the substance even when it is physically dangerous to
do so (such as driving a car); continuing to use the substance despite knowing
that it has caused or worsened social or relationship problems (fights, argu-
ments); and, finally, one nonbehavioral criterion (the person craves the sub-
stance or strongly wants to use it).
neurocogniTive disorders
Neurocognitive disorders are behavioral or psychological abnormalities that are
associated with temporary or permanent brain dysfunctions. The cause can be
an abnormality of brain structure, chemistry, or physiology, but the exact etiol-
ogy isn’t always known. Impairment can occur in any of four main areas: intel-
lectual functioning, judgment, memory, and orientation. Some patients also have
associated abnormalities of impulse control or mood. The neurocognitive disor-
ders have traditionally been broadly categorized as either delirium or dementia;
dementia is now classified in DSM-5 as major neurocognitive disorder.

-- 310 of 385 --

Appendix B 	295
Delirium
Delirium usually begins acutely, usually caused by something that occurs outside
the brain. It tends to fluctuate in intensity and is usually short-lived, resolving
once the underlying condition has been relieved.
• Patients cannot focus or maintain attention and are often easily distract-
ible. Their thought processes slow down; they have trouble solving prob-
lems and reasoning.
• There is also an alteration in thinking, such as problems with orientation,
use of language, executive functioning, memory, learning, or perception
(hallucinations). Hallucinations may confuse patients so that they cannot
tell whether they are dreaming or awake. They may accept the halluci-
nations as reality, thereby experiencing anxiety or fear; sometimes they
attempt to run away.
• The causes of delirium include endocrine disorders, infection, brain
tumor, cessation of alcohol intake, drug toxicity, vitamin deficiency, fever,
seizures, liver or kidney disease, poisons, and the effects of surgical opera-
tions. Multiple causes may contribute to a single episode.
• The symptoms develop rapidly and tend to worsen at night—a phenome-
non called sundowning. Later recall for the symptoms may be spotty or nil.
Dementia
Patients with DSM-5 major neurocognitive disorder (or dementia, as I’ll usually
continue to call it for the sake of brevity) show loss of ability to think and to
remember that is severe enough to interfere with work and social life. Dementia
can be transient, but more often it persists and progresses, frequently to the
point that the patient shows impaired judgment and abstract thinking. Severely
demented patients may not recognize family members; they can even become
lost in their own homes. Failure of judgment and impulse control can lead to
loss of the social graces, as shown by making crude jokes or by ignoring personal
hygiene. Ability to use language is usually spared until late in the disease.
The major features of dementia include the following:
• Clinician, informant, and/or patient worry that the patient’s cognition
has declined from a previous level of performance.
• Standard neurocognitive testing (or an equivalent clinical evaluation)
reveals that the patient’s performance is more than 2 standard deviations
below norms (for major neurocognitive disorder) or 1–2 standard devia-
tions below (for what DSM-5 now calls mild neurocognitive disorder).
• The symptoms limit the patient’s independence (for major neurocogni-
tive disorder) or don’t (in mild neurocognitive disorder, the patient can
compensate with effort).
• The symptoms aren’t better explained by a different major mental disor-
der, and they don’t occur only with delirium.
Onset of dementia is usually insidious, and the misconceptions (hallucina-
tions or illusions) so common in delirium are often absent, especially early in

-- 311 of 385 --

296 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
the process. Usually an organic cause can be identified. Causes include primary
diseases of the central nervous system, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s
disease, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson’s disease; infectious diseases, such as
neurosyphilis and HIV/AIDS; vitamin deficiencies; tumors; trauma; and vari-
ous diseases of liver, lungs, and the endocrine and cardiovascular systems. A few
causes (subdural hematoma, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, hypothyroidism)
can be successfully treated, leading to full recovery from the dementia symptoms.
Dementias are found mainly in older patients, and the course is usually one of
chronic deterioration.
A type of dementia that formerly carried its own DSM designation is amnes-
tic disorder, in which patients rather suddenly lose short-term memory, some-
times to the extent that they cannot recall events that took place scant minutes
earlier. Remote memory is usually less involved. Many patients confabulate infor-
mation spontaneously or in response to prompting (“Didn’t I see you in the bar
last night?”). Recovery can occur, although chronicity is more the rule.
anxieTY disorders
Warning: Many mentally ill patients have anxiety symptoms as a part of their
overall complaints. It is important not to let anxiety symptoms, which may be
presenting complaints of many patients, obscure other diagnoses that may be
even more important for diagnosis and treatment. In this regard, be especially
alert for the presence of depressive syndromes and substance-related disorders.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
• Patients with generalized anxiety disorder worry unreasonably about mul-
tiple life circumstances, such as money, family, health, and problems in
school or on the job.
• As a result, they have symptoms of anxiety such as feeling restless or edgy,
tiring easily, trouble concentrating, irritability, increased muscle tension,
and trouble with sleep.
• Because they feel this way most days, they will procrastinate or otherwise
avoid situations where they might have these feelings.
Generalized anxiety disorder usually starts in early adulthood; women out-
number men about 2:1. It’s encountered especially among patients of internists
and general practitioners. Some authorities believe that it may affect 5% of the
general population; others hold that it is often misdiagnosed instead of a differ-
ent anxiety or other disorder.
Panic Attack and Panic Disorder
• The patient experiences discrete episodes of anxiety or fear that begin
suddenly and reach their height within minutes. (Just before such an epi-
sode, the person could be either calm or anxious.)
• During an attack the patient experiences several typical symptoms, such

-- 312 of 385 --

Appendix B 	297
as chest pain, hot flashes or chills, choking sensations, feeling unreal or
detached from self, dizziness, fear of impending death, fear of “losing
my mind,” heart pounding or racing or skipping beats, nausea, tingling/
numbness (usually of fingers), excessive perspiration, shortness of breath,
and trembling.
• When unexpected panic attacks occur repeatedly and the patient is afraid
of further attacks or tries to forestall them, we say that the patient has
panic disorder.
Panic disorder affects perhaps 2% of all adults; it has a strong genetic com-
ponent and may be somewhat more common in women than in men. Although
it can start at any age, it usually develops in young adults. It is often associated
with agoraphobia.
Note that panic symptoms can occur in the course of other disorders—
including not only most anxiety disorders, but also substance intoxication, post-
traumatic stress disorder, and obsessive–compulsive disorder, among others.
Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia originally meant “fear of the marketplace,” but it now comprises
fears of being in any place or situation where it might be hard to escape or to get
help.
• The patient thus might avoid leaving home, markets, shops, open places,
public transportation, theaters— even standing in a line or crowd.
• For 6 months or more, the patient therefore avoids the feared situations
or needs a companion or suffers discomfort when confronting them.
Agoraphobia affects relatively few of us (perhaps 1 in 200 adults), women
more often than men. It typically starts early in life following a panic attack or
a traumatic event. Most patients with agoraphobia also have panic attacks; how-
ever, the two diagnoses can be made independently.
oBsessive– compulsive disorder
Obsessive–compulsive disorder is a well- studied illness that begins in the teens or
20s and often persists lifelong.
• These patients have obsessions or compulsions (or both) that come unbid-
den into awareness, accompanied by anxiety or dread.
• Patients invest a lot of time and effort in these distressing ideas or behav-
iors, which seem foreign (ego-alien), silly, or irrational to them.
Usually there is insight that these ideas are products of the patient’s own mind, but
occasionally it can be completely absent. The main compulsive patterns include
handwashing, cleaning, and compulsive checking to be sure that some action (such
as turning off the stove) has in fact been accomplished. The patient feels driven to

-- 313 of 385 --

298 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
complete these actions, which are geared toward reducing anxiety. Symptoms of
depression are common. In some patients, there is a tie-in to lifelong tics.
posTTraumaTic sTress disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder is a modern diagnosis comprising what was once called
shellshock or combat fatigue in soldiers. It is a common sequel for anyone who has
experienced rape, combat, or any other major naturally occurring or human-made
calamity (earthquakes, airplane crashes) that involves actual or threatened death
or injury. (The experience can be vicarious if it occurs to a close friend or relative.)
For at least a month the patient:
• Relives the traumatic event through intrusive dreams or waking thoughts.
• Avoids reminders of the event.
• Experiences negative emotions (“no future,” self-blame) and altered cog-
nitions (such as amnesia).
• Endures symptoms of hyperarousal (hypervigilance, increased startle
response).
It may take weeks or years to develop symptoms, which often fluctuate over time.
Severity is usually proportional to the intensity of the traumatic event. The con-
dition is more likely to occur in children, elderly persons, and those who are
socially isolated.
anorexia nervosa
• Patients with anorexia nervosa feel that they are overweight when they are
not. Even when emaciated, they perceive themselves as overweight and
fear becoming fat.
• They severely limit food intake, sometimes to the point of malnutrition
and (in females) the cessation of normal menses.
Patients may abuse diuretics and laxatives; some vomit to maintain low weight.
Severe symptoms can lead to death. This disorder is relatively common (up to
0.5%) among young females, but occurs only about one-tenth as often in males.
somaTizaTion disorder
Affecting perhaps 1% of adult women (rare in men), somatization disorder is
characterized by multiple somatic complaints. Suspect it in anyone who pres-
ents a complicated or vague history; responds poorly to treatment; is dramatic,
demanding, or seductive; has a family history of personality disorder; was abused
sexually as a child; misuses substances; or has depression with unusual features.
Many of these patients attempt suicide. This diagnosis is often overlooked even
by mental health professionals.

-- 314 of 385 --

Appendix B 	299
The exact nomenclature and diagnostic criteria for this disorder have
changed markedly over the past 50–60 years. In the middle of the 20th cen-
tury, criteria were devised to clearly identify what was then called Briquet’s syn-
drome, and to differentiate it from the hoary diagnosis of hysteria, which basically
depended on only one criterion: that the person have a symptom apparently not
due to any organic disease state. Beginning in DSM-III and continuing through
DSM-III-R, DSM-IV, and DSM-IV-TR, criteria for somatization disorder spelled
out sets of physical symptoms, of which certain numbers and distributions were
required for diagnosis. These symptom lists were long and somewhat clumsy to
use, and the suspicion that they were widely ignored by clinicians helped fuel the
steady reduction in the minimum number of required symptoms.
However, DSM-5 has now stepped back to a point where patients can be diag-
nosed with the most recent iteration—now termed somatic symptom disorder—if
they have basically a single physical symptom. It must last at least 6 months, and
there must be evidence of inordinate ongoing health concern; even so, one symp-
tom will do the job. I am deeply concerned that this retrograde step will reduce
our understanding of a group of patients who have been misdiagnosed and incor-
rectly treated throughout the history of medicine. Nonetheless, here are the char-
acteristics of DSM-5 somatic symptom disorder.
• For 6 months or more, at least one somatic symptom has caused distress
or disruption of daily life.
• As a result, the patient has continuing high anxiety about health concerns.
• With predominant pain can be added as a specifier if the patient’s present-
ing problem is mainly complaint of pain. (DSM-IV considered this a sepa-
rate diagnosis and called it pain disorder.)
As a counterpoint, I’ve appended below the original criteria for Briquet’s
syndrome. It allowed diagnosis of patients who had mental/emotional symptoms
as well as physical ones, and helped differentiate those with depression who might
be less amenable to medical treatment from those who might benefit from drugs
or electroconvulsive therapy. Furthermore, in the “Physical Complaints” section
of the Appendix D structured interview (p. 338), I’ve used the DSM-IV criteria for
somatization disorder—the disorder name I have generally chosen to use in this
book. Consistency hasn’t been the hallmark of mental health diagnosis over the
years, so “you pays your money and takes your choice.”
Briquet’s Syndrome
• Beginning by age 30, the patient is chronically or recurrently ill with a
dramatic, vague, or complicated medical history.
• The patient must report at least 25 medically unexplained symptoms
(20–24 for a “probable” diagnosis) in 9 or 10 of the following categories:
1. Headaches; being sickly for majority of life
2. Blindness, paralysis, anesthesia, aphonia, fits or convulsions,
unconsciousness, amnesia, deafness, hallucinations, urinary reten-
tion, trouble walking, other unexplained “neurological” symptoms

-- 315 of 385 --

300 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
3. Fatigue, lump in throat, fainting spells, visual blurring, weakness,
dysuria
4. Breathing difficulty, palpitations, anxiety attacks, chest pain, dizzi-
ness
5. Anorexia, weight loss, marked fluctuations in weight, nausea,
abdominal bloating, food intolerances, diarrhea, constipation
6. Abdominal pain, vomiting
7. Dysmenorrhea, menstrual irregularity, amenorrhea, excessive
menstrual bleeding
8. Sexual indifference, frigidity, dyspareunia, other sexual difficul-
ties; vomiting all 9 months of pregnancy at least once, or hospital-
ization for hyperemesis gravidarum
9. Back pain, joint pain, extremity pain; burning pains of sexual
organs, mouth, or rectum; other bodily pains
10. Nervousness, fears, depressed feelings; need to quit working or
inability to carry on regular duties because of feeling sick; crying
easily, feeling life is hopeless, thinking a good deal about dying,
wanting to die, thinking about suicide, suicide attempts
personaliTY disorders
DSM-5 lists 10 personality disorders that are defined well enough to achieve for-
mal recognition. For 6 of them, studies have been robust enough to have a decent
level of validity. I’ve characterized them below. In each of these personality dis-
orders, the attitudes and behaviors are present from early adult life (sometimes
much earlier) and are experienced in a variety of situations.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Magical thinking, ideas of reference, illusions or other unusual perceptions, and
sometimes unusual mannerisms or clothing can make patients with schizotypal
personality disorder seem quite odd. They may mistrust other people’s inten-
tions, leaving them isolated and anxious or otherwise uncomfortable with ordi-
nary social relationships. Though some do marry, they typically doubt the loyalty
of others and have few close friends. Their thinking may be dominated by sus-
picions and superstitions, which are expressed with restricted affect and speech
that is vague, digressive, or excessively abstract.
Many patients with schizotypal personality disorder are depressed when
they first come to clinical attention. Under stress, patients may become briefly
psychotic; some eventually develop schizophrenia, a diagnosis that is more fre-
quent in their relatives than in the general population.
This disorder occurs in up to 3% of the general population.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Although patients with antisocial personality disorder often seem charming
personally, from youth (generally beginning before age 15) they cannot follow

-- 316 of 385 --

Appendix B 	301
society’s rules. Their relationships with others are characterized by exploitation
rather than by mutual intimacy. These people may glibly claim to have guilt feel-
ings, but empathy and genuine remorse aren’t in evidence.
Their sense of self derives from exerting power over others or from per-
sonal pleasure or material gain; the result is callous and irresponsible behavior
that affects nearly every life area. There may be substance use, fighting, lying,
and dishonest (often criminal) behavior of any conceivable sort: theft, violence,
confidence schemes, and child/spouse abuse. Much of their aberrant behavior is
impulsive, often without real need or consideration of the possible consequences
for the risk they take. Although they may complain of multiple somatic problems
and will occasionally make suicide attempts, the manipulative nature of all their
interactions with others makes it difficult to decide whether their complaints are
genuine.
Two warnings for this one: Although patients with antisocial personality dis-
order often have a childhood marked by incorrigibility, delinquency, and school
problems such as truancy, fewer than half of all children with this sort of back-
ground eventually develop the full adult syndrome. Therefore, this personality
disorder should never be diagnosed before age 18. It is also important not to
diagnose it if antisocial behavior occurs only in the context of substance use.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Patients with borderline personality disorder often appear to be in a crisis of
mood (depression, anxiety, or fear), behavior, or interpersonal relationships.
Feeling empty and bored, they will attach themselves strongly to others. This
doesn’t work so well: Inevitably they fear they are being ignored or mistreated
(or fear abandonment) by those upon whom they feel dependent, and so become
intensely angry or hostile. They may impulsively try to harm or mutilate them-
selves. Other rash actions may form a pattern of risk taking or of too-frequent,
too- extreme shifts from one life goal to another.
Although unusually sensitive to possible insults toward themselves, these
patients may remain oblivious to the feelings and needs of others. Indeed, they
are likely to emphasize other people’s faults. Regard for another person may be
idealized at one time, devalued at another, resulting in alternating enmeshment
and withdrawal.
Patients with borderline personality disorder tend to be markedly self-
critical, sometimes to the point of dissociating when under extreme duress. How-
ever, any dissociative or psychotic episodes resolve so quickly that they are seldom
confused with the endogenous psychoses. Intense, rapid mood swings, impassiv-
ity, and unstable interpersonal relationships make it difficult for these people to
achieve their full potential socially, at work, or in school.
More common in women than in men (perhaps by a 3:1 ratio), this person-
ality disorder is identified in as much as 2% of the general population and in
10–20% of mental health patients.
Warning: In my opinion, clinicians too often content themselves with a diag-
nosis of borderline personality disorder when patients have other disorders that
require more urgent treatment. In the 21st century, it may still be the condition
we most often overdiagnose.

-- 317 of 385 --

302 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Obsessive– Compulsive Personality Disorder
Patients with obsessive–compulsive personality disorder have a lifelong tendency
to be rigid and perfectionistic. Insistence on a flawless product yields one that
is never completed; as Voltaire wrote, “The perfect becomes the enemy of the
good.” Preoccupation with detail, order, adherence to rules, and insistence that
things be done their way interfere with their effectiveness in work or social sit-
uations. They will try to push past failure long after most people would have
judged the effort futile. High, often unreasonable standards (scrupulosity) create
difficulty attaining goals or completing tasks. Work trumps relationships—their
identity tends to be in their work, which they prefer to leisure or social activities.
Stubborn rigidity also damages relationships with other people, whose feelings
and ideas they have difficulty understanding.
Patients with obsessive–compulsive personality disorder may have trouble
expressing affection; often they seem quite depressed. Though these moods
may wax and wane, they can sometimes become severe enough to drive patients
to treatment. Men are twice as often affected as women; perhaps 1 in 100 are
affected in the general population.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
People with narcissistic personality disorder have a lifelong pattern of grandiosity
(in behavior and in fantasy), thirst for admiration, and efforts to attract the atten-
tion of others. With the conviction that they are more than usually special, even
superior to others, they are self- centered individuals who commonly exaggerate
their own accomplishments.
Despite a sometimes condescending attitude of entitlement, individuals with
this personality disorder have fragile self- esteem and often feel unworthy. Even at
times of great personal success (many are talented), they may feel fraudulent or
undeserving. Motivated as they are by the desire for approval, they remain overly
sensitive to what others think about them and may feel compelled to extract com-
pliments. When criticized, they may cover their distress with a façade of icy indif-
ference. As sensitive as they are about their own feelings, they have little apparent
understanding of the feelings and needs of others and may feign empathy, just as
they may lie to cover their own faults.
People with narcissistic personality disorder often fantasize about wild suc-
cess and envy those who have achieved it. Relationships may be formed on the
basis of who can help them achieve their goals, who will stoke their egos. Their
job performance can suffer (due to interpersonal problems) or can be enhanced
(due to their eternal drive for success).
This personality disorder is more common in males than in females; it is
identified in less than 1% of the general population. (Note that narcissistic traits
don’t necessarily imply ultimate personality disorder in children and teenagers,
who are normally self- centered.)

-- 318 of 385 --

Appendix B 	303
Avoidant Personality Disorder
People with avoidant personality disorder feel inadequate or personally unap-
pealing and are socially inhibited. Judging themselves inferior, they are often
hypersensitive to criticism and rejection.
Anxiety and worry about disapproval or some other calamity makes these
people self- effacing and eager to please others, but it can usher in marked social
isolation. They may misinterpret innocent comments as critical; often they will
refuse to begin a relationship unless they are sure they will be accepted. They
hang back in social situations for fear of saying something foolish, and will avoid
goals (even occupations) that involve personal risk or social demands. Other than
close relatives, they tend to have few intimate friends. Comfortable with routine,
they may go to great lengths to stay in a rut. In an interview, as in social situa-
tions, they may feel tense and anxious; they may misinterpret even benign state-
ments as criticism.
When they do engage in activities, they often don’t seem to show much inter-
est or enjoyment. Although many such people work and marry, they may become
depressed or anxious if they lose their support systems.
Avoidant personality disorder probably occurs in just under 1% of the gen-
eral population, sometimes associated with a disfiguring illness or condition; it is
found about as often in men as in women. This personality disorder is not often
seen by itself clinically; these patients tend to come for evaluation only when
another illness appears. (Avoidant traits are common in children and don’t neces-
sarily imply later personality disorder.)

-- 319 of 385 --

304
A p p e n d i x 	C
Sample Interview,
Written Report, and Formulation
interview with pAtient
The patient, a man who appears to be in his late 20s, is dressed in a hospital gown over
chino pants and a white shirt, buttoned to the top. He sits in a straight- backed chair,
seldom gazing at the interviewer. His nose and lips are swollen and bruised, and there
is a large cut under his right eye. His facial expression is immobile; he doesn’t smile once
throughout the interview. His words are occasionally slightly mumbled. The interviewer’s
voice is warm and quiet.
I ntervIewer: (Shakes hands with the patient.) Good morning. My name is
Dr. 	.
PatIent: Hi.
I ntervIewer: I want to thank you for helping us out today with this demonstra-
tion interview.
PatIent: It’s OK.
I ntervIewer: I’ll probably take notes from time to time, just to remind me of
questions I might want to ask. Now, can you tell me a little bit about what
sort of difficulty brought you here?
PatIent: Um—hopelessness, despair, nowhere to go but to the heavens.
I ntervIewer: Nowhere but to the heavens. Does that mean that you were think-
ing about dying?
PatIent: Thinking?—Wanting!
I ntervIewer: Wanting to die. Can you tell me a bit more about that?
Of course, “Tell me more about that” is the classic, open-ended request for the patient to
elaborate further on what was just said.

-- 320 of 385 --

Appendix C 	305
PatIent: Well, I’m thinking, an option is either to hurt someone or hurt myself.
And I don’t like hurting anyone, and so I’d rather hurt myself.
I ntervIewer: I see.
PatIent: And I don’t want to live. You can die if you have, like, cancer, but not
when you have your head so screwed up. So you have to live with that.
I ntervIewer: Yes.
PatIent: They don’t call that terminal, they call that . . . “oh, well!”
I ntervIewer: So did you actually make some kind of a suicide attempt?
PatIent: Oh, yeah! The voices said, “Jump, now’s the time.” I took all my clothes
off; I figured, “You won’t be needing these.” And they all stopped, all the
vehicles stopped, so I ran across the street and then—that’s the last thing I
remember, seeing a truck in the distance going faster than everyone else. I
went for it.
I ntervIewer: So you headed right for the truck.
With several responses so far, the interviewer’s contributions have largely been made to
facilitate more speech on the patient’s part. The principle of free speech is largely pre-
served.
PatIent: Fast truck. I remember being in the ambulance, someone beating on
me, telling me to wake up.
I ntervIewer: So you were actually hit by the truck, do you think?
PatIent: That’s what they say, yeah, and by the looks of it.
I ntervIewer: Yeah, it looks like you got beaten up a little bit. And then you
remember being in the ambulance.
Notice the “Yeah” in the last speech— not at all the usual style of this interviewer, who may
be unconsciously trying to make a connection by using speech similar to the patient’s own.
Throughout the interview, this interviewer uses words the patient can understand; there
is little in the way of medical jargon that might be confusing or inhibit the formation of
rapport.
PatIent: For a split second, while they were beating on me.
I ntervIewer: Well, how does it seem to you now? I mean, you tried to kill
yourself—and here you are, not dead.
PatIent: It seems. Well, in the hospital I thought I was dead. I was in this white
room. It was like the waiting area before Heaven. I was in the waiting area;
it was just some room.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh.
PatIent: And now, I think, I might still be in a waiting area.
I ntervIewer: I see.
PatIent: You guys will help with that?
I ntervIewer: Well, I suspect that nobody here is going to help you die.

-- 321 of 385 --

306 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
A direct answer is better than an evasion. However, a still better response would have been
on the order of the classical “I can’t do that, but I can do this”—for example, “We’ll do all
we can to help you want to live.”
PatIent: Oh.
I ntervIewer: Do you still want to die?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: You said that you’d been feeling hopeless. How long had that been?
Note that the interviewer often picks up on the patient’s own words to turn the conversa-
tion in another direction.
PatIent: Years.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. Has it been worse recently?
PatIent: Oh, yeah. I was hopeless once in a while. It wasn’t every day. Since last
summer.
I ntervIewer: Since last summer. So that’s how many months now?
PatIent: Seven.
An apparent attempt to roughly assess the patient’s orientation to time and ability to
calculate.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. Had you been having other feelings? Like, had you felt
worthless?
PatIent: Oh, yeah.
I ntervIewer: Do you have any idea why?
PatIent: Well, I tried to get jobs, thinking that might work.
I ntervIewer: Yes.
PatIent: Can’t get one.
Thus far, the interviewer has identified three areas of clinical interest to investigate:
psychosis (the voices), mood disorder, and social difficulties. There may be more to come.
I ntervIewer: Do you feel pretty much the same throughout the day, or is one
time of day better for you than another?
PatIent: Best is at night, right when I go to bed.
I ntervIewer: So when you go to bed at night, that’s better somehow. Has your
sleep been pretty good?
PatIent: Here [in the hospital] it has.
I ntervIewer: How about normally . . . what sort of trouble do you have with your
sleep?
A less careful interviewer might move on to some other topic, rather than pinning the
patient down on the subject of his sleep prior to hospitalization. I wonder, though, about

-- 322 of 385 --

Appendix C 	307
using the term “normally”—just what does that mean? It might be better to specify a time
frame, such as “just before you were admitted.”
PatIent: I’d wake up every hour, grinding my teeth.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm. When you wake up, do you think about things?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: What sorts of things?
PatIent: “What am I going to do?”
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. Do you sleep pretty soundly in the morning, then?
PatIent: Not until recently.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. Do you wake up really early, before it’s time to get up, and
then you don’t get back to sleep at all?
Better would be the open-ended “What sort of trouble were you having?”
PatIent: Yeah. I’m saying, “Why did I wake up so early?”
I ntervIewer: Do you feel rested when you sleep?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: You do feel rested.
PatIent: But I feel pretty rested when I don’t sleep. It’s weird; it seems I don’t
need sleep.
I ntervIewer: How’s your appetite?
PatIent: Good. Here it is.
I ntervIewer: How about before you came in?
PatIent: Not good.
I ntervIewer: Has your weight changed any?
PatIent: Yeah. I lost 10 pounds. I don’t know about now; I might have gained
weight.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm. Over what period of time did you lose 10 pounds?
Throughout this interview, you’ll note that the clinician uses a lot of verbal encourage-
ments—“uh-huh” and its variants— as a clear but minimally intrusive way to indicate that
the patient’s message is being received and that the information flow should continue,
without directing that flow in any way. What the written record cannot show is the use of
nods, smiles, eye blinks, and other nonverbal methods that encourage with no intrusion
at all. To improve readability, I’ve cut out about half the nondirective verbal encourage-
ments the interviewer actually does use.
PatIent: About a week.
I ntervIewer: So that’s pretty rapid. You weren’t eating much. Not interested in
food?
PatIent: Not much.

-- 323 of 385 --

308 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: Were you interested in other things?
PatIent: Nope. Well, I had a girlfriend who has a kid. I was interested in him.
I ntervIewer: You’re interested in your girlfriend’s child.
PatIent: He’s a nice boy. I helped him.
I ntervIewer: And at the time you made your suicide attempt, were you main-
taining your interest pretty much in that child?
PatIent: Yeah, but she didn’t want me around.
I ntervIewer: She didn’t want you. What about things like reading or watching
television—was your interest good there?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Could you keep your mind on things?
PatIent: Yeah, television, if I did watch it. That’s about it. (Pause) But not for long
periods.
If the interviewer moved on too quickly to the next topic, the overall impression of this
patient’s ability to focus his concentration would be somewhat different.
I ntervIewer: Just for a short time? Like, about how long?
PatIent: Half-hour.
I ntervIewer: So you couldn’t watch a full-hour show and retain it.
PatIent: Without thinking about something.
I ntervIewer: Would you find that when people you liked were around, that took
your mind off feeling bad?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: That would help. How long would it help for?
PatIent: Until I realized what was going on with me.
I ntervIewer: So that would be just, like, for a few minutes it would distract you?
Objection, Your Honor—leading the witness! Much better would be “How long would it
usually distract you?”
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: OK. Did you feel guilty about things?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: What sorts of things?
PatIent: That I put myself in this position. I could have avoided it by certain deci-
sions I made. But now it’s too late.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm. Do you feel that you’re deserving to die?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Do you feel like you’re deserving to be punished?
PatIent: Yeah, in a way.

-- 324 of 385 --

Appendix C 	309
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm.
PatIent: I know a lot of people do it, but I knew better.
I ntervIewer: You knew better. A lot of people do . . . do what?
Again the interviewer is picking up on the patient’s previous speech, this time with elabo-
ration. It’s a method of verbal encouragement that can guide the conversation without
appearing to be excessively controlling.
PatIent: Similar things to what I do.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. The things that you feel guilty about. Can you tell me
what some of those are?
PatIent: Like spending money on drugs. Staying in hotel rooms instead of spend-
ing it on apartments or food.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm.
PatIent: Bills.
I ntervIewer: Right. And what sort of drugs have you been having a problem
with?
PatIent: Heroin and cocaine.
I ntervIewer: Has this been for quite a long time?
PatIent: Couple of years.
I ntervIewer: How much of a heroin habit have you had?
PatIent: I’d say a half gram a day.
I ntervIewer: And how much would that cost you?
PatIent: Twenty bucks. And 20 bucks for coke.
I ntervIewer: And also $20 for cocaine. Well, as habits go, how strong would you
say that is?
PatIent: Do I want it now?
I ntervIewer: Yeah.
PatIent: Strong.
This interviewer either isn’t sure just how much of a habit half a gram is, or wants to give
the patient an opportunity to demonstrate some expertise. In any event, asking a patient
for an explanation is a good way to ensure that you have the right information. It also
helps promote rapport.
I ntervIewer: So you feel a pretty strong craving right now.
PatIent: Not really that strong a craving; just probably if I had a lot of money and
a place to go, I would probably do it.
I ntervIewer: You would go out and use drugs again.
PatIent: ’Cause they make me feel safe.
I ntervIewer: Back before you were using drugs, how was your mood then?

-- 325 of 385 --

310 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
With two serious problems to consider, the interviewer is trying to learn which one started
first. The important reason: to differentiate between a primary mood disorder and one
that is secondary to drug use, with their differing treatment implications.
PatIent: It would depend where I was at, but . . . there was always something
missing.
I ntervIewer: Always something missing, even before you were using drugs.
PatIent: Yeah. And back in school, I never fit in, really. I mean, I had friends,
but I didn’t fit in.
Another area of clinical interest rears its head: the possibility of personality disorder.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm.
PatIent: Uncomfortable.
I ntervIewer: You felt uncomfortable, even with friends. Can you talk about that
a little bit more, about that feeling of discomfort?
Even this far into the interview, the interviewer extends an invitation to expand on these
feelings. Open-ended probes are an excellent way to develop information about emotions.
PatIent: Like, you don’t want to say the wrong thing or get made fun of. You
don’t want to do anything that will get you made fun of. So really, you just
keep quiet, keep to yourself. And then nothing does happen. You don’t get
more friends.
I ntervIewer: So you were always very afraid of making a mistake, of seeming out
of place. And that’s at least partly because you felt out of place. Has that been
true throughout your adult life?
Ordinarily, I recommend against long interviewer speeches. After all, the more an inter-
viewer talks, the less time the patient has to talk. However, occasional summary state-
ments, such as the one just above, can ensure that the interviewer has understood and can
help connect with the patient.
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: What about when you were a kid?
PatIent: That’s the only time when I wasn’t afraid, before my parents got
divorced. I remember the first day we lived here, my parents said, “There’s
a kid out there your age—go play with him.” I ran out there, pushed him on
his tricycle. We became best friends.
I ntervIewer: And that was when you were how old?
PatIent: Five.
I ntervIewer: And did that [friendship] last clear up until your parents got
divorced?
PatIent: (Nods.)

-- 326 of 385 --

Appendix C 	311
I ntervIewer: And how old were you then?
PatIent: Parents got divorced when I was about 7—6, 7.
I ntervIewer: Did you live with your mom or with your dad then?
PatIent: My mom, in California, so I missed some school. My other brothers
lived with my dad. ’Cause they were going to school.
I ntervIewer: And was it when you were 7 or so that you started to feel out of
place?
PatIent: I think so. I mean, right from the start, I felt awkward in certain situa-
tions. I gradually got it back, then it all went to heck. Then I switched schools
and then I got it back again. And then I went to a middle school and lost it
all. And never got it back.
I ntervIewer: You lost it all—what does that mean?
PatIent: It means all my friends were in a different area than I was, and I had to
make all new friends, and I never did.
I ntervIewer: So you never really got back to where you were.
PatIent: Yeah, and I just kept it there.
I ntervIewer: Back then, when you were, say, a teenager, did you feel depressed
then?
PatIent: Mm-hmm.
I ntervIewer: Was it as depressed as you’re feeling now?
PatIent: No, I thought of suicide, but I’d never do it.
I ntervIewer: And when was the first time you made a suicide attempt?
PatIent: Two years ago.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. Was that after you started to use drugs?
This interviewer puts quite a lot of effort into determining the sequence of symptoms—
what happened first, followed by what else? This information will prove important in
diagnosis and in determining what treatment might help.
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: And what did you do to yourself then?
PatIent: I tried to shoot the most heroin I ever did.
I ntervIewer: You tried to overdose on heroin.
PatIent: Yeah, and I took some prescription pills.
I ntervIewer: And obviously that didn’t work.
PatIent: Right.
I ntervIewer: Were you hospitalized then?
PatIent: Yeah, I woke up 3 days later.
I ntervIewer: That’s quite a long time.
PatIent: That was the closest.

-- 327 of 385 --

312 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: And have you made any suicide attempts between then and this
one?
Have you noticed that the interviewer starts many questions with the word “And”? We
all have verbal tics, which can be annoying or helpful to one degree or another. I would
recommend that you analyze your own to see which should be expunged. In this case, how-
ever, the repeated conjunction may actually serve to help tie the interview together while
moving it forward.
PatIent: Yeah, I took a bunch of over-the- counter sleeping pills. Those things just
made my heart go crazy, so I took myself to the emergency [room].
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm.
PatIent: And then I felt myself passing out when I got there. They charcoaled me,
and that was . . . (Long pause)
I ntervIewer: Well, now, you said that you had been hearing voices. Can you tell
me about that?
PatIent: My head’s thinking one thing, and then this voice will sound, like, out-
side, inside my head, I don’t know: “It’s OK. Just do it.”
I ntervIewer: By that is meant . . .
PatIent: Whatever I’m thinking.
I ntervIewer: Whatever you’re thinking. So this voice kind of encourages you.
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: Does it ever say anything different from that?
PatIent: It tells me not to do stuff.
I ntervIewer: Like what?
PatIent: Like “It’s a bad idea right now. Don’t do it.”
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm.
PatIent: I’ve always had it.
I ntervIewer: You’ve always had this voice. Dating back to when?
PatIent: When I was a kid. It kept me out of trouble, a lot of times.
I ntervIewer: I see. Do you think that this voice is an actual person or thing out
there somewhere? Or could it be your own conscience or your own thoughts?
Note the forced choice. An open-ended question might have worked better here—for exam-
ple, “Or could there be some other explanation?”
PatIent: I used to think it was my conscience until recently, when it got so strong
I can almost see it. And that’s when I started thinking it was something else.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm.
PatIent: My brother died. I swear that has something to do with it.
I ntervIewer: I didn’t understand that.

-- 328 of 385 --

Appendix C 	313
PatIent: My brother got murdered. And that had something to do with me not
dying.
I ntervIewer: So you’re thinking that—
PatIent: At the time I was trying to do the heroin overdose, same day I got out of
the hospital, my grandfather died.
I ntervIewer: Wow!
Shorthand for “That’s a really heavy load for one person.” This sort of response tells the
patient that the clinician understands and cares; it is a premier example of one-word
rapport building.
PatIent: It was, like, they had to do a switch. Me for him. It was already safe.
I ntervIewer: So you think that in some way, your grandfather died so you could
live?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: That’s a pretty big responsibility. How does that make you feel?
PatIent: Well, he was really sick. And that’s the kind of guy he is, so I’m not
surprised.
I ntervIewer: What did he die of?
PatIent: Old age.
I ntervIewer: And you said that your brother died—he got murdered.
Good for this interviewer, who remembered to ask about the murdered brother! This may
have been facilitated by the note taking mentioned at the outset of the interview.
PatIent: He was stabbed. And he got only about 2 years.
I ntervIewer: The person who stabbed him only got 2 years in prison for that.
What were the circumstances?
PatIent: He’d just got out of prison, my brother, and he didn’t know where to go,
and he was sleeping in the park with bums. And they were cooking, and he
went to borrow a bike that wasn’t his, to buy beer, and the dude whose bike it
was just flipped out—said “Get off my bike,” and went after him with a knife.
I ntervIewer: I see. So your brother had been in prison, for what?
PatIent: For burglary.
I ntervIewer: And had he been in a lot of trouble much of his life?
PatIent: Not really, just alcohol.
I ntervIewer: Oh, he drank. And was that why he did the burglary—he was intoxi-
cated at the time?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: And has anybody else in your family had any drug or alcohol prob-
lems?

-- 329 of 385 --

314 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
PatIent: Yeah, my brother.
I ntervIewer: Another brother?
PatIent: Yeah, and then my aunt and uncles.
I ntervIewer: So you had some aunts and uncles, on your dad’s side or—
PatIent: Mom’s side, and then my stepdad.
I ntervIewer: Was your mother a drinker or a drug user?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Tell me about her.
PatIent: She would drink and smoke pot.
I ntervIewer: And is she still alive now?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: Is she still drinking?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: She got straightened out. How did that happen?
PatIent: She quit.
I ntervIewer: Does that make you feel that there’s some kind of hope for you?
PatIent: I quit before. I’ve had 7 months clean.
I ntervIewer: Really? That’s terrific! When was that?
The compliment is hardly necessary, but in context it seems heartfelt, and perhaps it does
help to cement whatever feelings the patient may be forming for the interviewer.
PatIent: Last year.
I ntervIewer: And then you just slipped back into it.
PatIent: I just felt like shit still.
I ntervIewer: You mean, even though you were clean and sober, you still felt very
depressed.
PatIent: Uh-huh. Hopeless. And I had money.
I ntervIewer: Were you working at that time?
PatIent: No, but I had $6,000 in the bank.
I ntervIewer: Really! Wow. And that didn’t help you to feel any better.
PatIent: Nope.
I ntervIewer: Even though you were not using, not drinking, you still felt terribly
depressed.
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: And were you thinking about killing yourself then?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: Do you think you felt about as bad then as you do now?
PatIent: (Nods.) Yup.

-- 330 of 385 --

Appendix C 	315
I ntervIewer: Well, I was asking about your relatives. I heard about your broth-
ers and your mom. What about your dad—was he a drinker or a drug user?
PatIent: My stepdad.
I ntervIewer: What about your biological father?
PatIent: He did that stuff, but he quit. But when I was growing up, he was a
drinker.
I ntervIewer: I see. What kind of work did he do?
PatIent: He was a sales manager.
I ntervIewer: And do you have any kind of a relationship with him now?
PatIent: Now, more so than I did. I didn’t for a while.
I ntervIewer: Mm-hmm. And what about your mom—do you see her?
PatIent: (Nods.)
I ntervIewer: How do you and she get along?
PatIent: Pretty good, for the most part.
I ntervIewer: You know your brother died at one point, and your grandfather
died, and I’m sure that you felt bad when those events happened. Can you
compare how you feel now, with your depression, to the way you felt when
they died?
PatIent: When my brother died, I felt relief for him. He was lucky; he didn’t have
to go through that crap any more. Same with my grandpa, ’cause he was in
pain. So my depression [compared to] that—I wish I could be with them.
I ntervIewer: So the way you feel now, it’s quite different from how you felt when
they died. Is that correct?
An important summary statement—to try to characterize the type and degree of depression
now, as compared with how people feel when a loved one dies. This sort of information
can be used to help sort out the type of mood disorder when the interviewer considers the
differential diagnosis.
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: And do you still feel now that you wish you were dead?
PatIent: Yes.
I ntervIewer: You said that you hoped that somebody here would help you to die.
Does that seem like a realistic hope to you?
PatIent: I don’t see why not; they do it for people with cancer. My brain has
cancer.
I ntervIewer: Your brain has cancer—what do you mean by that?
PatIent: Cancerous thoughts.
I ntervIewer: Cancerous thoughts. Well, suppose that with medication or some
other treatment, your brain could get over these cancerous thoughts?
PatIent: Yeah, well, that would be something else.

-- 331 of 385 --

316 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: That would be something different.
PatIent: Kind of works with heroin. The thing with heroin, it just shuts the can-
cerous thoughts down. But it doesn’t make you feel better. I don’t want to
hang out with anyone. I just like to sit in a room and watch TV, and the can-
cerous thoughts be shut down. And that’s why I do that.
I ntervIewer: Does it seem to you that when you use heroin, it’s to shut down
some of these really bad, negative thoughts that you have?
PatIent: Exactly.
I ntervIewer: You mentioned that you heard these voices. Have you ever had any
other experiences that most people don’t have?
Good use of transition— picking up on the patient’s own words and using that as a bridge
to other questions about mental phenomena.
PatIent: Uh, no.
I ntervIewer: Do you see visions, for instance?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Tell me about that.
PatIent: I see visions of me hanging.
I ntervIewer: Hanging, like by a rope, you mean?
PatIent: See visions of me smashing my car into a brick wall. I see visions of me
jumping off the train platform, right into the train.
I ntervIewer: Are those visions something that you can actually see, just the way
you see me now? Or is it more like something that’s played on your mental
mind’s screen?
PatIent: No, I see it.
I ntervIewer: You can actually see it. You see it as clearly as you see me?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: And have you ever had the feeling or thoughts that people were
plotting against you in some way or another, trying to harm you?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Spy on you?
PatIent: Spy on me, yeah.
I ntervIewer: Tell me about that.
PatIent: Cops do these things. Try to stop me.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. So you thought that may be the police might be trying to
stop you from harming yourself.
PatIent: Yeah. There’s cameras everywhere.
I ntervIewer: On this ward there are cameras, that’s true. What about outside?
Do you feel there are cameras everywhere there?

-- 332 of 385 --

Appendix C 	317
PatIent: Pretty much. You go to malls, there will be. There’s cameras on lights,
stoplights.
I ntervIewer: Has anybody in your family ever had any other mental illnesses
besides using drugs or alcohol?
Oops. This would be an excellent point to ask whether the cameras are focusing just on
him, or whether they are intended for use on everyone. The latter response would of course
evoke far less concern.
PatIent: (Shakes head.)
I ntervIewer: Depression.
PatIent: Yeah, my stepdad.
I ntervIewer: Your stepdad.
PatIent: He did drugs and he quit, and he’s been clean for 6 or 7 years. The other
day, he had to go home because he’s so depressed.
I ntervIewer: Anybody besides your stepdad?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Anybody in the family with schizophrenia? . . . Any kind of psycho-
sis or craziness? . . . Anybody else who’s ever tried to kill himself?
The interviewer pauses after each question to allow the patient time to think about his
answer.
PatIent: (Shakes his head “no” to each of the questions above.)
I ntervIewer: Let’s see, you had two brothers. Any other brothers or sisters?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Are you oldest or—
PatIent: Youngest.
I ntervIewer: You’re the youngest. How old are you now?
PatIent: Thirty-one.
I ntervIewer: Uh-huh. And you mentioned your experiences when you were
growing up. How far did you go in school?
PatIent: All the way . . . high school, graduated. Went to college for a little bit.
I ntervIewer: And what kind of work have you done?
PatIent: I’ve done carpet; I worked in a car wash; delivering pizza. I’ve worked
in warehouses.
I ntervIewer: Do you like working?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: You get a good feeling out of that.
PatIent: Yeah.

-- 333 of 385 --

318 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: What’s the longest job you’ve held?
PatIent: Five years.
I ntervIewer: That’s pretty good. What was that?
Another compliment. A good rule is this: Never say anything that is complimentary unless
you truly mean it. It sounds as though this interviewer does.
PatIent: Delivering pizza.
I ntervIewer: And once you leave here, do you think you might try to get another
job?
PatIent: I’ve been trying, but they don’t call me back. That’s why I get hopeless.
I ntervIewer: Yeah. Your brother was in prison at one time. Have you ever had
troubles like that?
The interviewer uses previous information as a bridge to a topic that could be sensitive.
PatIent: Never.
I ntervIewer: And you mentioned your girlfriend. Have you ever been married?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Have you had quite a few girlfriends?
PatIent: Yes.
I ntervIewer: And has your relationship with women been pretty satisfactory
ordinarily?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Sexual satisfaction?
PatIent: OK.
I ntervIewer: How about when you’re really depressed? Is your interest in sex
different when you’re really depressed?
Note that this interviewer has delayed for a long time the question about libido when
depressed— until it flows more naturally into the conversation, and until the patient is
maximally used to the interview process.
PatIent: Don’t do it.
I ntervIewer: You just don’t do it. Not interested? How’s your physical health
been?
PatIent: Good.
I ntervIewer: Have you had any difficulty that has caused you to have an opera-
tion?
PatIent: My back hurts.
But did he ever have an operation? In context, it seems reasonable to assume that he did
not, but one goal of interviewing is accuracy.

-- 334 of 385 --

Appendix C 	319
I ntervIewer: Have you ever been unconscious, other than when you were hit by
the truck?
PatIent: (Shakes head.)
I ntervIewer: Have you had other hospitalizations, besides psychiatric?
PatIent: Just when I was a kid. I fell on my head, from about 8 feet high.
I ntervIewer: Wow!
PatIent: I was playing hide-and-seek, and I landed on my head. Cracked both
wrists. Got a concussion.
I ntervIewer: And you were out for how long then?
PatIent: A split second. But I was dizzy all day long.
I ntervIewer: I see. Did you recover from that fairly quickly then?
PatIent: Yeah. I slept that night in the hospital.
I ntervIewer: Now, I know you’ve had difficulty with depression for quite some
time. Have you had antidepressant treatment of any kind?
PatIent: Just pills.
I ntervIewer: What kind of pills have you had?
PatIent: Lexapro, Wellbutrin, and Depakote.
I ntervIewer: And did those seem to make any difference?
PatIent: Unh-unh.
I ntervIewer: How long did you take each one of them?
PatIent: Four months for Lexapro, a month for the Wellbutrin and Depakote.
I ntervIewer: And why did you stop taking them?
PatIent: Lexapro was making me tired and upset my stomach. Same with the
Depakote and Wellbutrin.
I ntervIewer: Do you know how much you were taking of each of those?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Was it several pills a day of each?
PatIent: Yeah. Four Depakotes, and one or two Wellbutrin.
I ntervIewer: And the Lexapro?
PatIent: I think it was two.
To try to pin down the adequacy of previous treatment, the interviewer has pursued this
information like a terrier hunting a rat.
I ntervIewer: And have you had any courses of psychotherapy? . . . Group ther-
apy? . . . Cognitive-behavioral therapy?
PatIent: (To each in turn) No.
I ntervIewer: Nothing of that sort. Now, some people who have depression have
the opposite feeling at times, too—where they feel ecstatic or too happy, on
top of the world. Has that ever happened to you?

-- 335 of 385 --

320 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Can you tell me about that?
PatIent: Like the other day, I had a ticket for not wearing my seat belt. I took a
class for 20 bucks—it was a $200 ticket— and they voided the ticket.
I ntervIewer: That made you feel pretty good.
PatIent: Yeah. Even though I had nothing in my wallet, [nothing] to eat, and
barely any gas.
I ntervIewer: I see. How long did that up feeling last?
PatIent: Huh! Five minutes.
I ntervIewer: Have you ever had up feelings that lasted for days at a time?
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Now, are there other important experiences that you’ve had that
you haven’t talked about so far?
This is a fishing expedition, designed to provide an opportunity to discuss anything else
that might be on the patient’s mind. This time it turns up negative, but it’s a good idea to
cast such a line at least once during every initial interview.
PatIent: No.
I ntervIewer: Have you ever had the experience of having thoughts that seem
pointless or silly to you, that you’d go back to over and over again?
PatIent No.
I ntervIewer: Do you have any fears or phobias?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Like . . .
PatIent: Fear of speaking in public, fear of drowning, fear of burning to death,
fear of failure, fear of being laughed at.
I ntervIewer: Do these fears cause you to change your way of life in any way?
PatIent: Yeah, I avoid it.
I ntervIewer: So what sorts of things do you avoid?
PatIent: I avoid meeting new people. I avoid anything that can injure me.
I ntervIewer: If you have to speak in public, are you able to do it, but it’s just
uncomfortable for you, or do you just not do it at all?
PatIent: Well, going to school, we never had to do it, in college. But I would have
just done it.
I ntervIewer: So you’d have done it, but you wouldn’t have been happy about it.
PatIent: Or I’d have been bad at it.
I ntervIewer: Would you ever get panic attacks—where you would feel something
awful was about to happen to you, and your heart would beat really fast?
PatIent: I get those all the time.

-- 336 of 385 --

Appendix C 	321
I ntervIewer: Do you get them even now?
PatIent: Bad. I hate that.
I ntervIewer: What sorts of thing set them off?
PatIent: Anything. I can be playing basketball; next thing I know, I feel one com-
ing on. My balls get all cold, weird feelings. I know what it is; I just try to let
it go. Gets me light-headed and [makes me] feel I’ve got to puke.
I ntervIewer: How often do those experiences happen?
PatIent: Depends. Sometimes when it happens, it’s like four times, five times a
day. Sometimes they don’t happen for a month.
I ntervIewer: Have you ever talked to a doctor about it?
PatIent: He said I had an anxiety attack. Gave me Xanax.
I ntervIewer: Did that seem to help?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: Of course, there are problems with Xanax, too. People can get
kind of used to taking it, and they may want to take it.
This response borders on intervention: The clinician is venturing an opinion (albeit
tentative) as to the dangers of certain medications. However, there is probably no harm in
the context of a patient who has had considerable experience with substance misuse, and
who has already made several suicide attempts.
PatIent: It made me tired, though. They’d give me a pill and I’d break it up in
fourths.
I ntervIewer: Are you much of a worrier?
Actually, a comment or bridge would be welcome here— something to indicate that the
interviewer understands the importance of the patient’s not abusing Xanax. (For that
matter, it wouldn’t be amiss to ask a question to make sure the patient hasn’t misused
Xanax.) In any event, the interviewer might say something like “I think I understand
about the Xanax. Let’s move on to something else”—and then ask about worries.
PatIent: Yeah, I worry.
I ntervIewer: What do you worry about?
PatIent: Anything . . . what’s going to happen next . . . where I’m going to go
from here . . . how can I control this . . . anything that’s not in my control,
I worry.
I ntervIewer: (With an “Uh-huh” for each of the worries mentioned above) Have you
sought help from organizations like AA or NA for drug use?
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: And what sort of help has that been?
PatIent: AA—that’s where I got my 7 months clean. I stopped going because
there’s a lot of new people in there. They were talking about how much
drugs they did, and I was like, “I don’t want to hear that.”

-- 337 of 385 --

322 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
I ntervIewer: It was a downer for you?
PatIent: Yeah, it just makes me want to do drugs.
I ntervIewer: But then you got back into doing drugs.
PatIent: Yeah.
I ntervIewer: I was curious about something you said earlier today. You
weren’t working, but you had $6,000 in the bank. I’m wondering how that
could be.
PatIent: I got in a car accident. The settlement was $6,000.
I ntervIewer: I see. And did you spend that fairly quickly, then?
PatIent: Couple of months.
I ntervIewer: On drugs?
PatIent: Drugs and hotel rooms, ’cause I had nowhere to live.
I ntervIewer: Well, good. I think I have a pretty good understanding of what’s
happened with you. Now I’d like to change directions and ask you a couple
of quiz questions, if I could. What is the date today?
This transition is an explicit notice that the interviewer has the needed information and
wants to move on.
PatIent: (States date, month, and year correctly.)
I ntervIewer: And where are we right now?
PatIent: (Answers correctly.)
I ntervIewer: Let’s see, did I tell you my name?
PatIent: Dr. 	.
All interview tests of memory are only approximations, and this one—just the name of
the interviewer— is pretty rough. But in conjunction with the patient’s evident clarity of
thought during the previous 40 minutes or so of the interview, the interviewer apparently
feels justified in not pursuing the issue of memory in greater detail.
I ntervIewer: Good. Can you tell me who the president is?
PatIent: (With more prompting, names several previous presidents in correct order.)
I ntervIewer: I know you’ve been asked to do things like subtracting sevens from
100. Would you mind doing that now?
PatIent: Ninety-three.
I ntervIewer: OK, keep subtracting sevens until you get below 60.
PatIent: OK, 93, 86, 79, 72, 67 . . . I screwed up already.
I ntervIewer: (After a long pause while the patient struggles) Well, you did great,
actually.
PatIent: Did I?
I ntervIewer: You got farther than most people do.
PatIent: I got them right?

-- 338 of 385 --

Appendix C 	323
The patient shows a touching eagerness for reassurance that he has performed well. It
suggests the degree of his dependency. It is fair to give reassurance whenever it is merited,
but not when it is obviously in opposition to the facts.
I ntervIewer: All but the last one. And that finishes the questions I wanted to ask
you today. Thank you very much for your time.
While forming and maintaining a good degree of rapport, this interviewer has obtained a
great deal of material pertinent to the diagnosis and treatment of this patient. In 45 min-
utes, information has been obtained for every one of the eight areas of clinical interest. In
addition, we have learned a fair amount (though not nearly enough) about this patient’s
personal and social background.
All interviews are flawed, however, and this one is no exception. Offhand, I can list half
a dozen points that are either covered inadequately or not touched upon at all. How many
can you find?
wriTTen reporT
Identifying data: This is a repeat psychiatric hospitalization for Marco Carlin,
a 30-year-old single white man.
Chief complaint: “Hopelessness, despair, nowhere to go but to the heavens.”
Informants: The patient alone.
History of the present illness: Mr. Carlin was admitted to the hospital follow-
ing a suicide attempt in which a truck hit him while he was running through
heavy traffic. He had been experiencing severe depression, characterized by feel-
ings of hopelessness and worthlessness, for about 7 months, building on a lon-
ger history of depression that goes back many years. Prior to admission he suf-
fered from insomnia (interval and terminal waking) and poor appetite, with a
10-pound weight loss in 1 week. However, since admission his sleep and appetite
have improved. During this 7-month period of severe depression, he maintained
interest in television and in his girlfriend’s child, though his libido has been mark-
edly reduced. His concentration has been somewhat diminished; people he likes
distract him only briefly. He admits to guilt feelings and believes he deserves to be
punished and to die. He appears to feel worse now than when he experienced the
deaths of his brother and his grandfather; for the latter, death was a release. Other
than a few minutes’ response to a fortunate event, he denies periods of elation.
Past treatment for depression has included Lexapro (4 months on 2 tablets/
day), Wellbutrin (1 month on 1 or 2 tablets), and Depakote (1 month on 4 tablets).
He has never had cognitive-behavioral therapy, group therapy, or other psycho-
therapy.
Some of Mr. Carlin’s guilt feelings center on his drug use, which has per-
sisted for at least the past 2 years. Spending about $20 a day on heroin and $20
for cocaine, he feels he has had a serious drug use problem. He craves drugs right
now and feels that he would use drugs again. Heroin shuts down his unacceptable
thoughts. He states that he has felt severely depressed even when he is not using
drugs or drinking.

-- 339 of 385 --

324 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Yet another area of concern is auditory hallucinations. He claims that for
years (“I’ve always had it”) he has heard a voice that will say things like “Just do
it” and “It’s a bad idea right now, don’t do it.” He says that this voice often helped
him when he was a child. He used to consider it the voice of his conscience, but
recently it has become so strong that he can “almost see it.”
Personal and social history: Even as a child, Mr. Carlin felt that he did not
fit in. He felt awkward, repeatedly changing schools and having to make new
friends; as a teenager, he felt depressed, though not suicidal. His parents were
divorced when he was about 7, after which he lived with his mother in California.
His two older brothers lived with his father. He considers that he has a reasonably
good relationship with his natural father and with his mother. He graduated from
high school and briefly attended college. He has held a variety of jobs, including
installing carpet, working in a car wash, and (for 5 years) delivering pizza. He has
been out of work lately, however, and has been unsuccessful at finding another
job. He has never married, but has had girlfriends. When not depressed, he has
no difficulties with sexual satisfaction.
His family history includes numerous relatives who have misused substances,
including his biological father, a sales manager who drank earlier in his life. A
brother was in prison.
Mr. Carlin’s physical health has been good overall. At age 8, the patient
struck his head in a fall and was hospitalized overnight for concussion. He com-
plains of back pain, but has had no operations; he takes no medications other
than for his mental condition.
Mental status exam: Mr. Carlin still wishes that he were dead and that some-
one in the hospital would help him die to relieve him of his “cancerous thoughts.”
He believes this is a reasonable expectation. He has seen clear visual hallucina-
tions of himself hanging by a rope, smashing his car into a brick wall, or jump-
ing off a train platform. Although he denies persecutory ideas, he admits to
some feelings that the police may be spying on him—the evidence is that there
are cameras everywhere. He is oriented for person, place, and time; his fund of
knowledge (presidents) is good; and his remote memory and retention/recall are
unimpaired. His concentration is reasonably good; he subtracted serial sevens
with one error.
Although he did not bring up these issues spontaneously, he admits to
some fears (drowning, failure, burning to death, speaking in public, being
laughed at). As a result, he says that he avoids people and situations that could
injure him, but he admits that if he were called on to speak to an audience, he’d
probably go ahead and do it. He denies obsessional ideas, but admits to panic
attacks.
Impression
Diagnosis deferred
1. Mood disorder
Depression secondary to head trauma
Substance-induced mood disorder with depressive features

-- 340 of 385 --

Appendix C 	325
Major depressive disorder, recurrent, possibly with dysthymia
Bipolar I disorder
Bipolar II disorder
2. Substance misuse
Cocaine use disorder, moderate
Heroin use disorder, moderate
3. Possible anxiety disorder
Social anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder
Panic disorder
Agoraphobia
4. Possible psychosis
Substance-induced psychotic disorder
Major depressive disorder, severe, with psychotic features
Schizophrenia
5. Possible unspecified personality disorder, with avoidant and schizoid
traits
Physical diagnoses: Recently hit by truck
Psychosocial problems: Currently unemployed and homeless
Global Assessment of Functioning:
15 (current)
70 (highest past year)
FormulaTion
Summary
This 30-year-old single white man was admitted to the hospital following his
attempt at suicide by being hit on the highway by a moving truck. He has had
depression of varying degrees dating back to about age 7; his depression has been
complicated in recent years by the use of cocaine and heroin. He has been treated
with several medications, largely to no avail. He has recently been unemployed
and is currently homeless.
Differential Diagnosis
Depression. Major depression is supported by the presence of numerous cri-
teria and a history of repeated suicide attempts. Mr. Carlin states that his depres-
sion antedates his use of drugs and persists even when he is not using drugs. The
long- standing depressive symptoms argue for coexisting dysthymia.
Psychosis. Mr. Carlin does not have sufficient criterion A symptoms for a
DSM-5 diagnosis of schizophrenia, and there is something less than compel-
ling about his auditory hallucinations. His symptoms seem insufficiently mood-
congruent for major depression with psychosis. The amount of recent substance
use seems insufficient for substance-induced psychotic disorder. Nonetheless, he
should be observed carefully for further emerging symptoms of psychosis.

-- 341 of 385 --

326 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Substance misuse. Although the extent of his substance use is unclear from
this interview, it almost doesn’t matter. It is obvious that use of cocaine and her-
oin have interfered with his life and may underlie his current depression.
Anxiety disorder. The patient has admitted to symptoms of several different
anxiety disorders. There is insufficient information to support any firm diag-
nosis; indeed, his responses to questions suggest that he may have been overly
compliant with the interview process.
Personality disorder. Some sort of personality diagnosis is supported by this
patient’s possible overcompliance with interview questions and long history of
drug use. Diagnosis deferred for now, in light of the major diagnostic possibili-
ties above.
Best Diagnosis
The most pressing diagnosis to address at present is major depressive disorder,
along with misuse of cocaine and heroin.
Contributing Factors
Family history (father, brother) is strongly implicated in Mr. Carlin’s substance
misuse. Divorce of parents when the patient was young may have contributed to
mood disorder. Substance use and depression may exacerbate one another.
Further Information Needed
In addition to prior medical records and the impressions of other clinicians, inter-
views with parents may help to disentangle the threads of Mr. Carlin’s depression
and substance use, as well as to resolve the questions concerning possible anxiety
disorder(s) and psychosis. Subsequent interviews should reveal additional details
not covered already, including the means of his current support, religious history,
and military service.
Treatment Plan
Further trials on antidepressant medication
Psychotherapy (perhaps cognitive-behavioral therapy) directed at feelings
of depression
Twelve-Step program for substance misuse
Referral for assistance with housing and employment
Prognosis
If the diagnosis of major depression is accurate and the patient responds to medi-
cation and cognitive-behavioral therapy, it might provide a platform from which
to succeed in managing his substance use. On the other hand, if his substance use
cannot be brought under control, management of his depression could prove very
difficult. The prognosis is complicated by the possibility of a personality disorder.

-- 342 of 385 --

327
a p p e n d i x 	d
A Semistructured Interview
For decades, clinicians have used structured and semistructured interviews to
gather health care data. These instruments are more effective than traditional
free-wheeling interviews at producing accurate principal diagnoses and at uncov-
ering secondary diagnoses. For example, one study found that the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM (SCID) identified five times more clinical diagnoses
than were documented in the patients’ charts. Also to the good, structured instru-
ments can reject unwarranted clinical diagnoses; a study of homeless patients
found that structured interviews identified fewer cases of antisocial personality
disorder than did traditional clinical methods.
I’ve written this appendix not to replace the clinical interview of an adult,
but to help you cover the ground necessary for the most complete diagnosis pos-
sible. Although the questions will provide the material for making diagnoses,
they won’t score themselves. For example, you’ll have to evaluate whether your
depressed patient has major depressive disorder, a bipolar depressive episode, or
dysthymia— and, if it is one of the first two, whether a specifier (such as with anx-
ious distress, with melancholic features, or with seasonal pattern) is in order. At many
points, you will have to elicit details; in an interview structured for a technician
to administer, that work would be done for you. This guide is intended for mental
health care professionals who already have a grounding in mental disorders.
Screening questions (in boldface) appear twice: just below, and again at the
beginning of each diagnostic set. (There is some evidence that asking all the stem
questions first helps discourage a tendency to say “no” once the person discovers
that positive answers lead to further questioning.) If you get negative answers to a
set of screens, you can skip the follow-up questions and move on.
The last two sections contain no screens, but don’t pass them by. They will
remind you of the tremendous breadth of information you need about your
patient’s background, personality, feelings, and general behavior.
By the way, some of the questions appear in sections that don’t correspond
exactly to recent diagnostic manual revisions. For example, I’ve grouped gam-
bling with other impulse- control disorders, not with substance use. That’s because
the diagnostic manuals try to place disorders in scientifically related groups that
don’t always follow the symptoms we see clinically. For ease of administration,
I’ve usually stuck with the more traditional groupings.

-- 343 of 385 --

328
all screens
A1. Was there ever a time when you felt unusually down, depressed, or sad
most of the day?
A2. Was there ever a period when you felt that most of the time you didn’t
enjoy your usual activities or take pleasure from them?
B1. Have you ever had a time when you felt the opposite of depressed—you
felt unreasonably happy, euphoric, “too happy”?
B2. Did you ever have a time when you (or others) noticed that you were
unusually cross, irritable, or cranky?
B3. Have you had periods when you were much more active than is normal
for you?
C1. Have you ever have an attack or spell when you suddenly felt anxious,
fearful, or extremely uneasy?
C2. Have you ever had a sudden attack or spell when you felt faint, you felt
you couldn’t breathe, or your heart seemed to race?
D1. Have you had fears or phobias related to anything? Examples: animals
(such as spiders, dogs, snakes); blood, needles, or injections; heights;
airplane travel; being closed in; thunderstorms; blushing; eating in
public; speaking, singing, or playing a musical instrument before an
audience.
D2. Have you had anxiety about being in a place or situation (such as a
store or the movies)—a place that you’d have trouble escaping from, or
where there might be no help available if you had a panic attack?
E1. Have you ever had ideas or thoughts that keep coming back to you—
thoughts that you try to resist but cannot?
E2. Do you ever experience physical behaviors that you feel you have to
perform over and over, such as handwashing, checking the stove, or
counting things?
F1. Have you ever had a traumatic, stressful experience that you found
you kept on reliving or having to avoid?
G1. Do you worry a great deal of the time?
G2. What do you worry about?
H1. Have you ever had unusual experiences such as seeing visions or
hearing voices that other people couldn’t see or hear?
H2. Do you ever taste things or smell things that other people cannot, or
feel things on your skin or in your body that other people don’t?
J1. 	Have you ever felt that people were spying on you, talking behind your
back, or working against you in some other way?
J2. 	Have you ever felt you had some sort of a special mission in life—
perhaps a divine purpose or calling?
From The First Interview, Fourth Edition, by James Morrison. Copyright 2014 by The
Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of
this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can
download a larger version of this material from www.guilford.com/morrison-forms.

-- 344 of 385 --

329
J3. 	Have you had some other seemingly strange experience you couldn’t
explain or account for?
K1. Have you ever used alcohol or street drugs?
K2. Have you ever taken prescription or over-the- counter medication in a
way that was different from the recommendation or prescription?
K3. Have you ever felt you drank or used drugs to excess?
K4. Have other people ever expressed concern about your drinking or
drug use?
L1. How has your memory been? I’d like to test it, if that’s OK.
L2. Have you ever had experiences or periods in your life that you
couldn’t remember later?
L3. Did you ever find yourself in a strange location and couldn’t
remember how you got there?
M1. Has your general health always been good?
M2. Have you had much medical attention for different conditions?
N1. Have you ever felt fat when people said you were too thin?
N2. Did you ever make yourself throw up because you felt so full?
N3. Do you ever go on eating binges, when you rapidly eat far more than
normal?
P1. Have you ever felt or feared that there was something terribly wrong
with you physically— some serious condition that doctors couldn’t
identify?
Q1. Have you ever felt that there was something about your body or your
appearance that wasn’t right— something that other people didn’t
seem to recognize?
R1. Do you easily become angry?
S1. 	Do you ever behave impulsively?
S2. Do you ever do things like pull out strands of your hair . . . or become
destructively aggressive . . . or steal from stores . . . or set fires?
[Pause for response between symptoms.]
T1. Do you gamble?
U1. Has any blood relative—by which I mean a parent, brother, sister,
grandparent, child, aunt, uncle, cousin, niece, or nephew— ever had
symptoms like yours?
U2. Has any of these relatives had any mental illness, including
depression . . . mania . . . psychosis . . . schizophrenia . . .
nervousness . . . severe anxiety . . . mental hospitalization . . . suicide
or suicide attempt . . . alcoholism or other substance misuse . . . or a
history of criminal behavior? [Pause for response between illnesses.]
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 2 of 18)

-- 345 of 385 --

330
mood disorders
A1. Was there ever a time when you felt unusually down, depressed, or sad
most of the day?
A2. Was there ever a period when you felt that most of the time you didn’t
enjoy your usual activities or take pleasure from them?
If “yes” to either:
Did you feel that way most days?
How long did these periods last?
How many such periods have you had?
Do you feel that way now?
Did you ever completely recover from such a period of sadness?
How severe is/was the experience? Did it affect your work, your home
life, or your social life?
Have you ever been treated for depression? If so, details?
Were you hospitalized?
During a typical period of depression:
Does your appetite go down?
Do you lose weight? If so, how much?
Does your sleep change? If so, up or down? Does it affect you most
days?
Do you tend to awaken very early in the morning and be unable to
get back to sleep?
Do you usually feel better in the morning or in the evening, or is
there no difference?
Do you feel slowed down or speeded up? If either, is it usually
enough that other people can notice?
Do you feel unusually tired or lacking in energy? If so, is this true
most days?
Do you feel worthless or more guilty than warranted about
something—not just about feeling sick? If so, is this true most
days?
Are you indecisive, or do you have trouble focusing your
concentration? If either, is this true most days?
Do you think about dying?
If so, how often does this thought occur to you?
Do you consider suicide?
If so, please tell me about that.
Have you ever made a suicide attempt?
If so, when? How?
Physically/medically serious?
Psychologically serious?
When you are depressed, do your arms or legs feel heavy, rather
like lead?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 3 of 18)

-- 346 of 385 --

331
When you are depressed, do you ever feel so bad that you hear or
see things that others cannot see or hear? If so, details?
When you are depressed, do you ever think that you deserve to feel
this bad, or that other people are trying to harm you or work
against you in some other way? If so, details?
When you are depressed, have you felt that things were hopeless or
there was no use?
When you are depressed, do you feel better when something good
happens (for example, when you are with friends or if you get
a raise)?
When you are depressed, do you feel different than you would
when, say, someone close to you died?
When you are depressed, do you lose your sense of pleasure in
almost everything?
Do you tend to become depressed at a particular season of the year?
If so, details?
Are you the sort of person who usually (not just when depressed) feels
highly sensitive to rejection?
B1. Have you ever had a time when you felt the opposite of depressed—you
felt unreasonably happy, euphoric, “too happy”?
B2. Did you ever have a time when you (or others) noticed that you were
unusually cross, irritable, or cranky?
B3. Have you had periods when you were much more active than is normal
for you?
If “yes” to any of these three:
How long did this period last?
How many such periods have you had?
Do you feel that way now?
Did you ever completely recover from such a period of excessive
happiness?
How severe is/was the experience? Did it affect your work, your home
life, or your social life?
Were you given treatment in any way for such a period? If so, details?
Were you hospitalized?
During such periods:
Do you feel like you have special strengths or powers others don’t
have (such as having telepathy or reading minds), or that you
were a special or exalted person (for example, Jesus or a movie
star)? If so, details?
How is your sleep? Details?
If sleep during these periods is less than normal: Do you feel you
need less sleep than usual?
Do you talk more than usual, or do others claim that you do?
Do your thoughts seem to race from one thing to another?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 4 of 18)

-- 347 of 385 --

332
Do you (or others) notice that you are more easily distractible than
usual?
Do you feel speeded up in your activity level, or do others say that
this is the case?
Do you make more plans than you normally would?
How is your sex drive?
What about your judgment— do you think it is impaired in any way?
Here’s what I mean:
Do you spend money you later wished you hadn’t?
Do you get into legal scrapes?
Do you pursue sex relations in a way that isn’t normal for you?
Do you ever think you hear or see things that others can’t see or
hear? If so, details?
Do you feel spied upon or persecuted or that other people are
trying to harm you or work against you in some other way?
If so, details?
anxieTY and relaTed disorders *
C1. Have you ever have an attack or spell when you suddenly felt anxious,
fearful, or extremely uneasy?
C2. Have you ever had a sudden attack or spell when you felt faint, you felt
you couldn’t breathe, or your heart seemed to race?
If “yes” to either:
How many such attacks have you had?
How often do they occur, on average?
How long do these attacks last?
How severe is/was the experience? Did it affect your work, your home
life, or your social life?
Have you ever been treated for such an episode? If so, details?
Were you hospitalized?
During these attacks, have you ever had any of these sensations:
Chest pain or other chest discomfort?
Chills or hot flashes?
Choking?
Feeling that things were unreal or that you were detached from
yourself?
Feeling dizzy, lightheaded, faint, or unsteady on your feet?
Fear that you might be dying?
Fear that you would lose control of yourself or become insane?
* Incorporating the DSM-5 categories of obsessive–compulsive and related disorders
and of trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 5 of 18)

-- 348 of 385 --

333
Heart pounding, racing, or skipping beats?
Nausea or other abdominal discomfort?
Numbness or tingling?
Sweating?
Shortness of breath or smothering sensation?
Trembling?
D1. Have you had fears or phobias related to anything? Examples: animals
(such as spiders, dogs, snakes); blood, needles, or injections; heights;
airplane travel; being closed in; thunderstorms; blushing; eating in
public; speaking, singing, or playing a musical instrument before an
audience.
If “yes,” ask for each feared stimulus:
How often has this fear occurred?
How many episodes have you had?
Does this sort of fear seem unreasonable or out of proportion to you?
Does this fear cause you to avoid the situation?
Does it interfere with your usual routine or your work, social, or
personal functioning?
Have you ever had treatment for it?
D2. Have you had anxiety about being in a place or situation (such as a
store or the movies)—a place that you’d have trouble escaping from, or
where there might be no help available if you had a panic attack?
If “yes”:
Do you therefore sometimes avoid stores or the movies (or the other
places)?
If you do go into one of these situations, do you feel anxious when
you are there?
Do you ever take a companion to help you if you should have a panic
attack while away from home?
E1. Have you ever had ideas or thoughts that keep coming back to you—
thoughts that you try to resist but cannot?
If “yes”:
How often do these ideas occur?
Do you try to resist or suppress these ideas/thoughts?
Do they come from your own mind, or does it seem that they are
imposed on you from somewhere outside you?
E2. Do you ever experience physical behaviors that you feel you have to
perform over and over, such as handwashing, checking the stove, or
counting things?
If “yes”:
Do these behaviors occur in response to an idea or thought that you
can’t resist, as we discussed just now?
Do they make you follow strict rules when carrying them out?
Do they prevent something bad from happening?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 6 of 18)

-- 349 of 385 --

334
Do they reduce your distress?
Do they cause severe distress?
How much time do they take up?
Do they interfere with your usual routine or with work, social, or
personal functioning? If so, details?
F1. Have you ever had a traumatic, stressful experience that you found
you kept on reliving or having to avoid?
If “yes”:
What was the event?
When did it occur?
Did it cause a sense of severe fear, horror, or helplessness?
Have you had any experiences that caused you to relive the event?
Intrusive thoughts or images?
Flashbacks, hallucinations, illusions, or feeling as if the event was
recurring?
Cues that symbolize or resemble the event, causing you a lot of
distress?
Physical events (such as rapid heartbeat, raised blood pressure) in
response to these cues?
Have you repeatedly tried to avoid things that remind you of the
trauma? If so, in which of these ways:
Have you tried to avoid feelings, thoughts, or conversations that
remind you of the event?
Have you tried to avoid activities, people, or places that remind you
of the event?
Have you been unable to recall any important features of the
event?
If so, which?
Have you lost interest in activities that are important to you?
If so, which ones?
To what degree?
Have you felt isolated from other people?
Have you felt that you’ve lost the ability to feel love or other strong
emotions?
Have you felt that your life would be brief or unrewarding— such as
a lack of marriage, job, or children?
Have you had any of the following symptoms that weren’t present
before the event:
Insomnia?
Irritability?
Trouble concentrating?
Excessive vigilance (such as frequently scanning the surroundings
for signs of danger)?
Increased startle response?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 7 of 18)

-- 350 of 385 --

335
G1. Do you worry a great deal of the time?
G2. What do you worry about?
If patient lists three or more worries:
Do you have trouble controlling these worries?
How many days a month do you think you worry about these matters?
For how many months have you had worries like this?
Did it lead to trouble with your job, your family life, or your personal
life?
When you worry:
Do you have feelings of being restless, edgy, or keyed up?
Do you get tired easily?
Do you have trouble concentrating?
Do you feel irritable?
Do you have increased muscle tension?
Do you have trouble sleeping?
psYchoTic disorders
H1. Have you ever had experiences like seeing visions or hearing voices
that other people couldn’t see or hear?
H2. Do you ever taste things or smell things that other people cannot, or
feel things on your skin or in your body that other people don’t?
If “yes” for voices:
How lifelike are they? Do they sound as real as my voice does now?
Do they seem to come from inside your head or somewhere outside?
When did you start hearing them?
Are they male or female?
Whose voices are they?
How many voices do you hear?
If more than one voice, do they ever talk with one another?
Do they ever talk together about you?
How often do the voices occur?
If every day, how often each day?
Do they tell you what to do?
Do you ever follow their commands?
If “yes” for visual material:
Can you see them as clearly as you see me now?
When do you see them?
If every day, how often each day?
When did you start seeing them?
If “yes” for tastes, smells, or tactile sensations:
Please describe these sensations.
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 8 of 18)

-- 351 of 385 --

336
How often do you experience them?
If every day, how often each day?
What are you doing when you experience them?
When did you start having them?
For all hallucinations:
What do you think causes these experiences to occur?
Could there be any connection between these experiences and drug
or alcohol use, or the use of medication?
Have you had any physical illness that could help account for these
experiences?
J1. 	Have you ever felt that people were spying on you, talking behind your
back, or working against you in some other way?
J2. 	Have you ever felt you had some sort of a special mission in life—
perhaps a divine purpose or higher calling?
J3. 	Have you had some other seemingly strange experience you couldn’t
explain or account for?
[If patient needs additional information: Here are some examples of the
sort of thing I mean:
Have you ever felt that people could hear your unspoken thoughts or
read your mind?
Have you ever felt that someone on TV or the radio was sending
messages that were meant for you alone?
Have you ever thought that someone from outside could put thoughts
into your mind or take them out?
Have you ever felt that you’ve done something so awful that you
deserve punishment for it?
Have you ever felt that you were someone famous, or that you had
abilities or powers that other people don’t have?]
If “yes” to any of the three J questions:
Specifically, what have you noticed?
How long have you had these experiences?
Who or what do you think has been responsible for these events?
How have you tried to combat them?
Has anyone close to you had similar experiences?
Could there be any connection between these experiences and drug
or alcohol use?
suBsTance misuse
K1. Have you ever used alcohol or street drugs?
K2. Have you ever taken prescription or over-the- counter medication in a
way that was different from the recommendation or prescription?
K3. Have you ever felt you drank or used drugs to excess?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 9 of 18)

-- 352 of 385 --

337
K4. Have other people ever expressed concern about your drinking or
drug use?
If “yes” to any of these:
Which substances?
How long have you used them?
Do you use them now?
Have you ever had withdrawal symptoms when coming off a specific
substance?
Alcohol/sedatives/hypnotics/anxiolytics: sweating, rapid heartbeat,
tremor, sleeplessness, nausea, vomiting, brief hallucinations or
illusions, speeded-up activity, grand mal seizures, anxiety?
Cocaine/amphetamines: Sad or depressed mood, fatigue, vivid
bad dreams, sleep increased or decreased, increased appetite,
activity speeded up or slowed down?
Opioids: Sad or depressed mood, nausea, vomiting, aching
muscles, tearing, runny nose, dilated pupils, erect hairs,
sweating, diarrhea, yawning, fever, sleeplessness?
Have you ever found yourself having to use increasing amounts of
the substance to get the same effect?
Have you ever found that you’ve used more of the substance than
you meant to?
Have you tried to control your use of the substance, but found you
couldn’t?
Does your substance use occupy a lot of your time— getting it, using
it, or recovering from its effects?
Have you found that your substance use has caused you to abandon
important work, social, or leisure activities such as home life
or getting together with friends?
Has your substance use caused you distress or impaired your
functioning?
If so, how?
Have you continued to use the substance, even though you
knew that it was probably causing you to have physical or
psychological problems?
Has substance use ever caused you not to fulfill major obligations, such
as attending school, going to work, or taking care of children?
Have you used substances even when doing so was physically
dangerous— such as driving a vehicle?
Has substance use caused you to have legal problems?
If so, how many, and when?
Has substance use ever caused you to have social or interpersonal
problems?
If so, did you continue to use the substance anyway?
Do you find that you crave the substance?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 10 of 18)

-- 353 of 385 --

338
diFFiculTY Thinking (cogniTive proBlems)
L1. How has your memory been? I’d like to test it, if that’s OK.
Repeat back to me [a name, a color, a street address].
What’s the date today?
Who is the current president [prime minister]? Name the one just
before this person . . . And now the three before that person.
Please subtract 7 from 100. Now 7 from that . . . Good, and keep going
until you get below 60.
L2. Have you ever had experiences or periods in your life that you
couldn’t remember later?
If so, please tell me about it.
How often has this happened?
L3. Did you ever find yourself in a strange location and couldn’t
remember how you got there?
If so, please tell me about it.
How often has this happened?
What were those three items I asked you to repeat a few minutes ago?
phYsical complainTs
M1. Has your general health always been good?
M2. Have you had much medical attention for different conditions?
[Regardless of answers to screens:]
What illnesses have you had? Details?
Have you had other medical conditions?
Use of medications?
Then, if “no” to M1 or “yes” to M2:
Now I’d like to ask about some symptoms people sometimes experience.
Have you ever had:
Pain symptoms, such as these: **
Head pain (other than headache)?
Abdominal pain?
Back pain?
Pain in your joints?
Pain in your arms or legs?
Chest pain?
** To count as positive, each symptom must have (1) not been fully explained by a general
medical condition or substance use; and (2) caused impairment or caused the patient
to seek treatment; and (3) exceeded the discomfort or impairment you’d expect for any
medical condition that seems related.
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 11 of 18)

-- 354 of 385 --

339
Rectal pain?
Pain with menstruation?
Pain with sexual intercourse?
Pain on urination?
Gastrointestinal symptoms, such as these:*
Nausea?
Abdominal bloating?
Vomiting (other than during pregnancy)?
Diarrhea?
Intolerance of several foods?
Sexual and genitourinary symptoms, such as these:*
Indifference to sex?
Difficulties with erection or ejaculation?
Irregular menses?
Excessive menstrual bleeding?
Vomiting throughout all 9 months of pregnancy?
Neurological symptoms, such as these:*
Impaired balance or coordination?
Weak or paralyzed muscles?
Lump in throat?
Trouble swallowing?
Loss of voice?
Retention of urine?
Hallucinations?
Numbness (to touch or pain)?
Double vision?
Blindness?
Deafness?
Seizures?
Amnesia?
Other dissociative symptoms?
Loss of consciousness (other than fainting)?
N1. Have you ever felt fat when people said you were too thin?
N2. Did you ever make yourself throw up because you felt so full?
If “yes” to either:
When was it?
Is this still the case?
What did you weigh then?
How tall were you then?
Were you afraid of gaining weight?
Did you exercise a lot to lose weight?
Did you ever use laxatives to lose weight?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 12 of 18)

-- 355 of 385 --

340
At that time, how did your body look to you? Thin, fat, or about
right?
How important was your body weight or shape to you then?
N3. Do you ever go on eating binges, when you rapidly eat far more than
normal?
If “yes”:
How often does this occur?
At these times, do you feel you’ve lost control of your eating?
To keep from gaining weight, do you ever use laxatives? Use
diuretics? Throw up? Fast? Exercise a lot?
P1. Have you ever felt or feared that there was something terribly wrong
with you physically— some serious condition that doctors couldn’t
identify?
If “yes”:
Please describe your symptoms.
How long have they lasted?
What disease or condition are you afraid of?
Q1. Have you ever felt that there was something about your body or your
appearance that wasn’t right— something that other people didn’t
seem to recognize?
If “yes”:
Do you spend a lot of time thinking about this problem, or trying to
deal with it?
What steps have you taken to remedy it?
impulse‑ conTrol disorders
R1. Do you easily become angry?
If “yes”:
In what sorts of situations do you become so angry?
Do you become so angry that you lose control?
As a result, do you ever destroy property? If so, how often?
As a result, do you ever assault another person? If so, how often?
S1. 	Do you ever behave impulsively?
S2. Do you ever do things like pull out strands of your hair . . . or become
destructively aggressive . . . or steal from stores . . . or set fires?
[Pause for response between symptoms.]
If “yes” to any:
Do you feel a sort of tension just before performing any of these
activities?
Do you feel gratification, pleasure, or relief during or after the
activity?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 13 of 18)

-- 356 of 385 --

341
T1. Do you gamble?
If “yes”:
How often?
Have you ever felt that you gambled excessively—that it was out of
control?
Do you find that gambling preoccupies you—that you spend a lot of
time figuring out how to get money to gamble, or reliving your
past gambling experiences, or planning new gambling ventures?
Have you ever needed to put more money into play to achieve the
same excitement?
Have you tried to control your gambling and couldn’t?
If so, how?
How many times has this happened?
Have you felt restless or irritable when trying to control your
gambling?
Do you ever gamble as an escape from your problems or to cope with
depressed or anxious moods?
Have you ever gambled to try to recoup your losses?
Have you ever lied to conceal how much you’ve lost gambling?
Have you ever had to rely on other people for money to cover your
gambling debts?
Have you ever used money that wasn’t yours to gamble with?
Has gambling ever jeopardized a job, an important relationship, or a
chance for your career or education?
FamilY hisTorY
U1. Has any blood relative—by which I mean a parent, brother, sister,
grandparent, child, aunt, uncle, cousin, niece, or nephew— ever had
symptoms like yours?
U2. Has any of these relatives had any mental illness, including
depression . . . mania . . . psychosis . . . schizophrenia . . .
nervousness . . . severe anxiety . . . mental hospitalization . . . suicide
or suicide attempt . . . substance misuse or alcoholism . . . or a history
of criminal behavior? [Pause for response between illnesses.]
For any positive response:
What were this person’s symptoms?
How old was the person at the time?
Do you know what treatment was given?
What happened to this person? [Possibilities might include recovery,
continued illness but functioning in society, inability to work,
repeated or chronic hospitalization.]
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 14 of 18)

-- 357 of 385 --

342
childhood Through adulT liFe
Childhood
Where were you born?
How many brothers and sisters did you have?
Were you the oldest, youngest—which number in the list?
Were you reared by both parents?
How did your parents get along?
If they fought, what about?
If they divorced or separated, how old were you then?
With whom did you live?
If you were adopted, how old were you at the time?
Do you know what the circumstances behind the adoption were?
How was your health as a child?
How far did you go in school?
Were you ever held back in school?
Any behavior or disciplinary problems in school?
Any truancy?
Were you ever suspended or expelled?
Did you have many friends as a child?
What interests and hobbies did you have as a child?
Outside of school, did you have legal or disciplinary problems?
If so, did you ever steal things?
Set fires?
Deliberately destroy the property of others?
Behave cruelly toward people or animals?
Run away from home overnight?
Adult Life
Are you married?
If so, number of times, and your age each time?
How did early marriage(s) end— divorce, death of spouse?
With whom do you live now?
Number of children, ages?
Do you have any stepchildren?
If so, how many?
How is your relationship with them?
What is your current occupation?
Number of jobs lifetime?
Reasons for job changes?
Were you ever fired? Why?
If you are not working now, what is your current means of support?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 15 of 18)

-- 358 of 385 --

343
Any military service?
If so, which branch?
Number of years?
Highest rank attained?
Combat experience?
Disciplinary problems in military?
How important is religion to you now?
What is your current religious affiliation?
Is it different from the religion of your childhood?
If so, what made you change?
What are your current leisure activities?
Clubs, organizations?
Hobbies, interests?
When did you first learn about sex?
What were the circumstances?
How old were you when you began dating?
How old were you at your first sexual experience?
What was its nature?
How did you feel about it?
Can you tell me about your current sexual interests?
Have there ever been sexual practices or experiences that troubled you?
Were you ever abused as a child?
Sexually?
Physically?
As an adult, were you ever raped or sexually abused? If so, details?
social and personaliTY proBlems
The following questions will elicit information about how patients view them-
selves and interact with others. In most cases, the answers will not allow you
to make a firm diagnosis; you will need to obtain further information from
other resources.
What sort of a person do you think you are?
What do you like most about yourself?
What do you like least about yourself?
Do you have many friends, or are you more of a loner?
How well do you get along with your [husband/wife/partner]?
Do you have any problems in getting along with members of your
family?
Do you avoid any of your relatives because of difficulties getting along?
Any difficulties with friends?
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 16 of 18)

-- 359 of 385 --

344
Have you had any interpersonal problems at work?
Do you tend to be suspicious of people’s motives, or are you more a
trusting sort of person?
Do you like being the center of attention, or are you more comfortable
staying in the background?
Are you usually comfortable being by yourself, or do you find you need
the presence of other people?
Have you ever done something that turned out to be poor judgment? If
so, what was it?
Have you ever had some sort of legal difficulty? If so, give details.
Have you ever been arrested? Spent time in jail? If so, give details.
Have you ever done something that could have gotten you into legal
difficulties, but you were never found out?
When you do [these behaviors], do you tend to feel sorry afterward?
Do you feel that other people would like to deceive, exploit, or harm
you?
If so, give examples.
Do you feel that your friends or acquaintances are disloyal to you? If so,
give examples.
Do you tend to bear grudges? If so, give examples.
Do you prefer to do things by yourself? If so, give examples.
Does criticism or praise affect you much? If so, give examples.
Are you a superstitious person? If so, give examples.
Do you believe in the supernatural, such as telepathy, black magic, mind
reading? If so, give examples.
Are your relationships with other people usually long-lasting? If so, give
examples.
Does your mood tend to be pretty stable, or are you more of an up-and-
down sort of person? If so, give examples.
Do you tend to describe yourself as feeling “empty”? If so, give
examples.
Do you feel angry much of the time or frequently lose your temper or
get into fights? If so, give examples.
Do you like being the center of attention? If so, give examples.
Do you feel that you are easily influenced by the opinions of other
people? If so, give examples.
Do you often have fantasies about yourself as achieving vast success,
ideal love, power, brilliance? If so, give examples.
Do you often feel that you deserve special treatment or consideration? If
so, give examples.
Is it hard for you to identify with the feelings of other people? If so, give
examples.
Do you fear embarrassment or disapproval so much that you avoid new
activities or interactions with other people? If so, give examples.
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 17 of 18)

-- 360 of 385 --

345
In new relationships, do you often feel inadequate? If so, give examples.
Do you feel you need a lot of advice and reassurance when making
everyday decisions? If so, give examples.
Does the fear that you’ll lose support make it hard for you to disagree
with others? If so, give examples.
Do you get so preoccupied with details that you sometimes lose sight of
the purpose of what you are doing? If so, give examples.
Do you regard yourself as being especially stubborn? If so, give
examples.
Would you say that you are a perfectionist? If so, give examples.
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix D (p. 18 of 18)

-- 361 of 385 --

346
A p p e n d i x 	e
Assessing Your Interview
All patients, and therefore all interviews, are different. Instructors also vary in
the emphasis they place on the several aspects of the initial interview. However,
there are many aspects that most clinicians agree are crucial for the typical inter-
view. These aspects include factual material, as well as items that contribute to
the process of obtaining information. They are listed in this appendix, where a
rough numerical value is assigned to each.
You can score your own interview from an audio or video recording, or
have a colleague do it for you while you are interviewing. The overall score and
subsection scores should help you plan where to expend additional effort. The
scoring system used has been based on, and extended from, articles by Maguire
and associates (see Appendix F).
For each section of this assessment, score 0 if the rated behavior or item of
data was not observed or covered at all. Score the maximum number of points if
the item was covered completely (as judged from the patient’s case notes in the
chart), or for desired behavior that was consistently present. Give proportional
credit for partial answers or behaviors.
The maximum score is 200 points. For a beginner, any score above 140 may
be considered acceptable, though advanced interviewers should average much
higher.
Mental status data are not included in this self- assessment, which was
designed to evaluate only the historical and interactive portions of the initial
interview.

-- 362 of 385 --

347
1. Initiating the interview (10 points)
Interviewer 	No 	Yes
a. Greets the patient 	0 	1
b. Shakes hands 	0 	1
c. Mentions patient’s name 	0 	1
d. Mentions own name 	0 	1
e. Explains status (training?) 	0 	1
f. Indicates where to sit 	0 	1
g. Explains purpose of interview 	0 	1
h. Mentions time available 	0 	1
i. Mentions note taking 	0 	1
j. Asks whether patient is comfortable 	0 	1
2. History of present illness (58 points)
Interviewer asks about . . . 	No 	Yes
a. Main complaint(s) 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8
b. Onset of problems 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
c. Stressors 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
d. Key events in course of illness 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
e. Current medications
1. Names or descriptions 	0 	1 	2
2. Doses 	0 	1 	2
3. Wanted effects obtained 	0 	1 	2
4. Side effects noted 	0 	1 	2
5. Duration of effects 	0 	1 	2
f. History of previous episodes
1. Type 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
2. Similarity to present episode 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
From The First Interview, Fourth Edition, by James Morrison. Copyright 2014 by The
Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of
this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can
download a larger version of this material from www.guilford.com/morrison-forms.
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix E (p. 1 of 4)

-- 363 of 385 --

348
3. Previous treatment 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
4. Outcome of treatment 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
g. Effects of illness on work 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
h. Effects of illness on family 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
i. Patient’s feelings about problems 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
3. Medical history (10 points)
Interviewer asks about . . . 	No 	Yes
a. Relevant data on physical illnesses 	0 	1 	2
b. Allergies to medications 	0 	1 	2
c. Operations 	0 	1 	2
d. Previous hospitalizations 	0 	1 	2
e. Relevant review of systems 	0 	1 	2
4. Personal and social history (20 points)
Interviewer asks about . . . 	No 	Yes
a. Details of family of origin 	0 	1 	2
b. Education 	0 	1 	2
c. Marital history 	0 	1 	2
d. Military history 	0 	1 	2
e. Work history 	0 	1 	2
f. Sexual preference and adjustment 	0 	1 	2
g. Legal problems 	0 	1 	2
h. Current living situation 	0 	1 	2
i. Leisure activities 	0 	1 	2
j. Source of support 	0 	1 	2
5. Family history of mental disorder (6 points)
Interviewer asks about . . . 	No 	Yes
a. Symptoms to make diagnosis 	0 	1 	2
b. Response to treatment 	0 	1 	2
c. All first- degree relatives 	0 	1 	2
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix E (p. 2 of 4)

-- 364 of 385 --

349
6. Screening questions (26 points)
Interviewer screens for . . . 	No 	Yes
a. Depression 	0 	1 	2
b. Panic attacks 	0 	1 	2
c. Phobias 	0 	1 	2
d. Obsessions and compulsions 	0 	1 	2
e. Mania 	0 	1 	2
f. Psychosis 	0 	1 	2
g. Childhood abuse 	0 	1 	2
h. Substance misuse (including medications) 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
i. Suicidal ideas/attempts 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
j. History of violence 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
7. Establishing rapport (18 points)
Interviewer 	No 	Yes
a. Smiles, nods at appropriate times 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
b. Uses language patient understands 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
c. Responds with feeling, empathy 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
d. Maintains eye contact 	0 	1 	2
e. Maintains appropriate distance 	0 	1 	2
f. Appears self-assured and relaxed 	0 	1 	2
8. Use of interview techniques (44 points)
Interviewer . . . 	Poor 	Good
a. Explores verbal leads to new material 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
b. Controls flow of interview while allowing
patient scope for response
0 	1 	2 	3 	4
c. Clarifies uncertainties to obtain complete
information
0 	1 	2 	3 	4
d. Makes smooth transitions; if abrupt, they
are pointed out
0 	1 	2 	3 	4
e. Avoids use of jargon 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix E (p. 3 of 4)

-- 365 of 385 --

350
f. Asks brief, single questions 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
g. Does not repeat questions already asked 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
h. Uses open, nondirective questions 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4
i. Facilitates patient’s replies verbally and
nonverbally
0 	1 	2 	3 	4
j. Encourages precise answers (dates,
numbers where appropriate)
0 	1 	2 	3 	4
k. Seeks out and sensitively handles
emotionally loaded material
0 	1 	2 	3 	4
9. Ending the interview (8 points)
Interviewer . . . 	No 	Yes
a. Warns that interview is nearly over 	0 	1 	2
b. Gives brief, accurate summary 	0 	1 	2
c. Solicits questions from patient 	0 	1 	2
d. Makes a concluding statement of
appreciation, interest
0 	1 	2
THE FIRST InTERvIEW, Appendix E (p. 4 of 4)

-- 366 of 385 --

351
a p p e n d i x 	F
Bibliography and
Recommended Reading
Books
Included here are the most recent editions available when we went to press; since
then, some may have been revised.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of men-
tal disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. [The bible of current diag-
nostic thinking.]
American Psychiatric Association. (2006). Practice guidelines for the treatment of
psychiatric disorders. Arlington, VA: Author. [Includes Psychiatric evaluation
of adults (2nd ed.).]
Bradburn, N. M., Sudman, S., & Wansink, B. (2004). Asking questions: The defini-
tive guide to questionnaire design (rev. ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cannell, C. E., & Kahn, R. L. (1968). Interviewing. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson
(Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (2nd ed., pp. 526–595). Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Carlat, D. J. (2012). The psychiatric interview: A practical guide (3rd ed.) Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Cormier, L. S., Nurius, P. S., & Osborn, C. J. (2013). Interviewing and change strate-
gies for helpers (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. [Massive, detailed text-
book for all mental health professionals, but aimed especially at psycholo-
gists and social workers. Material on different types of therapy, as well as
interviewing strategies.]
Ekman, P. (2009). Telling lies: Clues to deceit in the marketplace, politics, and marriage
(4th ed.). New York: Norton. [A great deal of information about lying and
its detection.]
Gill, M., Newman, R., & Redlich, F. C. (1954). The initial interview in psychiatric
practice. New York: International Universities Press. [Classic description of
an interviewing style that focuses on the patient’s needs and capabilities.]

-- 367 of 385 --

352 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Leon, R. L. (1989). Psychiatric interviewing: A primer (2nd ed.). New York: Elsevier.
[This volume covers much of the same material as The First Interview. The
author explicitly favors a nondirective approach to gathering information.]
MacKinnon, R. A., & Yudofsky, S. C. (1986). The psychiatric evaluation in clinical
practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott. [Only the first third of this book concerns
clinical interviewing. The balance is given over to clinical laboratory testing,
personality tests, and rating scales. The section on psychodynamic case for-
mulation provides some information not readily available elsewhere.]
Morrison, J. (2014). DSM-5 made easy: The clinician’s guide to diagnosis. New York:
Guilford Press. [A learner’s guide to the increasingly complex and lengthy
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.]
Morrison, J. (2014). Diagnosis made easier (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
[Step by step, this book helps the reader make sense of the interview mate-
rial. Newly revised to reflect DSM-5 changes.]
Othmer, E., & Othmer, S. C. (2002). The clinical interview using DSM-IV-TR. Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. [Encyclopedic in its coverage, this
book adheres strictly to the official DSM format.]
Oyebode, F. (2008). Sims’ symptoms in the mind. Edinburgh/New York: Saunders
Elsevier. [This British text contains more in the way of current mental health
terminology and definitions than any other I have seen.]
Shea, S. C. (1998). Psychiatric interviewing: The art of understanding (2nd ed.). Phil-
adelphia: Saunders. [Though a bit long-winded, it nevertheless presents a
great deal of relevant material.]
Sullivan, H. S. (1954). The psychiatric interview. New York: Norton. [An early, clas-
sic description of how to do an initial interview.]
arTicles
For purposes of the comments, the following articles are listed chronologically
within author groups, rather than alphabetically by author.
Sandifer, M. G., Hordern, A., & Green, L. (1970). The psychiatric interview: The
impact of the first three minutes. American Journal of Psychiatry, 126, 968–
973. [Half of all interviewers’ observations in this study were made within
the first 3 minutes of an experimental interview. These early data can some-
times have a decisive impact on diagnosis.]
Maguire, C. P., & Rutter, D. R. (1976). History-taking for medical students. 1:
Deficiencies in performance. Lancet, ii, 556–560. [Senior medical students
showed significant deficiencies in taking histories. These included avoid-
ance of personal issues, use of jargon, lack of precision, failure to pick up on
cues, needless repetition, poor clarification, failures of control, inadequate
facilitation, and inappropriate question style (leading or complicated ques-
tions).]
Maguire, P., Roe, P., Goldberg, D., Jones, S., Hyde, C., & O’Dowd, T. (1978). The
value of feedback in teaching interviewing skills to medical students. Psycho-
logical Medicine, 8, 695–704. [In a randomized trial, feedback (video, audio,

-- 368 of 385 --

Appendix F 	353
or ratings of practice interviews) led to greater ability to obtain relevant,
accurate facts. Only the video and audio groups also showed improved tech-
nique.]
Maguire, P., Fairbairn, S., & Fletcher, C. (1986). Consultation skills of young
doctors. I: Benefits of feedback training in interviewing as students persist.
British Medical Journal, 292, 1573–1576. [Young physicians who had either
been given feedback training by video or allotted to conventional teaching
in interview skills were followed up 5 years later. Both groups had improved
since graduation, but “those given feedback training had maintained their
superiority in the skills associated with accurate diagnosis.” The authors
conclude that feedback training should be given to all students.]
Platt, F. W., & McMath, J. C. (1979). Clinical hypocompetence: The interview.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 91, 898–902. [House officers in internal med-
icine had problems with initial interviews. These included poor rapport,
inadequate database, failure to formulate hypotheses, excessive control of
interview (patients complained of not being listened to), and acceptance
of patients’ reports of lab data or interpretations of what another health
care provider said, rather than the primary data of symptoms. Examples
are given.]
Rutter, M., & Cox, A. (1981). Psychiatric interviewing techniques: I. Methods and
measures. British Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 273–282. [The introductory arti-
cle in this series. The series of seven articles by these authors is a landmark
in the study of interview technique. These studies are based on interviews
with mothers of child psychiatry patients and compare four interviewing
styles that have been recommended by experts. Although the research they
report has not been replicated, the findings are so logical and the meth-
odology so impeccable that they strike the reader as received truth. These
articles provide much of the basis for this manual.]
Cox, A., Hopkinson, K., & Rutter, M. (1981). Psychiatric interviewing techniques:
II. Naturalistic study: Eliciting factual material. British Journal of Psychiatry,
138, 283–291. [This article demonstrates that “a directive style with specific
probes and requests for detailed descriptions” produced facts of better qual-
ity than did an approach that was more freestyle. Informants talked more
when interviewers talked less and used more open-ended questions. Double
questions led to confusion, but multiple- choice questions were sometimes
helpful.]
Hopkinson, K., Cox, A., & Rutter, M. (1981). Psychiatric interviewing techniques:
III. Naturalistic study: Eliciting feelings. British Journal of Psychiatry, 138,
406–415. [Several techniques were found to facilitate expression of emo-
tion. These included “a low level of interviewer talk with few interruptions, a
high rate of open rather than closed questions, direct requests for feelings,
interpretations and expressions of sympathy.”]
Rutter, M., Cox, A., Egert, S., Holbrook, D., & Everitt, B. (1981). Psychiatric inter-
viewing techniques: IV. Experimental study: Four contrasting styles. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 456–465. [The authors taught two interviewers to
use any of four interviewing styles: (1) A “sounding board” style used mini-
mal activity; (2) “active psychotherapy” tried to explore feelings and elicit

-- 369 of 385 --

354 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
emotional linkages and meanings; (3) a “structured” style used active cross-
questioning; (4) a “systematic exploratory” style combined high use of both
fact- and feeling- oriented techniques.]
Cox, A., Rutter, M., & Holbrook, D. (1981). Psychiatric interviewing techniques:
V. Experimental study: Eliciting factual material. British Journal of Psychia-
try, 139, 29–37. [This paper reports data on the study described just above.
The authors conclude that “it is desirable to begin clinical diagnostic inter-
views with a lengthy period with little in the way of detailed probing and in
which informants are allowed to express their concerns in their own way.”
Systematic questioning is essential to elicit good- quality facts. “Better data
were obtained when interviewers were sensitive and alert to factual cues and
chose their probes with care.”]
Cox, A., Holbrook, D., & Rutter, M. (1981). Psychiatric interviewing techniques:
VI. Experimental study: Eliciting feelings. British Journal of Psychiatry, 139,
144–152. [A variety of interview styles can be used to elicit feelings from
patients. Gathering good factual information is entirely compatible with
eliciting feelings.]
Cox, A., Rutter, M., & Holbrook, D. (1988). Psychiatric interviewing techniques:
A second experimental study: Eliciting feelings. British Journal of Psychia-
try, 152, 64–72. [Expression of emotions was maximized when interviewers
used “active” techniques, such as interpretation, reflection of feelings, and
expression of sympathy. This was especially true if the informant’s “sponta-
neous rate of expression was relatively low.”]
oTher sources used in The preparaTion oF This Book
Black, A. E., & Church, M. (1998). Assessing medical student effectiveness from
the psychiatric patient’s perspective: The Medical Student Interviewing Per-
formance Questionnaire. Medical Education, 32, 472–478.
Booth, T., & Booth, W. (1994). The use of depth interviewing with vulnerable
subjects. Social Science and Medicine, 39, 415–423.
Bradburn, N., Sudman, S., & Wansink, B. (2004). Asking questions: The definitive
guide to questionnaire design—for market research, political polls, and social and
health questionnaires (rev. ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Britten, N. (2006). Psychiatry, stigma, and resistance. British Medical Journal, 317,
963–964.
Budd, E. C., Winer, J. L., Schoenrock, C. J., & Martin, P. W. (1982). Evaluating
alternative techniques of questioning mentally retarded persons. American
Journal of Mental Deficiency, 86, 511–518.
Eisenthal, S., Koopman, C., & Lazare, A. (1983). Process analysis of two dimen-
sions of the negotiated approach in relation to satisfaction in the initial
interview. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 171, 49–53.
Eisenthal, S., & Lazare, A. (1977). Evaluation of the initial interview in a walk-in
clinic. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 164, 30–35.
Flores, G. (2005). The impact of medical interpreter services on the quality of
health care: A systematic review. Medical Care Research and Review, 62, 255–
299.

-- 370 of 385 --

Appendix F 	355
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975). Mini-Mental State: A prac-
tical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician.
Journal of Psychiatric Research 12, 189–198.
Fowler, J. C., & Perry, J. C. (2005). Clinical tasks of the dynamic interview. Psy-
chiatry, 68, 316–336.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New York:
Basic Books.
Hamann, J., Leucht, S., & Kissling, W. (2003). Shared decision making in psychia-
try. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 107, 403–409.
Harrington, R., Hill, J., Rutter, M., John, K., Fudge, H., Zoccolillo, M., et al.
(1988). The assessment of lifetime psychopathology: A comparison of two
interviewing styles. Psychological Medicine, 18, 487–493.
Jellinek, M. (1978). Referrals from a psychiatric emergency room: Relationship
of compliance to demographic and interview variables. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 135, 209–212.
Jensen, P. S., Watanabe, H. K., & Richters, J. E. (1999). Who’s up first?: Testing for
order effects in structured interviews using a counterbalanced experimental
design. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 27, 439–445.
Kendler, K. S., Silberg, J. L., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L.
J. (1991). The family history method: Whose psychiatric history is measured?
American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 1501–1504.
Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Cushman, F., & Hauser, M.
(2007). Damage to the prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judg-
ments. Nature, 446, 908–911.
Lovett, L. M., Cox, A., & Abou-Saleh, M. (1990). Teaching psychiatric interview
skills to medical students. Medical Education, 24, 243–250.
Meyers, J., & Stein, S. (2000). The psychiatric interview in the emergency depart-
ment. Emergency Medicine Clinics of North America, 18, 173–183.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: Helping people change
(3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Pollock, D. C., Shanley, D. E., & Byrne, P. N. (1985). Psychiatric interviewing and
clinical skills. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 30, 64–68.
Rogers, R. (2003). Standardizing DSM-IV diagnoses: The clinical applications of
structured interviews. Journal of Personality Assessment, 81, 220–225.
Rosenthal, M. J. (1989). Towards selective and improved performance of the men-
tal status examination. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 80, 207–215.
Stewart, M. A. (1984). What is a successful doctor–patient interview?: A study of
interactions and outcomes. Social Science and Medicine, 19, 167–175.
Torrey, E. F. (2006). Violence and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 88, 3–4.
Wilson, I. C. (1967). Rapid Approximate Intelligence Test. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 123, 1289–1290.
Wissow, S. L., Roter, D. L., & Wilson, M. E. H. (1994). Pediatrician interview style
and mothers’ disclosure of psychosocial issues. Pediatrics, 93, 289–295.

-- 371 of 385 --



-- 372 of 385 --

357
Index
In this index, definitions are indicated by the use of italics, main
discussions of topics by boldface, and tables by t.
Absence of parent, 74, 75
Abstract thinking, 155
Abuse
childhood, 76, 113
elder, 222
spousal, 114
Academic record, 78
Accents, coping with, 32
Acrophobia, 145
Acting out, 69
Activity level, patient’s, 126
Adherence to treatment, 84, 246
Adoption of patient, 74
Adult life, 78
Affect, 128
appropriateness, 130
bland, 130
blunted or flattened, 130
incontinence of, 130
intensity, 130
lability, 129
pathological, 130
reactivity of, 130
type, 128
Age, patient’s, 124
Agoraphobia, 145, 297
AIDS, risk factors for, 84, 113
Akathisia, 86
Alcohol, 104
drink equivalents, 105
misuse, 104
Alcoholism, diagnosis, 105
Alertness of patient, 125
Alexithymia, 66, 129
Allergy to medication, 85
Alliteration, 133
Altruism, 70
Alzheimer’s dementia, 153, 180
Ambivalence, 65
Amnesia, 153
Amnestic disorder, 296
Analogy, eliciting feelings with, 68
Anger
responding to, 121
signals of, 129
Anorexia nervosa, 87, 124, 186, 298
Anorgasmia, 111
Anticipation, 70
Antisocial
patient, responding to, 28
personality disorder, 45, 74, 79, 80,
93, 172, 214, 218, 241, 300, 327
Anxiety, 144
anticipatory, 146
differential diagnosis, 181
historical information, 182
mental status, 183
physical symptoms, 183
responding to, 121
signals, 129, 181
Aphasia, 151
Aphonia, 132

-- 373 of 385 --

358 	Index
Appearance, patient’s, 124
Appetite change, 44, 87
Appropriateness of affect, 130
Approximate answers, 210
Apraxia, 152
Areas of clinical interest, 42, 160
during free speech, 22, 306
signals, 23, 24t
Arrests, 80
Assault, sexual, 115
Assessing an interview, 272, 346
Associations of speech, 131
clang, 133
loose, 131
Attention deficit disorder, 78
Attention span, patient’s, 150
Attitude
interviewer’s, 28, 208
toward examiner, of patient, 128
Atypical depression, 290
Audible thoughts, 143
Auditory hallucinations, 142
Aura of seizure, 87
Authoritarianism, avoiding, 35
Autonomy, patient’s, 12, 33, 193
Avoidant personality disorder, 93, 303
Behaviors, patient, 92
inappropriate, 233
Bereavement, 167
Best diagnosis, 239, 263, 269
Biographical information, 73, 264
Biopsychosocial perspective, 3
Bipolar mood disorder, 74, 150, 166,
289, 290
Birth control, 111
Bisexuality, 111
Bizarre delusion, 139
Blackout, alcoholic, 106
Blaming of patient, 46
Blandness of affect, 130
Blind patient, 225
Blocking of thought, 133
Blunting of affect, 130
Body
build, patient’s, 124
change, delusions of, 141
dysmorphic disorder, 146
language
clinician’s, 26, 38, 40, 274, 277
patient’s, 27, 67, 97, 103, 129, 207
Borderline personality disorder, 93, 301
Boundaries between clinician and
patient, 32
Bragging, encouragement of, 207
Branson, Serene, 133
Brevity, interviewer, 59
Briquet’s syndrome, 299
Calculations, 306
Capgras syndrome, 141
Catalepsy, 127
Character disorder, 89, 92
Chief complaint, 18
importance, 18
time allotted for, 23
unfocused, 210
in written report, 262, 323
Childhood, 74
abuse, 76
health during, 76
hyperactivity, 78
molestation, 113
temperament during, 77
Children, patient’s, 83
Circumlocutions, 56
Circumstantial speech, 135
Clang associations, 133
Claustrophobia, 145
Clinical interest, areas of, 22, 160
noting in free speech, 306
signals, 24t
Closed-ended requests, 18, 118, 312
drawbacks, 118
for excessive emotionality, 71
mixing with open-ended, 58
Closure of interview, 187
Clothing, patient’s, 125
Clouding of consciousness, 125
Cluttering of speech, 134
Cognition in mental status exam, 136, 149
Cognitive disorders, 177, 294
amnestic disorder, 296
delirium, 295

-- 374 of 385 --

Index 	359
dementia, 295
differential diagnosis, 178
head injury and, 87
historical information, 179
mental status, 180
signals, 81, 132, 153, 157, 163, 177
Collaboration with patient, 32
Collateral information, 192, 220, 279
Command hallucinations, 143, 218
Communication
of findings with patient, 251
with other professionals, 261
spousal, 83
Compliance with treatment, 84, 246
Comprehension, test of language, 151
Compulsion, 146, 147
types, 182
Computerized records, 13
Concentration, patient’s, 150
Concern, interviewer’s, 66
Confabulation, 154, 296
Confidentiality
breaking, 101
in family conference, 258
reassurances about, 54, 192
Confrontation, 60
avoiding, 189, 235
expressing, 60, 72, 204, 212
about hostility, 218
about lying, 214
about overtalkativeness, 229
Confused patient, 220
Consciousness, 149
impaired, 125
Consequences of illness, 45
and prognosis, 245
Consultation
for reluctant patient, 260
for troubled interview, 275
Content of thought, 137
Contradictory information, as
resistance, 199
Contraindications to treatment, 243
Conversion, muteness as, 231
Convulsions, 87
Cost of care, 243, 247
Countertransference, 208, 277
Counting, as test of attention, 150
Course of illness, and prognosis, 244
Criminal behavior, 80
Criteria for diagnosis, 278
Cross dressing, 113
Crying, 129, 228
Cues
emotional, 67
follow-up of, 275
nonverbal, 38
to patient wariness, 41
Cultural information, 154
Culture, effect on symptoms, 130, 138,
150, 170, 226, 278
Current events, in mental status
examination, 154
Cyclothymia, 168
Deaf patient, 225
Death
delusion of, 141
rate in mentally ill, 84
wishes, 98, 289
Defense mechanisms, 69
Déjà vu, 41, 148
Delirium, 295
signals, 179, 220
tremens, 126, 144
Delusion, 138
bizarre, 139
contrasted with confabulation, 154
as first-rank symptom, 163
mood-congruent, 140
responding to, 41, 138, 208
specific types, 140
Delusional disorder, 293
Delusional perception, 163
Demanding patient, 224
Demeanor
interviewer’s, 26, 206
patient’s, 27, 273
Dementia, 295
challenge to interviewer, 220
pseudodementia, 179
signals, 124, 125, 130, 150, 153,
180
treatment, 241

-- 375 of 385 --

360 	Index
Denial, 69
Dependence
alcohol, 105
fear of, 215
substance, 171
Dependent personality, 94
Depersonalization, 149
Depression, 164
anxiety disorders with, 182
atypical, 290
cognitive defects, 150, 153
description, 288
differential diagnosis, 165
dysthymia compared to, 290
historical information, 166
insight in, 157
melancholia, 289
mental status, 167
muteness in, 231
parental death and, 74
premenstrual syndrome and, 87
previous episode, 166
pseudodementia, 179
psychosis with, 140
reactive, 166
seasonal pattern, 167
secondary versus primary, 171, 182,
310
signals, 44, 45, 50, 129, 134, 165
vegetative symptoms, 43
Derailment of speech, 131
Derealization, 149
Descriptions of diagnoses, 288
Devaluation, defense mechanism, 69
Diagnosis, 238
best, 239, 263, 269, 326
certainty of, 241
criteria, 278. See also individual
disorders
descriptions, 288
differential, 239, 325
neglect of, 278
in written report, 269
errors in, 238
importance, 238
manual of, 267
prognostic value, 245
safety principle, 239
social consequences may affect, 45
in written report, 267
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (5th ed.).
See DSM-5
Differences, interpreting, 155
Direct requests for feelings, 64
Directive interview, 16
Disability payments, 47
Displacement, 69
Dissociation, 69, 232
Distance, maintaining, 33
Distortion in patient’s story, 73
Distractible speech, 135
Distractions to interview, 54
Diurnal variation of mood, 45
Double questions, avoiding, 59
Drink, alcohol equivalents in, 105
Drugs
misuse of prescription, 108
previous prescription, 51, 85
side effects, 85
street, 107
DSM-5, 45, 146, 267
Duty, of clinician, 14, 101, 193
Dying patient, 234
Dyskinesia, tardive, 86, 126
Dyslexia, 78
Dysmorphophobia, 146
Dyspareunia, 111
Dysphoria, 87
Dysthymia, 290
Dystonia, acute, 86
Echolalia, 133
Editing material for reports, 263
Education history, 47, 78
Ejaculation, premature and retarded,
111
Elder patient, 221
abuse, 222
Emotion. See also Feelings
cues, 67
displaced, 215
handling excessive, 70
impediments to expression of, 65

-- 376 of 385 --

Index 	361
Empathy, 28, 117, 255
Employment history, 78
problems, 47, 106
Encouragements
nonverbal, 38
verbal, 307, 309
Energy level, 45
Environmental stressors, 49t
Episode of illness
present, 42
prior, 50
Erotomanic delusions, 293
Ethnicity, patient’s, 124
Evaluating information, 238
Exaggeration
of negative consequences, 206
as resistance, 199
Examples, use in written report, 266
Exhibitionism, 112
Expense of treatment, 243
Experimental treatment, 241
Expertise, interviewer’s, 35, 41
Expression, facial, 127
Extrapyramidal side effects, 86
Eye contact, 27, 38, 199, 213
Facial expression, 127
False generalizations, avoiding, 40
Family
education about treatment, 258
history, 87
in written report, 265
of origin, 74
quality of relationships, 81
Fantasy, 69
Feedback to patient, 137, 196, 252
Feelings. See also Emotions
eliciting, 64
exploring when patient resists, 204
ignoring, 279
impediments to expression of, 65
interpretation of, 67
interviewer’s, 28, 35
negative and positive, 63t
nonverbal clues to, 129
patient doesn’t recognize, 65
probing for details, 310
range of, 62
reflection of, 66
Fenton, Wayne, 11
Fetishism, 112
transvestic, 113
Finances, 81
First names, avoiding, 32
First-rank symptoms, 163
Fishing for information, 320
Flattening of mood, 130
Flight of ideas, 132
Flow of thought, 131
Fluctuating consciousness, 125
Fluency, test of language, 151
Folstein test, 155
Foreplay, 110
Forgetfulness, as resistance, 199
Formulation, case, 268, 325
Free speech, 20, 65, 305
reasons for, 21
time allotted for, 23
Frotteurism, 112
Functioning, assessment of, 246
Gardner, Howard, 156
GED (General Educational Development
or educational equivalency) test,
78
Generalization
excessive, 210
false, 40
Generalized anxiety disorder, 296
Gestures, hand, 126
Global Assessment of Functioning
(GAF), 246
Goals of interview, 53
Grandiose delusions, 141
Grief reaction, 167
Group interviews, 196
Guilt
and lying, 213
delusions of, 141
Gustatory (taste) hallucinations, 144
Hallucinations, 142, 148, 180
command, 143, 218
describing, 43

-- 377 of 385 --

362 	Index
Hallucinations (cont.)
as first-rank symptom, 163
responding to, 208
severity, 143
Handshake, 125
Head injury, 87
Health, during childhood, 76
Hereditary risk of illness, 245
History, 7
family, 87
in written report, 265
past medical, 84
in written report, 265
personal and social, 73, 264
present illness, 42, 53
in written report, 262
review of systems, 86
Histrionic personality, 94
Hobbies, 75
Home interview, 197
Homelessness, 81, 249
Homicide, risk of, 147, 218
Homosexuality, 109, 111
Hospitalization
medical, 84
prior, 52
recommending, 248
Hostility, 215
causes, 215
Humor, 30
as defense mechanism, 70
as resistance, 228
Huntington’s disease, 241
Hygiene, patient’s, 125
Hyperactivity
childhood, 78
observed behavior, 126
Hypersomnia, 44, 166
Hypervigilance, 125
Hypnopompic imagery, 144
Hypochondriasis, 184
Hysteria. See Somatization
ICD (International Classification of
Diseases), 267
Ideas
flight of, 132
overvalued, 148
Identifying data, in written report, 261,
323
Ideomotor apraxia, 152
Illness
consequences, 45
delusions of, 141
duration and prognosis, 245
fear of, 215
prior episodes, 50
term used as convention, 42
Illusions, 148
Immediate memory, 152
Impotence, 111
Incoherence of speech, 133
Inconsistencies in patient’s story, 60,
194, 213
Indifference, lofty, 130
Influence, delusions of, 141
Informants
choice of, 193
interviewing, 191
permission to interview, 192
in written report, 262, 323
Insight, 157
deficient, 231
in written report, 267
Insomnia, 44, 57, 166, 169
types, 44
Intellectualization, 69
Intelligence, 156
types, 156
Intensity of mood, 130
Intercourse, painful, 111
Interests
change in, 47
childhood, 75
current, 83
Interpersonal conflicts, 46
Interpretation of feelings, 67
Interpreter, use of, 227
Interrupting with grace, 117
Interval note, in written report, 263
Interview
accuracy, 318
assessment of, 346
breaking off, 72
closure, 187
control, 37, 70, 116, 276, 279

-- 378 of 385 --

Index 	363
directive, 16
distractions, 54
feelings, assessment of, 62
goals, 7, 53
group, 196
home setting for, 197
motivational, 254
multiple sessions, 8, 15
outline, 9
reasons for, 20
recording of, 274
scope, 275
seating arrangements, 10
semistructured, 277, 327
settings, 10
telephone, 197
therapeutic value of, 40
time needed, 7, 8, 278
troubled, 272
witnessed, 274
Interviewer
appearance, 11
attitude, 28, 208
bias, 278
body language, 26, 38, 274, 277
brief questions of, 59
demeanor, 26, 206
duty of, 14, 101, 193
errors, 30
expertise, 35, 41
expressions of sympathy, 66
features of good, 2
feelings of, 28, 35
insensitive, 277
moral standards of, 108
neutrality, 27
personal problems, 29
personality, 30
response to questions, 235
revealing self, 33
skills, 1, 4
speech of, 29, 116, 277, 305, 310
touching the patient, 228
unempathic, 216
vocabulary of, 56
Intimacy, fear of, 215
Introductions, 12
Involuntary movements, 126
Jargon, avoiding, 31, 56, 264, 278, 305
Jealousy, delusions of, 141
Job history, 47, 78
Judgment, 158
in written report, 267
La belle indifférence, 130
Lability of mood, 129
Laboratory tests, recommending, 247
Language
body. See Body
patient’s, 151
tests of, 151
using everyday, 31
Latency of response, 134
Lateness, as resistance, 198
Leading questions, 119, 308
avoiding, 59
Leads, watching for, 59
Legal
help for patient, 249
history, 46, 80, 101, 106
Leisure activities, 79, 83
Level of functioning, highest recent, 246
Likenesses, interpreting, 155
Listening, reflective, 38
Living situation, current, 80
Loaded terms, 31
Lofty indifference, 130
Long-term memory, 153
Loose associations of thought, 131
Loss
in childhood, 75
in older patients, 222
Lying, 213
Macho behavior, 65
Major depression. See also Depression
description, 288
Major diagnoses, 267
Malingering, 231
Mania, 290
differential diagnosis, 168
historical information, 168
mental status, 169
signals, 125, 132, 134, 141, 157, 168,
179
Mannerisms, 126

-- 379 of 385 --

364 	Index
Marital history, 81
problems, 46
Masturbation, 111
Medical history, 84
in written report, 265
Medication
misuse, 108
previous prescription, 85
side effects, 85
Melancholia, 289
Memory, 152, 179, 322
Mental retardation, 233
Mental status exam, 123
behavioral aspects, 123
cognitive aspects, 136, 322
omitting portions, 137, 158
in written report, 266
Microdepression, 129
Milestones, developmental, 76
Military history, 79
Mini-Mental State Exam, 155
Molestation, childhood, 113
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MCA),
156
Mood, 128
appropriateness, 130
blunted or flattened, 130
disorder. See Depression; Mania
disturbance, as area of clinical
interest, 164, 168
diurnal variation of, 45
intensity, 130
lability, 129
reactivity of, 130
type, 128
Motivating the patient, 26
Motivational interviewing, 254
Motor activity of patient, 126
Multiple choice requests, 118
Muteness, 132, 231
Naming, test of language, 151
Narcissistic personality disorder, 94, 302
Negative questions, avoiding, 59
Negatives, significant, in written report,
264
Negativism, 127
Negotiated approach to treatment, 253
Neologism, 133
Neurocognitive disorders. See Cognitive
disorders
Neutrality, interviewer, 27
Nihilistic delusions, 141
Nondirective interview, 16
Nonverbal encouragements, 37, 204
Note taking, 13, 117, 313
Nuclear family, childhood, 74
Nutrition of patient, 124
Observing the patient, 92, 124
Obsession, 146, 182
Obsessive–compulsive
disorder, 297
personality disorder, 94, 302
Occupation history, 47
Older patient, 221
Olfactory hallucinations, 144
Omitting information, as resistance, 199
Onset of symptoms, 47
Open-ended requests, 17, 82, 304, 307
for feelings, 64
insufficient use of, 276
validity with, 55
Opening request, 14, 17
Oral presentation, 271
Orderliness, excessive, 180
Organicity. See Cognitive disorders
Orientation, 150, 306
Outline of interview, 9
Overtalkativeness, 229
Overvalued ideas, 148
Pain symptoms, 43, 299
Panic attack, 145, 182, 296
Panic disorder, 296
Paranoid personality, 94
Paranoid schizophrenia, 291
Paraphilias, 112
Parentalism, 33, 35, 258
Parents, absence of, 74, 75
Parkinsonism, 86, 127
Passivity, delusions of, 141
Pathological affect, 130
Patient
alertness of, 125
angry, 121

-- 380 of 385 --

Index 	365
appearance, 124
background, different, 226
blind, 225
confused, 220
crying, 228
deaf, 225
demanding, 224
demeanor of, 27, 273
dying, 234
ethnicity of, 124
hostile, 215
humanity of, 264
lying, 213
mentally retarded, 233
mute, 231
older, 221
overtalkative, 229
psychotic, 230
seductive, 232
vague, 210
VIP, 225
younger, 223
Pauses, coping with, 37
Pedophilia, 112
Peeping Toms, 113
Perception
delusional, 163
in mental status exam, 142
Permission to interview informants, 192
Persecution, delusions of, 141
Perseveration of speech, 133
Personal
history, 73, 279
in written report, 264
problems of interviewer, 29
questions, coping with, 34, 236
Personality, 89
assessing, 89
disorder, 93
interviewer’s, 30
premorbid, 89, 246
problems
differential diagnosis, 174
historical information, 175
mental status, 176
signals, 173
strengths, 90
traits, 89, 173
Phobia, 145
agoraphobia, 297
school, 78
social, 146
Physical
abuse, 76
complaints, 184
differential diagnosis, 184
historical information, 185
mental status, 186
signals, 184
contact with patient, 233
Posttraumatic stress disorder, 79, 298
Posturing, 127
Poverty
delusions of, 141
of speech, 132
Praise, as reinforcement, 27, 314, 318
Precipitants. See Stressors
Precision
encouraging, 47, 59
in written report, 266
Premature ejaculation, 111
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 87
Premorbid personality, 89, 246
Present illness
history of, 42
obtaining, 53
in written report, 262
Presentation, oral, 271
Presidents, naming recent, 154
Pressured speech, 134
Principal diagnoses, 245
Probing
for details, 68
for feelings, 310
inappropriate, 276
questions, how to choose, 57
Professional appearance, 11
Prognosis, 244, 326
areas of, 244
factors in determining, 245
in written report, 270
Projection, 69
Prosody, 127
Protective services, referral to, 249
Proverbs, interpreting, 155
Pseudoparkinsonism, 86, 127

-- 381 of 385 --

366 	Index
Psychological testing, 247
Psychologically serious suicide attempt, 99
Psychomotor retardation, 134
Psychosis, 161
coping with, 230
differential diagnosis, 162
due to medical illness, 293
historical information, 162
mental status, 164
muteness in, 231
responding to, 208
signals, 125, 127, 132, 161
substance-induced, 293
Psychosocial stressors, 49t
Push of speech, 134
Questions. See also Requests
avoiding “why” questions, 57
leading, 119, 308
negative, 59
pejorative, 59
probing, 57
Rambling speech, 117, 229
Rape, 114
Rapid cycling, 169
Rapport, 26
building, 16, 26, 29, 34, 207, 309, 313, 314
inadequate, 276
maintaining, 114
Rate of speech, 134
Reaction formation, 69
Reactivity of mood, 130
Reading, test of language, 152
Reason for interview, 20
Reassurance, 40
offering, 323
requirements of, 40
unconditional, 41
Recent memory, 153
Recommendations, making, 238
Recording a session, 6, 14, 274
Records
as legal documents, 266
computerized, 13
using, 192, 207, 214
Recovery
from prior episode, 51
Recovery from prior episode, 51
and prognosis, 244
Red flag terms, 279
Reference, delusions of, 142
Referral of patient, 36, 247
Reflection of feelings, 66
Reflective listening, 38
Rejection of treatment plan, 259
Relationships, effect of illness on, 46
Relatives
education about treatment, 258
interviewing, 191
Religion, 80
Remote memory, 153
Repetition, test of language, 152
Report
oral, 271
written, 261, 323
Repression, 69
Requests
closed-ended, 18, 118, 312
direct, 64
for feelings, 64
multiple choice, 118
open-ended, 17, 64, 276, 304, 307
opening, 17
Resistance, 198
coping with, 53, 200
prevention, 207
reasons for, 199
to treatment, 255, 257
Response
latency of, 134
to questions, 235
Retardation
mental, 233
psychomotor, 134
Review of systems, 86
in written report, 265
Rhythm of speech, 134
Rut, therapeutic, 244
Sadism, 113
Safety
duty to protect, 14
principle, diagnostic, 239
principles of, 11, 103, 219
Schizoaffective disorder, 292

-- 382 of 385 --

Index 	367
Schizoid personality disorder, 94
Schizophrenia, 291
paranoid, 291
prodrome, 291
signals, 75, 79, 124, 126, 127, 130, 132,
140, 142, 144, 150, 162, 163
subtype diagnoses, 291
Schizophreniform disorder, 292
Schizotypal personality disorder, 94, 300
Schneider, K., 163
School
history, 47, 78
refusal, 78
Scope of interview, 275
Seasonal depression, 167
Seating arrangements for interview, 10, 27
Second opinion, 260
Secondary gain, 186
Secrecy in interviews, 193
Seductive behavior, 232
Seizures, 87, 232
Semistructured interview, 277, 327
Sensitive subjects, 96
Sensitivity to patient, 120
Sequence of symptoms, 47
Serial sevens, 150
Seriousness of suicide attempt, 99
Settings, interview, 10
Severity of illness, 45
Sex, 108
developing sexuality, 77
discussing, 108, 318
interest and functioning, 45
practices, 110
preference, 109
sexually transmitted diseases, 113
Sexual abuse, 76, 113
Shame, signals of, 129
Shelters for homeless, 249
Shoplifting, 80
Shorthand phrases, 221
Short-term memory, 153
Side effects
extrapyramidal, 86
of treatment, 85, 243
Silence
as resistance, 199
coping with, 37, 201
Similarities, interpreting, 155
Slang terms for street drugs, 107
Sleep, disturbances of, 44, 57, 144, 160,
166, 169, 180, 289
Social
history, 73, 264, 279
network, 81
problems
consequence of illness, 46
differential diagnosis, 174
historical information, 175
mental status, 176
and prognosis, 245
signals, 173
support, and prognosis, 246
Somatic complaints. See also Physical
coping with, 230
delusional, 293
multiple, 298
Somatic symptom disorders, 87
Somatization
defense mechanism, 69
disorder, 298
Speech
associations of, 131
circumstantial, 135
cluttering, 134
content, 137
derailment of, 131
distractible, 135
flow of, 131
free, 20, 65, 305
impediment, 127
incoherence of, 133
interviewer’s, 29, 310
loaded terms, 31
muteness, 132
paucity of, 232
perseveration of, 133
poverty of, 132
push of, 134
rate and rhythm, 134
spontaneous, 131
stilted, 134
stuttering, 134
tangential, 132
Spelling, as test of attention, 150
Splitting, 69

-- 383 of 385 --

368 	Index
Spontaneous speech, 131
Spouse
abuse, 114
relationship with, 81
Stereotypies, 127
Stilted speech, 134
Street drugs, 107
Stressors, 48
anxiety disorders and, 183
depressed mood and, 166
identifying, 49
suicide behavior and, 98
table of, 49
written report of, 268
Stupor, 125
Stuttering, 134
Style, interviewing, 2, 16, 23, 71, 119,
275
Sublimation, 70
Substance misuse, 104, 105, 170
abuse, 171
criminal behavior and, 80
dependence, 171
differential diagnosis, 170
disorders related to, 294
historical information, 171
mental status, 173
mood disorder and, 166, 168
psychosis and, 162
signals, 45, 170
somatic symptom disorders and, 186
street drugs, 107
substance-induced psychosis, 293
Suicide, 96
attempts, 93, 98, 147, 167, 180, 186
duty to protect, 14
ideas, 147
seriousness of attempt, 99
Summary statements, 25, 39, 315
Sundowning, 295
Support groups, 249
Support, social, and prognosis, 246
Supression, 70
Symptoms, 43
culture effect on, 130, 138, 150, 170,
226, 278
describing, 43
details, 58
first-rank, 163
meaning to patient, 47
onset of, 47
prognosis, 244
sequence, 47, 310, 311
vegetative, 43
Tactile hallucinations, 144
Tangential speech, 132
Tarasoff decision, 14
Tardiness, as resistance, 198, 205
Tardive dyskinesia (TD), 86, 126
Teenagers, interviewing, 31, 54
Telephone interview, 197
Temperament during childhood, 77
Temporal lobe epilepsy, 232
Tension, signs of, 219
Termination of interview, 72, 187
Tests, recommending, 247
Therapeutic rut, 244
Therapy, value of interview as, 40
Thinking difficulties. See Cognitive
disorders
Thought
abstract, 155
associations, 131
audible, 143
blocking, 133
broadcasting, 142
content, 137
control, delusions of, 142
flow of, 131
Threats, personal, 147
Tics, 127
verbal, 135
Time for interview, 7, 8, 23, 278
Tolerance to substances, 171
Tone of voice, 27
Touching the patient, 228
Trailing phenomena, 144
Transference, 200
Transitions, 120
avoiding abrupt, 117, 321
bridging, 316, 318
flagging, 322
Transvestic fetishism, 113

-- 384 of 385 --

Index 	369
Treatment
adherence, 84, 246
availability, and prognosis, 245
choosing, 240
contraindications, 243
cost of, 243
drawbacks, 253
experimental, 241
modalities, 242t
negotiated approach, 253
options, 253
plan, 270, 326
discussing with patient, 252
rejection of, 259
previous, 51, 246, 319
resistance, 255, 257
response, 244
urgency of, 241
with medication, 85
without definitive diagnosis, 241
Tremor, 126
Troubled interview, 272
Twins, 74
Urgency of treatment, 241
Vague patient, 210
Validity, 53, 119, 120
of biographical information, 73
with open-ended requests, 55
Variation of mood, daily, 45
Vegetative symptoms, 43
Verbal encouragements, 307, 309
Verbal tics, 312
Verbigeration, 133
Violence, 101
clinician risk of, 11
coping with, 218
drills for, 103
ideas of, 147
motivation behind, 102
safety principles for, 103, 219
VIP patient, 225
Visual hallucinations, 144
Vocabulary, patient’s, 31
Vocational services, 250
Voice, qualities of, 27, 127
Voyeurism, 113
Vulnerability of patient, 66
Wandering patient, 81
Wariness of patient, cues to, 41
Waxy flexibility, 127
Weight change, 44
“Why” questions, use of, 57, 92, 140,
276
Wilson, Ian, 156
Withdrawal from substances, 171
Witnessed interview, 274
Word salad, 133
Words, loaded, 31
Work history, 47, 78
Writing, test of language, 152
Written report, 261
Younger patient, 223

-- 385 of 385 --

