

-- 1 of 498 --



-- 2 of 498 --



-- 3 of 498 --

P SYCHOPATHOLOGY

-- 4 of 498 --



-- 5 of 498 --

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
From Science to Clinical Practice
SECOND EDITION
edited by
LOUIS G. CASTONGUAY
THOMAS F. OLTMANNS
ABIGAIL POWERS LOTT
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York 	London

-- 6 of 498 --

Copyright © 2021 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200, New York, NY 10001
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The authors have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide
information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards of practice that
are accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error
or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither the authors, nor
the editors and publisher, nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation
or publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein is in every
respect accurate or complete, and they are not responsible for any errors or omissions or
the results obtained from the use of such information. Readers are encouraged to confirm
the information contained in this book with other sources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Castonguay, Louis Georges, editor. | Oltmanns, Thomas F., editor. |
Lott, Abigail Powers, editor.
Title: Psychopathology : from science to clinical practice / Louis G. Castonguay,
Thomas F. Oltmanns, Abigail Powers Lott.
Description: Second edition. | New York : The Guilford Press, [2021] |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021000526 | ISBN 9781462547616 (cloth)
Subjects: LCSH: Psychology, Pathological.
Classification: LCC RC454 .P7863 2021 | DDC 616.89—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021000526

-- 7 of 498 --

To Larry Beutler and Clara Hill, for years of friendship and collaboration,
as well as for inspiring and guiding the field of psychotherapy
toward the integration of science and practice
—L. G. C.
To Richard McFall and Richard Bootzin, inspirational friends
who worked tirelessly for many years to foster the integration of science
and practice in clinical psychology
—T. F. O.
To Vasiliki Michopolous and Jennifer Stevens, for their friendship
and leadership, and for helping me to approach my research in novel ways
and encouraging my integration of science and practice
across both my treatment research and clinical care
—A. P. L.

-- 8 of 498 --



-- 9 of 498 --

vii
Louis G. Castonguay, PhD, is Liberal Arts Professor of Psychology at The Pennsylvania State
University. With more than 200 publications, he focuses his research on different aspects of
therapeutic change and training (including variables related to interventions, relationship,
client, and therapist), especially in the context of psychotherapy integration. Dr. Castonguay
is also involved in practice-oriented research and the development of practice research net-
works aimed at facilitating collaboration between clinicians and researchers. In addition, he
has been investigating the process and efficacy of integrative treatments for generalized anxi-
ety disorder and depression. Dr. Castonguay is a recipient of the Distinguished Psychology
Award from Division 29 (Society for the Advancement of Psychotherapy) of the American
Psychological Association and the Distinguished Career Award from the Society for Psycho-
therapy Research (SPR). He has served as president of SPR and of the North American chapter
of SPR.
Thomas F. Oltmanns, PhD, is the Edgar James Swift Professor of Psychology in Arts and
Sciences and Professor of Psychiatry at Washington University in St. Louis, where he was for-
merly Director of Clinical Training in Psychology. Dr. Oltmanns’s current research focuses on
links between maladaptive personality traits, adverse life events, and health in middle-aged
and older adults. He has served on the board of directors of the Association for Psychological
Science and as president of the Society for Research in Psychopathology, the Society for a Sci-
ence of Clinical Psychology, and the Academy of Psychological Clinical Science. Dr. Oltmanns
is a recipient of awards for outstanding teaching from Washington University in St. Louis and
the University of Virginia, as well as the Toy Caldwell-Colbert Award for Distinguished Edu-
cator in Clinical Psychology from Division 12 (Society of Clinical Psychology) of the Ameri-
can Psychological Association.
Abigail Powers Lott, PhD, ABPP, is Assistant Professor in the Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences at Emory University School of Medicine. A board-certified clinical psy-
chologist, she conducts research spanning a range of topics across personality, trauma, and
negative health outcomes. Dr. Lott has a particular focus on understanding mechanisms of
risk associated with chronic trauma exposure across the lifespan and advancing culturally
relevant treatment interventions in underserved and at-risk populations. She has received
numerous teaching awards for her efforts in educating both clinical psychology interns and
psychiatry residents at Emory University.
About the Editors

-- 10 of 498 --



-- 11 of 498 --

ix
Jonathan S. Abramowitz, PhD, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Evelyn Attia, MD, New York State Psychiatric Institute and Department of Psychiatry,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York
Jacques P. Barber, PhD, ABPP, Gordon F. Derner School of Psychology, Adelphi University,
Garden City, New York
Ashley Battaglini, MA, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Sophie Bergeron, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Craig J. Bryan, PhD, ABPP, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Health,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Richard A. Bryant, PhD, School of Psychology, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia
Louis G. Castonguay, PhD, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania
Elise M. Clerkin, PhD, Department of Psychology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio
Paul F. Crits-Christoph, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Judith R. Davidson, PhD, Department of Psychology, Queen’s University,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Matthew V. Elliott, BS, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California
Contributors

-- 12 of 498 --

x 	Contributors
Deborah R. Glasofer, PhD, New York State Psychiatric Institute and Department
of Psychiatry, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York
Alexandra K. Gold, MA, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
Marvin R. Goldfried, PhD, Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York
Sheri L. Johnson, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California
Terence M. Keane, PhD, National Center for PTSD, VA Boston Healthcare System,
Boston, Massachusetts
E. David Klonsky, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Ann M. Kring, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California
Joelle LeMoult, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Abigail Powers Lott, PhD, ABPP, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia
Jeffrey J. Magnavita, PhD, Strategic Psychotherapeutics, Glastonbury, Connecticut;
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
Ioan Tiberiu Mahu, BA, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Atina Manvelian, MA, Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
Alexandra F. Muratore, PhD, New York State Psychiatric Institute and Department
of Psychiatry, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York
Michelle G. Newman, PhD, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania
Thomas F. Oltmanns, PhD, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri
Michael W. Otto, PhD, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University,
Boston, Massachusetts
Robert O. Pihl, PhD, Department of Psychology, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Kathleen M. Pike, PhD, Departments of Psychiatry and Epidemiology, Columbia University
Irving Medical Center, New York, New York
Caroline F. Pukall, PhD, Department of Psychology, Queen’s University,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Gavin N. Rackoff, MS, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania
Katerina Rnic, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

-- 13 of 498 --

Contributors 	xi
Julia M. Salinger, MA, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
David A. Sbarra, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
Jeremy T. Schwob, MA, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania
Alexandra L. Silverman, MA, Department of Psychology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia
Lynne Siqueland, PhD, Children’s and Adult Center for OCD and Anxiety,
Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania
David A. Smith, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, Indiana
Sherry H. Stewart, PhD, Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Lauren E. Szkodny, PhD, Department of Psychiatry Dartmouth–Hitchcock Medical Center,
Lebanon, New Hampshire
Bethany A. Teachman, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia
Norah Vincent, PhD, Department of Clinical Health Psychology, Max Rady College
of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
Mark A. Whisman, PhD, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado

-- 14 of 498 --



-- 15 of 498 --

xiii
Chris Muran, a prominent and prolific clinical psychologist, once said that publish-
ing a book is like getting a medal or a trophy in sport. You work very hard for a long
time, you get a sign of recognition for your accomplishments, you put that sign on
a wall or a bookshelf, you look at it a few times, and then you move on to another
challenge.
We, the first two editors, worked intensively and extensively on the first edi-
tion of Psychopathology: From Science to Clinical Practice. The collaboration that took
place between us and the influential authors we had recruited also felt like playing
an exciting sport—and playing on a successful team! We were obviously proud to
get the book in our hands and happy to look at it (more than a few times, truth to be
told), but it did not stay on a bookshelf for very long. This is because we have been
using it to guide our writing and research (let alone clinical practice) and, most fre-
quently and consistently, we have used it to enhance our graduate teaching.
Our own use of this first edition fit with the purposes we had in mind when
designing it. As conveyed by its title, this book was aimed at weaving together infor-
mation about basic research on psychopathology and the treatment of clinical prob-
lems. As psychotherapy (L. G. C.) and psychopathology (T. F. O.) researchers, we
wanted the book to expand the boundaries of our respective knowledge. We also
intended for the book to serve as a practical reference for clinicians. It was, however,
designed primarily as a textbook for graduate students in the field of mental health.
More specifically, it was created to address a major source of disconnection in the
training of these professional disiplines.
Preface
A note about language: In this book, we use they/them/their when referring to a single individual.
We have made this choice to be inclusive of readers who do not identify with masculine or
feminine pronouns.

-- 16 of 498 --

xiv 	Preface
A course on psychopathology is one of the few course requirements in all
accredited programs related to mental health care. Typically, this course has two foci:
description of each disorder (DSM criteria, clinical features, comorbidity, onset, etc.)
and etiology (variables that are involved in the cause and/or the maintenance of the
disorder). This information is relatively standard, and it is covered clearly in exist-
ing textbooks. Unfortunately, very few sources (either textbooks or primary journal
articles) address the need to establish connections between basic psychopathology
research and treatment, and few provide anything more than superficial coverage
of treatment issues. Coverage of basic psychopathology research far outweighs the
space devoted to treatment procedures aimed at the various kinds of mental disor-
ders with which practicing clinicians work on a regular basis. As such, most text-
books miss a tremendous opportunity to solidify the bridge between science and
clinical practice.
Our textbook was designed to correct this failed opportunity. Specifically, it cov-
ers the basic, conventional topics of psychopathology, while also providing a more
extensive and thoughtful discussion of the connections between basic research and
clinical practice. We believe this is a two-way street. Many hypotheses that have
guided scientific studies of psychopathology have been derived from clinical expe-
rience. Conversely, many findings from basic research have been extended to the
realm of clinical practice. The chapters of our book focus on these connections.
Each chapter provides students with relevant clinical guidelines derived from basic
research in psychopathology, as they relate to assessment and case formulation, as
well as treatment plan and interventions.
We, again the first two editors, were delighted when The Guilford Press invited
us to begin working on a second edition of this book. To be completely honest, while
we were happy with the feedback we had received from students and practitioners,
we were surprised and rather humbled that it did well enough to provide us with
an opportunity to play together again—it is one thing to get a medal or a trophy, but
quite another one to go for a repeat experience.
Working with Guilford’s staff on how to make this new challenge as enjoyable
and successful as the first one, we agreed that we needed to broaden our editorial
perspectives. We also agreed that the best strategy would be to invite Abigail Powers
Lott to join us as a third member of the editorial team. Representing a “new genera-
tion” of clinical researchers, Abby’s paths of scholarship have been perfectly in sync,
in terms of both content and process, with the major aim of the book. For example,
following over a decade of research into the transdiagnostic impact of trauma expo-
sure across the lifespan, she has translated that research into disseminating cultur-
ally responsive treatments for traumatized individuals in underserved communities.
Abby’s experience as an author on one of the chapters in the first edition, coupled
with her broad background in both research and practice, made her a perfect col-
league (or teammate) to expand our respective knowledge and improve our editorial
(one might say, coaching) partnership.
We further agreed, this time with Abby, to maintain some key elements of the
first edition—the most crucial being that each chapter be coauthored by a pair or a
small team of authors. For most of the chapters, at least one author was an expert
in psychopathology research and at least one other author was an expert in treat-
ment research (for some of our chapters, the authors were experts in both fields). Our

-- 17 of 498 --

Preface 	xv
experience with the first edition confirmed that such teamwork can lead to new ways
of thinking about psychopathology and clinical practice. It also fostered new and
exciting experience in writing these book chapters (a process that, too frequently,
tends to involve mainly cutting and pasting old materials!).
For the second edition, we also decided that we would continue to focus on
presenting problems that, for the sake of clinical relevance, meet three criteria. They
have to show a moderate to high level of prevalence in the general population, as
well as a moderate to high prevalence in treatment settings; and they need to be the
focus of a substantial research literature. Several disorders (e.g., dissociative identity
disorder, somatic symptom disorder, and gender dysphoria) are not covered because
they are not encountered frequently in clinical practice and/or there is not enough
basic research on which to build an effective case formulation and treatment plan.
The clinical problems covered in the first edition of this book were depression, gener-
alized anxiety disorder, panic disorder and phobias, obsessive–compulsive disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder, eating disorders, substance abuse disorders, personal-
ity disorders, bipolar disorders, positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia,
as well as marital and relationship discord. We agreed to keep all of the chapters
that were included in the first edition, with the exception of the chapters on positive
and negative symptoms. In the current edition, these symptoms are addressed in a
single, integrated chapter on schizophrenia.
We also wanted to preserve the structure of these chapters across the two edi-
tions of the book. As such, each chapter provides a solid descriptive and etiological
grounding to understand psychopathology within the perspective of our current
knowledge. Each presents an up-to-date survey of typical symptoms, clinical fea-
tures (e.g., interpersonal, social, occupational, health, sleep, and sexual problems),
course (e.g., onset, duration, outcome, relapse), epidemiology (e.g., prevalence, gen-
der and cross-cultural differences), comorbidity, and etiology (i.e., vulnerability fac-
tors involved in cause, maintenance, recurrence, and/or relapse). The authors have
also derived clinical implications from the research findings they reviewed, antici-
pating readers’ question: How is this relevant for understanding and treating my cli-
ents? Interestingly, because these clinical implications are drawn from basic research
in psychopathology, they are not restricted to any one theoretical model underlying
current forms of psychotherapy.
All of the chapters on specific clinical problems identify psychosocial (and
medical) treatments that have been empirically validated. While these psychosocial
interventions have been linked to particular models of therapy, the authors have
also derived targets, general strategies, or principles of intervention from these treat-
ments—formulating them in a way that is not necessarily tied to the specific tech-
niques or terminology associated with a particular approach to therapy. As such,
these chapters provide guidelines that could be assimilated (sometimes after special-
ized training) in the practice of clinicians, irrespective of their preferred theoretical
orientation.
As in the first edition, we also wanted to open the book with an introductory
chapter that discusses general issues in psychopathology, as well as their relevance
for the conceptualization, assessment, and treatment of patients. The book closes
with a final chapter that attempts to identify similarities among different clinical
problems by examining clinical and etiological issues that cut across them, and by

-- 18 of 498 --

xvi 	Preface
providing general recommendations that may improve their assessment and treat-
ment.
To improve on the first edition, we decided to pursue a number of expansions.
First and foremost, we added three chapters adressing the following clinical prob-
lems: suicide, sleep difficulties, and sexual dysfunction. We chose these transdiag-
nostic issues because they are frequent targets of interventions in clinical practice,
and because they have been the focus of substantial basic and/or applied research.
To address these new territories of knowledge and action, we recruited three pairs of
visible researchers who were ready to engage in a new, fresh, and collaborative writ-
ing project with someone at the same career level as their own, but with a different
expertise in the field.
We also wanted the revision of the chapters included from the first edition to
expand on what we know empirically and how we work clinically. We shaped these
expansions by asking authors to update the chapters with regard to psychopathol-
ogy research and to modify, if and when needed, the scope of therapeutic guidelines
that might be derived from such research—in terms of case formulation, treatment
plan, or principles of interventions. For the revision of these chapters, we were for-
tunate to “re-sign” most of our highly recognized scholars, as well as to “sign up”
a number of outstanding early career contributors to the fields of psychopathology
and psychotherapy. We dare to say that in our pursuit of a new medal or trophy,
we have again been able to gather an all-star team of accomplished “veterans” and
promising “rookies.”
We believe the first edition of this book has been successful because it has
allowed students to more fully integrate empirical and clinical knowledge within
their training. In line with the current emphasis on evidence-based practice, we have
also been pleased to hear that it has served as a relevant resource for experienced
practitioners, allowing them to conduct therapy while being informed by research
on psychopathology. We hope the second edition will also be successful in these
aims. We also hope it will offer valuable guidance to psychotherapy researchers by
identifying predictor, moderator, and mediator variables that could be the focus of
treatment interventions. Furthermore, we hope it will be helpful to psychopathology
researchers by highlighting phenomena from clinical practice that have an impor-
tant bearing on issues and problems that they ought to address.
Pursuing these ambious goals has required the help and support of many indi-
viduals. First, we want to thank our authors for contributing chapters that are, in our
opinion, highly informative, insightful, and innovative—let alone elegantly written.
We are also grateful for the vote of confidence and collaborative spirit of The Guil-
ford Press, and in particular for the assistance provided by Jane Keislar. Most impor-
tantly, we want to express our gratitude to the members of our respective families,
who all deserve much more than medals and trophies!
Louis G. Castonguay
Thomas F. Oltmanns
Abigail Powers Lott

-- 19 of 498 --

xvii
1. General Issues in Understanding and Treating Psychopathology 	1
Thomas F. Oltmanns, Abigail Powers Lott, and Louis G. Castonguay
2. Depression 	17
Joelle LeMoult, Ashley Battaglini, Katerina Rnic, and Louis G. Castonguay
3. Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	56
Michelle G. Newman, Paul F. Crits‑Christoph, Lauren E. Szkodny, Gavin N. Rackoff,
and Jeremy T. Schwob
4. Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	77
Bethany A. Teachman, Marvin R. Goldfried, Elise M. Clerkin, and Alexandra L. Silverman
5. Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	125
Jonathan S. Abramowitz and Lynne Siqueland
6. Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	151
Richard A. Bryant, Abigail Powers Lott, and Terence M. Keane
7. Eating Disorders 	185
Deborah R. Glasofer, Alexandra F. Muratore, Evelyn Attia, and Kathleen M. Pike
8. Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	221
Robert O. Pihl, Sherry H. Stewart, and Ioan Tiberiu Mahu
Contents

-- 20 of 498 --

xviii 	Contents
9. Personality Disorders 	255
Abigail Powers Lott, Jeffrey J. Magnavita, Jacques P. Barber, and Thomas F. Oltmanns
10. Bipolar Disorder 	294
Sheri L. Johnson, Michael W. Otto, Alexandra K. Gold, and Matthew V. Elliott
11. Schizophrenia 	316
Ann M. Kring and David A. Smith
12. Marital and Relational Discord 	345
David A. Sbarra, Atina Manvelian, Julia M. Salinger, and Mark A. Whisman
13. Sexual Dysfunctions 	369
Caroline F. Pukall and Sophie Bergeron
14. Sleep–Wake Disorders 	398
Norah Vincent and Judith R. Davidson
15. Suicide 	429
Craig J. Bryan and E. David Klonsky
16. Psychopathology Research and Clinical Interventions: 	453
Broad Conclusions and General Recommendations
Louis G. Castonguay, Thomas F. Oltmanns, and Abigail Powers Lott
Index 	461

-- 21 of 498 --

1
The practice of any mental health profession (clinical and counseling psychology,
psychiatry, social work) depends heavily on the ability to recognize and conceptual-
ize various forms of mental disorder. Therapists, irrespective of their professional
background and theoretical orientation, must be aware of the varied manifestations
of psychopathology. They also have to understand many forms of vulnerability that
set the stage for the development and maintenance of commonly occurring mental
disorders that eventually touch all of our lives, either directly or indirectly. Mental
disorders are a leading cause of disability around the world, and within the United
States, neuropsychiatric disorders are the leading cause of disease-related disabil-
ity and risk for early mortality (Murray et al., 2013; Whiteford, Ferrari, Degenhardt,
Feigin, & Vos, 2015).
The individual chapters in this book provide truly unique reviews of the profes-
sional literature concerned with specific forms of psychopathology. Each is written
by a team of scholars that includes recognized experts in the treatment of the con-
dition, as well as leaders in the scientific study of the causes of the disorder. They
have worked together to produce a creative synthesis describing the nature of the
disorder (e.g., symptoms, course, epidemiology, and etiology) and the treatment
implications that follow from this knowledge (assessment, case formulation, and/
or principles of change). These chapters represent classic examples of the thought-
ful integration of science and practice: Clinical experience raises important research
questions, and evidence from scientific studies leads to the development and evalu-
ation of improved treatment procedures. In this opening chapter, we discuss several
basic issues that lay the foundation for subsequent chapters discussing specific types
of psychopathology.
C H A P T E R 1
General Issues in Understanding
and Treating Psychopathology
Thomas F. Oltmanns
Abigail Powers Lott
Louis G. Castonguay

-- 22 of 498 --

2 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
DEFINING MENTAL DISORDERS
Any systematic review of what is known about psychopathology first requires atten-
tion to how the construct of “mental disorder” is defined. Should some (if not all)
mental disorders be conceptualized (completely or in part) as diseases, character
flaws, deficits, or problems of living? How are mental disorders distinguished from
behaviors that are simply idiosyncratic, eccentric, or out of favor within a particular
culture? These questions determine, sometimes explicitly but most often implicitly,
how a mental health professional responds to a particular client or patient, includ-
ing issues such as whether the person should receive treatment, and what kind of
treatment should be provided. Many attempts have been made to define abnormal
behavior, but none is entirely satisfactory. No one has provided a universal definition
that can account for all situations in which the concept of mental disorder is invoked
(Pilgrim, 2005; Zachar & Kendler, 2007).
Arguably, one of the most influential and widely invoked definitions of “men-
tal disorder” was proposed by Wakefield (1992, 2010). According to his argument, a
behavioral condition should be considered a mental disorder if, and only if, it meets
two criteria:
1. The condition results from the inability of some internal mechanism (mental
or physical) to perform its natural function. In other words, something inside
the person is not working properly. Examples of such mechanisms include
those that regulate levels of emotion, and those that distinguish between real
auditory sensations and imagined ones.
2. The condition causes some harm to the person as judged by the standards of
the person’s culture. These negative consequences are measured in terms of
the person’s own subjective distress or difficulty performing expected social
or occupational roles.
Using Wakefield’s terms, mental disorders are defined as “harmful dysfunc-
tions.” One element (“dysfunction”) of this definition is an attempt to incorporate
(as much as it is possible) an objective evaluation of behavior. Wakefield argues that
internal processes (e.g., cognition and perception) have a natural function, and that
this function is to allow an individual to perceive the world in ways that are shared
with other people and to engage in rational thought, problem solving, and adaptive
behavior. The dysfunctions in mental disorders are assumed to be the product of
disruptions of thought, feeling, communication, perception, and motivation.
This view of mental disorder also recognizes that all types of dysfunction do
not lead to a disorder. Only dysfunctions that result in significant harm to the per-
son are considered to be disorders. There are, for example, many types of physical
dysfunction, such as albinism, reversal of heart position, and fused toes, that clearly
represent a significant departure from the way that some biological process ordinar-
ily functions. These conditions are not considered to be disorders, however, because
they are not necessarily harmful to the person.
By definition, mental disorders are harmful to the person’s adjustment. They
typically affect family relationships, as well as success in educational and occupa-
tional activities. There are, of course, other types of harm associated with mental

-- 23 of 498 --

General Issues 	3
disorders. These include subjective distress, such as high levels of anxiety or depres-
sion, as well as more tangible outcomes, such as suicide.
The definition of abnormal behavior presented in the fifth edition of the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013), which in the United States is considered a standard diagnostic system,
incorporates many of the factors we have already discussed. According to this defi-
nition, a “mental disorder” is “a syndrome characterized by clinically significant dis-
turbance in an individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects
a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underly-
ing mental functioning” (p. 20). The manual also notes that mental disorders are
associated with subjective distress or impairment in social functioning. DSM-5 also
excludes several conditions from consideration as mental disorders. These include
(1) an expectable or culturally sanctioned response to a particular event (e.g., death
of a loved one); (2) socially deviant behavior (e.g., the actions of political, religious, or
sexual minorities); and (3) conflicts that are between the individual and society (e.g.,
voluntary efforts to express individuality).
The DSM definition places primary emphasis on the consequences of certain
behavioral syndromes. Accordingly, mental disorders are defined by clusters of per-
sistent, maladaptive behaviors that are associated with personal distress, such as
anxiety or depression, or with impairment in social functioning, such as job perfor-
mance or personal relationships. This definition, therefore, recognizes the concept of
dysfunction, and it spells out ways in which the harmful consequences of a disorder
might be identified.
The practical boundaries of abnormal behavior are defined by the list of dis-
orders included in the DSM. Therefore, the manual provides a simplistic, though
practical, explanation of how someone’s behavior might be considered pathological:
It would be considered abnormal if the person’s experiences fit the description of one
of the forms of mental disorder listed in the diagnostic manual. Conceptually, how-
ever, it could be argued that a valid and adequate description of a mental disorder,
such as major depression, cannot be restricted to its symptomatic picture. In order to
define and understand major depression, it is necessary to consider a description of
other clinical features (e.g., marital and health problems with which it is frequently
associated), as well as a number of additional issues, such as its typical course (onset,
duration, recurrence, relapse), prevalence (across gender and culture), patterns of
comorbidity, and vulnerability factors.
In an effort to move beyond the DSM-5 definition of mental disorder, many
researchers have moved toward empirical approaches of mapping dimensions of
dysfunction and their interrelatedness as opposed to relying on categorical diagno-
ses. The hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP) is a dimensional model
of psychopathology that includes most mental disorders (e.g., mood, anxiety, sub-
stance use, psychotic, and personality disorders) (Kotov et al., 2017). At the high-
est level is a general factor of psychopathology (p factor), which has been replicated
across several samples in many contexts (Caspi et al., 2014; Smith, Atkinson, Davis,
Riley, & Oltmanns, 2020). The p factor is shared across all dimensions of psychopa-
thology and represents an index of nonspecific impairment. Beneath the p factor are
three broad domains of internalizing disorders, externalizing disorders, and thought
disorder. Many argue that the structure of general personality is fundamental to

-- 24 of 498 --

4 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
understanding the HiTOP dimensional model of psychopathology, and that in order
to understand and define mental disorders, one must consider personality as a core
component to the manifestation of psychopathology (Widiger et al., 2019). Another
definition of psychopathology that has recently received attention is “network the-
ory,” an approach suggesting that mental disorders arise from the causal interaction
between symptoms within a given network (Borsboom, 2017).
Mental disorders are actually best conceived as “hypothetical constructs”
(Morey, 1991; Neale & Oltmanns, 1980), which simply are abstract, explanatory
devices. In the case of behavioral disorders, a hypothetical construct (i.e., a particu-
lar mental disorder) is an internal event whose existence is inferred on the basis of
observable behaviors and the context in which they occur. The construct itself cannot
be directly observed, but it is tied to overt referents that can be observed. For exam-
ple, we cannot measure major depression directly, but we can see that the person no
longer enjoys formerly pleasurable activities, has withdrawn from social contacts, is
sleeping more than usual, has lost their appetite, and frequently talks about feeling
worthless. Beyond these specific symptoms, the utility of a hypothetical construct
ultimately depends on the extent to which it enters into relationships with other
constructs and observable events (interrelated dimensions of human functioning).
With this approach, a mental disorder is therefore defined by more than simply the
diagnostic criteria identified in a manual such as DSM-5.
Clinically, this approach to defining a disorder (e.g., major depression) does not
imply that clinicians should disregard “official” diagnostic criteria. Rather, it sug-
gests that in order to conduct more comprehensive assessments and case formula-
tions of their clients, as well as to identify a more complete list of potential targets for
intervention, therapists should complement their diagnostic (DSM-based) evaluation
with a careful consideration of nonsymptomatic factors that have been empirically
associated with this disorder. One of our goals in this book is to provide a review of
research on the factors that appear to contribute to the nature of each of the several
specific forms of psychopathology.
In the chapters to come, authors focus on describing mental disorders, the impact
of those disorders on people who suffer from them, the factors that provoke and
maintain these disorders, and relevant evidence-based strategies for clinical inter-
ventions to alleviate them and/or help patients manage them. These chapters do not
delineate specific criteria from the official diagnostic manuals that are widely in use
(the DSM and the International Classification of Diseases [ICD]). If you are interested in
those criteria, we encourage you to review them in the manuals themselves: DSM-5
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) and ICD-11 (World Health Organization,
2019).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Basic understanding of mental disorders requires data about the frequency with
which these disorders occur. Moreover, important clinical, organizational, and
social decisions can be based on epidemiological information, such as whether
the frequency of a disorder has increased or decreased during a particular period,
whether it is more common in one geographic area than in another, and whether

-- 25 of 498 --

General Issues 	5
certain types of people—based on factors such as gender, ethnicity, and socioeco-
nomic status—are at greater risk than other types for the development of the disor-
der. Health administrators often use such information to make decisions about the
allocation of resources for professional training programs, treatment facilities, and
research projects. As described in this book, answers to such questions have also
provided insights and generated further research on possible risk factors for specific
disorders.
How prevalent are the various forms of abnormal behavior? One important data-
set regarding this question comes from a large-scale study known as the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R) conducted between 2001 and 2003 (Kes-
sler et al., 2005; Kessler, Merikangas, & Wang, 2007). We use this study to illustrate
an overall impression regarding the prevalence of mental disorders because it col-
lected evidence of many major forms of mental disorders simultaneously in one large
group of individuals. Specifically, members of the NCS-R research team interviewed
a nationally representative sample of approximately 9,000 people living in the con-
tinental United States. Questions were asked pertaining to several (but not all) of
the major disorders listed in DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). The
NCS-R found that 46% of the people they interviewed received at least one lifetime
diagnosis (meaning that they met the criteria for one of the disorders assessed at
some point during their lives), with first onset of symptoms usually occurring dur-
ing childhood or adolescence. This proportion of the population is much higher than
many people expect, and it underscores the point we made at the beginning of this
chapter: All of us can expect to encounter the challenges of a mental disorder—either
for ourselves or for someone we love—at some point during our lives.
Figure 1.1 illustrates some results from this study using 12-month prevalence
rates—the percentage of people who had experienced each disorder during the most
recent year. The most prevalent specific types of disorder were major depression
(17%) and alcohol abuse (13%). Various kinds of anxiety disorders were also relatively
common. Substantially lower prevalence rates were found for obsessive– compulsive
disorder and bipolar disorder, which each affect approximately 2% of the population.
These lifetime prevalence rates are consistent with data reported by other, subse-
quent studies regarding the prevalence of mental disorders. More specific and recent
evidence regarding specific forms of mental disorder are presented in each of the
later chapters in this book.
Although many mental disorders are quite common, they are not always seri-
ously debilitating. The NCS-R investigators assigned each case a score with regard
to severity, based on the magnitude and number of symptoms, as well as the level
of occupational and social impairment that the person experienced. Averaged across
all of the disorders diagnosed in the past 12 months, 40% of cases were rated as mild,
37% as moderate, and only 22% as severe. Mood disorders were most likely to be rated
as severe (45%), while anxiety disorders were less likely to be rated as severe (23%).
These findings have important clinical (and social) implications, as they suggest that
not all individuals meeting criteria of a diagnosis necessarily need immediate treat-
ment. At the same time, it is worth noting that interventions (of varied length and
intensity) might be beneficial for some individuals suffering from low-level distress
and impairment, as subclinical levels of symptoms can, for some disorders, signal
the eventual emergence of acute and severe symptoms.

-- 26 of 498 --

6 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Epidemiological studies such as the NCS-R have consistently found gender dif-
ferences for many types of mental disorder: Major depression, anxiety disorders,
trauma and stress-related disorders, and eating disorders are more common among
women; alcoholism and antisocial personality disorders are more common among
men. Patterns of this sort are highlighted throughout the chapters in this book as
clues for possible causal mechanisms in some of these disorders.
Epidemiologists also measure the extent of mental disorders’ impact on people’s
lives. The Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 included a systematic review of all
epidemiological data on diseases, injuries, and related risk factors across 187 coun-
tries from 1990 to 2010. Whiteford and colleagues (2015) examined the specific global
burden of mental, neurological, and substance use disorders from that sample in
2010 and found that these disorders accounted for 10.4% of global disability-adjusted
life years and 28.5% of global years lived with disability; mental disorders repre-
sented the largest proportion of disability-adjusted life years (56.7%) among these
types of disorders. Within the United States, mental and behavioral disorders are the
largest contributor to years lived with disability, and in particular, major depression,
anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders are among the top 15 contributors to
chronic disability and early mortality (Murray et al., 2013). The burden of mental dis-
orders has greatly increased in the past 10 years and will likely continue to increase
by the year 2030. These surprising results indicate strongly that mental disorders are
one of the world’s greatest health challenges.
FIGURE 1.1. Twelve-month prevalence rates for various mental disorders (NCS-R data).
Data from Kessler, Merikangas, and Wang (2007). PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder;
OCD, obsessive– compulsive disorder. The NCS-R used DSM-IV definitions of mental
disorders. Thus, PTSD and OCD were still considered forms of anxiety disorder, and the
distinction between substance dependence and substance abuse was still recognized.
Panic disorder
Social phobia
Generalized anxiety
PTSD
OCD
ANY ANXIETY DISORDER
Major depression
Bipolar disorder
ANY MOOD DISORDER
Alcohol abuse
Alcohol dependence
Drug abuse
Drug dependence
ANY SUBSTANCE DISORDER
0 	5 	10 	15 	20 	25 	30

-- 27 of 498 --

General Issues 	7
CULTURE AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
As evidence regarding the global burden of disease clearly documents, mental dis-
orders affect people all over the world. That does not mean, however, that the symp-
toms of psychopathology and the expression of emotional distress take the same
form in all cultures. Epidemiological studies comparing the frequency of mental
disorders in different cultures suggest that some disorders, such as schizophrenia,
show important consistencies in cross-cultural comparisons. They are found in vir-
tually every culture that social scientists have studied. Other disorders, such as buli-
mia nervosa, are more specifically associated with cultural factors, as revealed by
comparisons of prevalence in different parts of the world and changes in prevalence
over several generations. Almost 90% of patients with bulimia are women. Within
the United States, the incidence of bulimia is much higher among university women
than among working women, and it is more common among younger women than
among older women (Udo & Grilo, 2018). The prevalence of bulimia is much higher in
Western nations than in other parts of the world. Furthermore, the number of cases
increased dramatically during the latter part of the 20th century (Keel & Klump,
2003). As discussed later in this book, these patterns suggest that holding particular
sets of values related to eating and to women’s appearance is an important ingredi-
ent in establishing risk for development of an eating disorder.
The strength and nature of the relationship between culture and psychopathol-
ogy varies from one disorder to the next. Several general conclusions can be drawn
from cross-cultural studies of psychopathology (Draguns & Tanaka-Matsumi, 2003),
including the following points:
• All mental disorders are shaped, to some extent, by cultural factors.
• No mental disorders are entirely due to cultural or social factors.
• Psychotic disorders are less influenced by culture than are nonpsychotic dis-
orders.
• The symptoms of certain disorders are more likely to vary across cultures
than are the disorders themselves.
Clinicians must consider the influence of cultural factors in both the expression
and recognition of symptoms of mental disorders. People express extreme emotions
in ways that are shaped by the traditions of their families and other social groups
to which they belong. Intense, public displays of anger or grief might be expected
in one culture but be considered signs of disturbance in another. Interpretations of
emotional distress and other symptoms of disorder are influenced by the explana-
tions that a person’s culture assigns to such experiences. Religious beliefs, social
roles, and sexual identities all play an important part in constructing meanings that
are assigned to these phenomena (Hwang, Myers, Abe-Kim, & Ting, 2008). The most
obvious clinical implication one can derive from these important issues is that the
accuracy and utility of a clinical diagnosis depend on more than a simple count of
the symptoms that appear to be present. They also hinge on the clinician’s ability to
consider the cultural context in which the problem appeared. This is a particularly
challenging task when the clinician and the person with the problem do not share
the same cultural background.

-- 28 of 498 --

8 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Clinicians can also become sensitized to the importance of cultural issues by
considering cultural concepts of distress, patterns of erratic or unusual thinking and
behavior that have been identified in diverse societies around the world and do not
fit easily into the other diagnostic categories. A list of these syndromes is included
in the appendix of DSM-5. They have also been called “culture-bound syndromes,”
because they are considered to be unique to particular societies, particularly in non-
Western or developing countries. Their appearance is easily recognized and under-
stood to be a form of abnormal behavior by members of certain cultures, but they do
not conform to typical patterns of mental disorder seen widely across areas in the
United States or Europe. Cultural concepts of distress have also been called “idioms
of distress.” In other words, they represent a manner of expressing negative emotion
that is unique to a particular culture and cannot be easily translated or understood
in terms of its individual parts.
One syndrome of this type is a phenomenon known as ataques de nervios, which
has been observed most extensively among people from Puerto Rico and other Carib-
bean countries (Lewis-Fernández et al., 2002; San Miguel et al., 2006). Descriptions of
this experience include four dimensions, in which the essential theme is loss of con-
trol—an inability to interrupt the dramatic sequence of emotion and behavior. These
dimensions include emotional expressions (an explosion of screaming and crying,
coupled with overwhelming feelings of anxiety, depression, and anger), bodily sen-
sations (including trembling, heart palpitations, weakness, fatigue, headache, and
convulsions), actions and behaviors (dramatic, forceful gestures that include aggres-
sion toward others, suicidal thoughts or gestures, and trouble eating or sleeping),
and alterations in consciousness (marked feelings of “not being one’s usual self,”
accompanied by fainting, loss of consciousness, dizziness, and feelings of being out-
side of one’s body).
Ataques are typically provoked by situations that disrupt or threaten the per-
son’s social world, especially the family. Many ataques occur shortly after the per-
son learns unexpectedly that a close family member has died. Others result from an
imminent divorce or occur after a serious conflict with a child. Women are primarily
responsible for maintaining the integrity of the family in this culture, and they are
also more likely than men to experience ataques de nervios. Puerto Rican women from
poor and working-class families define themselves largely in terms of their success
in building and maintaining a cohesive family life. When this social role is threat-
ened, an ataque may result. This response to threat or conflict—an outburst of power-
ful, uncontrolled negative emotion—expresses suffering, while simultaneously pro-
viding a means for coping with the threat. It serves to signal the woman’s distress to
important other people and to rally needed sources of social support.
What is the relation between cultural concepts of distress and the formal cat-
egories listed in the DSM or the ICD? The answer is unclear and also varies from
one syndrome to the next. Are they similar problems that are simply given different
names in other cultures? Probably not, at least not in most instances (Guarnaccia &
Pincay, 2008). In some cases, people who exhibit behavior that would fit the definition
of a culture-bound syndrome would also qualify for another diagnosis, if diagnosed
by a clinician trained in the use of the diagnostic manual (Tolin, Robison, Gaztam-
bide, Horowitz, & Blank, 2007). But not everyone who displays the culture-bound

-- 29 of 498 --

General Issues 	9
syndrome meets criteria for another mental disorder, and of those who do, not all
would receive the same diagnosis.
The DSM’s glossary on cultural concepts of distress has been praised as a sig-
nificant advance toward integrating cultural considerations into the classification
system (Trinh, Son, & Chen, 2019). It has also been criticized for its ambiguity. The
most difficult conceptual issue involves the boundary between culture-bound
syndromes and categories found elsewhere in the diagnostic manual. Some critics
have noted that if culturally unique disorders must be listed separately from other,
“mainstream” conditions, then certain disorders now listed in the main body of the
manual—especially eating disorders, such as bulimia—should actually be listed as
culture-bound syndromes. Like ataques de nervios, bulimia nervosa is a condition that
is found primarily among a limited number of cultures (Keel & Klump, 2003). “Dis-
sociative amnesia”—the inability to recall important personal information regarding
a traumatic event—also resembles culture-bound syndromes because it appears to be
experienced only by people living in modern, developed cultures (Pope, Poliakoff,
Parker, Boynes, & Hudson, 2007).
Though it is imperfect, DSM-5’s list of cultural concepts of distress raises impor-
tant conceptual and clinical implications. The fact that some diagnostic categories
that are familiar to most mental health professionals working in Western or devel-
oped countries are unique to their cultural environment helps to challenge the fre-
quently held assumption that culture shapes only conditions that appear to be exotic
in faraway lands. At a more direct, clinical level, the glossary serves to make clini-
cians more aware of the extent to which their own views of what is normal and
abnormal have been shaped by the values and experiences of their own culture
(Mezzich, Berganza, & Ruiperez, 2001).
DSM-5 also now includes the Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI), a supple-
mental module that serves as a semistructured assessment tool to assist providers in
clarifying the contribution of culture to clinical symptoms at any point during clini-
cal care (Lewis-Fernández et al., 2014). The core interview, the first and main com-
ponent of the CFI, includes 16 open-ended questions related to a cultural definition
of the psychological problem, cultural perceptions related to the problem (e.g., with
regard to cause, context, and support), and cultural factors affecting coping or help-
seeking behaviors. Other components of the CFI include an informant report and
other supplemental modules that can be used as needed. The CFI can be used with
any client, regardless of whether a clinician has questions about how their culture
may impact the presentation of clinical symptoms, and the CFI serves as a valuable
tool to ensure that relevant and important cultural factors are not missed during case
conceptualization and throughout treatment.
CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
One might argue that efforts to classify mental disorders are as important and have
raised as much controversy as efforts to define them. Despite many tribulations and
debates associated with the classification of psychopathology, this process has served
several purposes. A classification system helps clinicians to (1) identify (as accurately

-- 30 of 498 --

10 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
and comprehensively as possible) their clients’ problems and (2) formulate a plan of
intervention that is most likely to be effective for these difficulties. A classification
system also serves an important role in the search for new knowledge. The history
of medicine is filled with examples of problems that were recognized long before
they could be treated successfully. The classification of a specific set of symptoms
has often laid the foundation for research that eventually identified a cure or a way
of preventing the disorder.
Modern classification systems in psychiatry were introduced shortly after
World War II. During the 1950s and 1960s, psychiatric classification was widely criti-
cized. One major criticism focused on the lack of consistency in diagnostic deci-
sions (Nathan & Langenbucher, 2003). Independent clinicians frequently disagreed
with one another about the use of diagnostic categories. Objections were also raised
from philosophical, sociological, and political points of view. For example, some crit-
ics charged that diagnostic categories in psychiatry would be more appropriately
viewed as “problems in living” than as medical disorders (Szasz, 1963). Others were
concerned about the negative impact of using diagnostic labels. In other words, once
a psychiatric diagnosis is assigned, the person so labeled might experience discrimi-
nation of various kinds, and also find it more difficult to establish and maintain
relationships with other people. These are all serious problems that continue to be
the topic of important, ongoing discussions involving mental health professionals, as
well as patients and their families. Debates regarding these issues did fuel important
improvements in the diagnosis of mental disorders, including emphasis on the use
of detailed criterion sets for each disorder.
Currently, two diagnostic systems for mental disorders are widely recognized.
We have already mentioned DSM-5, which is published by the American Psychiatric
Association. The other—the ICD—is published by the World Health Organization.
Both systems were first developed shortly after World War II and have been revised
several times. The World Health Organization’s manual is in its 11th edition and
is therefore known as ICD-11. Deliberate attempts are made to coordinate the pro-
duction of DSM and ICD manuals. Most of the categories listed in the manuals are
identical, and the criteria for specific disorders are usually similar. More than 200
specific diagnostic categories are described in the current edition of DSM. Impor-
tantly, under both systems (DSM and ICD), a person can be assigned more than one
diagnosis if they meet criteria for more than one disorder.
EVALUATION OF PSYCHIATRIC CLASSIFICATION
The most important issue in the evaluation of a diagnostic category is whether it is
useful (Kendell & Jablensky, 2003). By knowing that a person fits into a particular
group or class, do we learn anything meaningful about that person? For example, is
the person who fits the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia likely to improve when
they are given antipsychotic medication? Or is that person likely to have a less sat-
isfactory level of social adjustment in five years than a person who meets diagnostic
criteria for bipolar mood disorder? Does the diagnosis tell us anything about the fac-
tors or circumstances that might have contributed to the onset of this problem? These
questions are concerned with the validity of the diagnostic category.

-- 31 of 498 --

General Issues 	11
Validity is, in a sense, a reflection of the success that has been achieved in under-
standing the nature of a disorder. Have important facts been discovered? Systematic
studies aimed at establishing the validity of a disorder may proceed in a sequence
of phases (Robins & Guze, 1989). After a clinical description has been established,
diagnostic categories are refined and validated through a process of scientific explo-
ration. Unfortunately, relatively few of the disorders listed in the official diagnostic
manual are supported by an extensive set of research evidence supporting all pos-
sible aspects of validity.
It may be helpful to think of different forms of validity in terms of their relation-
ship in time with the appearance of symptoms of the disorder. Etiological validity is
concerned with factors that contribute to the onset of the disorder. These are things
that have happened in the past. Was the disorder regularly triggered by a specific
set of events or circumstances? Did it run in families? The ultimate question with
regard to etiological validity is whether there are any specific causal factors that
are regularly, and perhaps uniquely, associated with this disorder. If we know that
a person exhibits the symptoms of the disorder, do we in turn learn anything about
the circumstances that originally led to the onset of the problem?
Concurrent validity is concerned with the present time and with correlations
between the disorder and other symptoms, circumstances, and test procedures. Is
the disorder currently associated with any other types of behavior, such as perfor-
mance on psychological tests? Do precise measures of biological variables, such as
brain structure and function, distinguish reliably between people who have the dis-
order and those who do not? Clinical studies aimed at developing a more precise
description of a disorder also fall into this type of validity.
Predictive validity is concerned with the future and with the stability of the prob-
lem over time. Will it be persistent? If it is short-lived, how long will an episode last?
Will the disorder have a predictable outcome? Do people with this problem typically
improve if they are given a specific type of medication or a particular form of psy-
chotherapy?
The overall utility of a diagnostic category depends on the body of evidence that
accumulates as scientists seek answers to questions raised by these multiple forms
of validity (reliability, or consistency of the diagnostic decisions, is also crucial, as it
precedes validity). At this point in time, some disorders included in the diagnostic
manual are based on a much more extensive foundation of evidence than others.
Thus, more research needs to confirm and enhance the validity (thus, the utility)
of our current diagnostic categories. Such research should be conducted in parallel
with other efforts (conceptual and empirical) to address serious criticism directed
toward the diagnostic manual.
LIMITATIONS OF AND POSSIBLE IMPROVEMENTS TO THE DSM
Developing each edition of the DSM involves a tremendous amount of work (with
regard to both theory and research), and each new edition represents an improve-
ment over previous ones (see Frances & Widiger, 2012). Nevertheless, several endur-
ing issues remain to be resolved. One fundamental question that applies to every
disorder involves the boundary between normal and abnormal behavior. DSM-5

-- 32 of 498 --

12 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
is based on a categorical approach to classification, but most of the symptoms that
define the disorders are actually dimensional in nature. Depressed mood, for exam-
ple, can vary continuously, from the complete absence of depression to moderate
levels of depression, on up to severe levels of depression. The same issue applies
to symptoms of anxiety disorders, eating disorders, and substance use disorders.
These are all continuously distributed phenomena, and there is not a bright line that
divides people with problems from those who do not have problems. DSM-5 does
include a greater focus on dimensional conceptualizations of certain disorders (e.g.,
including a spectrum for schizophrenia and for substance use disorders, the alterna-
tive model of personality disorder in Section III) in comparison to DSM-IV. Never-
theless, the DSM remains a categorical classification of separate disorders.
The absence of a specific definition of social impairment is another conceptual
and clinical issue that has plagued the current diagnostic manual. Most disorders in
the DSM include the requirement that a particular set of symptoms causes “clinically
significant distress or impairment in social or occupational functioning.” However,
no specific measurement procedures are provided to make this determination. Men-
tal health professionals must rely on their own subjective judgment of a person’s
symptoms to decide how distressed or how impaired a person must be in order to
qualify for a diagnosis. There is an important need for more specific definitions of
these concepts, and better measurement tools are needed for their assessment.
In addition, criticisms of the current classification system have emphasized
broad conceptual issues. Some clinicians and investigators have argued that the syn-
dromes defined in the DSM do not represent the most useful ways to think about
psychological problems, in terms of either planning current treatments or designing
programs of research. For example, it might be better to focus on more homogeneous
dimensions of dysfunction, such as anxiety or angry hostility, rather than on syn-
dromes (groups of symptoms) (Smith & Combs, 2010). Clinically and empirically, this
raises questions such as the following: Should we design treatments for people who
exhibit distorted, negative ways of thinking about themselves, regardless of whether
their symptoms happen to involve a mixture of depression, anxiety, or some other
pattern of negative emotion or interpersonal conflict? Indeed, in recent years there
has been a greater move toward the development and implementation of transdiag-
nostic treatments for mental disorders (e.g., the unified protocol for transdiagnostic
treatment of emotional disorders; Barlow et al., 2017).
No definite answer is available at this point in time. It would certainly be prema-
ture to cut off consideration of these alternatives just because they address problems
in a way that deviates from the official diagnostic manual. In our current state of
uncertainty, diversity of opinion should be encouraged, particularly if it is grounded
in cautious skepticism and supported by rigorous scientific inquiry.
From an empirical and clinical point of view, the DSM is hampered by a num-
ber of problems that suggest it does not classify clinical problems into syndromes
in the simplest and most beneficial way (Helzer, Kraemer, & Krueger, 2006). One of
the thorniest issues involves “comorbidity,” which is defined as the simultaneous
appearance of two or more disorders in the same person. Comorbidity rates are very
high for mental disorders as defined in the DSM system (Eaton, South, & Krueger,
2010). For example, in the NCS, among those people who qualified for at least one
diagnosis at some point during their lifetime, 56% met the criteria for two or more

-- 33 of 498 --

General Issues 	13
disorders. A small subgroup, 14% of the sample, actually met the diagnostic criteria
for three or more lifetime disorders. That group of people accounted for almost 90%
of the severe disorders in the study.
There are several ways to interpret comorbidity (Krueger, 2002). Some people
may independently develop two separate conditions. In other cases, the presence
of one disorder may lead to the onset of another. Unsuccessful attempts to struggle
with prolonged alcohol dependence, for example, might lead a person to become
depressed. Neither of these alternatives creates conceptual problems for the DSM; it
makes sense that some people have more than one disorder and that one disorder can
lead to another. Unfortunately, the high rates of comorbidity that have been observed
empirically suggest that these explanations account for a small proportion of overlap
between categories. In a large proportion of cases, the overlapping manifestations of
more than one disorder do not seem to reflect clearly distinct diagnostic constructs.
Major clinical problems associated with comorbidity can arise when a person
with a mixed pattern of symptoms, usually of a severe nature, simultaneously meets
the criteria for more than one disorder. Consider, for example, a client who was
treated by one of us (T. F. O.). This man experienced a large number of diffuse prob-
lems associated with anxiety, depression, and interpersonal difficulties. According
to the DSM system, he would have met the criteria for major depressive disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and obsessive– compulsive disorder, as well as three
types of personality disorder. It might be said, therefore, that he suffered from at
least six types of mental disorder. But is that really helpful? Is it the best way to think
about his problems? Would it be more accurate to say that he had a complicated set
of interrelated problems that were associated with worrying, rumination, and the
regulation of high levels of negative emotion, and that these problems constituted
one complex and severe type of disorder?
The comorbidity issue is related to another limitation of the DSM: the failure to
make better use of information regarding the course of mental disorders over time.
More than 100 years ago, when schizophrenia and bipolar mood disorder were origi-
nally described, the distinction between them was based heavily on observations
regarding their long-term course. Unfortunately, most disorders listed in the DSM
are defined largely in terms of snapshots of symptoms at particular points in time.
Diagnostic decisions are seldom based on a comprehensive analysis of the way that
a person’s problems evolve over time. If someone meets the criteria for more than
one disorder, does it matter which one came first? Is there a predictable pattern in
which certain disorders follow the onset of others? What is the nature of the connec-
tion between childhood disorders and adult problems? Our knowledge of mental
disorders would be greatly enriched if greater emphasis were placed on questions
regarding lifespan development (Buka & Gilman, 2002; Oltmanns & Balsis, 2011).
Progress on understanding some of the traditional diagnostic categories in the
DSM has been quite slow over the past 50 years, and it has led many to wonder
whether there are better ways to approach classification and thus treatment. A num-
ber of alternative models of psychopathology have been developed as a counter to
the “top-down,” categorically based DSM classification system. HiTOP, as described
earlier, was developed to understand the natural organization of psychopathology
(Kotov et al., 2017) and emerged with a hierarchical dimensional structure of psy-
chopathology, including a single general p factor and three broad domains under the

-- 34 of 498 --

14 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
p factor (internalizing, externalizing, and thought disorder) (Smith et al., 2020). The
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC; Insel et al., 2010) framework was created by the
National Institute of Mental Health to encourage the development of a dimensional
classification system of psychological processes that link with specific neural bases
and are related to various aspects of psychopathology. A main goal of RDoC is to
understand biological processes relevant to psychopathology, and many researchers
are now taking this approach to studying psychopathology. Whether a “bottom-up”
approach will yield better results in understanding clinical problems is a question
that is likely to remain at the forefront of the mental health field in the decade ahead.
The classification issues identified earlier are being considered by the experts
who develop each new edition of the DSM and the ICD. Of course, all of them will
not be solved immediately. Attempts to provide solutions to these problems and limi-
tations ensure that the classification system will continue to be revised. As before,
these changes will be driven by the interaction of clinical experience and empirical
evidence. Students, clinicians, and research investigators should all remain skepti-
cal when using this classification system and its successors. At the same time, the
complexity of psychopathology and its treatment should encourage all scholars and
providers in the field of mental health to pay close attention to our current knowl-
edge, and to derive from it new and creative ways to think about and intervene with
mental disorders. The following chapters in this book have been written with this
goal in mind.
REFERENCES
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Barlow, D. H., Farchione, T. J., Bullis, J. R., Gallagher, M. W., Murray-Latin, H., Sauer-Zavala,
S., . . . Ametaj, A. (2017). The unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emotional
disorders compared with diagnosis-specific protocols for anxiety disorders: A random-
ized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 74(9), 875–884.
Borsboom, D. (2017). A network theory of mental disorders. World Psychiatry, 16(1), 5–13.
Buka, S. L., & Gilman, S. E. (2002). Psychopathology and the lifecourse. In J. E. Helzer & J. J.
Hudziak (Eds.), Defining psychopathology in the 21st century (pp. 129–142). Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Caspi, A., Houts, R. M., Belsky, D. W., Goldman-Mellor, S. J., Harrington, H., Israel, S., . . .
Moffitt, T. E. (2014). The p factor: One general psychopathology factor in the structure of
psychiatric disorders? Clinical Psychological Science, 2, 119–137.
Draguns, J. G., & Tanaka-Matsumi, J. (2003). Assessment of psychopathology across and
within cultures: Issues and findings. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 755–776.
Eaton, N. R., South, S. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2010). The meaning of comorbidity among common
mental disorders. In T. Millon, R. F. Krueger, & E. Simonsen (Eds.), Contemporary direc-
tions in psychopathology: Scientific foundations of the DSM-V and ICD-11 (pp. 223–241). New
York: Guilford Press.
Frances, A. J., & Widiger, T. (2012). Psychiatric diagnosis: Lessons from the DSM-IV past and
cautions for the DSM-5 future. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 109–130.
Guarnaccia, P., & Pincay, I. M. (2008). Culture-specific diagnoses and their relationship to

-- 35 of 498 --

General Issues 	15
mood disorders. In S. Loue & M. Sajatovic (Eds.), Diversity issues in the diagnosis, treatment
and research of mood disorders (pp. 32–53). New York: Oxford University Press.
Helzer, J. E., Kraemer, H. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2006). The feasibility and need for dimensional
psychiatric diagnoses. Psychological Medicine, 36(12), 1671–1680.
Hwang, W., Myers, H. F., Abe-Kim, J., & Ting, J. Y. (2008). A conceptual paradigm for under-
standing culture’s impact on mental health. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 211–227.
Insel, T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K., . . . Wang, P. (2010).
Research domain criteria (RDoC): Toward a new classification framework for research
on mental disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 748–751.
Keel, P. K., & Klump, K. L. (2003). Are eating disorders culture-bound syndromes?: Implica-
tions for conceptualizing their etiology. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 747–769.
Kendell, R., & Jablensky, A. (2003). Distinguishing between the validity and utility of psychi-
atric diagnoses. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 4–12.
Kessler, R. C., Demier, O., Frank, R. G., Olfson, M., Pincus, H., Walters, E. E., . . . Zaslavsky,
A. M. (2005). Prevalence and treatment of mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. New England
Journal of Medicine, 352, 2515–2523.
Kessler, R. C., Merikangas, K. R., & Wang, P. S. (2007). Prevalence, comorbidity, and service
utilization for mood disorders in the United States at the beginning of the twenty-first
century. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 137–158.
Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., Althoff, R. R., Bagby, R. M., . . . Eaton,
N. R. (2017). The Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP): A dimensional
alternative to traditional nosologies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126(4), 454–477.
Krueger, R. F. (2002). Psychometric perspectives on co-morbidity. In J. E. Helzer & J. J. Hudziak
(Eds.), Defining psychopathology in the 21st century (pp. 41–54). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Lewis-Fernández, R., Aggarwal, N. K., Bäärnhielm, S., Rohlof, H., Kirmayer, L. J., Weiss, M. G.,
. . . Lu, F. (2014). Culture and psychiatric evaluation: Operationalizing cultural formula-
tion for DSM-5. Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 77(2), 130–154.
Lewis-Fernández, R., Guarnaccia, P. J., Martínez, I. E., Salmán, E., Schmidt, A., & Liebowitz,
M. (2002). Comparative phenomenology of ataques de nervios, panic attacks, and panic
disorder. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 26, 199–223.
Mezzich, J. E., Berganza, C. E., & Ruiperez, M. A. (2001). Culture in DSM-IV, ICD-10, and
evolving diagnostic systems. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 24, 407–419.
Morey, L. C. (1991). Classification of mental disorders as a collection of hypothetical con-
structs. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 289–293.
Murray, C. J., Abraham, J., Ali, M. K., Alvarado, M., Atkinson, C., Baddour, L. M., . . . Bolliger,
I. (2013). The state of US health, 1990–2010: Burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 310(6), 591–606.
Nathan, P. E., & Langenbucher, J. (2003). Diagnosis and classification. In G. Stricker, T. A.
Widiger, & I. B. Weiner (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Vol. 8. Clinical psychology (pp. 3–26).
New York: Wiley.
Neale, J. M., & Oltmanns, T. F. (1980). Schizophrenia. New York: Wiley.
Oltmanns, T. F., & Balsis, S. (2011). Personality pathology in later life: Questions about the
measurement, course, and impact of disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7,
321–349.
Pilgrim, D. (2005). Defining mental disorder: Tautology in the service of sanity in British men-
tal health legislation. Journal of Mental Health, 14, 435–443.
Pope, H. G., Poliakoff, M. B., Parker, M. P., Boynes, M., & Hudson, J. I. (2007). Is dissociative
amnesia a culture-bound syndrome?: Findings from a survey of historical literature. Psy-
chological Medicine, 37, 225–233.
Robins, E., & Guze, S. (1989). Establishment of diagnostic validity in psychiatric illness. In L.

-- 36 of 498 --

16 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
N. Robins & J. E. Barrett (Eds.), The validity of psychiatric diagnosis (pp. 177–197). New York:
Raven Press.
San Miguel, V. E. F., Guarnaccia, P. J., Shrout, P. E., Lewis-Fernandez, R., Canino, G. J., &
Ramirez, R. R. (2006). A quantitative analysis of ataque de nervios in Puerto Rico: Further
examination of a cultural syndrome. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Science, 28, 313–330.
Smith, G. T., Atkinson, E. A., Davis, H. A., Riley, E. N., & Oltmanns, J. R. (2020). The general
factor of psychopathology. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 16, 75–98.
Smith, G. T., & Combs, J. (2010). Issues of construct validity in psychological diagnoses. In T.
Millon, R. F. Krueger, & E. Simonsen (Eds.), Contemporary directions in psychopathology:
Scientific foundations of the DSM-V and ICD-11 (pp. 205–222). New York: Guilford Press.
Szasz, T. (1963). Law, liberty, and psychiatry: An inquiry into the social uses of mental health practices.
New York: Macmillan.
Tolin, D. F., Robison, J. T., Gaztambide, S., Horowitz, S., & Blank, K. (2007). Ataques de nervios
and psychiatric disorders in older Puerto Rican primary care patients. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 38, 659–669.
Trinh, N.-H. T., Son, M., & Chen, J. A. (2019). Culture in the DSM-5. In N.-H. T. Trinh & J. A.
Chen (Eds.), Sociocultural issues in psychiatry: A casebook and curriculum (pp. 37–49). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Udo, T., & Grilo, C. M. (2018). Prevalence and correlates of DSM-5-defined eating disorders
in a nationally representative sample of U.S. adults. Biological Psychiatry, 84(5), 345–354.
Wakefield, J. C. (1992). The concept of mental disorder: On the boundary between biological
facts and social values. American Psychologist, 47, 373–388.
Wakefield, J. C. (2010). Taking disorder seriously: A critique of psychiatric criteria for men-
tal disorders from the harmful-dysfunction perspective. In T. Millon, R. F. Krueger, &
E. Simonsen (Eds.), Contemporary directions in psychopathology: Scientific foundations of the
DSM-V and ICD-11 (pp. 275–300). New York: Guilford Press.
Whiteford, H. A., Ferrari, A. J., Degenhardt, L., Feigin, V., & Vos, T. (2015). The global burden of
mental, neurological and substance use disorders: An analysis from the Global Burden
of Disease Study 2010. PLOS ONE, 10(2), e0116820.
Widiger, T. A., & Clark, L. A. (2000). Toward DSM-5 and the classification of psychopathology.
Psychological Bulletin, 126, 946–963.
Widiger, T. A., Frances, A. P., Pincus, H. A., Davis, W. W., & First, M. B. (1991). Toward an
empirical classification for the DSM-IV. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 280–288.
Widiger, T. A., Sellbom, M., Chmielewski, M., Clark, L. A., DeYoung, C. G., Kotov, R., . . .
Wright, A. G. C. (2019). Personality in a hierarchical model of psychopathology. Clinical
Psychology Science, 7, 77–92.
World Health Organization. (2019). International classification of diseases and related health prob-
lems, 11th revision. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Zachar, P., & Kendler, K. S. (2007). Psychiatric disorders: A conceptual taxonomy. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 557–565.

-- 37 of 498 --

17
It is estimated that 16% of the general population experiences clinically significant
depression in a given 12-month period (Kessler, Tat Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005).
In addition to the impact on affected individuals and their families, depressive disor-
ders place a burden of almost $50 billion per year on the American economy, account-
ing for over 20% of costs for all mental illness (Stewart, Ricci, Chee, Hahn, & Mor-
ganstein, 2003). Compared to other physical and mental disorders, depression is the
leading cause of disability worldwide according to the World Health Organization
(James et al., 2018). Given the substantial personal and societal costs of this disorder,
efforts to identify vulnerability factors and effective interventions for depression are
particularly important.
Our goal in this chapter is to present basic psychopathology research in depres-
sion and to discuss the treatment implications of these findings. Though all depres-
sive disorders share similar features (Gotlib & LeMoult, 2014), there are some impor-
tant differences between diagnostic categories that are not covered in this chapter.
Instead, we focus here on depressive symptoms in general and major depressive
disorder (MDD) in particular. We first describe the phenomenology of depression,
including its associated clinical features and course. We then discuss the etiology of
depression and focus in particular on novel empirical findings. After each section,
we address the clinical implications of the findings. This is a timely and important
task because, even though effective depression treatments exist, these interventions
have undergone few changes in the past decades, and rates of recurrence of depres-
sion are still high even after successful treatment.
C H A P T E R 2
Depression
Joelle LeMoult
Ashley Battaglini
Katerina Rnic
Louis G. Castonguay

-- 38 of 498 --

18 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), for example, is currently one of the most
empirically supported and effective treatments for this emotional disorder. It is fas-
cinating to see, however, that CBT for depression has undergone few changes in the
last 50 years. This is surprising given the impressive increase in depression research
in recent years, which has led to important improvements in models of depression,
including cognitive models, regarding the risk for the onset and maintenance of this
disorder. This is not by any means unique to CBT; Joiner and Timmons (2009) note
that proponents of interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) have yet to incorporate sev-
eral basic findings from interpersonal research. Indeed, the majority of treatment–
outcome research on IPT has used existing IPT protocols (Markowitz & Weissman,
2012).
PHENOMENOLOGY
As described earlier, we first review the phenomenology of depression. Toward this
goal, we describe the clinical symptoms, associated clinical features, prevalence,
course and outcome, and common comorbid conditions. We then discuss the clinical
implications of these findings.
Typical Symptoms
Depression is typified by low mood and/or loss of interest or pleasure in daily activi-
ties. People with MDD also experience cognitive, affective, and somatic difficul-
ties, such as weight/appetite disturbance, sleep disturbance, psychomotor agitation/
retardation, fatigue, feelings of worthlessness or guilt, and difficulty concentrating.
Thoughts of suicide or death are also present in MDD at rates higher than those in
the general population (as reviewed by Klonsky, Saffer, & Bryan, 2018).
The diagnostic criteria place much emphasis on vegetative or somatic symptoms
of depression, but it is important to note that these symptoms are not specific to
depression and are observed in many disorders, such as generalized anxiety disor-
der (GAD). There is evidence, however, to support the view that these symptoms are
important to diagnosis but may not be central to the disorder. Mitchell, Goodwin,
Johnson, and Hirschfeld (2008) found that somatic symptoms, when present, have
high rule-in value for diagnosis but do not provide adequate classification on their
own. Instead, according to these authors, mood and emotional symptoms are most
clinically useful for making accurate diagnoses. This suggests that somatic symp-
toms play a role in depression but may not be central to the disorder in all cases. That
being said, somatic symptoms do have prognostic significance; they are associated
with more severe depression and predict greater depressive symptoms 6 months and
2 years later (Hung, Liu, Wang, Juang, & Yang, 2010).
However, what seems to particularly define depression across heterogeneous
presentations is that it is a disorder of mood or affect. As a consequence, many newer
etiological models of depression emphasize difficulties in emotion regulation as a
central feature of the disorder (LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019; Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, &
Lyubomirsky, 2008). Thus, we discuss emotion regulation in more detail in the etiol-
ogy section of this chapter.

-- 39 of 498 --

Depression 	19
Associated Clinical Features
Depression is associated with several common clinical features not included in the
diagnostic criteria. Anger or hostility is often a characteristic of depression (e.g., Pai-
nuly, Grover, Gupta, & Mattoo, 2011). Importantly, it seems that irritability is cor-
related with higher severity of depression (Perlis et al., 2005) and that it represents
an additional risk factor within this population rather than a subtype of irritable
depression. Others have also found that anger distinguished those with a history of
a suicide attempt from those without one (Jandl, Steyer, & Kaschka, 2010; Perlis et al.,
2005). Moreover, anger also appears to characterize depressed individuals’ relation-
ships with others, including friends, strangers, therapists, and spouses (Coyne, Bur-
chill, & Stiles, 1991; Joiner, 2002). It is notable in this context that irritability is listed in
the DSM as a symptom of depression in children and adolescents, but not in adults.
Interpersonal problems associated with depression are not restricted to hostil-
ity. Depressed individuals show social skills deficits and tend to seek both excessive
reassurance and negative feedback from others. These aversive interpersonal behav-
iors can lead to frustration in close others and eventually, to rejection. Moreover,
evidence from longitudinal studies indicates that excessive reassurance seeking and
negative feedback seeking are robust risk factors for depression (Evraire & Dozois,
2011; Joiner & Timmons, 2009). Considering such interpersonal difficulties, it is not
surprising that depression has been associated with elevated levels of marital dissat-
isfaction and discord, which appear to be both causes and consequences of depres-
sion (Davila, Stroud, & Starr, 2009; Joiner & Timmons, 2009).
The most serious associated feature of MDD is the increased risk for suicide.
While death by suicide is rare, the consequences are dire. Depressive disorders are
among the psychiatric disorders associated with the highest risk for suicide (as also
reviewed by Bryan & Klonsky, Chapter 15, this volume). The likelihood of attempt-
ing suicide increases with depression severity, and acute and intense negative mood
tends to precede attempts (Berman, 2009). Recent research has identified risk factors
associated with suicidal ideation and attempts (Klonsky et al., 2018). Klonsky and
May’s (2015) three-step theory of suicide posits that the transition from suicide ide-
ation to attempt occurs in three steps. In Step 1, the combination of pain (often psy-
chological pain) and hopelessness leads to suicidal ideation. In Step 2, ideation esca-
lates if pain exceeds level of connectedness with others, with valued roles, or with a
sense of meaning and purpose. In Step 3, this can escalate to a suicide attempt if the
individual has the capacity to attempt suicide. This includes dispositional capacity
(e.g., high pain threshold, low fear of death), acquired capacity (habituation to pain,
fear, or death through exposure to life events involving these themes), and practical
capacity (knowledge and access to lethal means). Importantly, psychological pain,
hopelessness, and low connectedness are all common features of depression.
Individuals with depression also display significant distress and/or impairment
across domains of functioning. For example, depression is associated with sexual
dysfunction, as well as relationship or marital problems (see Sbarra, Manvelian,
Salinger, & Whisman, Chapter 12, and Pukall & Bergeron, Chapter 13, this volume).
It is also frequently noted that occupational difficulties, including unemployment,
absenteeism, and reduced work performance, are common in depression and are
associated with greater symptom severity (e.g., Birnbaum et al., 2010).

-- 40 of 498 --

20 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Medical conditions are frequently comorbid with MDD. While there does not
seem to be a consensus regarding whether (or which) medical conditions predict
the occurrence of depressive episodes, numerous prospective studies have shown
that depression increases the likelihood of physical illness (e.g., Salaycik et al., 2007).
While depression may lead to physical illness as a result of engagement in maladap-
tive health behaviors (e.g., sedentary lifestyle, poor nutrition), there is also strong
evidence that depression is associated with higher levels of systemic inflammation.
Over time, high levels of inflammation may not only promote depressive symptoms
but also result in the physical diseases commonly comorbid with depression (e.g.,
arthritis, cardiovascular disease, cancer; Slavich & Irwin, 2014). When a medical con-
dition co-occurs with depression, the course of the medical condition is often longer,
and the condition may complicate treatments for depression (Carney & Freedland,
2017; Freedland & Carney, 2009). Given its effects on physical health, it follows that
depression also impacts all-cause mortality rates, particularly among older individu-
als. Evidence suggests that the mortality rate for people over age 55 increases three
to four times with depression, and that mortality is substantially higher among indi-
viduals with depression during the first year living in a nursing home (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013).
It should also be noted that cognitive factors are closely associated with depres-
sion. As described in the section on etiology, some cognitive content and processes
have been identified as risk factors for depression (e.g., biased information process-
ing), whereas others (e.g., negative automatic thoughts) appear as features or symp-
toms of current depression episodes.
Epidemiology
Depression is highly prevalent, with lifetime prevalence rates varying between 10
and 21% (Hasin, Sarvet, & Meyers, 2018). The 12-month and lifetime prevalence rate
is between 13 and 26% for women, and between 7 and 15% for men (Hasin et al.,
2018). Prevalence rates differ considerably by age group, with higher prevalence rates
in individuals ages 18–64 years compared to individuals 65 years or older (Hasin et
al., 2018). Interestingly, there has been a steady increase in prevalence rates of depres-
sion since World War II (Kessler et al., 2003). Although there are some discrepan-
cies, most studies indicate that prevalence rates differ among people who identify
as White, Asian, Native American, Hispanic, and Black (e.g., Hasin et al., 2018). For
example, Hasin and colleagues (2018) reported higher prevalence rates in individu-
als who identify as White or Native American compared to individuals who identify
as Asian, Hispanic, or Black in the United States. Higher rates of depression are also
found among people living in poverty or who have less education (Kessler et al.,
2003). Furthermore, the manifestation of depression symptoms can vary across cul-
tures and ethnic groups. For instance, somatic complaints are more common in some
non-Western populations, highlighting how culture can dramatically influence how
clients present their complaints (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Another key finding is that women are 1.5 to 3 times as likely as men to experi-
ence depressive episodes (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The gender dif-
ference in rates of depression begins to present around age 13 (Hankin et al., 1998),
and the likelihood of developing depression is twofold for females compared to
males by age 15 (Cyranowski, Frank, Young, & Shear, 2000). This gender gap may be

-- 41 of 498 --

Depression 	21
influenced by pubertal maturation differences between females and males, and the
hormonal changes that occur during this time (e.g., changes in gonadal hormones;
Cyranowski et al., 2000). However, the biological changes during puberty are not
solely responsible for depression onset, as they interact with an increase in negative
life events that occur during this developmental period (Cyranowski et al., 2000). A
critical explanation for gender differences in the prevalence of depression is that dif-
ferences in emotion regulation make females more prone than males to respond to
major life events with depressive episodes (Jose & Brown, 2008; Nolen-Hoeksema et
al., 2008). We return to this explanation later in the chapter when we discuss etiologi-
cal models of the disorder.
Course
The first onset of a major depressive episode can occur at any age, with data from
prospective studies suggesting that the first onset of depression typically occurs dur-
ing adolescence (Kim-Cohen et al., 2003). An earlier age of onset is associated with
greater impairment across several domains (e.g., social and occupational function-
ing, quality of life, suicide attempts, recurrence; e.g., Zisook et al., 2007). Importantly,
individuals who develop depression frequently report a history of depressive symp-
toms even before their first episode. Put another way, subclinical forms of depres-
sion are very common and may predict the onset of clinical episodes of the disorder
(Jeuring, Huisman, Comijs, Stek, & Beekman, 2016).
Moreover, depression can be both a chronic and recurrent disorder. The typical
time to recovery from a depressive episode ranges from 3 to 6 months; however, a
proportion of individuals continue to meet criteria for a depressive episode a year
after initial diagnosis (Whiteford et al., 2013). In a recent study, approximately 37.6%
of a depressed sample experienced a subsequent depressive episode within 4 years
of remission (Scholten et al., 2016). Research shows that the probability of onset of
another episode of depression increases by 16% with every episode a person experi-
ences (Solomon et al., 2000).
Even though initial success rates of treatment are high, relapse rates also remain
high; thus, there is considerable room to improve treatment effectiveness (Steinert,
Hofmann, Kruse, & Leichsenring, 2014). For example, whereas Hollon, Stewart, and
Strunk (2006) reported less than a 5% relapse rate 6 months after CBT for most anxi-
ety disorders, they reported an almost 20% relapse rate 6 months after discontinuing
cognitive therapy for depression. This is despite the fact that booster sessions were
included in the depression, but not in the anxiety, treatment protocol. Furthermore,
relapse rates may be worse for individuals who do not fully benefit from treatment.
In a study of inpatients with depression, Conradi, Ormel, and de Jonge (2011) found
that residual symptoms during remission were highly prevalent. Indeed, approxi-
mately one-third of patients reported residual symptoms during remission, and
these symptoms enhanced risk for short-term relapse, poor social functioning, and
poor health outcomes (Kennedy & Foy, 2005).
Comorbidity
Comorbidity among psychiatric disorders has received increasing attention in
both clinical research and practice. The presence of comorbidity is now frequently

-- 42 of 498 --

22 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
accepted as the rule rather than the exception. Moreover, the presence of comorbidity
has important implications for the course, prognosis, and treatment of depression.
Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication indicate that 45% of
individuals with psychopathology meet criteria for more than one disorder (Kessler
et al., 2005). Of those with MDD, the percentage of people with comorbidity increases
to 76%. There are particularly high correlations among MDD, GAD, social anxiety
disorder (SAD), and agoraphobia. Within an outpatient sample with depression, for
example, anxiety disorders (particularly SAD at 29.3% and GAD at 20.8%) were the
most common comorbid disorders (Rush et al., 2005). Additionally, posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and depression are commonly comorbid, with approximately
52% of individuals with PTSD presenting with comorbid MDD (Ikin, Creamer, Sim,
& McKenzie, 2010; Rytwinski, Scur, Feeny, & Youngstrom, 2013). Individuals in the
military and those who have experienced interpersonal trauma show higher rates of
comorbid MDD and PTSD compared to the general population and survivors of nat-
ural disasters (Rytwinski et al., 2013). Concordance estimates are also high between
lifetime MDD and substance-related disorders (Hasin, Goodwin, Stinson, & Grant,
2005). Finally, personality disorders, especially borderline personality disorder, are
also highly associated with depression (Lenzenweger, Lane, Loranger, & Kessler,
2007).
The onset, frequency, and duration of depressive episodes are influenced by the
presence of comorbid psychiatric disorders. For example, comorbidity of depression
and anxiety disorders is associated with earlier onset and longer depressive episodes
compared to the presence of depression alone (Penninx et al., 2011). Interestingly,
symptoms of depression are also a risk factor for developing symptoms of anxiety,
suggesting a bidirectional association between anxiety and depression (Jacobson &
Newman, 2017). There is also a bidirectional association between PTSD and MDD;
however, PTSD typically precedes depression (see Stander, Thomsen, & Highfill-
McRoy, 2014, for a review). Similarly, the majority of longitudinal epidemiological
data indicate strong evidence for a bidirectional association between depression and
substance use. Heavier alcohol use and more frequent drug use during periods of
childhood, adolescence, or early adulthood predicts the development of MDD (Brook,
Brook, Zhang, Cohen, & Whiteman, 2002). Other studies have suggested that MDD
might also be a precursor to substance use disorders (Armstrong & Costello, 2002;
Rao & Chen, 2008). Regardless of temporal sequencing, the presence of substance
use disorders is associated with more prolonged and recurrent depressive episodes.
When comorbidity is present, it is strongly related to the severity of symptom
presentation. Comorbidity of depression and anxiety, in particular, has been associ-
ated with more severe complaints, increased behavioral avoidance, greater impair-
ment in social and occupational functioning, higher risk of suicide, and higher uti-
lization of mental health services (as reviewed in Belzer & Schneier, 2004). Of the
anxiety disorders, the presence of depression with comorbid SAD or GAD is asso-
ciated with particularly poor outcomes. Comorbidity of SAD and MDD is gener-
ally associated with increased risk for suicidality and alcohol dependence (Belzer &
Schneier, 2004). Furthermore, data from an epidemiological study indicate that the
presence of depression and comorbid GAD is highly disabling, over and above that
of depression alone (Hunt, Slade, & Andrews, 2004). Those with comorbid PTSD and
depression report reduced life satisfaction, diminished quality of life, and higher
symptom severity compared to those presenting with either disorder alone (Ikin et

-- 43 of 498 --

Depression 	23
al., 2010). The co-occurrence of addictive disorders and depression is also associ-
ated with greater impairment, including more severe substance-related problems,
increased frequency of behavioral problems, and more severe impairment in family,
school, and legal domains (see Rao & Chen, 2008, for a review).
The co-occurrence of depression and other psychiatric disorders has been
explained by a variety of factors, including cognitive biases, biological dysregulation,
and coping strategies. Depressed individuals with a comorbid anxiety disorder show
different attention and memory biases than do those without comorbidity (Dann-
lowski et al., 2006), as detailed in the section on etiology. Biased processing of nega-
tive information may place some individuals at risk for both depression and anxiety
disorders. In addition, some anxiety disorders (e.g., SAD or agoraphobia) may lead to
decreased social support, which increases risk for the onset of a depressive episode
following stress. Researchers posit that the bidirectional association between PTSD
and MDD is due to shared vulnerability factors (genetics, family environment) that
increase the likelihood of the onset of both disorders (Stander et al., 2014). Depression
is also associated with impaired executive functioning (Chakrabarty, Hadjipavlou,
& Lam, 2016), which may preclude the ability to effectively manage trauma-related
cognitions and may worsen prognosis of PTSD (Olff, Polak, Witteveen, & Denys,
2014). Other research has documented that increased risk for substance use disorders
in depressed individuals might be partially accounted for by increased activation in
the hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis (Rao, Hammen, & Poland, 2009).
Substance use may also be an attempt to improve mood, particularly for individuals
who do not use more adaptive emotion regulation strategies.
Clinical Implications
Research findings on the phenomenology of depression have various clinical impli-
cations that are relevant to therapists, irrespective of their theoretical orientation. To
begin with, while psychopathology research indicates that low mood and dimin-
ished pleasure are the most characteristic features of this disorder, it also suggests
that the presence of somatic symptoms, including changes in sleep, appetite, and
psychomotor changes, is indicative of more severe and chronic depression. Because
these symptoms do not always receive as much emphasis in the psychotherapy lit-
erature as psychological symptoms (e.g., feelings of worthlessness, guilt), vegeta-
tive or somatic features of depression may not always be on the therapist’s “radar”
despite their prognostic relevance. Therapists should assess these somatic symptoms
when forming a case conceptualization and evaluating their clients’ progress. The
presence of somatic symptoms may inform the need for a greater number of ses-
sions focused on interventions that target somatic symptoms and disengagement.
For example, a cognitive-behavioral therapist may work through a more graduated
hierarchy of activity scheduling as part of behavioral activation when working with
a patient with vegetative symptoms to ensure that goals are realistic, achievable, and
reinforcing. Across all forms of psychotherapy, therapists should assist patients who
have difficulty with sleep or low energy with establishing a routine and may need to
provide psychoeducation on sleep hygiene.
It is also important for therapists to remember that even though anger is not part
of the diagnostic criteria, it is likely to be present and to manifest in the therapeu-
tic relationship with a depressed client. Since the psychotherapeutic setting can be

-- 44 of 498 --

24 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
viewed as a “microcosm” (Goldfried & Davison, 1976) of the client’s ways of reacting
with others, we can predict from basic research that some depressed clients will feel
frustration toward treatment and therapists. Such frustration may lead to, and be
exacerbated by, negative responses (at times referred to as “countertransference reac-
tions”) that have been observed across various theoretical orientations (Castonguay
& Hill, 2017). When such interactions emerge, clinical judgment is needed to discern
how much of this is a manifestation of the client’s disorder and how much is a reflec-
tion of an alliance rupture (e.g., due to a lack of fit between the client’s needs and the
treatment implemented by the therapist, or the result of empathic failures on the part
of the clinician).
Irrespective of the causes of the client’s anger or hostile transactions, process-
oriented discussions about maladaptive interpersonal behaviors may be instru-
mental to meaningful therapeutic change. Potential growth opportunities include
increasing the client’s awareness of the reactions the therapist and others have to
the client’s verbal and nonverbal communication style, as well as providing a model
of how to recognize and discuss one’s own negative emotions and their contribu-
tions to the dynamics of relationships (which scholars such as Safran & Segal, 1990,
have referred to as “meta-communication”). As we discuss later in this chapter, other
interpersonal issues related to the onset and maintenance of depression may merit
being a foci of treatment.
When treating depressed clients, therapists must closely assess and monitor
clients’ risk for suicide. Several factors have been associated with suicide attempts
and deaths, such as comorbid substance abuse and older age. In addition, specific
symptoms and comorbid diagnoses are highly associated with suicide in depressed
individuals, including anxiety, panic attacks, anhedonia, alcohol use, difficulty con-
centrating, and global insomnia (Klonsky, May, & Saffer, 2016). These should be care-
fully assessed before and during treatment with depressed clients. Furthermore,
given findings from the three-step theory of suicide (Klonsky & May, 2015), pain
(including psychological pain), hopelessness, and connectedness also need to be
monitored and treated. Capacity to attempt suicide should be assessed, including
dispositional (e.g., high pain tolerance, low fear of death), acquired (e.g., history of
physical abuse, nonsuicidal self-injury, combat training) and practical (knowledge,
expertise, and access to lethal means) contributors.
Therapists also need to assess nonsymptomatic aspects of client function-
ing, such as work performance and satisfaction, sexual functioning, health prob-
lems, and health behaviors. Treatments that target affect may lead to a decrease in
depressive symptoms, but they may not directly or immediately impact these other
dimensions, which can have critical effects on a person’s quality of life. Unless these
domains are addressed by specific therapeutic interventions or referral to other ser-
vices, the scope of the therapist’s interventions may be limited. While clients may
experience better mood at the end of short-term therapy, they may have a recurrence
of depression if they continue to be confronted with serious occupational and health
difficulties—as suggested by basic research on stressors associated with the onset of
depressive episodes.
In line with increasing the specificity of psychological treatments for depression,
clinicians would be wise to familiarize themselves with cultural differences in the
manifestation and report of depressive symptoms. This has clear implications for the
possibility of over- or underdiagnosing individuals due to cultural insensitivity, and

-- 45 of 498 --

Depression 	25
could also have important impacts on treatment process, fit, and ultimately, effec-
tiveness. For instance, establishing a shared understanding of the causes of somatic
symptoms may be key in building a therapeutic alliance, and could provide a focus
for monitoring treatment progress.
Basic psychopathology research also suggests that clinicians would be well
advised to ask when clients experienced their first depressive episode, as well as
to assess for other disorders frequently associated with depression (e.g., anxiety,
substance abuse, and personality disorders) to inform treatment planning. As men-
tioned earlier, both early onset of depression and comorbidity have been linked with
greater impairment. Because depressed clients with higher levels of impairment
have also been shown to require longer-term therapy to achieve significant symptom
reduction (as reviewed by Beutler, Blatt, Alimohamed, Levy, & Angtuago, 2006), an
a priori limited number of sessions, which is frequently mandated in clinical trials
and managed care settings, may not be sufficient for these clients. Comorbidities
may also need to be addressed as part of treatment and, based on the case concep-
tualization, may need to be included in the treatment plan. Newer transdiagnostic
therapies, such as the unified protocol for emotional disorders (Barlow et al., 2010)
and group transdiagnostic CBT (tCBT; Norton, 2012), are designed to simultaneously
treat multiple and comorbid disorders, and these should be considered when select-
ing interventions and planning treatment. Transdiagnostic empirically supported
treatment (EST) provides an evidence-based framework for effectively targeting
common mechanisms underlying multiple disorders, and represents a promising
advance in psychotherapy research.
Careful assessment of the idiographic course of the disorder for a particular
client is also informative for treatment planning. Basic research demonstrates that
people experience a number of symptoms before suffering from a full episode of
depression, and that having such an episode is a strong predictor of future recur-
rences. Subthreshold levels of depression should therefore be an important target
of prevention and intervention efforts. Furthermore, considering the strong rela-
tionship between the number of previous episodes and the likelihood of future epi-
sodes, clinicians should assess their clients’ past episodes of major depression. Since
repeated episodes may indicate extreme vulnerability, therapists should expect that
stronger (more intense, longer) doses of treatment might be necessary to foster res-
toration and/or consolidation of adaptive ways of functioning than the amount of
therapy typically delivered in current EST for depression. Irrespective of the length
and intensity of the treatment required, data also suggest that treatment should con-
tinue until symptoms fully abate; failure to do so may predict relapse.
Given that a substantial number of untreated individuals with depression do
not experience remission from their symptoms for a year or longer, treatment should
not be delayed with the hope that depression will go away by itself (i.e., spontaneous
recovery). This recommendation for treatment can and should be made strongly by
therapists, government agencies, and managed health care organizations because
several psychological (and pharmacological; see Nathan & Gorman, 2021) treatments
have received empirical support for their efficacy. In a review, Follette and Greenberg
(2006) categorized three treatments as “well established” (behavior therapy, cognitive
therapy, and IPT); two as “probably efficacious” (short-term psychodynamic therapy,
process– experiential therapy); and one (mindfulness therapy) as “experimental,”
based on promising initial results. The evidence supporting the effectiveness of

-- 46 of 498 --

26 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
these different treatment orientations for depression means that it may be clinically
unsound for clinicians not to use ESTs, at least as first lines of intervention.
Follette and Greenberg (2006) also derived six principles of change from treat-
ment manuals of empirically supported psychological therapies that could guide
evidence-based practice for depression: (1) challenging cognition and behavior;
(2) increasing positive reinforcements and decreasing negative reinforcements (for
avoidant and depressotypic behavior) in the client’s life; (3) improving the client’s
interpersonal functioning; (4) improving marital, family, and social environment;
(5) fostering emotional awareness, acceptance, and regulation; and (6) providing a
treatment that is both structured and focused. These therapeutic strategies cut across
several ESTs and may be incorporated into most forms of psychological treatments.
Moreover, these principles are precise enough to guide the focus of clinicians’ inter-
ventions without being restricted to a narrow and orientation-specific set of pre-
scribed procedures (see Castonguay & Beutler, 2006). There are, for example, many
techniques (e.g., interpretation, cognitive restructuring) that therapists can use to
challenge client appraisals or views of self and others, all with similar aims (Gold-
fried, 1980). In addition, principles of change can help therapists to increase their
repertoire of interventions and individually optimize treatment if their treatment
protocol does not sufficiently target factors believed to cause or maintain depression
for that particular client. For example, in addition to using effective techniques to
address “internal” or intrapersonal issues (e.g., exploring a client’s emotions or chal-
lenging distorted cognitions), experiential, psychodynamic, and cognitive-oriented
therapists should also assess and, if necessary, address interactional issues that are
frequently associated with depression, such as social isolation, interpersonal skills
deficits, and dysfunctional marital or familial relationships. Detailed descriptions of
how these and other empirically derived principles of change are implemented in
routine treatment of depression (both with or without comorbid substance abuse or
personality disorder) by experienced therapists of different theoretical orientations
have been recently presented (Castonguay, Constantino, & Beutler, 2019).
As mentioned earlier, however, not all depressed clients benefit from therapy,
and many who do benefit fail to retain their therapeutic gains after the completion of
treatment. There is much room for improvement in our interventions for this debili-
tating and costly disorder. While it is unlikely that devising new forms of therapy is
the best strategy to improve treatment outcomes, a more fruitful strategy may be to
build on and improve already established and supported treatments. This could be
done by modifying existing therapies based on the findings of psychotherapy pro-
cess research. As an example, promising evidence suggests that integrating interper-
sonal and humanistic interventions aimed at repairing alliance ruptures (which are
robustly linked to worse outcomes in depression treatment) may improve the efficacy
of cognitive therapy for depression (Castonguay et al., 2004; Constantino et al., 2008;
Safran & Muran, 2000). Other researchers have found that therapists are more effec-
tive when they promote their client’s autonomy by encouraging them to set therapeu-
tic goals and make decisions (Zuroff, Koestner, Moskowitz, McBride, & Bagby, 2012).
As most clinicians are already aware, depression is one of the most common
problems encountered in clinical practice. Interestingly, and perhaps alarmingly,
research has shown that the prevalence of depression may be increasing (Hidaka,
2012). According to Seligman (1989), this increase points to social/environmental

-- 47 of 498 --

Depression 	27
determinants of depression. Contrasting a 10-fold increase in prevalence observed
in the general population with the rate of depression in some “nonmodern” cul-
tures (e.g., Amish), he argued that contemporary society’s emphasis on individual-
ism rather than on the common good plays a causal role in depression. It may be
that the lack of commitment to common goals has reduced opportunities for group
activities and a sense of belongingness that buffer against depression when one is
confronted with personal difficulties or failures. An overinvolvement in activities
aimed at increasing individualistic accomplishments, wealth, and comfort might
make it more difficult to ask others for help when we are experiencing major diffi-
culties. With this in mind, and irrespective of their orientation, clinicians are encour-
aged to help clients renew or create meaningful relationships. They should teach
clients skills to be appropriately vulnerable, and they should encourage clients to
become involved in purposeful and pleasurable activities with others. These clinical
recommendations focused on improving clients’ interpersonal functioning, as well
as improving the marital, family, and social environment, emerge from the basic
research described earlier and are consistent with the principles of change derived
from ESTs. Such a convergence of findings across different domains of research may
not be a surprise considering the core aspects of human functioning to which they
appear to be linked. As argued by MacLean (1985), communication and attachment
are two of the evolutionary developments that differentiate humans, and all mam-
mals, from reptiles. Denying or not attending to such ways of being forces ourselves
and our clients to fight a losing evolutionary battle!
Helping clients to be more engaged interpersonally, however, may be more dif-
ficult with some people than with others. Individual preferences and cultural norms
vary in terms of agency and communion needs and tendencies. As described by
Bonanno and Castonguay (1994), when conducting therapy with agency-oriented
people, it might be best to initially focus on intrapersonal or individualistic issues,
so that the tasks and goals of therapy may be more synchronized with individu-
als’ typical ways of coping with life difficulties. With the development of a stronger
therapeutic alliance, however, we may begin to focus more on what are likely to be
deficits in the interpersonal functioning of these individuals.
ETIOLOGY
As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, the extent of the empirical literature on the
determinants of depression prevents us from providing a comprehensive review of
vulnerability factors for this disorder. Among the most obvious omissions in the
following subsections are basic findings related to some biological models (e.g., neu-
rochemical abnormalities, genetic disposition) and learning (e.g., operant and vicari-
ous conditioning) that have been associated with depression (for reviews, see Burke,
Davis, Otte, & Mohr, 2005; Johnson, Joormann, LeMoult, & Miller, 2009; Sullivan,
Neale, & Kendler, 2000). These well-established vulnerability factors have provided
a foundation for some of the currently supported psychological and pharmacological
treatments. Our goal, however, is to focus primarily on recent basic findings and eti-
ology research that have not yet been sufficiently incorporated in our current treat-
ments.

-- 48 of 498 --

28 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Cognitive Theories
Cognitive models of depression posit that depressed individuals exhibit cognitive
biases in all aspects of information processing, including memory, attention, and
interpretation (Mathews & MacLeod, 2005). These cognitive biases may increase risk
for the onset and maintenance of depressive episodes. Although empirical results
for some of these biases are mixed, others have been consistently associated with
depression and may have important treatment implications.
Memory
Overall, there is strong evidence for biased memory in depression (Mathews &
MacLeod, 2005). In fact, better recall of negative relative to positive information rep-
resents one of the most robust cognitive findings associated with major depression.
Memory biases are found most consistently in free recall and explicit memory tasks.
For example, when attempting to recall details of past events or recently viewed
words, individuals with depression are more likely than nondepressed controls to
recall negative or unpleasant information.
Additional evidence that individual differences in memory play an important
role in depression comes from research on overgeneral memory (Williams et al.,
2007). These studies show that depressed participants respond to positive and nega-
tive cues with memories that summarize a category of similar events. For example,
when asked to describe a specific positive memory, nondepressed controls provide
specific details of a past event (e.g., “the day my family went to Lake Michigan”);
however, individuals with depression tend to recall a more general period in time
(e.g., fifth grade). Importantly, this research has demonstrated that overgeneral mem-
ories are associated with poor problem solving, difficulty imagining specific future
events, and delayed recovery from episodes of depression. Moreover, overgeneral
memories remain stable outside of episodes of the disorder and have been shown to
predict later onset of depressive episodes following life events.
Attention
Researchers have also investigated whether depressed individuals display biases in
attention, which refers to the tendency to visually attend to negative versus positive
information in the environment (see LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019, for a review). Although
evidence for attentional biases in depression has been mixed, there are specific cir-
cumstances when depressed individuals do display attentional biases, and under-
standing these circumstances can offer treatment-relevant insights. For example,
whereas depressed and nondepressed individuals do not differ in their attention
to negative information presented for short durations, depressed individuals spend
more time attending to negative information that has captured their attention. These
findings suggest that depressed individuals do not automatically orient their atten-
tion toward negative information in the environment, but once such information
becomes the focus of their attention, they have greater difficulty disengaging from it.
Notably, difficulty disengaging attention from negative stimuli has important impli-
cations, such as predicting greater reactivity to stress (Sanchez, Vazquez, Marker,

-- 49 of 498 --

Depression 	29
LeMoult, & Joormann, 2013) and a worse course of depression symptoms over time
(Disner, Shumake, & Beevers, 2017).
Interpretation
Results also have been mixed regarding whether depression is characterized by an
interpretation bias (Lawson, MacLeod, & Hammond, 2002). Recent evidence, how-
ever, suggests that those with depression typically make negative interpretations of
ambiguous information, and that symptom severity correlates with the magnitude
of their negative interpretation bias (see LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019, for a review). In a
meta-analysis, Everaert, Podina, and Koster (2017) found that negative interpretation
biases are stronger for self-referential stimuli (i.e., referencing personal experience)
than for non-self-referential stimuli. Other research indicates that healthy control
participants show a positive cognitive bias that does not appear in participants with
depression. Thus, whereas healthy controls have a positive interpretation bias, indi-
viduals with depression may have a more “realistic” view of the world (McKendree-
Smith & Scogin, 2000).
Cognitive Control
Recent cognitive theories posit that the aforementioned depressogenic biases in
attention and memory are due in large part to biases in cognitive control (Joormann,
2010). Indeed, depression is associated with difficulty in multiple aspects of cog-
nitive control, including difficulty inhibiting negative information from entering
working memory, difficulty shifting away from negative information held in work-
ing memory, and difficulty disengaging from negative material in working memory
(LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019). Consequently, depressed individuals exhibit sustained
processing and increased elaboration of negative content, often observed as biases in
attention and memory (described earlier) or as rumination (described in more detail
later in this chapter). Because the experience of negative mood states and negative
life events is associated with the activation of mood-congruent cognitions in work-
ing memory, the ability to control the contents of working memory may be critical
in differentiating people who recover easily after experiencing negative affect from
those who initiate a vicious cycle of increasingly negative ruminative thinking and
deepening sad mood.
Summary
Overall, the literature points to several cognitive biases that may have important
treatment implications in depression. For example, as described earlier, depressed
individuals have difficulty disengaging from negative stimuli once it enters into
their awareness (e.g., Joormann & Gotlib, 2007), and this may lead to the increased
elaboration of negative information and the negative memory biases frequently
observed in depression (Mathews & MacLeod, 2005). In addition, overgeneral mem-
ory in response to negative cues is thought to contribute to negative mood states
and is considered a risk factor for the development of depression (e.g., Rawal & Rice,
2012). Moreover, evidence suggests that deficits in cognitive control might underlie

-- 50 of 498 --

30 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
the attention and memory biases observed in depression. Such deficits might also
contribute to increased elaboration of negative information and rumination (Joor-
mann, 2010), which are key contributors to prolonged negative affect. As such, train-
ing individuals to control the contents of working memory could interrupt the cogni-
tive mechanisms that contribute to depressive episodes.
Emotion Regulation in Depression
Depression has been referred to as a disorder of emotion regulation (ER; Gross &
Muñoz, 1995; Joormann & D’Avanzato, 2010). Sustained negative affect and persistent
reduction in positive affect are the hallmark features of a diagnosis of a major depres-
sive episode. How can we explain why some people respond to minor stressors with
increasingly negative affect that can devolve into a full-blown depressive episode,
while others seem never to become depressed, even when they face major adver-
sity? Individual differences in ER, the important ability to regulate affective states,
may provide an answer to these questions (Bonanno, 2005). Specifically, depression-
vulnerable and nonvulnerable people do not differ in their initial response to a nega-
tive life event. Both groups experience sadness and respond with the activation of
mood-congruent cognitions and increased accessibility of mood-congruent memo-
ries. Depression-vulnerable and nonvulnerable people do differ, however, in their
ability to recover from this initial response (Teasdale, 1988). This suggests that we
need to examine factors that impair or support this recovery.
The construct of ER, which evolved from the more general concept of coping,
involves the use of behavioral and cognitive strategies to influence the duration,
intensity, and experience of affect (Thompson, 1994). Emotions are regulated for a
variety of reasons, such as to enhance desirable feelings, maintain social norms, and
foster interpersonal relationships (Fischer, Manstead, Evers, Timmers, & Valk, 2004).
Theories of depression emphasize that increased risk for MDD stems from the use
of strategies that fail to down-regulate negative emotions after their initial onset
(e.g., LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019; Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008), which leads to prolonged
negative affect (John & Gross, 2004). In response to distress, the use of less effective
ER strategies (e.g., rumination, suppression) has been associated with multiple psy-
chological disorders, including depression (Kring & Werner, 2004), whereas effective
ER strategies (e.g., reappraisal, emotional disclosure) are typically characteristic of
healthy psychological functioning and mood (Gross, 1998; Nils & Rimé, 2012). In fact,
studies indicate that less frequent use of effective ER strategies such as reappraisal
is not only characteristic of those with depression, but it also predicts an increase in
depressive symptoms (Dryman & Heimberg, 2018). These findings support the claim
that more frequent use of certain maladaptive strategies (e.g., emotion suppression,
rumination, and catastrophizing) and less frequent use of other, more adaptive strat-
egies (e.g., reappraisal, self-disclosure) are related to depression (e.g., Garnefski &
Kraaij, 2006; Kahn & Garrison, 2009).
An emerging line of research has focused on ER flexibility, the ability to flex-
ibly use ER strategies to meet situational demands (Aldao, Sheppes, & Gross, 2015).
This research deemphasizes the uniform effectiveness of ER strategies (described
earlier) and instead argues that ER strategies are adaptive when they fit the context
and facilitate goal pursuit (Aldao et al., 2015; Bonanno & Burton, 2013). For instance,

-- 51 of 498 --

Depression 	31
although reputed to be uniformly effective, reappraisal is less effective at regulating
emotions elicited by stressors that are controllable by the individual. In this instance,
engaging with and solving the problem itself is more effective (Bonanno & Burton,
2013). Indeed, research indicates that higher ER flexibility is associated with reduced
symptoms of psychopathology (Aldao et al., 2015).
In addition, studies suggest that impaired ER not only characterizes currently
depressed people but also may be observed after recovery. For example, Ehring,
Fischer, Schnülle, Bösterling, and Tuschen-Caffier (2008) found that remitted
depressed participants had greater difficulty regulating their negative emotions and
more frequently used rumination and catastrophizing compared to control partici-
pants. Within the depression literature, rumination and distraction have received
the most attention; however, emerging evidence also points to the important role of
suppression and reappraisal.
Rumination
Rumination is a process of responding to distress by repetitively and passively focus-
ing on symptoms of low mood and the potential causes or consequences of these
symptoms. It is differentiated from negative automatic thoughts because it is a
style of thinking rather than being characterized solely by negative thought content
(Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). This ER strategy is a particularly salient risk factor
for depression because it exacerbates and prolongs depressed mood (see review by
Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). Empirical evidence has shown that rumination pre-
dicts the onset of major depressive episodes and higher levels of depressive symp-
toms, and that it mediates the gender difference in depressive symptoms (for a
review, see Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). Many studies that experimentally tested
the effects of rumination show that induced rumination leads to sustained negative
mood, increased negative cognitions, increased overgeneral autobiographical mem-
ory, and decreased problem solving in depressed participants (e.g., Nolen-Hoeksema
et al., 2008).
Distraction
In contrast to rumination, “distraction” involves engaging in positive or neutral
activities in order to divert one’s thoughts from symptoms of distress and depres-
sion (Lyubomirsky, Caldwell, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1998). For example, one may lower
the level of subjective emotion experienced by focusing on thoughts unrelated to
the situation (e.g., planning a supermarket shopping list). It is important to differ-
entiate attentional distraction, which involves shifting visual or auditory attention
away from emotion-producing stimuli, as discussed earlier, from cognitive distrac-
tion described here, which involves shifting one’s thoughts away from the emotion
or emotion-producing stimuli. Researchers have reported that dysphoric, clinically
depressed, and recovered depressed people can use cognitive distraction to repair an
induced negative mood state (Joormann & Siemer, 2004; Joormann, Siemer, & Gotlib,
2007). Indeed, distraction has been associated with adaptive outcomes such as faster
physiological recovery from stress (Vickers & Vogeltanz-Holm, 2003), decreased
depressed mood (Kuehner, Huffziger, & Liebsch, 2009), and shorter duration of

-- 52 of 498 --

32 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
depressive symptoms (Nolen-Hoeksema, Morrow, & Fredrickson, 1993). However,
depressed participants are less likely to use distraction even though they state that
it could help them alleviate their negative affect (Lyubomisky & Nolen-Hoeksema,
1993). Importantly, while distraction may be adaptive for limited periods, persistent
distraction is an ineffective long-term ER strategy because it hinders effective prob-
lem solving (Campbell-Sills & Barlow, 2007; Kross, Ayduk, & Mischel, 2005).
Suppression
Suppression comprises both thought suppression and expressive suppression.
Whereas thought suppression involves attempting not to think of an emotion-
provoking event or stimuli, expressive suppression involves inhibiting the outward
expression of an emotional experience, including facial, postural, and verbal cues.
Ironically, research has shown that thought suppression can lead to increases in the
accessibility and frequency of the thought the individual is attempting to suppress
(Kircanski, Craske, & Bjork, 2008), which in turn increases their emotional response
(e.g., Campbell-Sills, Barlow, Brown, & Hofmann, 2006). Several studies suggest that
depressed and recovered depressed people are more likely than control participants
to use thought suppression, and that the use of this ER strategy may play an impor-
tant role in the onset and maintenance of depression (Wenzlaff, Rude, Taylor, Stultz,
& Sweatt, 2001). Kahn and Garrison (2009) documented that depression is associated
with not only more suppression but also less emotional self-disclosure (Kahn & Gar-
rison, 2009), a technique that has far-reaching benefits. Indeed, self-disclosure can
free up cognitive resources, can buffer against the effects of stress, has long-term
health benefits, and can serve as an emotionally therapeutic experience (Pennebaker,
1997a, 1997b).
Although studies reveal that participants can successfully engage in expressive
suppression when instructed, participants also show greater physiological activa-
tion when doing so. This suggests that expressive suppression is an effortful means
of regulating emotion (Gross, 1998). Expressive suppression has also been found
to be ineffective at regulating negative feelings, and several studies indicate that it
decreases the experience of positive, but not negative, emotions (e.g., Gross & John,
2003; Nezlek & Kuppens, 2008). Moreover, the habitual use of this strategy is asso-
ciated with lower well-being and greater symptoms of depression (Haga, Kraft, &
Corby, 2009; LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019). Even outside the laboratory, greater use of
expressive suppression has been linked to lower social support, lower social satisfac-
tion, and decreased closeness to others (Srivastava, Tamir, McGonigal, John, & Gross,
2009).
Reappraisal
Reappraisal has increasingly become a focus within the depression literature. This
construct refers to the process of changing the way one thinks about a situation
to alter its emotional impact (John & Gross, 2004). Some people may reappraise a
situation by changing their point of view (i.e., taking a third-person rather than a
first-person perspective), whereas others change their interpretation of the situation
(i.e., viewing a difficult task as a challenge rather than as a threat; Ray et al., 2005).

-- 53 of 498 --

Depression 	33
Habitual use of this strategy has been associated with adaptive changes in emotions,
cognitions, and physiological arousal. For example, reappraisal has been linked to
increased well-being, fewer depressive symptoms, increased inhibition of negative
material, greater positive autobiographical recall, more adaptive physiological reac-
tivity to distress, and better interpersonal functioning (Gross & John, 2003; LeMoult
& Gotlib, 2019). Compared to other ER strategies, such as expressive suppression,
reappraisal is associated with the experience of more positive affect and less negative
affect (Gross & John, 2003).
Neuroendocrinology
Stressful life events and other psychosocial stressors are robustly associated with
the onset, severity, and course of MDD (see review in Hammen, 2005). Dysfunc-
tions in the neuroendocrine system might partially explain the link between stress
and depression, making “neuroendocrinology”—the study of interactions between
the endocrine and the nervous system—increasingly important (LeMoult, 2020). A
central component of the neuroendocrine system is the HPA axis, which is essential
in regulating the hormone cortisol. Cortisol affects many aspects of the body, includ-
ing metabolism, immune function, and the brain. In addition to being released in
response to stressors, it is released spontaneously throughout the day and shows
patterns of diurnal variation. Diurnal cortisol production is influenced both by
sleep–wake cycles and by affective state (Dedovic & Ngiam, 2015).
Given that functioning of the HPA system is so integrally related to the human
stress response, it is not surprising that atypical patterns of both diurnal HPA func-
tioning and acute HPA stress reactivity have been documented in various psychi-
atric disorders, including depression (e.g., Porter & Gallagher, 2006). Investigating
neuroendocrine response in these disorders is important because it might represent
a crucial link to the neurobiological research we describe later. For example, the hip-
pocampus and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) are the brain regions with the highest
density of glucocorticoid receptors. Chronic exposure to stressful events that result
in persistent and increased cortisol secretion might lead to neurotoxicity in these
areas (Sapolsky, 2000). Chronic cortisol secretion may also disrupt functioning in
regions of the brain that are responsible for regulating emotion (e.g., the PFC and
the amygdala), which, in turn, can interfere with the ability to cope effectively with
subsequent stressors.
Differences in basal HPA activity and diurnal cortisol fluctuations have been
found in individuals with MDD compared to their healthy control counterparts. Spe-
cifically, compared to healthy control participants, individuals with depression tend
to show an exaggerated cortisol awakening response (CAR) and elevated cortisol
levels throughout the day (see reviews by Burke et al., 2005; Dedovic & Ngiam, 2015;
Pariante & Lightman, 2008). In a meta-analysis, Burke and colleagues (2005) reported
that depressed individuals exhibit less cortisol reactivity in response to stress and
slower cortisol recovery poststress compared to nondepressed individuals. They
also reported that the higher the cortisol levels at baseline, the less cortisol produced
after the stressor. Whereas some researchers have reported that HPA axis abnormali-
ties in depressed individuals are state-dependent and ameliorate with clinical remis-
sion (e.g., Ribeiro, Tandon, Grunhaus, & Greden, 1993), more recent research has

-- 54 of 498 --

34 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
documented dysregulated HPA-axis function in those with a history of depression
(LeMoult, Chen, Foland-Ross, Burley, & Gotlib, 2015; Lok et al., 2012). Those remit-
ted individuals who continue to show abnormal cortisol profiles during periods of
remission also have a higher rate of relapse (e.g., Aubry et al., 2007; Zobel et al., 2001).
Importantly, elevated evening cortisol levels have been found in depressed ado-
lescents compared to nondepressed adolescents, and elevations in evening cortisol
levels within the sample of depressed adolescents predicted a recurrent course of
the disorder at a 7-year follow-up assessment (Mathew et al., 2003; Rao et al., 1996).
In addition, numerous studies have indicated elevated cortisol secretion in response
to acute stressors in depressed children (e.g., Luby et al., 2003; Watamura, Donzella,
Alwin, & Gunnar, 2003). Elevated levels of cortisol have also been found in healthy
youth at risk for depression based on a maternal history of the disorder (LeMoult,
Chen, et al., 2015), and in turn, elevated cortisol has been shown to predict the first
onset of depression in these youth (LeMoult, Ordaz, Kircanski, Singh, & Gotlib, 2015).
Neuroimaging
Brain areas and neural circuits associated with the generation and regulation of emo-
tional states have received increasing attention in research on affective disorders
(see Davidson, Pizzagalli, & Nitschke, 2002, for a review). Theorists have posited
that emotional behavior is linked to the functioning of two neural systems, a ven-
tral system and a dorsal system. The ventral system involves brain regions that are
important for identifying the emotional significance of a stimulus and producing
affect; the dorsal system is important for executive function and cognitive control,
including selective attention, planning, and effortful regulation of affective states.
Adaptive emotional behavior is posited to depend on the integrity and balanced
interaction of these systems (Ochsner & Gross, 2005).
Although the ventral system includes many different brain structures, the vast
majority of mood disorders research on this system focuses on the amygdala and the
subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). The dorsal region that has received the
most attention is the PFC, with a particular focus on the dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC),
and some focus on the ventromedial PFC (VMPFC; e.g., Gotlib et al., 2010). Although
we focus on these brain regions, it is worth noting that they interact with many dif-
ferent divisions of the ACC, the PFC, and other brain regions in important ways that
have repercussions for understanding emotion. The amygdala has been shown to
play a prominent role in emotionally mediated attention, in assigning emotional sig-
nificance to stimuli, and in memory of emotionally significant events. The subgenual
ACC appears to mediate the subjective experience of emotion and emotional reaction
to stimuli, particularly in guiding reward-seeking behavior (Pizzagalli et al., 2004).
The DLPFC appears to be involved in the regulation of emotion (Drevets, 2000). For
example, it appears to diminish amygdala activity in response to an emotional chal-
lenge (Siegle, Steinhauer, Thase, Stenger, & Carter, 2002).
Depression is associated with dysregulated neural functioning, particularly
with a hyperactive ventral system (more specifically, the amygdala and subgenual
ACC) and a hypoactive dorsal system (DLPFC; see Mayberg, 2002), as well as defi-
cits in areas associated primarily with the processing of rewarding stimuli (David-
son et al., 2002). For example, compared to controls, depressed individuals exhibit
greater activity in the amygdala (e.g., Siegle, Thompson, Carter, Steinhauer, & Thase,

-- 55 of 498 --

Depression 	35
2007) and subgenual ACC in response to emotional stimuli (e.g., Gotlib et al., 2005).
Depression is also associated with diminished top-down activation in areas of the
brain responsible for regulating emotion (i.e., DLPFC; see Gotlib et al., 2010, for a
review), which exacerbates excess bottom-up activation in the ventral system.
A concern, though, is that much of this research examines participants dur-
ing episodes of MDD, when group differences in activation could reflect a state-
dependent feature of depression rather than an etiological risk factor. To disentangle
epiphenomena from causal mechanisms, studies examining at-risk and unaffected
family members are particularly important. Although more extensive research is
needed, preliminary studies indicate that compared to healthy controls, youth at risk
for depression display increased activation of the ventral system (Gotlib & Hamilton,
2008) and decreased activation of the dorsal region (e.g., Joormann, Cooney, Henry,
& Gotlib, 2012). These findings suggest that amygdala response to emotional stimuli
in depression is not just a state marker, but rather a preexisting vulnerability factor
that could precipitate disorder onset.
Given that anhedonia is a cardinal symptom of depression and that aberrant
reward responsivity is therefore important for understanding MDD (Kasch, Rotten-
berg, Arnow, & Gotlib, 2002), researchers have also begun to attend to areas impli-
cated in the anticipation and response to reward. These include the ventral striatum
and the nucleus accumbens (e.g., Knutson, Fong, Adams, Varner, & Hommer, 2001),
which are regulated by the PFC (e.g., Phillips, Drevets, Rauch, & Lane, 2003). Along
these lines, researchers have found that depressed individuals exhibit reduced acti-
vation in the nucleus accumbens relative to controls (Pizzagalli et al., 2004). More-
over, deep brain stimulation of the accumbens and the ventral capsule/ventral stria-
tum has been shown to significantly reduce symptoms of anhedonia in those with
depression (Malone et al., 2009).
Interpersonal and Developmental Contributions
Interpersonal factors have been associated with the onset, maintenance, and recur-
rence of depression across different phases of development. Early risk factors for
depression include several manifestations of inadequate parenting, childhood mal-
treatment, and interpersonal life stress (Humphreys et al., 2020; LeMoult et al., 2020).
Caregiver deficits that are risk factors for later depression in children (both in youth
and adulthood) include various types of neglect, such as inattentiveness, with-
drawal, understimulation, emotional unresponsiveness, lax enforcement, incon-
sistent reinforcement, and low frequency of positive reinforcement. Experiences of
severe neglect and deprivation are particularly common when children are reared
in institutions such as orphanages (Gunnar, Van Dulmen, & International Adop-
tion Project Team, 2007). Other forms of early life interpersonal stress and child-
hood maltreatment may involve aggression toward the child, such as overt hostility,
intrusiveness, and antipathy, as well as emotional overinvolvement, overstimula-
tion, exposure to maladaptive interpersonal behavior and affect, and physical and
sexual abuse. Insecure parent– child attachment and parental conflict have also been
identified as early vulnerability factors for developing depression. Similarly, losing
a parent, particularly to suicide or an accident, and having a depressed parent are
robust predictors of depressive disorders (Davila et al., 2009; Goodman & Brand,
2009; Hammen, 2009).

-- 56 of 498 --

36 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
A number of these early risk factors frequently co-occur and act in tandem to
cause later depression. Impaired parenting, for example, has been found to medi-
ate the relationship between parental depression and child psychological difficulties
(Goodman & Brand, 2009; Hammen, 2009). Furthermore, children who are exposed
to greater cumulative adverse events experience more negative outcomes in adoles-
cence (Appleyard, Egeland, van Dulmen, & Sroufe, 2005). It should also be noted that
children’s vulnerabilities or problems (biological, cognitive, affective, and behav-
ioral) may contribute to parenting difficulties, for instance, by prompting criticism
from parents (see Goodman & Brand, 2009; Hammen, 2009). Regardless of whether
their impact is direct or indirect, early interpersonal adversities and maltreatment
likely contribute to the development of difficulties (e.g., deficits in emotion regula-
tion and interpersonal skills, social-cognitive biases, insecure attachments, dysfunc-
tional attributions, and poor ability to respond to stress) that make children vulner-
able to later depression (Goodman & Brand, 2009; Jopling, Tracy, & LeMoult, 2020;
Rnic et al., 2018).
In addition to childhood adverse experiences, major stressful events across the
lifespan have also been associated with depression. As reviewed by Monroe, Slav-
ich, and Georgiades (2009), most of the major events that have been linked with the
onset of depression are interpersonal, such as humiliation, social defeat, rejection,
social exclusion, ostracism, and loss. Among the evidence reported by Monroe and
colleagues on the role of social-environmental factors is the finding that depressed
individuals who experience major stress before the onset of depression have more
severe symptoms than depressed people who were not confronted with such stress-
ors (Monroe, Harkness, Simons, & Thase, 2001; Tennant, 2002). Research also sug-
gests that stressful events occurring during a depressive episode may interfere with
recovery (Mazure, 1998). Although interpersonal stressors are most closely associ-
ated with an onset of depression, other noninterpersonal events, such as occupa-
tional failure or job loss, also predict the disorder. Though findings are somewhat
inconsistent, evidence indicates that some individuals may be particularly vulner-
able to noninterpersonal stressors due to personality or cognitive styles related
to placing a strong emphasis on achievement and autonomy (e.g., Mazure, Bruce,
Maciejewski, & Jacobs, 2000).
Stressful events occurring in adulthood may also be an important mechanism
for the intergenerational transmission of depression. For instance, studies suggest
that parental stressful life events may mediate the relationship between parental
depression and psychological problems experienced by their children. For example,
the chronically stressful conditions in which depressed individuals live can increase
the prevalence of depression in offspring (Hammen, 2009).
Romantic difficulties are frequently experienced interpersonal risk factors for
depression in adulthood. When romantic relationships are supportive, they can be
protective against depression. However, depression is also associated with chal-
lenges in romantic relationships, including a lack of support from one’s spouse,
couples’ difficulties with solving problems, lower relationship satisfaction, and dis-
solution in romantic or marital relationships (Davila et al., 2009). Importantly, the
association between depression and romantic problems is bidirectional. Negative
events or chronic stressors in close relationships (e.g., conflict, tension, or loss) place
individuals at risk for depression. In turn, depressed individuals are more likely to

-- 57 of 498 --

Depression 	37
contribute to negative dynamics and events in their relationships (Davila et al., 2009),
often via maladaptive interpersonal behaviors.
Other research supports the role of specific interpersonal behaviors/styles as
risk factors for the onset and maintenance of depression. These include excessive
reassurance seeking, interpersonal dependency, and an insecure attachment style in
adulthood (Joiner & Meltalsky, 2001; Joiner & Timmons, 2009; Roberts, Gotlib, & Kas-
sel, 1996), all of which result in negative interpersonal life events, including conflict
and rejection by others. Depression is also associated with negative feedback seek-
ing, a concept linked to the social-psychological concept of self-verification (Swann,
1983). Numerous studies have demonstrated that depressed individuals prefer to be
with (and/or give more credibility to) people who react negatively to them compared
to people who provide them with positive feedback (e.g., Giesler, Josephs, & Swann,
1996; Swann, Wenzlaff, Krull, & Pelham, 1992). The inferred mechanism is that the
desire for safety in having one’s self-concept confirmed (even when it is negative) is
stronger than the disconfirming (but positive) impact that enhancement feedback
can have. However, as noted earlier, depressed individuals also tend to excessively
seek reassurance from others. Evraire and Dozois (2011) posit that this discrepancy
in the types of feedback depressed individuals attempt to elicit is explained by a
desire for global enhancement, attained through reassurance seeking, and verifica-
tion of specific attributes, pursued via negative feedback seeking.
As can be evidenced in several of the previous examples, depression-prone indi-
viduals have characteristics and engage in behaviors that increase their exposure to
stressors—particularly interpersonal stressors—that in turn further increase depres-
sion risk. This process is referred to as “stress generation” (Hammen, 2006), and it is
a key mechanism through which the cycle of stress and depression intensifies over
time.
Clinical Implications
Several clinical recommendations can be derived from the vulnerability factors we
have described. As previously mentioned, cognitive and affective factors involved
in the onset and maintenance of depression are closely interconnected. Interest-
ingly, research investigating both cognitive biases and ER strategies suggests that
depressed individuals become stuck in maladaptive patterns of automatic reactions.
Studies on attention, interpretation, and memory indicate that depressed individuals
have difficulty disengaging from negative information. Similarly, ER studies show
that depressed individuals inflexibly use strategies that prevent them from recover-
ing from the initial response of sadness and its related mood-congruent thoughts
and memories. If these factors do play a causal role in the onset and maintenance of
depression, therapeutic interventions that can directly modify them may be particu-
larly promising.
Cognitive Biases
Interestingly, experimental studies suggest that it might be possible to modify
depressed mood by modifying the cognitive biases posited to underlie it. Initial
studies demonstrated that training depressed people to disengage their attention

-- 58 of 498 --

38 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
from negative material improves mood and reduces reactivity to stressful events (as
reviewed by Hertel & Mathews, 2011). Positive attentional biases can also be trained
(Wadlinger & Isaacowitz, 2008). Moreover, positive attentional bias training reduces
attention to negative images during a stress induction (Wadlinger & Isaacowitz,
2008), and reduces self-reported and cortisol responses to stress (Dandeneau, Bald-
win, Baccus, Sakellaropoulo, & Pruessner, 2007). These findings provide an exciting
example of the way modifying cognitive biases may remediate dysfunctions in the
neuroendocrine system, and they are consistent with theoretical models of depres-
sion positing a bidirectional association between cognitive and biological dysregula-
tion (LeMoult, 2020).
Encouraging results have also been documented for interpretation bias training
(see Hallion & Ruscio, 2011). Researchers have found that adults and youth can be
trained to positively interpret ambiguous information (Holmes, Lang, & Shah, 2009;
LeMoult et al., 2018), and that doing so attenuates depressed mood and responses to
stress (Hallion & Ruscio, 2011). For example, Holmes and colleagues (2009) demon-
strated that training positive biases helped to alleviate a subsequently induced nega-
tive mood state. These results suggest that changes in interpretation biases can lead
to changes in emotional responding.
Other training studies have targeted the negative memory biases often found
in depression (LeMoult & Gotlib, 2019). Overall, findings suggest that it is possible
to alter the negative and overgeneral memory biases associated with depression.
In positive memory enhancement training (PMET), for example, depressed partici-
pants were asked to recall a happy memory in a way that facilitated vivid recall
of the moment-to-moment details (Arditte Hall, De Raedt, Timpano, & Joormann,
2018). Arditte Hall and colleagues (2018) found that PMET enhanced the specificity
of depressed participants’ positive memories and facilitated mood repair following
a sad mood induction. Memory specificity training (MEST) has also been used to
combat memory biases in depression. In MEST, participants are trained to recall spe-
cific details of their autobiographical memories. One focus of MEST is on making
negative memories more specific; this is done to make negative memory less over-
general (e.g., “I’m a failure”) and specific memory (e.g., “I did not receive the promo-
tion at work”; Raes, Williams, & Hermans, 2009). Both PMET and MEST training are
associated with multiple benefits, including more specific positive memories, fewer
intrusive negative memories, improved emotion regulation, and positive changes in
mood state (Arditte Hall et al., 2018; Lang, Moulds, & Holmes, 2009; Raes et al., 2009;
Watkins, Baeyens, & Read, 2009).
Researchers have also started to investigate the possibility of training cogni-
tive control in depression and of examining the effects of this training on emotion
regulation. Joormann, Hertel, LeMoult, and Gotlib (2009), for example, showed that
depressed participants can be trained to forget negative material when provided
with a strategy for how to keep irrelevant material out of working memory. These
training paradigms typically ask participants to practice removing irrelevant nega-
tive material from working memory and replacing it with relevant positive or neutral
materials for later recall. Brief interventions that target increasing cognitive control
in severely depressed outpatients have, in turn, led to significant decreases in both
depressive symptoms and rumination (Siegle, Thompson, et al., 2007). Moreover,
Jopling, Gotlib, and LeMoult (2020) documented that depressed participants who

-- 59 of 498 --

Depression 	39
completed cognitive control training also exhibited more adaptive neuroendocrine
and physiological responses to stress compared to depressed participants who
received sham training.
Thus, taken together, findings suggest that cognitive biases can be modified
in relatively few training sessions using easily implemented designs. Modifying
cognitive biases has, in turn, been linked to short-term improvements in mood and
stress reactivity, which highlights the interconnection between cognitive and psy-
chobiological responses to stress (LeMoult, 2020) and suggests that such training
might play an important role in treatment. Future research is needed to extend these
investigations to a clinical population, and to examine the persistence of cognitive
changes and mood states over longer durations of time.
ER Strategies
Consistent with some of the studies on cognitive biases, researchers interested in ER
have found that ruminating about negative thoughts, feelings, and events is linked
with depression. In contrast, research findings suggest that reappraisal is an effec-
tive strategy to shift individuals’ affect from negative to positive. These findings
highlight a clear convergence between basic psychopathology research and applied
psychotherapy research. One of the best examples of this convergence is a new ther-
apy focused on reducing engagement in maladaptive emotion regulation strategies.
Rumination-focused CBT for depression (Watkins, 2018) is an EST centered around
helping clients to shift from ruminative thinking to more action-oriented, concrete,
specific, and experientially focused thoughts and behaviors.
As mentioned earlier, helping clients to change their cognitive appraisals has
been identified as a key principle of change underlying psychological treatments
that work for depression. Similarly, the basic finding that emotional disclosure has
a positive effect on mood and functioning, as opposed to the negative impact of
emotion suppression, is also consistent with another principle of change identified
earlier (i.e., improving awareness, acceptance, and regulation of emotions). Interest-
ingly, however, while therapists from different theoretical orientations have consis-
tently recognized the importance of changing clients’ views of self and others, and
employ a range of techniques to do so (e.g., reformulation, or cognitive restructur-
ing), an explicit focus on the experience and processing of emotion is emphasized to
a greater and lesser extent across ESTs. Brief psychodynamic, process– experiential
and interpersonal therapies, exposure-based CBT, and newer emotion-focused CBT
(e.g., Unified Protocol for Emotional Disorders; Barlow et al., 2010) tend to place the
greatest emphasis on emotional processing in session. Moreover, emotional activa-
tion has been linked with treatment outcome across a variety of theoretical orienta-
tions (Peluso & Freund, 2018). Not surprisingly, this has been the case in experiential
and humanistic therapies, such as emotion-focused therapy (EFT; Greenberg & Wat-
son, 2006), which specifically and explicitly focus on the processing and transforma-
tion of emotion (see Elliott, Watson, Greenberg, Timulak, & Freire, 2013). However,
emotional deepening has also been associated with treatment outcome in traditional
CBT (e.g., Castonguay, Goldfried, Wiser, Raue, & Hayes, 1996; Watson & Bedard,
2006), an important finding given that cognitive behavioral therapist tend to try to
control or reduce emotions—at least compared to psychodynamic therapy (Blagys &

-- 60 of 498 --

40 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Hilsenroth, 2000). Thus, both basic and psychotherapy research appear to suggest
that therapists might foster clients’ improvement by facilitating emotional disclosure
and expression, irrespective of their preferred theoretical orientation.
While basic research findings on reappraisal and suppression are consistent
with principles of change derived from psychotherapy research, this is not the case
for distraction. Distraction has received only limited attention in EST treatments for
depression despite evidence from basic research that it is an effective ER strategy that
is less effortful, and therefore more accessible, to those who are severely depressed.
One exception is dialectical behavioral therapy (Linehan, 1993), a CBT that includes
a module on distress tolerance skills, in which clients are taught to use strategies to
self-soothe and distract themselves during crises. Clinicians and scholars of differ-
ent orientations are encouraged to complement their clinical repertoires with inter-
ventions that use distraction to help depressed clients to disengage, at appropriate
times and places and for limited periods, from rumination and negative emotions.
For example, one of the authors of this chapter (L. G. C.) has learned that blasting
Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony in response to pervasive and recurrent ruminations
late at night is not incompatible with (and may actually be a powerful adjunct to) ver-
bally oriented forms of therapy. In other words, although there are times to explore
emotions and examine maladaptive cognitions, there are also times when individu-
als would benefit from taking their minds away from them, for example, at bedtime
or when they need to be present and engaged in other interpersonal or occupational
activities.
Stress
Research conducted within both biological and psychological domains of psychopa-
thology has demonstrated that stressful life events have an impact on the onset and
maintenance of depression. A central implication of such findings is that therapists
who are working with depressed clients should be prepared to use interventions to
help clients decrease their levels of stress and to deal more effectively with the stress-
ors they encounter in their lives.
Most CBTs for depression include teaching relaxation, coping, and problem-
solving skills to help patients manage ongoing stressors (see Follette & Green-
berg, 2006). Of note, exposure-based cognitive therapy (EBCT)—a newer CBT for
depression—makes stress management a primary focus in an attempt to build on
and increase the efficacy of current ESTs for depression (see Hayes, Feldman, Beevers,
Laurenceau, & Cardaciotto, 2007). The exposure-based phase of this therapy involves
activating and emotionally processing key experiences and feelings of worthless-
ness, hopelessness, and defectiveness that drive individuals’ depression. However,
depressed individuals who seek treatment frequently experience high levels of dis-
tress and depletion of resources, and their depressive symptoms and attempts to
cope with stressors can generate even more stress. These problems may make pro-
cessing core beliefs challenging and counterproductive. Therefore, the initial stage
of this treatment aims to increase resources that build resilience, motivation, and
stability in preparation for exposure. This initial stabilization phase involves emo-
tion regulation and mindfulness meditation techniques to help clients recognize and
reduce avoidance and rumination, behavioral activation exercises, problem solving,

-- 61 of 498 --

Depression 	41
and strategies for increasing the health and regularity of sleep, eating, and exercise
patterns. The purpose of this first phase of therapy is to teach stress management
skills and to reduce maladaptive processes, including avoidance, rumination, and
stress generating behaviors that maintain depression. These skills are thought to be
critical both to prepare for deeper emotional and cognitive change and to prevent
relapse.
Importantly, there is no reason to assume that the addition of these stress-
regulating strategies should be restricted to CBT-based interventions. They are not
likely to interfere with flexible and competent use of traditional interventions pre-
scribed in any EST-based treatment for depression, and they may help individuals to
better cope with stressors they encounter.
Interpersonal Factors
Research on interpersonal vulnerability for depression underscores the influence
of adverse interpersonal relationships, especially early caregiving relationships, in
the pathogenesis of depression. As such, more adaptive relational patterns may be
core to achievement of successful therapy. Alexander and French (1946) posited that
clients improve in psychodynamic therapy not because they acquire insights about
previously unconscious conflicts, but because therapy provides them with a correc-
tive emotional experience. Therapeutic change takes place, more precisely, when the
therapist reacts to the client in a way that disconfirms the client’s negative expecta-
tions of others that the client derived from the relationship with their parents or
other early attachment figures. While the construct of corrective experience emerged
from the psychodynamic literature, it is now recognized as a core mechanism of
change that cuts across different orientations (Castonguay & Hill, 2012).
There can be no doubt that the relational stance embraced in all ESTs for depres-
sion (including CBT; see Castonguay, Youn, Xiao, & McAleavey, 2018) sharply con-
trasts with the neglect (e.g., inattentiveness, withdrawal, emotional unresponsive-
ness) and abuse (e.g., overt hostility, antipathy) that have been experienced by some
depressed individuals. Interacting with clients in an attentive, warm, engaged,
empathic, accepting, affirming, autonomy-granting, calm, structured, and consis-
tent way (as promoted in the writing of leading clinicians of different orientations;
e.g., Carl Rogers, Lorna Benjamin, Marsha Linehan, and Marvin Goldfried), is likely
to differ from the way many depressed people have been treated. This new way of
being treated violates the client’s expectations that they will be treated poorly by a
person with whom they have shared personal information and have been emotion-
ally vulnerable, one whom they may view as an authority figure, and with whom
they have developed an attachment, not unlike that with a parent. As described else-
where (see Hill et al., 2012), this disconfirmation of expectations may facilitate the
reduction of symptoms, change the view of self and others, and allow the client to
test out, practice, and integrate more adaptive interpersonal patterns.
In contrast, interacting in a hostile and dismissive way might reenact old aver-
sive interpersonal patterns and prevent change. This is consistent with a number of
applied psychotherapy studies. For example, fine-grained analyses of therapist– client
transactions indicated that poorer outcomes were associated with therapists using
“blaming” or complex communications (i.e., seemingly “supportive” statements that

-- 62 of 498 --

42 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
also convey hostility or criticism; Henry, Schacht, & Strupp, 1986). In a subsequent
study, Henry, Schacht, and Strupp (1990) found that therapists exercised more disaf-
filiative interpersonal behaviors (e.g., belittling and blaming, ignoring and neglect-
ing) with clients who had a poor outcome, as defined by no change in how they
treated themselves, compared to those clients who had a good outcome. For those
with a good outcome, therapists displayed an almost complete absence of such nega-
tive interpersonal processes. These authors also found a significant positive correla-
tion between the frequency of therapist statements marked by disaffiliative control
and hostility and the frequency of patient utterances marked by self-criticism and
self-blame. Altogether, these findings suggest that the contrast between the early
experiences of many depressed clients and the experience of a supportive relation-
ship with a therapist may mediate (at least in part) the positive link between the
working alliance and outcome across different forms of therapy.
In addition to underscoring the importance of adopting an interpersonally
warm and involved attitude, research findings indicate that clients may benefit from
exploring early relationship events, including traumas, and their ramifications rela-
tive to clients’ relationships with others during their life. This is at the core of at
least two ESTs: process– experiential (i.e., emotion-focused) and short-term psycho-
dynamic therapies. Consistent with the emotion-focused model, the resolution of
unfinished business with significant others has been linked with therapeutic change
(Elliott et al., 2013). In line with psychodynamic theory, process research indicates
that the therapist’s accurate interpretation of core relationships in the client’s life is
linked with positive outcomes (Crits-Christoph & Connolly Gibbons, 2002). Inter-
estingly, a focus on past relationships and the pattern of interactions they might
have influenced may also be beneficial in other forms of treatment. For example,
while process studies indicate that CBT focuses less on developmental and inter-
personal issues than does psychodynamic therapy (see Blagys & Hilsenroth, 2000),
other investigations suggest that it might be helpful when CBT therapists do focus
on these issues. For example, Hayes, Castonguay, and Goldfried (1996) found that
the degree to which CBT therapists focused on attachment with early caregivers pre-
dicted therapeutic outcomes at the end of treatment and relapse rates 2 years after
therapy. In addition, a study by Jones and Pulos (1993) suggests that CBT therapists
may improve treatment outcomes by eliciting and processing memories of interper-
sonal experiences using the following psychodynamic techniques: linking patients’
feelings or perceptions to situations or behavior of the past; discussing memories
or reconstructions of childhood; drawing connections between the therapeutic rela-
tionship and other relationships; and identifying recurrent themes in patients’ expe-
rience or conduct.
These findings suggest that generating emotional memories in therapy for
depression might be helpful, a finding that will not surprise practitioners of CBT
for PTSD, exposure-based methods for depression, and psychodynamic therapies.
However, given the presence of memory biases and ruminative tendencies in depres-
sion, the timing of interventions that elicit emotional memories need to be consid-
ered carefully in the context of the therapeutic relationship and the client’s current
functioning, resources, and ability to regulate their emotions. Moreover, these inter-
ventions are not necessary in all cases, and therapists should use their skills in case
conceptualization and progress monitoring to determine whether and when these
techniques are indicated.

-- 63 of 498 --

Depression 	43
In addition to the developmental influence of interpersonal events and relation-
ships, basic findings also point to the importance of addressing current interper-
sonal issues. Phenomenological research on interpersonal irritability and marital
discord provides support for some of the specific principles of change underlying
ESTs for depression, in particular IPT. Moreover, research on interpersonal factors
that are involved in the etiology of depression can inform more specific treatment
targets. When working with depressed clients, therapists should inquire about and,
if necessary, work to help change clients’ tendency to seek excessive reassurance
and verification of their negative view of self, as well as other aversive behaviors
that generate interpersonal stress and subsequent depression. As discussed by Joiner
and Timmons (2009), such foci of interventions are not explicit components of cur-
rent IPT. While they are consistent with principles of change underlying behavior
therapy (i.e., “decreasing reinforcement for depressive and avoidant behavior”; Fol-
lette & Greenberg, 2006, p. 94), full recognition of these issues may further improve
the efficacy of traditional CBT for depression. For example, Hayes and colleagues
(1996) found that relative to interpersonal issues, cognitive therapists tend to focus
more on changing patients’ cognitions about others than on direct interpersonal
change. While the latter was linked with positive outcomes, the former was predic-
tive of worse outcomes. Thus, attempting to foster concrete behavioral change in the
interpersonal domain may be an important recommendation across many forms of
therapy.
CONCLUSION
A great deal of research has been conducted on the psychopathology of depression.
Studies investigating its phenomenology have revealed the preponderance, sever-
ity, recurrence, chronicity, and debilitating nature of this disorder. This descriptive
research highlights several issues that therapists should assess and address when
treating individuals with depression. Many of these issues are not frequently empha-
sized in the psychotherapy literature, including treatment implications of somatic
symptoms, anger, poor health and occupational functioning, and timing of disorder
onset.
Basic research on the etiology of depression has also identified several vulner-
ability factors involved in the onset and maintenance of this disorder. Some of these
vulnerability factors are consistent with the principles of change that underlie cur-
rently validated psychological treatments for depression. However, other vulnerabil-
ity factors have clinical implications that need to be more explicitly examined as
ways to further improve evidence-based psychotherapy.
Basic research also conveys that the etiology of depression is not restricted to
one set of causal or maintaining variables. Depression is likely to have multiple
determinants. In addition, these determinants are interconnected (e.g., LeMoult,
2020), thereby creating complex networks of moderating and mediating influences
on client’s functioning. Accordingly, rather than restrict their understanding of
depression within the confines of a single theory, clinicians are likely to increase
their effectiveness by assessing an array of potentially underlying variables (biologi-
cal, developmental, emotional, cognitive, behavioral, interpersonal). When forming
a case conceptualization, clinicians are also encouraged to determine which of these

-- 64 of 498 --

44 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
variables are likely to play primary roles for that specific client, and should therefore
be core targets of their treatment.
In addition to targeting primary determinants of depression, the therapist’s case
formulation and treatment plan should take into account how these determinants
interact with each other to interfere with the client’s optimal level of functioning.
While eclectic or prescriptive approaches to treating depression are likely to be effec-
tive (e.g., using social skills techniques with clients whose depression appears to be
primarily related to their negative impact on others; using cognitive interventions
when a highly functioning individual holds unreasonable standards), therapists
should also develop integrative frameworks that assimilate different dimensions of
functioning into broad and cohesive models (e.g., Gotlib & Hammen, 1992). More-
over, consistent with both prescriptive and integrative approaches, it is important
to keep in mind that improvement in one domain of functioning is likely to have a
positive impact on other domains. Adopting a more affiliative way of relating to oth-
ers not only helps a client to find more fulfillment in relationships but is also likely
to have an impact on their views of self. Therefore, therapists should assess multiple
effects of interventions as part of ongoing outcome monitoring and in refining the
treatment plan as therapy progresses. However, it is also important for the thera-
pist to consider that a set of interventions may not have an impact on all potential
determinants of depression; thus, they should broadly assess a client’s functioning
before terminating therapy, even if substantial changes have been achieved in one
core dimension of functioning.
REFERENCES
Aldao, A., Sheppes, G., & Gross, J. J. (2015). Emotion regulation flexibility. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 39(3), 263–278.
Alexander, F., & French, T. M. (1946). Psychoanalytic therapy: Principles and applications. New
York: Ronald Press.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Appleyard, K., Egeland, B., van Dulmen, M. H., & Sroufe, L. A. (2005). When more is not bet-
ter: The role of cumulative risk in child behavior outcomes. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 46(3), 235–245.
Arditte Hall, K. A., De Raedt, R., Timpano, K. R., & Joormann, J. (2018). Positive memory
enhancement training for individuals with major depressive disorder. Cognitive Behav-
iour Therapy, 47(2), 155–168.
Armstrong, T. D., & Costello, E. J. (2002). Community studies on adolescent substance use,
abuse, or dependence and psychiatric comorbidity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 70, 1224–1289.
Aubry, J. M., Gervasoni, N., Osiek, C., Perret, G., Rossier, M. F., Bertschy, G., & Bondolfi, G.
(2007). The DEX/CRH neuroendocrine test and the prediction of depressive relapse in
remitted depressed outpatients. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 41, 290–294.
Barlow, D. H., Farchione, T. J., Fairholme, C. P., Ellard, K. K., Boisseau, C. L., Allen, L. B., & May,
J. T. E. (2010). Unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders: Therapist
guide. New York: Oxford University Press.
Belzer, K., & Schneier, F. R. (2004). Comorbidity of anxiety and depressive disorders: Issues in
conceptualization, assessment, and treatment. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 10(5), 296–
306.

-- 65 of 498 --

Depression 	45
Berman, A. L. (2009). School-based suicide prevention: Research advances and practice impli-
cations. School Psychology Review, 38, 233–238.
Beutler, L. E., Blatt, S. J., Alimohamed, S., Levy, K. N., & Angtuago, L. A. (2006). Participant
factors in treating dysphoric disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of
therapeutic change that work (pp. 13–63). New York: Oxford University Press.
Birnbaum, H. G., Kessler, R. C., Kelley, D., Ben-Hamadi, R., Joish, V. N., & Greenberg, P. E.
(2010). Employer burden of mild, moderate, and severe major depressive disorder: Men-
tal health services utilization and costs, and work performance. Depression and Anxiety,
27, 78–89.
Blagys, M. D., & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2000). Distinctive features of short-term psychodynamic–
interpersonal psychotherapy: A review of the comparative psychotherapy process litera-
ture. Clinical Psychology, 7, 167–188.
Bonanno, G. A. (2005). Resilience in the face of potential trauma. Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science, 14, 135–138.
Bonanno, G. A., & Burton, C. L. (2013). Regulatory flexibility: An individual differences per-
spective on coping and emotion regulation. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(6),
591–612.
Bonanno, G. A., & Castonguay, L. G. (1994). On balancing approaches to psychotherapy:
Prescriptive patterns of attention, motivation, and personality. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice and Training, 31, 571–587.
Brook, D. W., Brook, J. S., Zhang, C., Cohen, P., & Whiteman, M. (2002). Drug use and the risk
of major depressive disorder, alcohol dependence, and substance use disorders. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 59(11), 1039–1044.
Burke, H. M., Davis, M. C., Otte, C., & Mohr, D. C. (2005). Depression and cortisol responses to
psychological stress: A meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30, 846–856.
Campbell-Sills, L., & Barlow, D. H. (2007). Incorporating emotion regulation into conceptual-
izations and treatments of anxiety and mood disorders. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of
emotion regulation (pp. 542–559). New York: Guilford Press.
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann, S. G. (2006). Effects of suppression
and acceptance on emotional responses of individuals with anxiety and mood disorders.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(9), 1251–1263.
Carney, R. M., & Freedland, K. E. (2017). Depression and coronary heart disease. Nature
Reviews Cardiology, 14(3), 145–155.
Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (2006). Principles of therapeutic change: A task force on par-
ticipants, relationships, and techniques factors. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 631–638.
Castonguay, L. G., Constantino, M. J., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2019). Principles of change: How
psychotherapists implement research in practice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Wiser, S., Raue, P. J., & Hayes, A. H. (1996). Predicting out-
come in cognitive therapy for depression: A comparison of unique and common factors.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 497–504.
Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (Eds.). (2012). Transformation in psychotherapy: Corrective expe-
riences across cognitive behavioral, humanistic, and psychodynamic approaches. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (Eds.). (2017). How and why some therapists are better than oth-
ers: Understanding therapist effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association
Press.
Castonguay, L. G., Schut, A. J., Aikens, D. E., Constantino, M. J., Laurenceau, J.-P., Bologh, L.,
& Burns, D. D. (2004). Integrative cognitive therapy for depression: A preliminary inves-
tigation. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 14, 4–20.
Castonguay, L. G., Youn, S. Y., Xiao, H., & McAleavey, A. A. (2018). The therapeutic relation-
ship: A warm, important, and potentially mutative factor in cognitive behavior therapy.
In O. Tishby & H. Wiseman (Eds.), Developing the therapeutic relationship: Integrating case

-- 66 of 498 --

46 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
studies, research and practice (pp. 157–179). Washington, DC: American Psychological Asso-
ciation.
Chakrabarty, T., Hadjipavlou, G., & Lam, R. W. (2016). Cognitive dysfunction in major depres-
sive disorder: Assessment, impact, and management. Focus, 14(2), 194–206.
Conradi, H. J., Ormel, J., & De Jonge, P. (2011). Presence of individual (residual) symptoms dur-
ing depressive episodes and periods of remission: A 3-year prospective study. Psychologi-
cal Medicine, 41(6), 1165–1174.
Constantino, M. J., Marnell, M. E., Haile, A. J., Kanther-Sista, S. N., Woman, K., Zappert, L.,
& Arnow, B. A. (2008). Integrative cognitive therapy for depression: A randomized pilot
comparison. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice and Training, 45, 122–134.
Coyne, J. C., Burchill, S. A. L., & Stiles, W. (1991). An interactional perspective on depression.
In C. R. Snyder & D. O. Forsyth (Eds.), Handbook of social and clinical psychology: The health
perspective (pp. 327–349). New York: Pergamon.
Crits-Christoph, P., & Connolly Gibbons, M. B. (2002). Relational interpretations. In J. C. Nor-
cross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (pp. 285–300). New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Cyranowski, J. M., Frank, E., Young, E., & Shear, M. K. (2000). Adolescent onset of the gender
difference in lifetime rates of major depression: A theoretical model. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 57(1), 21–27.
Dandeneau, S. D., Baldwin, M. W., Baccus, J. R., Sakellaropoulo, M., & Pruessner, J. C. (2007).
Cutting stress off at the pass: Reducing vigilance and responsiveness to social threat by
manipulating attention. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 651–666.
Dannlowski, U., Kersting, A., Lalee-Mentzel, J., Donges, U.-S., Arolt, V., & Suslow, T. (2006).
Subliminal affective priming in clinical depression and comorbid anxiety: A longitudi-
nal investigation. Psychiatry Research, 143, 63–75.
Davidson, R. J., Pizzagalli, D., & Nitschke, J. B. (2002). The representation and regulation of
emotion in depression: Perspectives from affective neuroscience. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L.
Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 219–244). New York: Guilford Press.
Davila, J., Stroud, C. B., & Starr, L. R. (2009). Depression in couples and families. In I. H. Gotlib
& C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 467–491). New York: Guilford Press.
Dedovic, K., & Ngiam, J. (2015). The cortisol awakening response and major depression:
Examining the evidence. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 11, 1181–1189.
Disner, S. G., Shumake, J. D., & Beevers, C. G. (2017). Self-referential schemas and attentional
bias predict severity and naturalistic course of depression symptoms. Cognition and Emo-
tion, 31(4), 632–644.
Drevets, W. C. (2000). Neuroimaging studies of mood disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 48, 813–
829.
Dryman, M. T., & Heimberg, R. G. (2018). Emotion regulation in social anxiety and depres-
sion: A systematic review of expressive suppression and cognitive reappraisal. Clinical
Psychology Review, 65, 17–42.
Ehring, T., Fischer, S., Schnülle, J., Bösterling, A., & Tuschen-Caffier, B. (2008). Characteristics
of emotion regulation in recovered depressed versus never depressed individuals. Per-
sonality and Individual Differences, 44, 1574–1584.
Elliott, R., Watson, J., Greenberg, L. S., Timulak, L., & Freire, E. (2013). Research on humanistic–
experiential psychotherapies. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psy-
chotherapy and behavior change (6th ed., pp. 495–538). New York: Wiley.
Everaert, J., Podina, I. R., & Koster, E. H. (2017). A comprehensive meta-analysis of interpreta-
tion biases in depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 58, 33–48.
Evraire, L. E., & Dozois, D. J. (2011). An integrative model of excessive reassurance seeking and
negative feedback seeking in the development and maintenance of depression. Clinical
Psychology Review, 31(8), 1291–1303.
Fischer, A., H., Manstead, A. S. R., Evers, C., Timmers, M., & Valk, G. (2004). Motives and

-- 67 of 498 --

Depression 	47
norms underlying emotion regulation. In P. Philippot & R. S. Feldman (Eds.), The regula-
tion of emotion (pp. 187–210). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Follette, W., & Greenberg, L. (2006). Technique factors in treating dysphoric disorders. In L.
Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 83–109). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Freedland, K. E., & Carney, R. M. (2009). Treatment-resistant depression and mortality after
acute coronary syndrome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 410–417.
Garnefski, N., & Kraaij, V. (2006). Relationships between cognitive emotion regulation strate-
gies and depressive symptoms: A comparative study of five specific samples. Personality
and Individual Differences, 40, 1659–1669.
Giesler, R. B., Josephs, R. A., & Swann, W. B. (1996). Self-verification in clinical depression: The
desire for negative evaluation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105, 358–368.
Goldfried, M. R. (1980). Toward the delineation of therapeutic change principles. American
Psychologist, 35, 991–999.
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1976). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Wiley.
Goodman, S. H., & Brand, S. R. (2009). Depression and early adverse experiences. In I. H.
Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 249–274). New York: Guilford
Press.
Gotlib, I. H., Hamilton, J. P., Cooney, R. E., Singh, M. K., Henry, M. L., & Joormann, J. (2010).
Neural processing of reward and loss in girls at risk for major depression. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 67(4), 380–387.
Gotlib, I. H., & Hammen, C. L. (1992). Psychological aspects of depression: Toward a cognitive–
interpersonal integration. New York: Wiley.
Gotlib, I. H., & LeMoult, J. (2014). The “ins” and “outs” of the depressive disorders section of
DSM-5. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 21(3), 193–207.
Gotlib, I. H., Sivers, H., Gabrieli, J. D. E., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Goldin, P., Minor, K. L., &
Canli, T. H. (2005). Subgenual anterior cingulate activation to valenced emotional stimuli
in major depression. NeuroReport, 16, 1731–1734.
Greenberg, L. S., & Watson, J. C. (2006). Emotion-focused therapy for depression. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Gross, J. J. (1998). The emerging field of emotion regulation: An integrative review. Review of
General Psychology, 2, 271–299.
Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003). Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes:
Implications for affect, relationship, and well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 85, 348–362.
Gross, J. J., & Muñoz, R. F. (1995). Emotion regulation and mental health. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 2, 151–164.
Gunnar, M. R., Van Dulmen, M. H., & International Adoption Project Team. (2007). Behav-
ior problems in postinstitutionalized internationally adopted children. Development and
Psychopathology, 19(1), 129–148.
Haga, S. M., Kraft, P., & Corby, E.-K. (2009). Emotion regulation: Antecedents and well-being
outcomes of cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression in cross-cultural samples.
Journal of Happiness Studies, 10, 271–291.
Hallion, L. S., & Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of the effect of cognitive bias modifica-
tion on anxiety and depression: Generation of stress in the course of unipolar depres-
sion. Psychological Bulletin, 137(6), 940–958.
Hammen, C. (2005). Stress and depression. Annual Reviews in Clinical Psychology, 1, 293–319.
Hammen, C. (2006). Stress generation in depression: Reflections on origins, research, and
future directions. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62(9), 1065–1082.
Hammen, C. L. (2009). Children of depressed parents. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.),
Handbook of depression (pp. 275–297). New York: Guilford Press.
Hankin, B. L., Abramson, L. Y., Moffitt, T. E., Silva, P. A., McGee, R., & Angell, K. E. (1998).

-- 68 of 498 --

48 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Development of depression from preadolescence to young adulthood: Emerging gen-
der differences in a 10-year longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107(1),
128–140.
Hasin, D. S., Goodwin, R. D., Stinson, F. S., & Grant, B. F. (2005). Epidemiology of major
depressive disorder: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcoholism and
Related Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(10), 1097–1106.
Hasin, D. S., Sarvet, A. L., & Meyers, J. L. (2018). Epidemiology of adult DSM-5 major depres-
sive disorder and its specifiers in the United States. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 336–346.
Hayes, A. H., Castonguay, L. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (1996). Effectiveness of targeting the vul-
nerability factors of depression in cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 64, 623–627.
Hayes, A. M., Feldman, G., Beevers, C., Laurenceau, J. P., & Cardaciotto, L. (2007). Discontinui-
ties and cognitive changes in exposure-based cognitive therapy for depression. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 409–421.
Henry, W. P., Schacht, T. E., & Strupp, H. H. (1986). Structural analysis of social behavior:
Application to a study of interpersonal process in differential psychotherapeutic out-
come. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54(1), 27–31.
Henry, W. P., Schacht, T. E., & Strupp, H. H. (1990). Patient and therapist introject, interper-
sonal process, and differential psychotherapy outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 58, 768–774.
Hertel, P. T., & Mathews, A. (2011). Cognitive bias modification: Past perspectives, current
findings, and future applications. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(6), 521–536.
Hidaka, B. H. (2012). Depression as a disease of modernity: Explanations for increasing preva-
lence. Journal of Affective Disorders, 140(3), 205–214.
Hill, C. E., Castonguay, L. G., Farber, B. A., Knox, S., Stiles, W. B., Anderson, T., . . . Sharpless,
B. A. (2012). Corrective experiences in psychotherapy: Definitions, processes, conse-
quences, and research directions. In L. G. Castonguay & C. D. Hill (Eds.), Transformation
in psychotherapy: Corrective experiences across cognitive behavioral, humanistic, and psychody-
namic approaches. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hollon, S. D., Stewart, M. O., & Strunk, D. (2006). Enduring effects for cognitive behavior
therapy in the treatment of depression and anxiety. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 285–
315.
Holmes, E. A., Lang, T. J., & Shah, D. M. (2009). Developing interpretation bias modification
as a “cognitive vaccine” for depressed mood—Imagining positive events makes you feel
better than thinking about them verbally. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 76–88.
Humphreys, K. L., LeMoult, J., Wear, J. G., Piersiak, H. A., Lee, A., & Gotlib, I. H. (2020). Child
maltreatment and depression: A meta-analysis of studies using the Childhood Trauma
Questionnaire. Child Abuse and Neglect, 102, Article 104361.
Hung, C. I., Liu, C. Y., Wang, S. J., Juang, Y. Y., & Yang, C. H. (2010). Somatic symptoms: An
important index in predicting the outcome of depression at six-month and two-year
follow-up points among outpatients with major depressive disorder. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 125, 134–140.
Hunt, C., Slade, T., & Andrews, G. (2004). Generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive
disorder comorbidity in the National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being. Depres-
sion and Anxiety, 20(1), 23–31.
Ikin, J. F., Creamer, M. C., Sim, M. R., & McKenzie, D. P. (2010). Comorbidity of PTSD and
depression in Korean War veterans: Prevalence, predictors, and impairment. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 125(1–3), 279–286.
Jacobson, N. C., & Newman, M. G. (2017). Anxiety and depression as bidirectional risk factors
for one another: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 143(11),
1155.

-- 69 of 498 --

Depression 	49
James, S. L., Abate, D., Abate, K. H., Abay, S. M., Abbafati, C., Abbasi, N., . . . Abdollahpour,
I. (2018). Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with dis-
ability for 354 diseases and injuries for 195 countries and territories, 1990–2017: A sys-
tematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet, 392(10159), 1789–
1858.
Jandl, M., Steyer, J., & Kaschka, W. P. (2010). Suicide risk markers in major depressive disorder:
A study of electrodermal activity and event-related potentials. Journal of Affective Disor-
ders, 123, 138–149.
Jeuring, H. W., Huisman, M., Comijs, H., Stek, M. L., & Beekman, A. (2016). The long-term
outcome of subthreshold depression in later life. Psychological Medicine, 46(13), 2855–2865.
John, O. P., & Gross, J. J. (2004). Healthy and unhealthy emotion regulation: Personality pro-
cesses, individual differences, and life span development. Journal of Personality, 72, 1301–
1333.
Johnson, S. L., Joormann, J., LeMoult, J., & Miller, C. (2009). Mood disorders: Biological bases.
In P. H. Blaney & T. Millon (Eds.), Oxford textbook of psychopathology (2nd ed., pp. 222–256).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Joiner, T. E. (2002). Depression in its interpersonal context. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen
(Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 295–313). New York: Guilford Press.
Joiner, T. E., & Timmons, K. A. (2009). Depression in its interpersonal context. In I. H. Gotlib
& C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 322–339). New York: Guilford Press.
Jones, E. E., & Pulos, S. M. (1993). Comparing the process in psychodynamic and cognitive-
behavioral therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 306–316.
Joormann, J. (2010). Cognitive inhibition and emotion regulation in depression. Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 19(3), 161–166.
Joormann, J., Cooney, R. E., Henry, M. L., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Neural correlates of automatic
mood regulation in girls at high risk for depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121(1),
61–72.
Joormann, J., & D’Avanzato, C. (2010). Emotion regulation in depression: Examining the role
of cognitive processes. Cognition and Emotion, 24, 913–939.
Joormann, J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2007). Selective attention to emotional faces following recovery
from depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116, 80–85.
Joormann, J., Hertel, P. T., LeMoult, J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2009). Training forgetting of negative
material in depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 34–43.
Joormann, J., & Siemer, M. (2004). Memory accessibility, mood regulation, and dysphoria: Dif-
ficulties in repairing sad mood with happy memories? Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
113, 179–188.
Joormann, J., Siemer, M., & Gotlib, I. H. (2007). Mood regulation in depression: Differential
effects of distraction and recall of happy memories on sad mood. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 116, 484–490.
Jopling, E., Gotlib, I. H., & LeMoult, J. (2020). Effects of working memory training on cognitive,
affective, and biological responses to stress in major depression: A novel cognitive bias
modification protocol. Journal of Affective Disorders, 265, 45–51.
Jopling, E., Tracy, A., & LeMoult, J. (2020). Childhood maltreatment, negative self-referential
processing, and depressive symptoms during stress. Psychology Research and Behavior
Management, 13, 79–87.
Jose, P. E., & Brown, I. (2008). When does the gender difference in rumination begin?: Gender
and age differences in the use of rumination by adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adoles-
cence, 37(2), 180–192.
Kahn, J. H., & Garrison, A. M. (2009). Emotional self-disclosure and emotional avoidance:
Relations with symptoms of depression and anxiety. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56,
573–584.

-- 70 of 498 --

50 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Kasch, K. L., Rottenberg, J., Arnow, B., & Gotlib, I. H. (2002). Behavioral activation and inhibi-
tion systems and the severity and course of depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
111, 589–597.
Kennedy, N., & Foy, K. (2005). The impact of residual symptoms on outcome of major depres-
sion. Current Psychiatry Reports, 7(6), 441–446.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Koretz, D., Merikangas, K., . . . National Comor-
bidity Survey Replication. (2003). The epidemiology of major depressive disorder. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 289, 3095–3105.
Kessler, R. C., Tat Chiu, W., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comor-
bidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.
Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Harrington, H., Milne, B. J., & Poulton, R. (2003). Prior
juvenile diagnoses in adults with mental disorder: Developmental follow-back of a
prospective-longitudinal cohort. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(7), 709–717.
Kircanski, K., Craske, M. G., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Thought suppression enhances memory
bias for threat material. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 462–476.
Klonsky, E. D., & May, A. M. (2015). The three-step theory (3ST): A new theory of suicide
rooted in the “ideation-to-action” framework. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy,
8(2), 114–129.
Klonsky, E. D., May, A. M., & Saffer, B. Y. (2016). Suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal ide-
ation. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 12, 307–330.
Klonsky, E. D., Saffer, B. Y., & Bryan, C. J. (2018). Ideation-to-action theories of suicide: A con-
ceptual and empirical update. Current Opinion in Psychology, 22, 38–43.
Knutson, B., Fong, G. W., Adams, C. M., Varner, J. L., & Hommer, D. (2001). Dissociation of
reward anticipation and outcome with event-related fMRI. NeuroReport, 12, 3683–3687.
Kring, A. M., & Werner, K. H. (2004). Emotion regulation and psychopathology. In P. Philip-
pot & R. S. Feldman (Eds.), The regulation of emotion (pp. 359–385). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kross, E., Ayduk, O., & Mischel, W. (2005). When asking “why” does not hurt. Psychological
Science, 16, 709–715.
Kuehner, C., Huffziger, S., & Liebsch, K. (2009). Rumination, distraction and mindful self-
focus: Effects on mood, dysfunctional attitudes and cortisol stress response. Psychological
Medicine, 39(2), 219–228.
Lang, T. J., Moulds, M. L., & Holmes, E. A. (2009). Reducing depressive intrusions via a com-
puterized cognitive bias modification of appraisals task: Developing a cognitive vaccine.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 139–145.
Lawson, C., MacLeod, C., & Hammond, G. (2002). Interpretation revealed in the blink of an
eye: Depressive bias in the resolution of ambiguity. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111,
321–328.
LeMoult, J. (2020). From stress to depression: Bringing together cognitive and biological sci-
ence. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 29(6), 592–598.
LeMoult, J., Chen, M. C., Foland-Ross, L. C., Burley, H. W., & Gotlib, I. H. (2015). Concordance
of mother– daughter diurnal cortisol production: Understanding the intergenerational
transmission of risk for depression. Biological Psychology, 108, 98–104.
LeMoult, J., Colich, N., Joormann, J., Singh, M. K., Eggleston, C., & Gotlib, I. H. (2018). Inter-
pretation bias training in depressed adolescents: Near-and far-transfer effects. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 46(1), 159–167.
LeMoult, J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2019). Depression: A cognitive perspective. Clinical Psychology
Review, 69, 51–66.
LeMoult, J., Humphreys, K. L., Tracy, A., Hoffmeister, J. A., Ip, E., & Gotlib, I. H. (2020). Meta-
analysis: Exposure to early life stress and risk for depression in childhood and adoles-
cence. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 59, 842–855.

-- 71 of 498 --

Depression 	51
LeMoult, J., Ordaz, S. J., Kircanski, K., Singh, M. K., & Gotlib, I. H. (2015). Predicting first onset
of depression in young girls: Interaction of diurnal cortisol and negative life events. Jour-
nal of Abnormal Psychology, 124, 850–859.
Lenzenweger, M. F., Lane, M. C., Loranger, A. W., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). DSM-IV personal-
ity disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 62,
553–564.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York:
Guilford Press.
Lok, A., Mocking, R. J. T., Ruhé, H. G., Visser, I., Koeter, M. W. J., Assies, J., . . . Schene, A. H.,
(2012). Longitudinal hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis trait and state effects in recur-
rent depression. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 37, 892–902.
Luby, J. L., Heffelfinger, A., Mrakotsky, C., Brown, K., Hessler, M., & Spitznagel, E. (2003).
Alterations in stress cortisol reactivity in depressed preschoolers relative to psychiatric
and no-disorder comparison groups. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 1248–1255.
Lyubomirsky, S., Caldwell, N. D., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1998). Effects of ruminative and
distracting responses to depressed mood on the retrieval of autobiographical memories.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 166–177.
Lyubomirsky, S., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1993). Self-perpetuating properties of dysphoric
rumination. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 339–349.
MacLean, P. D. (1985). Evolutionary psychiatry and the triune brain. Psychological Medicine,
15, 219–221.
Malone, D. A., Jr., Dougherty, D. D., Rezai, A. R., Carpenter, L. L., Friehs, G. M., Eskandar,
E. N., . . . Greenberg, B. D. (2009). Deep brain stimulation of the ventral capsule/ventral
striatum for treatment-resistant depression. Biological Psychiatry, 65(4), 267–275.
Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (2012). Interpersonal psychotherapy: Past, present and
future. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 19, 99–105.
Mathew, S. J., Coplan, J. D., Goetz, R. R., Feder, A., Greenwald, S., Dahl, R. E., . . . Weissman,
M. M. (2003). Differentiating depressed adolescent 24 h cortisol secretion in light of their
adult clinical outcome. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 1336–1343.
Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C., (2005). Cognitive vulnerability to emotional disorders. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 167–195.
Mayberg, H. S. (2002). Mapping mood: An evolving emphasis on frontal– limbic interactions. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Mazure, C. M. (1998). Life stressors as risk factors in depression. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 5, 291–313.
Mazure, C. M., Bruce, M. L., Maciejewski, P. K., & Jacobs, S. C. (2000). Adverse life events and
cognitive–personality characteristics in the prediction of major depression and antide-
pressant response. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 896–903.
McKendree-Smith, N., & Scogin, F. (2000). Depressive realism: Effects of depression severity
and interpretation time. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 56(12), 1601–1608.
Mitchell, P. B., Goodwin, G. M., Johnson, G. F., & Hirschfeld, R. M. A. (2008). Diagnostic guide-
lines for bipolar depression: A probabilistic approach. Bipolar Disorders, 10, 144–152.
Monroe, S. M., Harkness, K., Simons, A. D., & Thase, M. E. (2001). Life stress and the symp-
toms of major depression. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189, 168–175.
Monroe, S. M., Slavich, G. M., & Georgiades, K. (2009). The social environment and life stress
in depression. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 340–360).
New York: Guilford Press.
Nathan, P. E., & Gorman, J. M. (Eds.). (2021). A guide to treatments that work (4th ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Nezlek, J. B., & Kuppens, P. (2008). Regulating positive and negative emotions in daily life.
Journal of Personality, 76(3), 561–580.

-- 72 of 498 --

52 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Nils, F., & Rimé, B. (2012). Beyond the myth of venting: Social sharing modes determine the
benefits of emotional disclosure. European Journal of Social Psychology, 42, 672–681.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Morrow, J., & Fredrickson, B. L. (1993). Response styles and the duration
of episodes of depressed mood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 20–28.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). Rethinking rumination. Perspec-
tives on Psychological Science, 3, 400–424.
Norton, P. J. (2012). An open trial of a transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral group therapy for
anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 39, 242–250.
Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J. (2005). The cognitive control of emotion. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 9, 242–249.
Olff, M., Polak, A. R., Witteveen, A. B., & Denys, D. (2014). Executive function in posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and the influence of comorbid depression. Neurobiology of Learning
and Memory, 112, 114–121.
Painuly, N. P., Grover, S., Gupta, N., & Mattoo, S. K. (2011). Prevalence of anger attacks in
depressive and anxiety disorders: Implications for their construct? Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 65(2), 165–174.
Pariante, C. M., & Lightman, S. L. (2008). The HPA axis in major depression: Classical theories
and new developments. Trends in Neurosciences, 31(9), 464–468.
Peluso, P. R., & Freund, R. R. (2018). Therapist and client emotional expression and psycho-
therapy outcome. Psychotherapy, 55, 461–472.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997a). Opening up: the healing power of expressing emotions. New York: Guil-
ford Press.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997b). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process. Psy-
chological Science, 8(3), 162–166.
Penninx, B. W., Nolen, W. A., Lamers, F., Zitman, F. G., Smit, J. H., Spinhoven, P., . . . Verhaak,
P. (2011). Two-year course of depressive and anxiety disorders: Results from the Nether-
lands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). Journal of Affective Disorders, 133(1–2),
76–85.
Perlis, R. H., Fraguas, R., Fava, M., Trivedi, M. H., Luther, J. F., Wisniewski, S. R., & Rush, A.
J. (2005). Prevalence and clinical correlates of irritability in major depressive disorder: A
preliminary report from the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression
Study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66(2), 159–166.
Phillips, M. L., Drevets, W. C., Rauch, S. L., & Lane, R. (2003). Neurobiology of emotion per-
ception: II. Implications for major psychiatric disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 515–528.
Pizzagalli, D. A., Oakes, T. R., Fox, A. S., Chung, M. K., Larson, C. L., Abercrombie, H. C., . . .
Davidson, R. J. (2004). Functional but not structural subgenual prefrontal cortex abnor-
malities in melancholia. Molecular Psychiatry, 9, 393–405.
Porter, R., & Gallagher, P. (2006). Abnormalities of the HPA axis in affective disorders: Clinical
subtypes and potential treatments. Acta Neuropsychiatrica, 18, 193–209.
Raes, F., Williams, J. M. G., & Hermans, D. (2009). Reducing cognitive vulnerability to depres-
sion: A preliminary investigation of MEmory Specificity Training (MEST) in inpatients
with depressive symptomatology. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
40(1), 24–38.
Rao, U., & Chen, L.-A. (2008). Neurobiological and psychosocial processes associated with
depressive and substance-related disorders in adolescents. Current Drug Abuse Reviews,
1, 68–80.
Rao, U., Dahl, R. E., Ryan, N. D., Birmaher, B., Williamson, D. E., Giles, D. E., . . . Nelson,
B. (1996). The relationship between longitudinal clinical course and sleep and cortisol
changes in adolescent depression. Biological Psychiatry, 40, 474–484.
Rao, U., Hammen, C. L., & Poland, R. E. (2009). Mechanisms underlying the comorbidity

-- 73 of 498 --

Depression 	53
between depressive and addictive disorders in adolescents: Interactions between stress
and HPA activity. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 361–369.
Rawal, A., & Rice, F. (2012). Examining overgeneral autobiographical memory as a risk factor
for adolescent depression. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychia-
try, 51(5), 518–527.
Ray, R. D., Ochner, K. N., Cooper, J. C., Robertson, E. R., Gabrieli, J. E. D., & Gross, J. J. (2005).
Individual differences in trait rumination and the neural systems supporting cognitive
reappraisal. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 156–168.
Ribeiro, S. C., Tandon, R., Grunhaus, L., & Greden, J. F. (1993). The DST as a predictor of out-
come in depression: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 1618–1629.
Rnic, K., Sabbagh, M. A., Washburn, D., Bagby, R. M., Ravindran, A., Kennedy, J. L., . . . Hark-
ness, K. L. (2018). Childhood emotional abuse, physical abuse, and neglect are associ-
ated with theory of mind decoding accuracy in young adults with depression. Psychiatry
Research, 268, 501–507.
Roberts, J. E., Gotlib, I. H., & Kassel, J. D. (1996). Adult attachment security and symptoms of
depression: The mediating roles of dysfunctional attitudes and low self-esteem. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 310–320.
Rush, A. J., Zimmerman, M., Wisniewski, S. R., Fava, M., Hollon, S. D., Warden, D., . . . Thomas,
B. (2005). Comorbid psychiatric disorders in depressed outpatients: Demographic and
clinical features. Journal of Affective Disorders, 87(1), 43–55.
Rytwinski, N. K., Scur, M. D., Feeny, N. C., & Youngstrom, E. A. (2013). The co-occurrence
of major depressive disorder among individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder: A
meta-analysis. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26(3), 299–309.
Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2000). Negotiating the therapeutic alliance: A relational treatment guide.
New York: Guilford Press.
Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990). Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic
Books.
Salaycik, K. J., Kelly-Hayes, M., Beiser, A., Nguyen, A.-H., Brady, S. M., Kase, C. S., & Wolf, P. A.
(2007). Depressive symptoms and risk of stroke: The Framingham Study. American Heart
Association Journal, 38, 16–21.
Sanchez, A., Vazquez, C., Marker, C., LeMoult, J., & Joormann, J. (2013). Attentional disengage-
ment predicts stress recovery in depression: An eye-tracking study. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 122(2), 303–313.
Sapolsky, R. M. (2000). Glucocorticoids and hippocampal atrophy in neuropsychiatric disor-
ders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 925–935.
Scholten, W. D., Batelaan, N. M., Penninx, B. W., van Balkom, A. J., Smit, J. H., Schoevers, R. A.,
& van Oppen, P. (2016). Diagnostic instability of recurrence and the impact on recurrence
rates in depressive and anxiety disorders. Journal of Affective Disorders, 195, 185–190.
Seligman, M. E. (1989). Research in clinical psychology: Why is there so much depression
today? In S. Ira (Ed.), The G. Stanley Hall lecture series: Vol. 9 (pp. 75–96). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Siegle, G. J., Steinhauer, S. R., Thase, M. E., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S. (2002). Can’t shake
that feeling: Assessment of sustained event-related fMRI amygdala activity in response
to emotional information in depressed individuals. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 693–707.
Siegle, G. J., Thompson, W., Carter, C. S., Steinhauer, S. R., & Thase, M. E. (2007). Increased
amygdala and decreased dorsolateral prefrontal BOLD responses in unipolar depres-
sion: Related and independent features. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 198–209.
Slavich, G. M., & Irwin, M. R. (2014). From stress to inflammation and major depressive disor-
der: A social signal transduction theory of depression. Psychological Bulletin, 140, 774–815.
Solomon, D. A., Keller, M. B., Leon, A. C., Mueller, T. I., Lavori, P. W., Shea, M. T., . . . Endicott, J.

-- 74 of 498 --

54 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(2000). Multiple recurrences of major depressive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
157(2), 229–233.
Srivastava, S., Tamir, M., McGonigal, K. M., John, O. P., & Gross, J. J. (2009). The social costs of
emotional suppression: A prospective study of the transition to college. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 96, 883–897.
Stander, V. A., Thomsen, C. J., & Highfill-McRoy, R. M. (2014). Etiology of depression comor-
bidity in combat-related PTSD: A review of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review,
34(2), 87–98.
Steinert, C., Hofmann, M., Kruse, J., & Leichsenring, F. (2014). The prospective long-term
course of adult depression in general practice and the community: A systematic litera-
ture review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 152, 65–75.
Stewart, W. F., Ricci, J. A., Chee, E., Hahn, S. R., & Morganstein, D. (2003). Cost of lost pro-
ductive work time among US workers with depression. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 289, 3135–3144.
Sullivan, P. F., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2000). Genetic epidemiology of major depression:
Review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1552–1562.
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1983). Self-verification: Bringing social reality into harmony with the self.
In J. Suls & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Social psychological perspectives on the self (pp. 33–66).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Swann, W. B., Jr., Wenzlaff, R. M., Krull, D. S., & Pelham, B. W. (1992). Allure of negative feed-
back: Self-verification strivings among depressed persons. Journal of Abnormal Psychol-
ogy, 101(2), 293–306.
Teasdale, J. D. (1988). Cognitive vulnerability to persistent depression. Cognition and Emotion,
2, 247–274.
Tennant, C. (2002). Life events, stress and depression: A review of recent findings. Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 36, 173–182.
Thompson, R. A. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme in search of definition. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59, 25–52, 250–283.
Vickers, K. S., & Vogeltanz-Holm, N. D. (2003). The effects of rumination and distraction tasks
on psychophysiological responses and mood in dysphoric and nondysphoric individu-
als. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27, 331–348.
Wadlinger, H. A., & Isaacowitz, D. M. (2008). Looking happy: The experimental manipulation
of a positive visual attention bias. Emotion, 8, 121–126.
Watamura, S. E., Donzella, B., Alwin, J., & Gunnar, M. R. (2003). Morning-to-afternoon
increases in cortisol concentrations for infants and toddlers at child care: Age differences
and behavioral correlates. Child Development, 74, 1006–1020.
Watkins, E. R. (2018). Rumination-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression. New York:
Guilford Press.
Watkins, E. R., Baeyens, C. B., & Read, R. (2009). Concreteness training reduces dysphoria:
Proof-of-principle for repeated cognitive bias modification in depression. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 118, 55–64.
Watson, J. C., & Bedard, D. (2006). Clients’ emotional processing in psychotherapy: A com-
parison between cognitive-behavioral and process-experiential psychotherapy. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 152–159.
Wenzlaff, R. M., Rude, S. S., Taylor, C. J., Stultz, C., & Sweatt, R. A. (2001). Beneath the veil of
thought suppression: Attentional bias and depression risk. Cognition and Emotion, 15,
435–452.
Whiteford, H. A., Harris, M. G., McKeon, G., Baxter, A., Pennell, C., Barendregt, J. J., & Wang, J.
(2013). Estimating remission from untreated major depression: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 43(8), 1569–1585.

-- 75 of 498 --

Depression 	55
Williams, J. M. G., Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., Hermans, D., Raes, F., & Dalgleish, T. (2007). Auto-
biographical memory specificity and emotional disorder. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 122–
148.
Zisook, S., Lesser, I., Stewart, J. W., Wisniewski, S. R., Balasubramani, G. K., Fava, M., . . . Rush,
A. J. (2007). Effect of age at onset on the course of major depressive disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 1539–1546.
Zobel, A. W., Nickel, T., Sonntag, A., Uhr, M., Holsboer, F., & Ising, M. (2001). Cortisol response
in the combined dexamethasone/CRH test as predictor of relapse in patients with remit-
ted depression: A prospective study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 35, 83–94.
Zuroff, D. C., Koestner, R., Moskowitz, D. S., McBride, C, & Bagby, R. M. (2012). Therapist’s
autonomy support and patient’s self-criticism predict motivation during brief treatments
for depression. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 31, 903–932.

-- 76 of 498 --

56
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) has been conceptualized as the “basic” anxiety
disorder given its persistent course and the features it shares with other anxiety
disorders (Brown, Barlow, & Liebowitz, 1994). Accordingly, understanding the etiol-
ogy and maintenance of GAD may have implications for understanding all anxiety
disorders (Roemer, Orsillo, & Barlow, 2002).
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND ASSOCIATED FEATURES
Worry, a central feature of GAD, has been defined as “a chain of thoughts and
images, negatively affect-laden and relatively uncontrollable . . . an attempt to engage
in mental problem-solving on an issue whose outcome is uncertain but contains the
possibility of one or more negative outcomes . . . [and] relate[d] closely to the fear
process” (Borkovec, Robinson, Pruzinsky, & DePree, 1983, p. 10). The definition was
later extended to include anxious apprehension for future negative events (Borkovec,
Ray, & Stoeber, 1998). Although worry is a common phenomenon, it can become a
persistent and disabling source of emotional discomfort in GAD. Persons with GAD
worry not only about major life issues (e.g., health, finances, relationships) but also
minor issues that others would not perceive as threatening (e.g., household chores).
Pathological worry often generates additional distress due to its catastrophic thought
content, and it deviates from normal worry due to its pervasiveness (e.g., Niles, Leb-
eau, Liao, Glenn, & Craske, 2012) and uncontrollability (e.g., Hallion & Ruscio, 2013).
C H A P T E R 3
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Michelle G. Newman
Paul F. Crits‑Christoph
Lauren E. Szkodny
Gavin N. Rackoff
Jeremy T. Schwob

-- 77 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	57
Cognitive and physiological features of GAD elucidate the nature and func-
tion of worry. Worry is predominated by negative verbal thought activity, such that
when people worry, they talk to themselves about negative events that may occur in
the future (Borkovec et al., 1998). Because of its threat-related content, worry gener-
ates increases in subjective distress and sympathetic nervous system activity, while
also reducing parasympathetic nervous system activity (e.g., Llera & Newman, 2010,
2014; Steinfurth, Alius, Wendt, & Hamm, 2017). By generating distress and somatic
activation, worry reduces the likelihood of further reactivity associated with a fear-
ful event (e.g., Llera & Newman, 2010, 2014). Thus, worry may account for the auto-
nomic inflexibility characteristic of GAD (e.g., Hoehn-Saric, McLeod, Funderburk, &
Kowalski, 2004) and serve as a strategy to avoid emotional processing of unexpected
negative events (Newman & Llera, 2011). Accordingly, persons with GAD report that
worry creates sustained levels of negative emotion, while also helping them avoid
sudden increases in negative emotion and prepare for the worst (Borkovec & Roemer,
1995; Llera & Newman, 2017).
GAD and worry impact information processing in ways that interfere with
learning from experience and contribute to the maintenance of anxious meanings
attributed to various stimuli. People with GAD demonstrate a bias for attending to
threat cues (Goodwin, Yiend, & Hirsch, 2017) and hold exaggerated beliefs about the
probability of negative events (Butler & Mathews, 1983). However, given that there
is no actual danger, as it only exists in their future-oriented thought, the threat can-
not be physically avoided. As long as danger is perceived, individuals with GAD
continue to search for ways to avoid it or prepare themselves to cope with it. Thus,
worry is a mental response to perceived threat when no behavioral solution exists.
It primarily functions as a maladaptive coping behavior, a means to prepare for the
worst and avoid large shifts in negative emotions (Borkovec & Roemer, 1995; New-
man & Llera, 2011).
Cognitive biases in GAD also extend to memory for positively and negatively
valenced information. For example, compared to persons without anxiety disor-
ders, persons with GAD have a bias toward greater memory for threat-related words
(Coles, Turk, & Heimberg, 2007). Persons with GAD also show deficiencies in prob-
abilistic learning, with a particular tendency to underestimate the probabilities of
positive outcomes (LaFreniere & Newman, 2019). Memory biases and probabilistic
learning deficits may account for the persistent apprehensive expectations charac-
teristic of GAD. For example, when individuals with GAD were asked to track the
outcomes of their worries, 91% of worries did not come true, and 30% of worries
that did come true turned out better than expected (LaFreniere & Newman, 2020).
Furthermore, recording a greater number of untrue worries predicted a reduction in
worry over time (LaFreniere & Newman, 2020), suggesting that memory for positive
and negative information may be involved in the maintenance of GAD.
GAD is also associated with significant distress, disability, and impairment in
quality of life. The most detailed information on disability and quality-of-life effects
of GAD comes from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) community survey
(Robins & Regier, 1991), one of the largest investigations of the prevalence of men-
tal disorders, and from a multisite survey of psychiatric outpatients (Massion, War-
shaw, & Keller, 1993). The overall picture for GAD is one of significant psychosocial
impairment, with 38% of ECA subjects and 71% of outpatients characterizing their

-- 78 of 498 --

58 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
emotional health as only fair to poor; 27 and 25%, respectively, were receiving dis-
ability payments, and only about 50% were working full-time. Of those who were
working, 38% had missed at least 1 week of work in the past year due to their anxiety
(Massion et al., 1993). In the ECA, GAD was associated with a threefold greater likeli-
hood of working at a low occupational level, and a more than a twofold likelihood
of earning less than $10,000 per year (Robins & Regier, 1991). Studies suggest that
role and quality of life impairment in those with pure GAD (without comorbidity) is
comparable to pure major depressive disorder (MDD; Hoffman, Dukes, & Wittchen,
2008; Wittchen, Carter, Pfister, Montgomery, & Kessler, 2000). Moreover, high rates of
suicidality can be found in persons with GAD. In one longitudinal epidemiological
study in the United States, young adults (ages 16–25 years) diagnosed with GAD had
a sixfold increased likelihood of suicidal ideation and a more than twofold greater
likelihood of attempted suicide, after researchers controlled for other mental disor-
ders and stressful life events (Boden, Fergusson, & Horwood, 2007).
GAD also has consequences for physical health, with 35% of individuals with
GAD in the ECA sample and 23% of those in the Massion and colleagues (1993)
sample rating their physical health as only fair to poor. GAD is associated with a
number of comorbid medical problems such as asthma (Goodwin, Jacobi, & The-
feld, 2003), chronic pain conditions (Von Korff et al., 2005), irritable bowel syndrome
(Gros, Antony, McCabe, & Swinson, 2009), and insomnia (Brenes et al., 2009). Fur-
thermore, GAD is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease independent of depression
(e.g., Batelaan, ten Have, van Balkom, Tuithof, & de Graaf, 2014; Martens et al., 2010).
Persons with GAD are among the heaviest users of primary care, specialty clinic,
and emergency room resources, contributing substantially to the nonpsychiatric cost
associated with anxiety disorders in the United States (e.g., Fogarty, Sharma, Chetty,
& Culpepper, 2008; Jones, Ames, Jeffries, Scarinci, & Brantley, 2001). Even individuals
who do not meet the full criteria for GAD but have a subthreshold level of symptoms
experience significant impairment, as well as greater health care use compared to
individuals without GAD symptoms (Haller, Cramer, Lauche, Gass, & Dobos, 2014).
Finally, GAD has been associated with interpersonal dysfunction (Crits-
Christoph, Gibbons, Narducci, Schamberger, & Gallop, 2005; Newman & Erickson,
2010; Przeworski et al., 2011). Individuals with GAD tend to report a predominance
of worrisome thoughts related to relationship concerns (Breitholtz, Johansson, & Öst,
1999; Roemer, Molina, & Borkovec, 1997). They also exhibit a tendency to perceive
social threats in their environment (Goodwin et al., 2017). In a like manner, GAD is
more associated with marital discord or dissatisfaction than other anxiety or mood
disorders (Whisman, 1999). Compared to those without GAD, individuals with GAD
are more likely to have enmeshed relationships or to engage in role reversal, such as a
child assuming parental responsibility (Cassidy, 1995; Cassidy, Lichtenstein-Phelps,
Sibrava, Thomas, & Borkovec, 2009). People with GAD have disrupted perceptions
of their negative interpersonal impact on others (Erickson & Newman, 2007), which
can impact their relationships and maintain interpersonal dysfunction.
Treatment Implications
Individuals with GAD anxiously anticipate and engage in mental attempts to
problem-solve and prepare for possible negative events. They frequently detect and
interpret threat in their environment, even when no threat exists (Goodwin et al.,

-- 79 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	59
2017). Their mental experience is dominated by worry, which is elicited by internal or
external cues that signal real or imagined danger. Individuals with GAD use worry
to figure out how to prevent bad things from happening or to prepare for the worst
(Borkovec & Roemer, 1995). They spend a significant amount of time preoccupied
with their worrisome thoughts and therefore tend to describe themselves as having
been worriers all their lives. Chronic worry becomes a way of life to the point that
these individuals may not realize there are treatments available to them. Since many
people with GAD might not even seek treatment, dissemination of information about
the helpfulness and availability of psychotherapy for GAD is an important first step.
Individuals with GAD may be so preoccupied with worries that they neglect the
world around them. Generally anticipating the worst, they tend to absorb informa-
tion in accordance with their negative expectations. They do not utilize informa-
tion available to them via their emotional experience, which can adaptively motivate
them, guide their behavior, or facilitate learning and subsequent growth (Borkovec,
2002). In their efforts to focus on imagined threat, they are distracted from the pres-
ent, including any information that may be useful and/or make life less stressful.
Despite its negative impact, GAD is unique compared to other anxiety disorders, in
that worry is inherently reinforcing. Some individuals with GAD hold the super-
stitious belief that their worry can actually prevent negative things from happen-
ing. The relief they experience when the feared event does not occur reinforces their
worry. They are firm in their conviction that if they had not engaged in worrisome
thinking, the aversive event might have taken place. Other individuals with GAD
believe that their motivation hinges on their worry. Without it, they would no lon-
ger be goal-oriented. They feel that they need to be in a constant state of activation,
anticipating future catastrophes so they can avoid them.
Based on empirical findings on the symptoms and clinical features of GAD
reviewed earlier, we can make a number of recommendations about how treatment
might best proceed with such patients. Because worry is negatively reinforced, indi-
viduals with GAD need to gain insight that their worry is ultimately maladaptive.
Although it is likely to take considerable therapeutic effort for patients with GAD to
learn that their worry is not helpful, clinicians should assist them in developing a
new perspective. As many individuals with GAD tend to associate their worry with a
motivation to succeed, they need to learn to differentiate between emotional distress
and drive and ambition. It is important for them to realize that they can still be goal-
oriented in the absence of anxiety. The majority of their experience centers on trying
to prevent future disasters; thus, their actions are perceived to be externally moti-
vated. Accordingly, treatment should focus on helping them rediscover the intrinsic
motivation behind their actions and come to understand that it is possible to engage
in something even when not actively fearing negative consequences. Patients with
GAD do not fully experience life because they are consumed by mentally creating,
and subsequently avoiding, new dangers and threats. To maximize their experience,
they need to refrain from attending to external consequences to the extent that they
are disengaged from meaningful and rewarding activities. They need to recognize
the negative impact their worry has on their well-being. Thus, before beginning to
work with clients on decreasing worry, therapists need to help clients see that their
worry is neither helpful nor necessary.
Given the potency of worry, it is also important to target and track this cogni-
tive process consistently and not to treat GAD as simply diffuse anxiety. Therefore,

-- 80 of 498 --

60 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
self-monitoring is likely to be a beneficial component of therapy, irrespective of the
clinician’s theoretical orientation. Clinicians need to help patients identify experi-
ences that are inconsistent with their expectations. These patients are constantly
attuned to imagined negative events that may happen in the future, so it is necessary
for them to return to the present moment. Being present enables accurate tracking
of information that can disabuse patients of maladaptive beliefs. When focused on
what may happen in the future, people with GAD tend to lose information available
to them that they can use to their benefit in their present environment. Therefore, it
is important that clinicians help them actively make an effort to track and observe
aspects of the world around them that are inconsistent with their apprehensions.
Moreover, individuals with GAD need more adaptive ways to perceive, interpret,
and predict events. They tend to reject information that contradicts their negative
cognitions, often regarding positive experiences as flukes. Therefore, therapists need
to teach clients to change negative beliefs. Overall, a major goal of therapy is to help
these patients shift from inaccurate negative expectations to beliefs that are less anxi-
ety provoking.
In addition to teaching new ways of seeing the world, more recently developed
treatments have targeted the predilection of individuals with GAD to avoid emotional
processing via worry. Given that emotional processing avoidance may be maintain-
ing the generalized anxiety symptoms, active engagement in emotional processing
may be an important component of treatment, particularly the processing of fear
(Llera & Newman, 2010; Newman, Castonguay, Borkovec, Fisher, & Nordberg, 2008).
However, given that worry precludes such processing, and because worry increases
and maintains anxiety and stress, an important therapeutic task is to engage clients
in the use of applied relaxation. In a relaxed state, emotional processing is more
likely. Within therapy, exposing clients to sharp shifts in anxiety by having them
relax and then imagine a worrisome outcome might be helpful. Outside of therapy,
it is necessary for clients to expose themselves to sharp shifts in negative emotions,
especially those occurring in worry-related situations, such as interpersonal rela-
tionships (Newman, Llera, Erickson, & Przeworski, 2014). Care should be taken to
ensure that clients attempt to lower their baseline state of anxiety and tension during
normal activity to one that mimics euthymia and naturally allow any mood shifts
that may occur both during and outside of therapy.
Because GAD is associated with impairment in health and occupational func-
tioning, it is recommended that clinicians subscribing to all theoretical orientations
assess associated disability at different phases of treatment in order to determine
ways in which clients can improve those important aspects of functioning. Similarly,
therapists should assess for suicidal ideation, intent, and plan throughout the course
of treatment, especially if it has been determined that the patient is at risk for suicide.
Moreover, some of the somatic symptoms associated with GAD (e.g., fatigue, sleep
disturbance, irritability, difficulties with concentration) can be addressed with spe-
cific interventions, such as relaxation and sleep hygiene techniques, and should be
incorporated into treatment.
Also, because interpersonal problems are highly associated with GAD, thera-
pists should assess interpersonal difficulties at different phases of therapy, including
the end of the treatment. Remaining interpersonal problems at the end of therapy
have been linked to poorer outcome at follow-up. Thus, addressing such problems
before the end of treatment may prevent relapse. Both theory and research evidence

-- 81 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	61
have suggested that interpersonal problems (past and current) are linked to the
cause and/or maintenance of GAD. As such, interpersonal difficulties are further
addressed in the section on etiology.
The aforementioned recommendations are beneficial in targeting the core cog-
nitive, emotional, and behavioral symptoms of individuals diagnosed with GAD.
However, individuals who fall below threshold may still be significantly affected by
their GAD symptoms. Although their overall dysfunction may not be as severe as
that of individuals with full GAD, their symptoms can be just as debilitating during
periods of excessive worry and high anxiety. Therefore, it is important to assess clini-
cally for the presence of subthreshold levels of GAD. Whereas a patient is generally
treated within an overall diagnostic and therapeutic framework, including consid-
eration of personality disorders, it may be necessary to consider the patient’s needs
from an individual standpoint. This is especially true if they do not meet criteria for
a particular disorder but report some associated symptoms requiring stabilization.
COURSE AND OUTCOME
GAD has a common onset during middle age (median = 31–39 years; Kessler et
al., 2005; Ruscio et al., 2017) and assumes a chronic course. In the Harvard–Brown
Anxiety Research Program (HARP), a naturalistic prospective study of psychiatric
patients, the probability of recovery from GAD over a 12-year period was 58%, and
the probability of subsequent recurrence among those who did recover was 45%
(Bruce et al., 2005). A separate prospective study of primary care patients with GAD
revealed a 39% probability of full recovery after 2 years, as well as a 52% probability
of recurrence of moderate or greater symptoms among recovered patients (Rodri-
guez et al., 2006). Thus, full recovery from GAD is rare and often short-lived. Factors
associated with a longer course of GAD in the United States include being female
and being of African American or Latinx ethnicity (Bjornsson et al., 2014; Rodri-
guez et al., 2006; Sibrava et al., 2013). Internationally, GAD takes on a more prolonged
course in lower-income countries and among individuals with lower socioeconomic
status (Ruscio et al., 2017).
Individuals with GAD experience varying levels of symptom severity and
impairment over time. Among HARP participants with GAD, disorder severity
declined modestly over 14 years, though participants did not improve beyond partial
recovery on average (Ramsawh, Raffa, Edelen, Rende, & Keller, 2009). Just as some
persons with GAD experience decreases in severity, others experience increases
in severity, rising from subthreshold to threshold levels (Angst, Gamma, Baldwin,
Ajdacic-Gross, & Rossler, 2009). Thus, while experiencing a chronic course, the typi-
cal person with GAD experiences fluctuations in symptom severity (e.g., Wittchen,
Lieb, Pfister, & Schuster, 2000). As such, there may be periods when the severity of
GAD symptoms is below threshold levels, without necessarily indicating recovery.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is currently the “gold standard” treatment
for GAD. CBT for GAD produces significant improvement that is maintained for
up to 2 years following treatment termination (Borkovec & Ruscio, 2001; Cuijpers et
al., 2014). CBT has also been found to generate greater improvement than no treat-
ment, psychodynamic therapy, pharmacotherapy, nondirective therapy, and placebo
therapy (Borkovec & Ruscio, 2001; Cuijpers et al., 2014; Salzer, Winkelbach, Leweke,

-- 82 of 498 --

62 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Leibing, & Leichsenring, 2011). CBT is well liked by clients and associated with a
lower dropout rate compared to pharmacotherapy (Mitte, 2005). Though findings
are mixed, the literature generally demonstrates superior efficacy of CBT compared
to either individual cognitive or behavioral therapy components alone (Borkovec &
Ruscio, 2001; Cuijpers et al., 2014). Moderator analyses suggest that individual com-
ponent treatments may be more effective for GAD clients with a longer course of
the disorder (Newman & Fisher, 2013; Newman, Shin, & Lanza, 2019). These find-
ings suggest that, while full CBT packages provide a range of efficacious therapeutic
techniques, prolonged and intensive focus on individual techniques may help clients
break deeply entrenched habits.
In addition to showing statistically significant improvement, CBT has also dem-
onstrated clinically significant improvement. CBT reduces worry to normative levels
and leads to recovery in a majority of clients, and these gains are typically main-
tained for up to 1 year (Covin, Ouimet, Seeds, & Dozois, 2008; Hanrahan, Field,
Jones, & Davey, 2013). CBT interventions include self-monitoring, stimulus con-
trol, relaxation, self-control desensitization, and cognitive therapy. As described by
Woody and Ollendick (2006) and Newman, Stiles, Janeck, and Woody (2006), these
techniques reflect five principles of change (i.e., challenge misconceptions, actively
test the validity of erroneous beliefs, use repeated exposure, eliminate avoidance,
and improve skills) that can be implemented by interventions espoused in various
approaches.
Benzodiazepines (BZs), buspirone, and tricyclic antidepressants were the first
classes of medications to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for the treatment of GAD. However, BZs carry risk of sedation, motor and
cognitive abnormalities, as well as physical dependency and withdrawal problems
(e.g., van Laar, Volkerts, & Verbaten, 2001; Wang, Bohn, Glynn, Mogun, & Avorn,
2001). Because of their adverse effects, BZs have been relegated by most psychiatrists
to treat only acute anxiety symptoms (Baldwin, Allgulander, Bandelow, Ferre, & Pal-
lanti, 2012). In clinical trials, buspirone (Rickels et al., 1982; Volz, Möller, & Sturm,
1994) and the tricyclic antidepressant imipramine (Kahn et al., 1986; Rickels, Down-
ing, Schweizer, & Hassman, 1993) have shown efficacy.
Since 1999, a number of studies have documented the efficacy of selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
(SNRI) antidepressants in the treatment of GAD. Venlafaxine XR (extended release)
was the first of these drugs to be approved by the FDA for the indication of GAD.
In large-scale studies, venlafaxine XR demonstrated significantly better clinical effi-
cacy than placebo after 8 weeks (Rickels, Pollack, Sheehan, & Haskins, 2000; Shee-
han, 1999), and after 6 months (Allgulander, Hackett, & Salinas, 2001; Gelenberg et
al., 2000) of treatment. Paroxetine was also studied in several GAD trials (Davidson,
2001; McCafferty, Bellew, Zanelli, Iyengar, & Hewett, 2000; Pollack et al., 2001; Rickels
et al., 2003; Stocchi et al., 2003) and approved by the FDA for the treatment of GAD.
Additional SSRI/SNRI drugs approved by the FDA for the treatment of GAD include
duloxetine and escitalopram.
Despite the efficacy of SNRIs and SSRIs in the treatment of GAD, low remission
rates have been observed during the acute phase of treatment of GAD for venlafax-
ine XR (37%; Gelenberg et al., 2000) and paroxetine (33–39%; Rickels, Rynn, Iyengar,
& Duff, 2006). Although remission rates are higher after longer-term treatment with
venlafaxine XR (79%; Rickels et al., 2013) and paroxetine (73%; Stocchi et al., 2003),

-- 83 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	63
it is equally important to attempt to increase these rates during acute treatment in
order to improve compliance and relieve suffering and functional impairment as
quickly as possible. Thus, it is important to test new ways of improving short-term
pharmacological treatment of GAD.
Treatment Implications
Given GAD’s chronic fluctuating course, it is unlikely that GAD symptoms and
associated features will permanently resolve themselves over time in the absence
of treatment. Although symptoms may decrease unaided, they can resurface to the
same degree, especially in response to stressors. In patients seeking treatment, GAD
symptoms may appear to have been successfully treated when assessed at discrete
time points. Likewise, patients presenting with subthreshold GAD may be at risk to
develop full-blown GAD. Psychotherapists should use standards employed in epi-
demiological studies to track GAD symptoms and better understand their ebb and
flow, such as the symptom course indicative of sustained recovery. Also, it is rec-
ommended that treatment not be discontinued until clients have shown sustained
recovery.
Although data suggest that GAD is chronic, clinicians should also be aware that
patients may inaccurately report their symptoms. For instance, if they are feeling
anxious in a given moment or for an extended period, they are more likely to report
that they have been that way for the past 6 months, thus meeting the chronicity
criterion for GAD. Therefore, it is important for therapists to help patients increase
their awareness of their patterns of functioning. Furthermore, individuals with
GAD rarely experience full or sustained recovery, so it is imperative that therapists
approach treatment with realistic expectations and aim not for a “cure” but to help
the client to learn how to cope with the disorder. The chronicity and recurrence of
GAD also suggests that clients may need long-term therapy. Therapists should incor-
porate methods to predict and prevent relapses, as well as cope with possible resur-
gences of the disorder. Acceptance-based therapy techniques, such as mindfulness,
may also help clients to stop bracing for the worst and prevent full-blown relapses
(Whiteside et al., 2007).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Variations in definition, including subsequent changes to DSM criteria, have inter-
fered with precise prevalence estimates for GAD. However, several epidemiological
studies employing large representative samples have approximated actual preva-
lence rates. Lifetime prevalence of DSM-III-R GAD, excluding comorbid panic and
depression, was 3.6% (Kendler, Neale, Kessler, Heath, & Eaves, 1992). The National
Comorbidity Survey found a 12-month prevalence of 3.1% and a lifetime prevalence
of 5.1% (Wittchen, Zhao, Kessler, & Eaton, 1994). The National Comorbidity Survey
Replication study indicated a lifetime prevalence for DSM-IV GAD of 5.7% and a
12-month prevalence of 3.1% (Kessler et al., 2005). Projected lifetime prevalence at age
75 is 8.3%. Compared with DSM-IV GAD prevalence rates, the World Mental Health
Surveys report a higher 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 GAD of 4.0% and a lifetime
prevalence of 7.8% for the United States (Ruscio et al., 2017). Globally, a lifetime

-- 84 of 498 --

64 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
DSM-5 prevalence of 3.6% and a 12-month prevalence of 1.8% has been found in the
26 participating countries (Ruscio et al., 2017).
The presence of GAD is associated with a number of sociodemographic features.
Gender is one of the factors most consistently associated with GAD, with rates of
the disorder approximately two times greater in women than in men in community
(Wittchen et al., 1994) and clinical (e.g., Woodman, Noyes, Black, Schlosser, & Yagla,
1999) samples. Furthermore elevated rates of GAD have been found in previously
married (Wittchen et al., 1994) and never married (Ruscio et al., 2017) individuals
compared to married individuals. Homemakers, individuals not working outside the
home, and unemployed individuals also have elevated rates of GAD (Ruscio et al.,
2017; Wittchen et al., 1994). Within the United States, prevalence is greatest in the
Northeastern region (Wittchen et al., 1994), and globally, prevalence is greatest in
higher income countries (Ruscio et al., 2017). Prevalence increases across adulthood,
beginning at 4.1% for ages 18–29, 6.8% for ages 30–44, rising to 7.7% for ages 45–59,
before decreasing to 3.6% for ages 60 and older (Kessler et al., 2005). Epidemiological
surveys in the United States have found few differences in the prevalence of GAD as
a function of ethnicity, religion, income, education and urbanicity (Wittchen et al.,
1994).
Treatment Implications
GAD prevalence rates depend on the current diagnostic criteria. However, it is not
uncommon for anxious patients to worry excessively or meet criteria for subthresh-
old GAD. Therefore, therapists should understand the determinants of GAD and
related symptoms, since they are likely to encounter worrisome patients. Although
patients may not meet full criteria for GAD, clinicians of all experience levels should
not neglect subthreshold GAD symptoms because the emergence of full GAD may be
prevented through early detection of symptoms. Given a patient’s sociodemographic
features, therapists should be aware that differential risk of GAD may be associ-
ated with different determinant stressors, such as divorce or the death of a loved
one. Whereas ethnicity, education, religion, and income are not related to increased
incidence of GAD, the content of patients’ worries may differ depending on their
sociodemographic background. Thus, clinicians need to understand the manifesta-
tions of GAD within the context of an individual’s culture, ethnicity, religion, educa-
tion, and income level.
COMORBIDITY
GAD is frequently comorbid with other psychological disorders. Current comorbid-
ity for GAD has been reported to range from 6 to 29% for dysthymia, 39 to 76%
for major depression, 23 to 44% for social phobia, 12 to 44% for panic disorder, and
12 to 25% for specific phobia—the five most common comorbid diagnoses (Brown,
Campbell, Lehman, Grisham, & Mancill, 2001; Lamers et al., 2011; Ruscio et al., 2017;
Wittchen et al., 1994). Reported rates of lifetime comorbidity for GAD range from 53
to 86% for major depression and 52 to 74% for other anxiety disorders (Brown et al.,
2001; Judd et al., 1998; Lamers et al., 2011; Ruscio et al., 2017). High levels of lifetime

-- 85 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	65
comorbidity have also been reported between GAD and substance used disorders
(22%) and personality disorders (38%) (Dyck et al., 2001; Ruscio et al., 2017).
Comorbidity occurs both concurrently and sequentially in GAD (Moffitt et al.,
2007). GAD has been found both to precede and to follow substance use disorders,
panic disorder, and major depression (Grant et al., 2009; Moffitt et al., 2007; Wittchen,
Kessler, Pfister, & Lieb, 2000). Moreover, the presence of GAD at one time point
increases the probability of developing a different disorder at a later time point. In
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication, current GAD significantly predicted
subsequent panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, mood disorders, and sub-
stance use disorders; even subthreshold GAD significantly predicted new onsets of
panic disorder, mood disorders, and substance use disorders (Ruscio et al., 2007).
Because GAD is highly comorbid with other disorders, particularly MDD, some
researchers have questioned whether GAD is a distinct disorder. However, con-
siderable evidence supports the distinctiveness of GAD. Pure GAD and MDD pro-
duce comparable impairment, and they produce further impairment when comor-
bid (Hoffman et al., 2008). Moreover, the relationships among GAD symptoms are
stronger than their relationships with MDD symptoms, and these relationships are
stable over time (Beard et al., 2016). Beyond differences in clinical presentation, GAD
and MDD have distinct risk factors (Beesdo, Pine, Lieb, & Wittchen, 2010; Kendler,
Gardner, Gatz, & Pedersen, 2007) and neurobiological features (Oathes, Patenaude,
Schatzberg, & Etkin, 2015; Weinberg, Kotov, & Proudfit, 2015). GAD and MDD are
also equally likely to be temporally primary (Moffitt et al., 2007), refuting the notion
that GAD is a mere prodrome for MDD. Thus, the literature supports the validity of
GAD as a distinct disorder.
Comorbidity is associated with further impairment. Compared to those with
pure GAD, persons with comorbidity in addition to GAD report more disability days
(Hunt, Issakidis, & Andrews, 2002), interpersonal problems (Judd et al., 1998), and
lower life satisfaction (Henning, Turk, Mennin, Fresco, & Heimberg, 2007). More-
over, compared to those with pure GAD, those with comorbidity generate greater
health care costs due to medication use, hospitalization, and outpatient care (Sand-
elin, Kowalski, Ahnemark, & Allgulander, 2013). Having comorbid disorders in addi-
tion to GAD predicts a more prolonged course of both GAD (Bruce et al., 2005; Bruce,
Machan, Dyck, & Keller, 2001; Kessler et al., 2002) and the comorbid disorders (Bruce
et al., 2005; Kessler et al., 1996, 1998). Finally, comorbidity in GAD is associated with
greater risk of suicide and all-cause mortality (Boden et al., 2007; Phillips et al., 2009).
Comorbid interpersonal factors such as marital tension (Durham, Allan, &
Hackett, 1997) and personality disorders (Skodol, Geier, Grant, & Hasin, 2014) predict
a more prolonged course of GAD, including poorer treatment outcomes. Borkovec,
Newman, Pincus, and Lytle (2002) found that CBT for GAD failed to make a signifi-
cant change in most interpersonal problem domains. Clients endorsing pretherapy
interpersonal problems associated with dominance (e.g., domineering/controlling,
intrusive/needy, vindictive/self-centered) responded least favorably to CBT. Tailor-
ing CBT to address interpersonal problems may improve treatment outcomes for
some clients. For example, behavior therapy outperformed both CBT and cognitive
therapy in the treatment of clients with problems related to dominance (Newman,
Jacobson, Erickson, & Fisher, 2017), and the addition of interpersonal and emotion
processing techniques to traditional CBT led to better treatment outcomes among

-- 86 of 498 --

66 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
clients with dismissive attachment styles (Newman, Castonguay, Jacobson, & Moore,
2015). Identifying and addressing clients’ interpersonal problems can maximize the
effectiveness of treatment for GAD.
Treatment Implications
GAD is a highly comorbid disorder that is associated with significant impairment
whether or not it is the primary disorder. Clinicians are advised to periodically
assess for the presence of other disorders when treating GAD, in order to adjust
treatment in accordance with the client’s difficulties. Assessing psychopathology at
the end of treatment also allows clinicians to determine whether therapy alleviated
comorbidity. The detection of residual comorbid problems might call for additional
targeted interventions, particularly for interpersonal problems, because these tend
to predict poor outcome after the completion of therapy. Similarly, given the high
level of comorbid GAD observed in other disorders, especially depression, clinicians
are advised to assess for GAD at different phases of treatment, even when it is not
the primary disorder.
Conceptualization and treatment planning may differ depending on comorbid-
ity, such that one disorder or related symptoms can affect the expression of another
disorder. For example, a diagnosis of panic disorder alongside GAD can be associ-
ated with increased behavioral avoidance and may require situational exposure tech-
niques. GAD can also be associated with symptoms of other disorders in the absence
of those disorders. For instance, individuals with GAD may engage in behavioral
avoidance of worry triggers. Thus, a thorough assessment of symptoms of associated
disorder symptoms, including avoidance, is important. Addressing comorbid prob-
lems in patients with GAD may be critical for long-term recovery from GAD.
ETIOLOGY
The development of GAD is caused by the interplay of genetic, biological, environ-
mental, and psychological factors. According to twin studies (e.g., Kendler et al.,
1992), GAD is moderately regulated by genetic factors, such that about 30% of the
variance is due to heritability. Similarly, heritable traits related to temperament, such
as neuroticism, are strongly associated with anxiety disorders (Hettema, Neale,
Myers, Prescott, & Kendler, 2006). Although genetic influences alone do not cause
GAD, heritability contributes to a general biological predisposition to anxiety, which
interacts with other elements in the emergence of a distinct disorder (e.g., Beesdo et
al., 2010). A genetic vulnerability to anxiety manifests as GAD when the necessary
biological, psychological, and environmental elements converge.
Learning theories illuminate factors in the development and maintenance of
anxiety, and therefore suggest possible pathways in the etiology of GAD. Classical
conditioning theory suggests that a child comes to fear a conditioned stimulus (CS)
following repeated pairings with an aversive unconditioned stimulus. The CS gener-
ates anxiety because the child expects it to result in an aversive outcome. Anxious
behavior is reinforced and maintained upon avoiding the CS (Mowrer, 1939). Oper-
ant conditioning also contributes to the development and maintenance of anxiety

-- 87 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	67
when some parents foster children’s anxious behavior by providing attention, reas-
surance, and assistance with avoidant behavior (Ayllon, Smith, & Rogers, 1970).
Learning from social modeling may also contribute to anxious behavior (Bandura
& Menlove, 1968).
Early attachment likely plays a role in the development and maintenance of
GAD. Bowlby (1982) suggested that when a child’s attachment figure is in some way
absent, the child fails to develop a secure base from which to explore their environ-
ment. Subsequently, the child may view the world as unpredictable, uncontrollable,
and threatening, thereby exaggerating the perceived likelihood and negative impact
of feared events, and undermining their perceived ability to cope with these events.
In support of Bowlby’s model, adults with GAD have been found to report elevated
rates of both anxious–ambivalent and avoidant attachment to their parents, com-
pared to nondisordered control participants (Newman, Shin, & Zuellig, 2016).
It is possible that cognitive biases characteristic of GAD develop prior to the
onset of GAD and serve as risk factors for the disorder. Although there are cur-
rently no empirical data to support this, a child might learn that bad things happen
unexpectedly and develop the maladaptive coping strategy of repeatedly interpret-
ing ambiguous information as an indication that something bad has happened or
will happen, as a means to prepare for the worst. Models of GAD implicate processes
such as worry about worry (Wells, 2005), intolerance of uncertainty (Dugas, Buhr, &
Ladouceur, 2004), and fear of a negative emotional contrast (i.e., the fear of a sharp
shift in negative emotion or being emotionally caught off guard) as possible cogni-
tive factors that precede the development of GAD (Newman & Llera, 2011).
Children with GAD tend to have apprehensive expectations for the future, hold
a negative self-image, and seek constant reassurance (Masi et al., 2004). These chil-
dren also tend to have fewer friends and are less assertive than nonanxious chil-
dren (Scharfstein, Alfano, Beidel, & Wong, 2011; Scharfstein & Beidel, 2015). Anxious
children’s fear and negative expectations of social situations may result in negative
interpersonal cycles (Safran & Segal, 1990) in which these children influence oth-
ers’ behavior in a manner that reinforces their negative expectations and contributes
to the maintenance of their anxiety. Indeed, children displaying anxious behavior
tend to be judged less favorably by peers (Baker, Hudson, & Taylor, 2014), and ado-
lescents’ GAD symptoms predict greater levels of maternal criticism in subsequent
years (Nelemans, Hale, Branje, Hawk, & Meeus, 2014). Thus, interpersonal dysfunc-
tion may be a pathway by which GAD develops and is maintained.
During childhood, individuals with GAD may learn that caring for others elicits
love, approval, and nurturance. Extending this pattern into adulthood, they are fre-
quently concerned about interpersonal relationships (Breitholtz et al., 1999; Roemer
et al., 1997). Thus, worry may function as a means of anticipating the needs of, and
threats to, significant others in the pursuit of satisfying interpersonal needs. Accord-
ingly, persons with GAD display an attentional bias to social threat information
(Goodwin et al., 2017) and are especially attuned to others’ negative mental states
when worried (Zainal & Newman, 2018). At the same time, persons with GAD and
elevated worry are inaccurate in perceiving the impact of their social behavior on
others (Erickson et al., 2016; Erickson & Newman, 2007; Shin & Newman, 2019). Con-
sidering these cognitive tendencies in concert, it follows that individuals with GAD
would show not only greater interpersonal distress but also greater rigidity in their

-- 88 of 498 --

68 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
interpersonal styles across differing situations than nonanxious people (Przeworski
et al., 2011). Histories of role-reversed and enmeshed relationships may also cause
persons with GAD to experience unresolved anger toward their primary caregivers
(Cassidy, 1995; Cassidy et al., 2009), exacerbating their interpersonal difficulties.
Treatment Implications
Although many biological, psychological, and social factors are likely to be involved
in the development of GAD, it is important to keep in mind that the etiology of a dis-
order does not necessarily have a bearing on its maintenance. Whereas people come
to behave in certain ways as a result of some etiological factor, the behavior often
persists in the absence of its origin. Often it is difficult to determine how a disorder
develops, but recovery is possible if maintaining factors are identified and addressed.
Therapists should investigate factors that may contribute to their GAD patients’ wor-
risome and anxious states, especially since these patients tend to engage in behaviors
that are perceived to be helpful but ultimately may exacerbate their problem. Addi-
tionally, it is important to monitor for secondary gains that enable patients’ condi-
tions. For example, GAD is often associated with reassurance seeking. Individuals
with this disorder work themselves into an excessively worried state, then want vali-
dation from significant others that they are OK. They learn to associate worry with
reassurance, which promotes further worry.
Once maintaining factors have been identified, therapy can center on eliminat-
ing them. Many of these factors have been targeted in CBT protocols. We should
mention, however, that CBT techniques such as relaxation, stimulus control, social
skills training, and exposure can be incorporated into treatment, irrespective of the
therapist’s theoretical approach. As we mentioned earlier, these interventions can be
viewed as manifestations of general principles of change that could be implemented
by techniques typically prescribed in other orientations (e.g., cognitive distortions
and processes can be addressed by the use of confrontation and interpretation, as
well as by cognitive restructuring; see Castonguay, 2000; Newman et al., 2006). Simi-
larly, treatments for GAD have involved interpersonally focused psychotherapies to
address interpersonal problems in GAD (Crits-Christoph et al., 2005; Newman et al.,
2008, 2011), underscoring the importance of integrating therapy techniques in the
treatment of GAD.
CONCLUSION
Worry is a universal experience that enables people to deal with challenging future
events. Since this thought style is more abstract and less concrete (less image pro-
ducing) than other types of thinking (Borkovec & Inz, 1990), it allows for abstract
processing of emotional information, thereby facilitating avoidance of reactivity and
surprising negative events. Thus, it functions as a strategy to manage the unpre-
dictability and uncontrollability of potentially threatening future events. Neverthe-
less, the worry experienced by individuals with GAD is a pervasive, uncontrollable
daily activity that often elicits emotional discomfort. Although patients with GAD
engage in worry as a means to combat potential threat, it serves to exacerbate their

-- 89 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	69
anxiety. Accordingly, GAD can be associated with debilitating distress, disability,
and impairment in quality of life.
Overall, GAD is a highly chronic and comorbid anxiety disorder whose etiology
is linked to a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological
factors. Its core and associated symptoms are the products of the interaction among
cognitive, imaginal, and physiological responses to continuously perceived threat
(Borkovec & Inz, 1990; Newman & Borkovec, 2002). Although GAD is the least suc-
cessfully treated anxiety disorder given its chronicity and pervasiveness (Brown et
al., 1994), CBT is an efficacious treatment for GAD. CBT targets each of the aforemen-
tioned response systems, and interventions include self-monitoring, stimulus con-
trol, relaxation, self-control desensitization, and cognitive therapy. Although DSM-5
brought significant changes to the diagnostic criteria for anxiety disorders, worry
continues to play a central, prominent role in GAD’s conceptualization (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). Therefore, when treating GAD, clinicians and thera-
pists should assist patients in recognizing the detrimental impact of their worry on
their psychological and emotional functioning, and identifying and tracking their
worrisome thinking, as well as underscore those experiences and aspects in the
patients’ environment that are inconsistent with their schemas to remediate mal-
adaptive thought and behavior patterns.
REFERENCES
Allgulander, C., Hackett, D., & Salinas, E. (2001). Venlafaxine extended release (ER) in the
treatment of generalised anxiety disorder: Twenty-four-week placebo-controlled dose-
ranging study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 15–22.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Angst, J., Gamma, A., Baldwin, D. S., Ajdacic-Gross, V., & Rossler, W. (2009). The generalized
anxiety spectrum: Prevalence, onset, course and outcome. European Archives of Psychiatry
and Clinical Neuroscience, 259, 37–45.
Ayllon, T., Smith, D., & Rogers, M. (1970). Behavioral management of school phobia. Journal of
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 1, 125–138.
Baker, J. R., Hudson, J. L., & Taylor, A. (2014). An investigation into the lower peer liking of
anxious than nonanxious children. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 28, 599–611.
Baldwin, D. S., Allgulander, C., Bandelow, B., Ferre, F., & Pallanti, S. (2012). An international
survey of reported prescribing practice in the treatment of patients with generalised
anxiety disorder. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 13, 510–516.
Bandura, A., & Menlove, F. L. (1968). Factors determining vicarious extinction of avoidance
behavior through symbolic modeling. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 99–108.
Batelaan, N. M., ten Have, M., van Balkom, A. J. L. M., Tuithof, M., & de Graaf, R. (2014).
Anxiety disorders and onset of cardiovascular disease: The differential impact of panic,
phobias and worry. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 28, 252–258.
Beard, C., Millner, A. J., Forgeard, M. J. C., Fried, E. I., Hsu, K. J., Treadway, M. T., . . . Björgvins-
son, T. (2016). Network analysis of depression and anxiety symptom relationships in a
psychiatric sample. Psychological Medicine, 46, 3359–3369.
Beesdo, K., Pine, D. S., Lieb, R., & Wittchen, H. U. (2010). Incidence and risk patterns of anxiety
and depressive disorders and categorization of generalized anxiety disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 67, 47–57.

-- 90 of 498 --

70 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Bjornsson, A. S., Sibrava, N. J., Beard, C., Moitra, E., Weisberg, R. B., Benitez, C. I., & Keller, M.
B. (2014). Two-year course of generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, and
panic disorder with agoraphobia in a sample of Latino adults. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 82, 1186–1192.
Boden, J. M., Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2007). Anxiety disorders and suicidal behav-
iours in adolescence and young adulthood: Findings from a longitudinal study. Psycho-
logical Medicine, 37, 431–440.
Borkovec, T. D. (2002). Life in the future versus life in the present. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 9, 76–80.
Borkovec, T. D., & Inz, J. (1990). The nature of worry in generalized anxiety disorder: A pre-
dominance of thought activity. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 153–158.
Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R. (2002). A component analysis of
cognitive-behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder and the role of interper-
sonal problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 288–298.
Borkovec, T. D., Ray, W. J., & Stoeber, J. (1998). Worry: A cognitive phenomenon intimately
linked to affective, physiological, and interpersonal behavioral processes. Cognitive Ther-
apy and Research, 22, 561–576.
Borkovec, T. D., Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T., & DePree, J. A. (1983). Preliminary exploration of
worry: Some characteristics and processes. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 21, 9–16.
Borkovec, T. D., & Roemer, L. (1995). Perceived functions of worry among generalized anxiety
disorder subjects: Distraction from more emotionally distressing topics? Journal of Behav-
ior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26, 25–30.
Borkovec, T. D., & Ruscio, A. M. (2001). Psychotherapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Jour-
nal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62(Suppl. 11), 37–45.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books.
Breitholtz, E., Johansson, B., & Öst, L. G. (1999). Cognitions in generalized anxiety disorder
and panic disorder patients: A prospective approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37,
533–544.
Brenes, G. A., Miller, M. E., Stanley, M. A., Williamson, J. D., Knudson, M., & McCall, W. V.
(2009). Insomnia in older adults with generalized anxiety disorder. American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 17, 465–472.
Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1994). The empirical basis of generalized anxi-
ety disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1272–1280.
Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J. R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current
and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical
sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 585–599.
Bruce, S. E., Machan, J. T., Dyck, I., & Keller, M. B. (2001). Infrequency of “pure” GAD: Impact
of psychiatric comorbidity on clinical course. Depression and Anxiety, 14, 219–225.
Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., . . . Keller, M.
B. (2005). Influence of psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized
anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A 12-year prospective study. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1179–1187.
Butler, G., & Mathews, A. (1983). Cognitive processes in anxiety. Advances in Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 5, 51–62.
Cassidy, J. A. (1995). Attachment and generalized anxiety disorder. In D. Cicchetti & S. L. Toth
(Eds.), Rochester symposium on developmental psychopathology: Vol. 6. Emotion, cognition, and
representation (pp. 343–370). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Cassidy, J., Lichtenstein-Phelps, J., Sibrava, N. J., Thomas, C. L., & Borkovec, T. D. (2009). Gen-
eralized anxiety disorder: Connections with self-reported attachment. Behavior Therapy,
40, 23–38.
Castonguay, L. G. (2000). A common factors approach to psychotherapy training. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 10, 263–282.

-- 91 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	71
Coles, M. E., Turk, C. L., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Memory bias for threat in generalized
anxiety disorder: The potential importance of stimulus relevance. Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy, 36, 65–73.
Covin, R., Ouimet, A. J., Seeds, P. M., & Dozois, D. J. (2008). A meta-analysis of CBT for patho-
logical worry among clients with GAD. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 108–116.
Crits-Christoph, P., Gibbons, M. B. C., Narducci, J., Schamberger, M., & Gallop, R. (2005). Inter-
personal problems and the outcome of interpersonally oriented psychodynamic treat-
ment of GAD. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice and Training, 42, 211–224.
Cuijpers, P., Sijbrandij, M., Koole, S., Huibers, M., Berking, M., & Andersson, G. (2014). Psycho-
logical treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology
Review, 34, 130–140.
Davidson, J. R. T. (2001). Pharmacotherapy of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 62(Suppl. 11), 46–50.
Dugas, M. J., Buhr, K., & Ladouceur, R. (2004). The role of intolerance of uncertainty in etiol-
ogy and maintenance. In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized
anxiety disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. 143–163). New York: Guilford Press.
Durham, R. C., Allan, T., & Hackett, C. A. (1997). On predicting improvement and relapse in
generalized anxiety disorder following psychotherapy. British Journal of Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 36, 101–119.
Dyck, I. R., Phillips, K. A., Warshaw, M. G., Dolan, R. T., Shea, M. T., Stout, R. L., . . . Keller, M.
B. (2001). Patterns of personality pathology in patients with generalized anxiety disor-
der, panic disorder with and without agoraphobia, and social phobia. Journal of Personal-
ity Disorders, 15, 60–71.
Erickson, T. M., & Newman, M. G. (2007). Interpersonal and emotional processes in general-
ized anxiety disorder analogues during social interaction tasks. Behavior Therapy, 38,
364–377.
Erickson, T. M., Newman, M. G., Siebert, E. C., Carlile, J. A., Scarsella, G. M., & Abelson, J. L.
(2016). Does worrying mean caring too much?: Interpersonal prototypicality of dimen-
sional worry controlling for social anxiety and depressive symptoms. Behavior Therapy,
47, 14–28.
Fogarty, C. T., Sharma, S., Chetty, V. K., & Culpepper, L. (2008). Mental health conditions are
associated with increased health care utilization among urban family medicine patients.
Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 21, 398–407.
Gelenberg, A. J., Lydiard, R. B., Rudolph, R. L., Aguiar, L., Haskins, J. T., & Salinas, E. (2000).
Efficacy of venlafaxine extended-release capsules in nondepressed outpatients with gen-
eralized anxiety disorder: A 6-month randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 283, 3082–3088.
Goodwin, H., Yiend, J., & Hirsch, C. R. (2017). Generalized anxiety disorder, worry and atten-
tion to threat: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 54, 107–122.
Goodwin, R. D., Jacobi, F., & Thefeld, W. (2003). Mental disorders and asthma in the commu-
nity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 1125–1130.
Grant, B. F., Goldstein, R. B., Chou, S. P., Huang, B., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., . . . Compton,
W. M. (2009). Sociodemographic and psychopathologic predictors of first incidence of
DSM-IV substance use, mood and anxiety disorders: Results from the Wave 2 National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Molecular Psychiatry, 14, 1051–
1066.
Gros, D. F., Antony, M. M., McCabe, R. E., & Swinson, R. P. (2009). Frequency and severity of
the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome across the anxiety disorders and depression.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 290–296.
Haller, H., Cramer, H., Lauche, R., Gass, F., & Dobos, G. J. (2014). The prevalence and burden of
subthreshold generalized anxiety disorder: A systematic review. BMC Psychiatry, 14, 128.
Hallion, L. S., & Ruscio, A. M. (2013). Should uncontrollable worry be removed from the

-- 92 of 498 --

72 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
definition of GAD?: A test of incremental validity. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122,
369–375.
Hanrahan, F., Field, A. P., Jones, F. W., & Davey, G. C. L. (2013). A meta-analysis of cognitive
therapy for worry in generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 120–132.
Henning, E. R., Turk, C. L., Mennin, D. S., Fresco, D. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Impair-
ment and quality of life in individuals with generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and
Anxiety, 24, 342–349.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., Myers, J. M., Prescott, C. A., & Kendler, K. S. (2006). A population-
based twin study of the relationship between neuroticism and internalizing disorders.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 857–864.
Hoehn-Saric, R., McLeod, D. R., Funderburk, F., & Kowalski, P. (2004). Somatic symptoms and
physiologic responses in generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder: An ambula-
tory monitor study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 913–921.
Hoffman, D. L., Dukes, E. M., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2008). Human and economic burden of gen-
eralized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 72–90.
Hunt, C., Issakidis, C., & Andrews, G. (2002). DSM-IV generalized anxiety disorder in the
Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being. Psychological Medicine, 32,
649–659.
Jones, G. N., Ames, S. C., Jeffries, S. K., Scarinci, I. C., & Brantley, P. J. (2001). Utilization of
medical services and quality of life among low-income patients with generalized anxiety
disorder attending primary care clinics. International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 31,
183–198.
Judd, L. L., Kessler, R. C., Paulus, M. P., Zeller, P. V., Wittchen, H. U., & Kunovac, J. L. (1998).
Comorbidity as a fundamental feature of generalized anxiety disorders: Resulavts from
the National Comorbidity Study (NCS). Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98(Suppl. 393),
6–11.
Kahn, R. J., McNair, D. M., Lipman, R. S., Covi, L., Rickels, K., Downing, R., . . . Frankenthaler,
L. M. (1986). Imipramine and chlordiazepoxide in depressive and anxiety disorders: II.
Efficacy in anxious outpatients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 79–85.
Kendler, K. S., Gardner, C. O., Gatz, M., & Pedersen, N. L. (2007). The sources of co-morbidity
between major depression and generalized anxiety disorder in a Swedish national twin
sample. Psychological Medicine, 37, 453–462.
Kendler, K. S., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1992). Generalized anxi-
ety disorder in women: A population-based twin study. Archives of General Psychiatry,
49, 267–272.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P. A., Dewit, D. J., Ustun, T. B., Wang, P. S., & Wittchen, H. U. (2002).
Distinguishing generalized anxiety disorder from major depression: Prevalence and
impairment from current pure and comorbid disorders in the US and Ontario. Interna-
tional Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 11, 99–111.
Kessler, R. C., Nelson, C. B., McGonagle, K. A., Liu, J., Swartz, M., & Blazer, D. G. (1996). Comor-
bidity of DSM-III-R major depressive disorder in the general population: Results from
the US National Comorbidity Survey. British Journal of Psychiatry, 168(Suppl. 30), 17–30.
Kessler, R. C., Stang, P. E., Wittchen, H. U., Ustun, T. B., Roy-Burne, P. P., & Walters, E. E. (1998).
Lifetime panic– depression comorbidity in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55, 801–808.
LaFreniere, L. S., & Newman, M. G. (2019). Probabilistic learning by positive and negative
reinforcement in generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychological Science, 7(3), 502–515.
LaFreniere, L. S., & Newman, M. G. (2020). Exposing worry’s deceit: Percentage of untrue wor-
ries in generalized anxiety disorder treatment. Behavior Therapy, 51, 413–423.

-- 93 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	73
Lamers, F., van Oppen, P., Comijs, H. C., Smit, J. H., Spinhoven, P., van Balkom, A. J. L. M., . . .
Penninx, B. W. J. H. (2011). Comorbidity patterns of anxiety and depressive disorders in a
large cohort study: The Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 341–348.
Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2010). Effects of worry on physiological and subjective reactiv-
ity to emotional stimuli in generalized anxiety disorder and nonanxious control partici-
pants. Emotion, 10, 640–650.
Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2014). Rethinking the role of worry in generalized anxiety dis-
order: Evidence supporting a model of emotional contrast avoidance. Behavior Therapy,
45, 283–299.
Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2017). Development and validation of two measures of emo-
tional contrast avoidance: The Contrast Avoidance Questionnaires. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 49, 114–127.
Martens, E. J., de Jonge, P., Na, B., Cohen, B. E., Lett, H., & Whooley, M. A. (2010). Scared to
death?: Generalized anxiety disorder and cardiovascular events in patients with stable
coronary heart disease: The Heart and Soul Study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 750–
758.
Masi, G., Millepiedi, S., Mucci, M., Poli, P., Bertini, N., & Milantoni, L. (2004). Generalized
anxiety disorder in referred children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 752–760.
Massion, A. O., Warshaw, M. G., & Keller, M. B. (1993). Quality of life and psychiatric morbid-
ity in panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
150, 600–607.
McCafferty, J. P., Bellew, K., Zanelli, R., Iyengar, M., & Hewett, K. (2000). Paroxetine is effective
in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: Results from a randomized placebo-
controlled flexible dose study. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 10, 347–348.
Mitte, K. (2005). Meta-analysis of cognitive-behavioral treatments for generalized anxiety dis-
order: A comparison with pharmacotherapy. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 785–795.
Moffitt, T. E., Harrington, H., Caspi, A., Kim-Cohen, J., Goldberg, D., Gregory, A. M., & Poul-
ton, R. (2007). Depression and generalized anxiety disorder: Cumulative and sequential
comorbidity in a birth cohort followed prospectivity to age 32 years. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64, 651–660.
Mowrer, O. H. (1939). A stimulus-response analysis of anxiety and its role as a reinforcing
agent. Psychological Review, 46, 553–566.
Nelemans, S. A., Hale, W. W., III, Branje, S. J., Hawk, S. T., & Meeus, W. H. (2014). Maternal criti-
cism and adolescent depressive and generalized anxiety disorder symptoms: A 6-year
longitudinal community study. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 42, 755–766.
Newman, M. G., & Borkovec, T. D. (2002). Cognitive behavioral therapy for worry and general-
ized anxiety disorder. In G. Simos (Ed.), Cognitive behavior therapy: A guide for the practicing
clinician (pp. 150–172). New York: Taylor & Francis.
Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T. D., Fisher, A. J., Boswell, J., Szkodny, L. E.,
& Nordberg, S. S. (2011). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy
for generalized anxiety disorder with integrated techniques from emotion-focused and
interpersonal therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79, 171–181.
Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T. D., Fisher, A. J., & Nordberg, S. S. (2008). An
open trial of integrative therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice and Training, 45, 135–147.
Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Jacobson, N. C., & Moore, G. A. (2015). Adult attachment
as a moderator of treatment outcome for generalized anxiety disorder: Comparison
between cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) plus supportive listening and CBT plus
interpersonal and emotional processing therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 83, 915–925.

-- 94 of 498 --

74 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Newman, M. G., & Erickson, T. M. (2010). Generalized anxiety disorder. In J. G. Beck (Ed.),
Interpersonal processes in the anxiety disorders: Implications for understanding psychopathology
and treatment (pp. 235–259). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Newman, M. G., & Fisher, A. J. (2013). Mediated moderation in combined cognitive behavioral
therapy versus component treatments for generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 81, 405–414.
Newman, M. G., Jacobson, N. C., Erickson, T. M., & Fisher, A. J. (2017). Interpersonal problems
predict differential response to cognitive versus behavioral treatment in a randomized
controlled trial. Behavior Therapy, 48, 56–68.
Newman, M. G., & Llera, S. J. (2011). A novel theory of experiential avoidance in generalized
anxiety disorder: A review and synthesis of research supporting a contrast avoidance
model of worry. Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 371–382.
Newman, M. G., Llera, S. J., Erickson, T. M., & Przeworski, A. (2014). Basic science and clinical
application of the Contrast Avoidance model in generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 24, 155–167.
Newman, M. G., Shin, K. E., & Lanza, S. T. (2019). Time-varying moderation of treatment
outcomes by illness duration and comorbid depression in generalized anxiety disorder.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 87, 282–293.
Newman, M. G., Shin, K. E., & Zuellig, A. R. (2016). Developmental risk factors in generalized
anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 206, 94–102.
Newman, M. G., Stiles, W. B., Janeck, A., & Woody, S. R. (2006). Integration of therapeutic fac-
tors in anxiety disorders. In L. G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeu-
tic change that work (pp. 187–202). New York: Oxford University Press.
Niles, A. N., Lebeau, R. T., Liao, B., Glenn, D. E., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Dimensional indica-
tors of generalized anxiety disorder severity for DSM-V. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26,
279–286.
Oathes, D. J., Patenaude, B., Schatzberg, A. F., & Etkin, A. (2015). Neurobiological signatures of
anxiety and depression in resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. Biologi-
cal Psychiatry, 77, 385–393.
Phillips, A. C., Batty, G. D., Gale, C. R., Deary, I. J., Osborn, D., MacIntyre, K., & Carroll, D.
(2009). Generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, and their comorbidity
as predictors of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality: The Vietnam Experience Study.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 71, 395–403.
Pollack, M. H., Zaninelli, R., Goddard, A., McCafferty, J. P., Bellew, K. M., Burnham, D. B., &
Iyengar, M. K. (2001). Paroxetine in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: Results
of a placebo-controlled, flexible-dosage trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 350–357.
Przeworski, A., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., Kasoff, M. B., Yamasaki, A. S., Castonguay, L.
G., & Berlin, K. S. (2011). Interpersonal pathoplasticity in individuals with generalized
anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 286–298.
Ramsawh, H. J., Raffa, S. D., Edelen, M. O., Rende, R., & Keller, M. B. (2009). Anxiety in middle
adulthood: Effects of age and time on the 14-year course of panic disorder, social phobia
and generalized anxiety disorder. Psychological Medicine, 39, 615–624.
Rickels, K., Downing, R., Schweizer, E., & Hassman, H. (1993). Antidepressants for the treat-
ment of generalized anxiety disorder. A placebo-controlled comparison of imipramine,
trazodone, and diazepam. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 884–895.
Rickels, K., Etemad, B., Rynn, M. A., Lohoff, F. W., Mandos, L. A., & Gallop, R. (2013). Remis-
sion of generalized anxiety disorder after 6 months of open-label treatment with venla-
faxine XR. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 82, 363–371.
Rickels, K., Pollack, M. H., Sheehan, D. V., & Haskins, J. T. (2000). Efficacy of extended-release
venlafaxine in nondepressed outpatients with generalized anxiety disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 968–974.

-- 95 of 498 --

Generalized Anxiety Disorder 	75
Rickels, K., Rynn, M., Iyengar, M., & Duff, D. (2006). Remission of generalized anxiety disor-
der: A review of the paroxetine clinical trials database. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67,
41–47.
Rickels, K., Weisman, K., Norstad, N., Singer, M., Stoltz, D., Brown, A., & Danton, J. (1982).
Buspirone and diazepam in anxiety: A controlled study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 43,
81–86.
Rickels, K., Zaninelli, R., McCafferty, J., Bellew, K., Iyengar, M., & Sheehan, D. (2003). Par-
oxetine treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 749–756.
Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A. (1991). Psychiatric disorders in America: The Epidemiologic Catch-
ment Area Study. New York: Free Press.
Rodriguez, B. F., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M. E., Bruce, S. E., Spencer, M. A., Culpepper, L., &
Keller, M. B. (2006). Characteristics and predictors of full and partial recovery from gen-
eralized anxiety disorder in primary care patients. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
194, 91–97.
Roemer, L., Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1997). An investigation of worry content among gen-
erally anxious individuals. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185, 314–319.
Roemer, L., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Generalized anxiety disorder. In D. H. Bar-
low (Ed.), Anxiety and its disorders (pp. 477–515). New York: Guilford Press.
Ruscio, A. M., Chiu, W. T., Roy-Byrne, P., Stang, P. E., Stein, D. J., Wittchen, H. U., & Kessler, R.
C. (2007). Broadening the definition of generalized anxiety disorder: Effects on preva-
lence and associations with other disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replica-
tion. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 662–676.
Ruscio, A. M., Hallion, L. S., Lim, C. C. W., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Al-Hamzawi, A., Alonso, J., . . .
Scott, K. M. (2017). Cross-sectional comparison of the epidemiology of DSM-5 general-
ized anxiety disorder across the globe. JAMA Psychiatry, 74, 465–475.
Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990). Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic
Books.
Salzer, S., Winkelbach, C., Leweke, F., Leibing, E., & Leichsenring, F. (2011). Long-term effects
of short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy in gener-
alized anxiety disorder: 12-month follow-up. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 56, 503–508.
Sandelin, R., Kowalski, J., Ahnemark, E., & Allgulander, C. (2013). Treatment patterns and
costs in patients with generalised anxiety disorder: One-year retrospective analysis of
data from national registers in Sweden. European Psychiatry, 28, 125–133.
Scharfstein, L., Alfano, C., Beidel, D., & Wong, N. (2011). Children with generalized anxiety
disorder do not have peer problems, just fewer friends. Child Psychiatry and Human Devel-
opment, 42, 712–723.
Scharfstein, L. A., & Beidel, D. C. (2015). Social skills and social acceptance in children with
anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 44, 826–838.
Sheehan, D. V. (1999). Venlafaxine extended release (XR) in the treatment of generalized anxi-
ety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 22), 23–28.
Shin, K. E., & Newman, M. G. (2019). Self- and other-perceptions of interpersonal problems:
Effects of generalized anxiety, social anxiety, and depression. Journal of Anxiety Disor-
ders, 65, 1–10.
Sibrava, N. J., Beard, C., Bjornsson, A. S., Moitra, E., Weisberg, R. B., & Keller, M. B. (2013). Two-
year course of generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder
in a longitudinal sample of African American adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 81, 1052–1062.
Skodol, A. E., Geier, T., Grant, B. F., & Hasin, D. S. (2014). Personality disorders and the persis-
tence of anxiety disorders in a nationally representative sample. Depression and Anxiety,
31, 721–728.

-- 96 of 498 --

76 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Steinfurth, E. C., Alius, M. G., Wendt, J., & Hamm, A. O. (2017). Physiological and neural cor-
relates of worry and rumination: Support for the contrast avoidance model of worry.
Psychophysiology, 54, 161–171.
Stocchi, F., Nordera, G., Jokinen, R. H., Lepola, U. M., Hewett, K., Bryson, H., . . . the Paroxetine
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Study. (2003). Efficacy and tolerability of paroxetine for
the long-term treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64,
250–258.
van Laar, M., Volkerts, E., & Verbaten, M. (2001). Subchronic effects of the GABA-agonist
lorazepam and the 5-HT2A/2C antagonist ritanserin on driving performance, slow wave
sleep and daytime sleepiness in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology, 154, 189–197.
Volz, H. P., Möller, H. J., & Sturm, Y. (1994). Generalisierte angsterkrankungen [Generalized
anxiety disorder]. Psychopharmakotherapie, 4, 101–106.
Von Korff, M., Crane, P., Lane, M., Miglioretti, D. L., Simon, G., Saunders, K., . . . Kessler,
R. (2005). Chronic spinal pain and physical-mental comorbidity in the United States:
Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Pain, 113, 331–339.
Wang, P. S., Bohn, R. L., Glynn, R. J., Mogun, H., & Avorn, J. (2001). Hazardous benzodiaz-
epine regimens in the elderly: Effects of half-life, dosage, and duration on risk of hip
fracture. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 892–898.
Weinberg, A., Kotov, R., & Proudfit, G. H. (2015). Neural indicators of error processing in
generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive– compulsive disorder, and major depressive dis-
order. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 124, 172–185.
Wells, A. (2005). The metacognitive model of gad: Assessment of meta-worry and relationship
with dsm-iv generalized anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29, 107–121.
Whisman, M. A. (1999). Marital dissatisfaction and psychiatric disorders: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 701–706.
Whiteside, U., Nguyen, T., Logan, D. E., Fagan, C., Marlatt, G. A., & Witkiewitz, K. (2007).
Relapse prevention for return of pathological worry in CBT-treated GAD. In A. G. Mar-
latt & K. Witkiewitz (Eds.), Therapist’s guide to evidence-based relapse prevention (pp. 91–116).
Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Wittchen, H. U., Carter, R. M., Pfister, H., Montgomery, S. A., & Kessler, R. C. (2000). Dis-
abilities and quality of life in pure and comorbid generalized anxiety disorder and major
depression in a national survey. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 15, 319–328.
Wittchen, H. U., Kessler, R. C., Pfister, H., & Lieb, M. (2000). Why do people with anxiety disor-
ders become depressed?: A prospective-longitudinal community study. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 102(Suppl. 406), 14–23.
Wittchen, H. U., Lieb, R., Pfister, H., & Schuster, P. (2000). The waxing and waning of mental
disorders: Evaluating the stability of syndromes of mental disorders in the population.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 41(Suppl. 1), 122–132.
Wittchen, H. U., Zhao, S., Kessler, R. C., & Eaton, W. W. (1994). DSM-III-R generalized anxiety
disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 355–364.
Woodman, C. L., Noyes, R., Jr., Black, D. W., Schlosser, S., & Yagla, S. J. (1999). A 5-year follow-
up study of generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and Men-
tal Disease, 187, 3–9.
Woody, S. R., & Ollendick, T. H. (2006). Technique factors in treating anxiety disorders. In L.
G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 167–186).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Zainal, N. H., & Newman, M. G. (2018). Worry amplifies theory-of-mind reasoning for nega-
tively valenced social stimuli in generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Affective Disor-
ders, 227, 824–833.

-- 97 of 498 --

77
Four types of anxiety disorders are discussed in this chapter: (1) panic disorder, typi-
fied by recurrent attacks that involve the rapid onset of multiple physical symptoms
(e.g., shortness of breath and racing heart), as well as fear of future attacks; (2) ago-
raphobia, characterized by avoidance of situations in which anxiety or panic symp-
toms might occur, especially when escape may be difficult; (3) social anxiety disor-
der (previously termed “social phobia”), which involves intense anxiety or avoidance
of interpersonal and/or performance situations fueled by fear of negative evaluation
by others; and (4) specific phobias, characterized by excessive fear toward a particu-
lar object or situation (e.g., animals), certain natural environments (e.g., heights), and
closed spaces.
The anxiety disorders overlap considerably with one another, both in terms of
their typical symptoms and the models of etiology to explain their development.
Thus, rather than review all of the data for each disorder separately, we highlight
those aspects of panic disorder and phobias that are shared, then consider the evi-
dence specific to a given disorder. We outline each disorder’s common symptoms
and related clinical features, natural course and treatment outcome findings, epide-
miological data, and the high rates of comorbidity for panic and phobic disorders.
C H A P T E R 4
Panic Disorder,
Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias
Bethany A. Teachman
Marvin R. Goldfried
Elise M. Clerkin
Alexandra L. Silverman
Go to the heart of danger . . . for there you will find safety.
—Old Chinese proverb
You must do the things you think you cannot do.
—Eleanor Roosevelt

-- 98 of 498 --

78 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Finally, we review general and specific models of etiology, emphasizing the many
shared biological and psychological vulnerability factors across the anxiety difficul-
ties. Throughout the chapter, we raise potential clinical implications that follow from
the psychopathology literature and consider some of the many exciting challenges
that arise in helping patients reduce their disabling anxiety symptoms.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES
The anxiety disorders, including panic disorder, social anxiety, and the various pho-
bias, share a number of features, such as avoidance behaviors and excessive fear rela-
tive to what others would experience in a given situation. These common features
(as we discuss below) have led many researchers to suggest that a dimensional per-
spective may more appropriately characterize the range of anxiety problems rather
than the current classification system that emphasizes specific categories. Relatedly,
certain transdiagnostic models (e.g., Nolen-Hoeksema & Watkins, 2011) integrate dis-
tal (e.g., childhood sexual abuse) and proximal (e.g., rumination) risk factors, as well
as moderators (e.g., social stress), to help explain why a given risk factor may lead
to multiple different disorders (this concept is known as “multifinality”). Further-
more, these models can help to explain why one individual with a given risk fac-
tor may develop one set of symptoms, another individual with the same risk factor
may develop a different set of symptoms, and a third individual may not have any
significant mental health symptoms (this concept is known as “divergent trajecto-
ries”). Thus, we consider symptom dimensions that are common across panic, social
anxiety, and phobic disorders, as well as the unique ways these difficulties play out
across specific disorders. This focus on both common and disorder-specific features
is important from a treatment perspective because seeing patients with multiple
rather than isolated anxiety difficulties is the norm (see Brown, Campbell, Lehman,
Grisham, & Mancill, 2001).
Subjective distress that is excessive given the objective danger in the environ-
ment is present across anxiety difficulties, on a continuum from diffuse worry and
future-oriented anxious apprehension (often present in agoraphobia), to more spe-
cific targeted fears (seen in specific phobia and social anxiety disorder), to immi-
nent threat and panic (characteristic of panic disorder). Related to the experience of
emotion (e.g., fear, anxiety, distress), there are also impairments in the regulation of
emotions (Cisler, Olatunji, Feldner, & Forsyth, 2010). For instance, anxious individ-
uals typically strive to make their world feel “safe.” These maladaptive strategies
to reduce the sense of danger and vulnerability often result in extensive efforts to
avoid or escape from the feared situations or feelings, which adds considerably to the
impairment in occupational, academic, and social functioning typical of panic, social
anxiety, and phobic disorders. Similarly, anxious individuals often rely too heavily
on cues or signals in their environment that help to reduce their distress at entering
feared situations (see Rachman, 1994). For instance, a person with agoraphobia may
only go out to the mall if their spouse accompanies them; a person with panic disor-
der may insist on always carrying their medication or water bottle when leaving the
house; a person with social anxiety disorder may only attend a party after consum-
ing three beers. Finally, although much previous research has focused on negative

-- 99 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	79
emotions and emotion regulation, to better understand the experience of those with
pathological anxiety, there is an increasing focus on impairments in positive emotions
and emotion regulation (e.g., Eisner, Johnson, & Carver, 2009; Kashdan et al., 2013).
This is reflected in the individual with social anxiety who does not emotionally ben-
efit from savoring the memory of their date and even fears being evaluated positively
by their date, or the person with panic disorder who actively dampens positive emo-
tions when they arise.
Anxious individuals also tend to process information in distorted ways that
are thought to increase their beliefs about the world being a dangerous, uncontrol-
lable place and the individual being vulnerable to threat (see MacLeod & Mathews,
2012). Examples include spider-fearful individuals orienting their attention quickly
to pictures of spiders (e.g., Mogg & Bradley, 2006); individuals who are afraid of dogs
being more likely than nonphobic individuals to use ferocity features in classifying
dogs (Landau, 1980); people with panic disorder misinterpreting benign changes in
bodily sensations as catastrophic signs of illness (e.g., interpreting a slightly racing
heart as indicative of an impending heart attack; Teachman, Smith-Janik, & Saporito,
2007); or people with social anxiety disorder judging themselves more harshly on a
social performance (e.g., giving a speech) than do outside observers (e.g., Norton &
Hope, 2001). Furthermore, there is compelling evidence that threat-oriented cogni-
tions occur both at relatively explicit (controlled, deliberative) and automatic (outside
one’s conscious control) levels (Teachman, Clerkin, Cunningham, Dreyer- Oren, &
Werntz, 2019). Additionally, there is some indication that individuals with phobic
symptoms may actually see their environment as more threatening at a perceptual
level, in addition to judging it as more dangerous (e.g., Teachman, Stefanucci, Cler-
kin, Cody, & Proffitt, 2008).
Just as thinking patterns often become highly geared toward managing per-
ceived threats when individuals become anxious, so too can physiological respond-
ing. There is considerable variability in the physiological changes that occur across
the anxiety disorders, but some degree of the “fight-or-flight” reaction (initially
described by Cannon, 1929) is common to both panic and phobic reactions. The fight-
or-flight system involves dramatic surges of autonomic arousal that motivate individ-
uals either to escape or avoid a situation or defend themselves. A freezing response
may also occur in some individuals. During the heightened activation of the sym-
pathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system, a series of physical reactions that
occur very rapidly help to prepare the body for action. These include increased heart
rate, rapid breathing, inhibition of digestive processes, constriction of blood vessels
in some parts of the body with dilation of blood vessels for muscles, pupil dilation,
endorphin release, and acceleration of reflexes (see Gray & McNaughton, 1996; Gun-
nar & Quevedo, 2007). This response prompts the individual for immediate action
and is adaptive when a real danger exists in the environment, but it essentially (mal)
functions as a false alarm when no objective danger exists, as occurs in panic and
phobias (see Barlow, 2002).
Thus, across a variety of emotional response systems (e.g., subjective distress,
behavior, physiology, cognitive processing; Eysenck, 2014; Lang, 1985), we see com-
mon signs and consequences of anxious arousal associated with both panic disor-
der and phobias, pointing to their shared phenomenological presentation. These
common features (combined with frequent difficulties in determining the clinical

-- 100 of 498 --

80 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
threshold for a given disorder, as well as the high level of comorbidity across them)
have led to many questions about the adequacy of a categorical classification system
for these disorders (see review in Barlow, 2002, Chapter 9). Simply put, questions
have arisen as to whether the current system effectively “carves nature at its joints.”
However, the heuristic value of categories (e.g., for communication about diagnoses)
and advantages conferred by the specificity of categorical criteria for research and
clinical decision making make it unlikely that the categories will be fully abandoned
any time soon (see Brown & Barlow, 2009).
Taking into consideration the overlap across anxiety disorders also recognizes
that the typical symptoms unique to each disorder represent important variation in
the way anxiety pathology manifests across individuals, depending on their particu-
lar vulnerability factors and learning experiences. We turn to these specific symp-
toms next.
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Panic disorder is defined by recurrent and unexpected panic attacks, which are fol-
lowed by at least 1 month of fear about future panic attacks, concern about the con-
sequences of the attacks (e.g., worries about “going crazy”), or changes in behavior
related to the attacks (e.g., avoidance or introduction of extensive safety cues). The
term “panic attack” is used frequently by the general public, but it has a specific
set of criteria in the context of anxiety pathology: The attack must involve a dis-
tinct period of intense discomfort and/or fear that rises to a peak within minutes.
It must involve at least four of the following symptoms: “palpitations, pounding
heart, or accelerated heart rate; sweating; trembling or shaking; sensations of short-
ness of breath or smothering; feeling of choking; chest pain or discomfort; nausea
or abdominal distress; feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint; chills or heat
sensations; paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations); derealization (feelings
of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from oneself); fear of losing con-
trol or going crazy; fear of dying” (list from American Psychiatric Association, 2013,
p. 208). Attacks that involve fewer than four symptoms are termed “limited symp-
tom” attacks.
Importantly, panic attacks can occur within the context of many anxiety prob-
lems. As one example, a person with social anxiety disorder may experience a panic
attack before having to give a speech; however, in these cases the fear focuses on the
negative evaluation by others and expected social embarrassment. In panic disorder,
the attacks themselves become a problem, as indicated by the fear of future attacks
and altered behavior in response to the attacks. For this reason, panic disorder is
often described as a “fear of fear” (Goldstein & Chambless, 1978). It is notable that fre-
quent panic attacks are not actually required for the diagnosis, provided that impair-
ment or fear of future attacks is evident. Furthermore, the occurrence of panic attacks
alone is not sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of panic disorder. In fact, roughly 11% of
adults in the United States experience a panic attack during a given 12-month period,
which is clearly much higher than the prevalence rate of actual panic disorder (e.g.,
American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Thus, tracking and reducing how often
panic attacks occur are useful in treatment but not the sole goal of treatment; rather,
helping people reduce their fear of future attacks and diminish associated avoidance

-- 101 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	81
is paramount. Along these lines, simply asking patients to monitor the percentage
of time they are worried about becoming anxious can provide the therapist—and
the patient—with a useful index of change. This marker is meaningful because, at
the outset of treatment, the lives of these patients are often very much about their
anxiety; indeed, in most of their waking hours, they are preoccupied with concern
about becoming anxious.
Panic attacks may be entirely unexpected, in that they seem to come on “out of
the blue” (when a person cannot identify a trigger), especially during early stages
of the disorder. It has been our clinical experience that more often than not, such
uncued attacks occur in situations in which the person is unaware of the precipitat-
ing factors (e.g., a fleeting thought and emotion). Alternatively, they may be expected,
in that an attack is more likely to occur following certain triggers (e.g., when in a
crowded place), or when the attack regularly occurs after exposure to a particular
situation. Situational events may involve a place, such as a restaurant, but they may
also be a physical state or symptom (e.g., when experiencing arousal following caf-
feine intake), or an emotional circumstance (e.g., during conflict with significant oth-
ers). Not surprisingly, people often start to avoid situations or feelings that tend to
trigger their panic attacks. When this becomes extreme and impairing in its own
right, the person may qualify for diagnoses of both panic disorder and agoraphobia.
Currently in the field, we consider agoraphobia as an independent disorder,
even though it often co-occurs with panic disorder. A person with agoraphobia expe-
riences unusually high anxiety about situations or places that they perceive would
be hard to escape from, or in which they would not be able to find help if they have
a panic attack or similar symptoms. We think of such experiences as a “disorder”
when they last for a while (months), and cause a person enough stress that they find
themself going out of their way to avoid those situations and places. Common situ-
ations that trigger agoraphobic avoidance include various modes of transportation
(e.g., car, bus), going outside of the home alone, or standing in crowds or lines. Avoid-
ance of internal sensations (known as “interoceptive cues”) that make a person fear-
ful is also common. These include sensations associated with dizziness, shortness
of breath, or hyperventilation (Schmidt & Trakowski, 2004), as well as sensations
associated with normal arousal in response to exercise, sex, eating heavy meals, or
strong emotional reactions.
Given the considerable avoidance behaviors and fear of bringing on panic symp-
toms that characterize panic disorder and/or agoraphobia, it is not surprising that
significant impairment is associated with these disorders. The morbidity associated
with panic disorder and agoraphobia cuts across many domains of biopsychosocial
functioning. For instance, in terms of relationship functioning, couples may have
stopped having sexual intercourse because of the patient’s fears about experiencing
intense physical sensations. In addition, difficulties with driving and related travel
fears often lead to considerable dependence on loved ones. Work impairment is also
common (Alonso et al., 2004) as the triggers associated with panic become more
ubiquitous. In severe cases of agoraphobia, the person may literally be homebound,
which clearly limits work opportunities. Individuals with panic disorder and/or ago-
raphobia are also at an elevated risk for experiencing a range of other anxiety, mood,
impulse-control, and substance use disorders (Kessler et al., 2006). Additionally,
sleep dysregulation is common and may be tied in part to the frequent occurrence of

-- 102 of 498 --

82 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
nocturnal panic attacks (Craske et al., 2002). Patients who experience nocturnal panic
attacks, which occur when a person wakes from sleep in a state of panic, show simi-
lar panic symptom severity and general impairment to that of panic patients who do
not experience nocturnal panic. However, patients with nocturnal panic attacks tend
to show lower levels of agoraphobic avoidance, possibly because they have more fear-
ful associations with sleep than with external situational factors.
One of the most serious clinical features connected to panic disorder is the
increased risk for suicide attempts (see Schmidt, Woolaway-Bickel, & Bates, 2001). In
an early meta-analysis (Harris & Barraclough, 1997), panic disorder was associated
with a 10-fold increase in suicide risk, relative to expected rates in the population.
Moreover, although there is some support for the “depression mediation hypoth-
esis” (i.e., that panic disorder is indirectly linked to suicide via its relationship with
heightened depression; Schmidt et al., 2001), there is little doubt that clinicians need
to be alert to the increased risk in this population. This is especially true given that
comorbidity is the norm rather than the exception (Kessler et al., 2006). It is possible
that elevated rates of suicide risk among individuals with panic disorder may be tied
to beliefs that anxiety sensations are dangerous, potentially indicating a cognitive
disaster such as going crazy or losing control of one’s mind. Referred to as “anxiety
sensitivity cognitive concerns,” researchers theorize that these beliefs may amplify
the distress brought on by the sensations associated with mental illness, such as dif-
ficulty sleeping or concentrating (Capron, Norr, Macatee, & Schmidt, 2013). In turn,
after the “amplified” distress reaches a potently high level, suicidal ideation and
attempts may occur.
Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder is characterized by marked and persistent fear of social inter-
actions or performance situations in which scrutiny by others is possible (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). Individuals with social anxiety disorder consistently
experience anxiety when confronted with social and/or performance situations, and
this disproportionate anxiety typically lasts for at least 6 months to qualify for a
diagnosis. Given the common tendency by socially anxious individuals to overes-
timate threat in social situations, individuals suffering from social anxiety disorder
need not recognize that their fears are unreasonable or excessive. Typically, indi-
viduals with social anxiety disorder avoid feared social or performance situations.
Less frequently, social situations are not avoided but are endured with considerable
dread. Significant anticipatory anxiety is also common.
Although early theorists believed that social anxiety is caused by deficits in
social skills (see Trower, Bryant, & Argyle, 1978), empirical findings are inconsistent
regarding the extent to which individuals with social anxiety disorder actually have
social skills deficits (e.g., Stopa & Clark, 1993). What is clear is that compared with
healthy control participants, people with social anxiety disorder are typically more
critical of their social performances, even after accounting for actual differences in
social abilities (e.g., Rapee & Lim, 1992).
Recent research has focused on understanding moderators and mediators link-
ing social anxiety with biased self-evaluations. For instance, there is evidence that
among socially anxious individuals, a tendency to engage in postevent processing

-- 103 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	83
(i.e., to ruminatively dwell on previous social interactions) is associated with more
negative judgments about one’s social performance (Brozovich & Heimberg, 2011).
Other research points to the importance of experiential avoidance (i.e., attempts to
control or avoid one’s internal emotions and thoughts; Kashdan et al., 2014) for under-
standing why social anxiety symptoms may lead to less positive self-evaluations
across time (Sarfan, Cody, & Clerkin, 2019). Moreover, research from Wallace and
Alden (1997) indicates that individuals with social anxiety disorder often believe
that they will be unable to make desired impressions on others, or that they will fail
to live up to others’ expectations. This fear is tied to one of the defining symptoms
at the heart of cognitive models of social anxiety disorder—extreme fears of nega-
tive evaluation (e.g., Clark & Wells, 1995). Interestingly, there is also evidence that
individuals with social anxiety disorder fear positive evaluation (Weeks, Heimberg,
& Rodebaugh, 2008).
Many theorists contend that the distinction between social anxiety disorder and
the more commonly experienced forms of shyness is a matter of degree rather than
kind, with symptoms of social anxiety ranging along a continuum from mild and
transient social unease to shyness to social anxiety disorder (see Heimberg & Becker,
2002). Thus, while social anxiety disorder and shyness have many similarities, symp-
toms of social anxiety disorder are more extreme across a variety of domains, and
the vast majority of people (~88%) who report that they are shy would not meet diag-
nostic criteria for social anxiety disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
The issue of diagnosis becomes further complicated when one considers the
relationship between social anxiety disorder and avoidant personality disorder.
Given the striking similarities and high rates of comorbidity between these two dis-
orders (as they were defined in DSM-IV, which mainly guided this research), some
theorists believe that there is not a “distinct symptomatic delineation” between them
(see Reich, 2001, p. 157), and avoidant personality disorder is sometimes conceptual-
ized as an extreme form of social anxiety disorder. Interestingly, there also does not
appear to be strong evidence for the notion that there are meaningful subtypes of
social anxiety disorder with distinct symptom profiles (for reviews, see Heimberg,
Holt, Schneier, Spitzer, & Liebowitz, 1993; Rapee, 1995).
The subjective anxiety experienced by individuals with social anxiety disorder
is often extremely impairing and distressing, as are the physical sensations typically
tied to social anxiety, such as heart racing, sweating, gastrointestinal discomfort,
blushing, and so forth. Avoidance is also particularly problematic. For instance, a
student who fears appearing inarticulate or stupid may avoid raising a question dur-
ing class; a teenager who fears being rejected may never risk asking someone on a
date; a middle-aged man who fears that others will notice his hands shaking or voice
trembling may avoid giving presentations at work. In some cases, this avoidance
behavior can even lead to employment or financial difficulties (e.g., when individu-
als pass up promotions at work because the new position would involve increased
social interactions). Moreover, experiential avoidance appears to be critically impor-
tant in differentiating between adults with social anxiety disorder and healthy con-
trol participants (Kashdan et al., 2013).
Alcohol problems within the context of social anxiety are also quite high. Epi-
demiological research indicates that social anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder
commonly co-occur (Grant et al., 2004; Schneier et al., 2010), possibly because some

-- 104 of 498 --

84 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
individuals with social anxiety disorder drink to minimize anxiety when interacting
socially. Indeed, there is evidence that coping motives (i.e., drinking to reduce nega-
tive affect) mediate the relationship between social anxiety symptoms and drinking
problems, particularly for emerging adults (Clerkin, Werntz, Magee, Lindgren, &
Teachman, 2014). The presence of social anxiety disorder may also increase the prob-
ability of suicide ideation and attempts (Cougle, Keough, Riccardi, & Sachs-Ericsson,
2009), and individuals with social anxiety disorder have lower well-being ratings
compared to individuals without a mental illness (Wersebe et al., 2018).
Specific Phobia
Specific phobias are defined by disproportionate and persistent fear toward a partic-
ular object or situation that typically lasts at least 6 months to qualify for a diagnosis
(see American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Unlike less intense, subclinical fears,
a specific phobia must almost always evoke an extreme and immediate fear reac-
tion. Furthermore, the phobic target must be avoided or endured with severe distress
and result in some impairment in functioning. Similar to social anxiety disorder,
individuals with a specific phobia need not recognize their fear is unreasonable or
excessive because of the tendency by many phobic individuals to have exaggerated
perceptions of the danger in phobic situations. Note that we focus in this chapter on
panic and phobias among adults, but given the relatively high prevalence of phobias
in children, the interested reader is encouraged to see excellent summaries of fear
and phobias in children and adolescents (e.g., Ollendick, White, & White, 2018).
The overlap in criteria and feared situations for panic disorder, agoraphobia,
social anxiety disorder, and specific phobias can make their differential diagnosis a
challenge. More generally, determining whether a fear target constitutes a specific
phobia or another anxiety problem is sometimes difficult. For example, a fear of dirt
can reflect either obsessive– compulsive disorder for a person with contamination
obsessions or be part of a specific phobia. Similarly, fear of a particular situation
may be tied to a traumatic event in the context of posttraumatic stress disorder or
reflect a more circumscribed specific phobia. Distinguishing among these possibili-
ties involves a functional analysis that includes a careful assessment of the triggers
and feared consequences associated with encountering the feared object or situation.
In theory, a phobia can be directed toward almost any target, and identifying
some of the more esoteric phobias, often by their Greek or Latin names, can be an
entertaining party game (e.g., “apeirophobia,” a fear of infinity). However, in clini-
cal practice, a smaller set of phobias tends to be represented, and these have been
organized into subtypes in recent DSM versions (i.e., animal, natural environment,
blood–injection–injury, situational, and other). Although these types have some heu-
ristic value for research and communication purposes, the utility of using subtype
specifiers as part of the diagnostic label has been questioned (see Antony & Barlow,
2002).
As with panic disorder and the other phobias reviewed in this chapter, spe-
cific phobias are associated with a strong physiological response, characterized by
increased heart rate and skin conductance. In fact, a panic attack is a common reac-
tion for persons with specific phobias upon encountering their feared object/situ-
ation (Antony, 1994). Although increased arousal is common across various types

-- 105 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	85
of specific phobias, blood–injection–injury phobia has a unique, additional compo-
nent to its physiological profile that includes a tendency to faint. Another interesting
characteristic of certain specific phobias, such as spider, snake, and blood–injury–
injection fears, is that patients often feel a strong disgust reaction to their feared
object (see review in Cisler, Olatunji, & Lohr, 2009). One theory (which requires more
empirical validation), known as the “disease avoidance model,” is that disgust serves
an adaptive function, in that it promotes avoidance, which helps to prevent the
transmission of disease (Davey, 1992). Supporting this theory, meta-analytic work
suggests that although disgust proneness is elevated for a range of anxiety disor-
ders, the effect is especially pronounced for individuals whose anxiety symptoms
are linked to contagion fears (Olatunji, Armstrong, & Elwood, 2017). Thus, applying
transdiagnostic frameworks may be helpful to understand conditions under which
disgust proneness leads to one set of symptoms (e.g., spider phobia) versus another
(e.g., health anxiety). For instance, someone with a tendency toward disgust prone-
ness may be more likely to develop spider phobia if their environment emphasizes
concerns tied to small animals and disease. Furthermore, the avoidance of disgust
elicitors to prevent disease may function similarly to the avoidance in panic disorder
of bodily sensations to prevent physical illness; both cases involve an oversensitive
“false alarm” system that exaggerates the presence of danger.
Finally, for individuals with specific phobias, avoidance is problematic because
it can result in limited functioning in social, recreational, and work situations (see
Rowa, McCabe, & Antony, 2006), and persons with blood–injection–injury fears often
do not adhere to recommended medical regimens (Mollema, Snoek, Ader, Heine, &
van der Ploeg, 2001). However, the impairment associated with specific phobias has
more often been described as moderate rather than severe (e.g., Becker et al., 2007),
in part because it is often possible to avoid encountering one’s feared situation/object
effectively because of the circumscribed nature of the fear. For instance, organizing
one’s life to avoid seeing a snake is far easier than trying to avoid all social perfor-
mance situations or triggers of bodily sensations (as might be desired in social anxi-
ety or panic disorder, respectively). Thus, it is not unusual for people to meet all of
the diagnostic criteria for a specific phobia except for the impairment in functioning
requirement (e.g., Romano, Tremblay, Vitaro, Zoccolillo, & Pagani, 2001).
Clinical Implications
The typical symptoms associated with anxiety disorders can be manifested in one
or more responses systems: behavioral, physiological, expressive emotion, and/or
cognitive. We deal with some of the clinical implications associated with each of
these domains, considering the behavioral (e.g., avoidance of therapy), physiological
(e.g., difficulty tolerating physiological reactions), expressive emotion (e.g., dysregu-
lation of multiple emotions), and cognitive (e.g., beliefs about not feeling in control,
selective processing of threatening information) features of anxiety. One consid-
erable challenge in assessing and treating anxiety difficulties is that these differ-
ent response systems are often not closely aligned and may not change in tandem
(see seminal work by Lang, Cuthbert, & Bradley [1998] and recent perspective by
Taschereau-Dumouchel, Kawato, & Lau [2020], a process termed “desynchrony”
or “uncoupling”). Thus, it is important to consider multiple outcome markers to

-- 106 of 498 --

86 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
determine the success of therapy because there is no one true measure of fear or
anxiety. Analogously, evaluating other markers of impairment in functioning, such
as quality of relationships and work life, is critical.
Avoidance of Therapy Itself
Reducing the avoidance of cues associated with panic and phobic targets is typically
a key focus in therapy, but avoidance symptoms also have other important treatment
implications. In particular, individuals who use avoidance as a coping strategy, albeit
a maladaptive one, to reduce their anxiety in the short term also may sometimes
desire to avoid treatment and therapy homework, especially if exposure to fear cues
is involved in therapy. This may be particularly true in a group treatment context, in
which it can be slightly more challenging to permit total flexibility for each individ-
ual to set the pace for their exposures. Thus, building a strong therapeutic alliance
is essential to help patients become willing to face their fears, and enhancing moti-
vation for treatment may be needed to reduce patients’ ambivalence about making
changes in their lives, or even about being in treatment (motivational interviewing
approaches can be very helpful in this regard; see Miller & Rollnick, 2012). This, of
course, would be in conjunction with careful monitoring of patients’ avoidance, as
well as successful exposure practice between sessions.
Physiological Reactions
A salient characteristic of anxiety disorders is the increased activation of the sym-
pathetic nervous system. Thus, in addition to the subjective feeling of anxiety and
the associated behavioral manifestations, there are physiological symptoms such as
rapid breathing, increased heart rate, and sweating. These reactions are involuntary
and contribute to the feeling of not being in control—a point we return to later. At
times, patients are encouraged to tolerate these physiological sensations to learn that
they are not actually dangerous, so that the sensations become less frightening; at
other times, patients may want to reduce the arousal.
As a means of helping patients reduce their physiological reaction, it can be
helpful in some cases to teach them how to use relaxation as a coping skill. This can
be accomplished by various methods, most of which involve learning to differenti-
ate between feelings of tension and relaxation, and to use the tension as a signal for
reducing their arousal. Using external cues to remind patients to apply the relaxation
response can be helpful. Thus, anxious patients can learn to use recurrent situational
cues as reminders to relax, such as putting the key in the ignition of the car or sitting
down in front of one’s computer. Another example is a patient who tended to have
panic attacks at restaurants and was able to use the placement of the napkin on her
lap as a cue to relax. She was successful in reducing the physiological arousal that
was the precursor to panic, and soon she jokingly referred to this as “the magic nap-
kin.” Alternatively, patients may be taught to observe their physiological reactions
without judging them or attempting to change them, a common approach in more
acceptance-based (often called “third wave”) therapies, including mindfulness and
acceptance and commitment therapy (e.g., Eifert & Forsyth, 2005).

-- 107 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	87
Dysregulation of Multiple Emotions
In some respects, the term “anxiety disorders” is somewhat limiting. While it is cer-
tainly true that fear, panic, and anxiety are central emotional states in these disor-
ders, they are not the only forms of affect that become dysregulated or that may
require therapeutic attention. For instance, as noted earlier, patients with certain spe-
cific phobias often feel a strong disgust reaction to their feared object (see Olatunji
& McKay, 2009; Woody & Teachman, 2000). Yet the extent to which it is important
to reduce disgust (as well as fear) in treatment remains an open empirical question.
While there is some evidence that disgust related to spiders is reduced following
successful exposure therapy (e.g., de Jong, Andrea, & Muris, 1997), there is also some
indication that disgust may be slower than fear to decline during exposure (e.g., Ola-
tunji, Forsyth, & Cherian, 2007).
Social anxiety disorder is often characterized by feelings of shame and embar-
rassment, and it is not uncommon for people to feel intense sadness in response to
their anxiety disorder symptoms. Along these lines, it is helpful to consider pos-
sible interactions between different emotional presentations and traditional gender
expectations (e.g., women expressing sadness about their inability to manage their
anxiety, and men expressing anger when they feel threatened), though more research
is needed to determine the empirical support for these possible gender differences in
the treatment context.
Finally, in panic disorder, it is not unusual to see anger as a central aspect of
the presentation (Moscovitch, McCabe, Antony, Rocca, & Swinson, 2008), though the
tie between anger and depression in these cases needs to be considered. In the case
of a panic patient with whom we were unable to simulate panic sensations during
the session by means of hyperventilation, we inadvertently triggered a panic attack
when he discussed his relationship with his brother. After the panic symptoms had
subsided, he reluctantly acknowledged that he was indeed angry at his brother.
However, he was raised with a strict religious background and was told at a young
age that being angry meant “the devil was in him.” Given that he was fearful of feel-
ing or expressing anger, he was first encouraged to acknowledge that he was “frus-
trated” with his brother, after which he agreed that he was “upset.” With further
encouragement, he allowed that perhaps he was “annoyed,” and finally that he was
“angry.” Thus, gradual exposure to his concerns about anger became an integral part
of the treatment of his panic disorder, as did work on increasing his assertiveness
with his brother.
Not Feeling “in Control”
The belief that the world is somehow unpredictable and uncontrollable is central to
many anxiety difficulties (Barlow, 2002). Furthermore, one of the clinical hallmarks
of panic disorder is that the patients feel “out of control” when panic symptoms arise.
In this regard, it is important to frame the therapy intervention as a means by which
patients can learn to manage their anxiety, so that they no longer feel they are at the
mercy of anxiety symptoms and do not find them as threatening. Along these lines,
in treatment, we aim to reduce the unhelpful belief that the patient is totally “out

-- 108 of 498 --

88 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
of control” and cannot cope when anxious (e.g., by teaching patients that control is
really on a continuum, despite the popular but misleading terminology of being “in”
vs. “out” of control). At the same time, we normalize the experience of anxiety and
seek to reduce the belief that all anxiety needs to be controlled. Using a coping skills
approach to treatment, it is often helpful to tell patients that our goal is not to elimi-
nate all anxiety symptoms, but to help them learn to manage their anxiety by becom-
ing less frightened of anxiety symptoms and their reaction to these symptoms. By
understanding that they can tolerate some anxiety and still function, patients actu-
ally tend to become less anxious and feel less need to always control their internal
(e.g., anxiety symptoms) and external (e.g., rigid behavior) environments.
Limitations of the DSM
It is also important for clinicians to go beyond global diagnostic categories, such as
“social anxiety disorder,” to adequately assess and treat patients’ presenting prob-
lems. Specific, idiographic targets of intervention need to be identified (e.g., delineat-
ing public speaking concerns or dating fears is more informative than “social anxi-
ety disorder”). Identification of symptoms alone is insufficient, however. A broad
biopsychosocial evaluation and case formulation is critical to learn the patient’s
strengths and weaknesses, and the challenging realities within which some of our
patients live.
While improvements in the DSM have clearly been made since it was first pub-
lished in 1952, it continues to have its shortcomings—particularly for the practicing
clinician. The changes have not only helped to bring the classification system more
closely in line with the disorders’ phenomenology but they also present some chal-
lenges in differential diagnosis. For instance, the fact that panic attacks can occur
across multiple anxiety problems beyond panic disorder can make it difficult to dif-
ferentiate whether panic attacks occur in the context of panic disorder, social anxi-
ety disorder, or specific phobia. Imagine a person who regularly has panic attacks
while driving; it is possible this person has panic disorder because he fears the con-
sequences of the attack (e.g., that he might faint while driving and cause an accident).
Alternatively, it is plausible that this person has a specific driving phobia and has
panic attacks tied to his general fears about driving and having an accident. To dis-
tinguish among these options, it is helpful to assess whether the attacks also occur
in other situations (e.g., when he is not driving), as well as the specific fear triggers
and perceived consequences tied to the attacks. Thought experiments in which a
patient tries to isolate a given symptom can be helpful in this regard. Consider a
woman who has panic attacks when asked to speak in public, and the challenge of
determining whether panic disorder and/or social anxiety disorder diagnoses are
warranted. Asking the patient how extensively she would still fear public speaking
if she could take a magic pill and know that she would not have a panic attack while
giving a speech to her coworkers can be useful to determine whether the fears are
tied to panic attacks per se, or to fears of negative evaluation. Alternatively, asking
how much she would still fear public speaking if there were a risk of having a panic
attack but she could take a magic pill, causing her coworkers to think she did a great
job, can help to rule in or out fears about the consequences of panic. Thus, focus of the
fear is important (fear of fainting, bodily sensations, etc., vs. fear of being ridiculed,

-- 109 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	89
appearing stupid, etc.). Not surprisingly, making these fine distinctions in practice
can be challenging, especially given that it is quite possible for the patient in this
example to have both panic disorder and social anxiety disorder.
Another clinical issue stems from the fact that the social anxiety category is
quite heterogeneous, including anxiety in interpersonal interactions, anxiety in
public speaking situations, fear of using public bathrooms, and anxiety experienced
when signing one’s name in public. Moreover, patients who are socially anxious may
vary in their social skills, such that behavioral skills training may be appropriate for
some but not others (see Rapee & Spence, 2004). Researchers have also found that
many gay men who appear to be “socially anxious” are responding appropriately to
realistic fears of rejection (Pachankis & Goldfried, 2006); hence, their anxiety may not
necessarily be considered unwarranted or maladaptive.
Impairment in Functioning: Love and Work
Given the disruption to relationships caused by avoidance behavior that is character-
istic of panic disorder and phobias, and the consequent dependence on loved ones,
it is not unusual for families to need some help renegotiating their roles when a
patient starts making progress in treatment and is able to function more indepen-
dently. While this is usually an exciting step, it is not always easy for family members
to change long-standing patterns of who are the “strong” or “helper” members of
the household. Thus, even with significant progress in achieving anxiety symptom
reduction, it is important to evaluate how these life changes influence other aspects
of a person’s functioning, including possible impairment in interpersonal relation-
ships and work.
We should also emphasize that family members can either assist or interfere
with therapeutic progress. For example, researchers found that spousal assistance in
the treatment of agoraphobia helped to facilitate the reduction of avoidance behavior
(Barlow, O’Brien, & Last, 1984). Serving as a therapeutic aide, the partner of the per-
son with agoraphobia can encourage graduated exposure to feared situations. Some-
times, however, such “assistance” can undercut the therapist’s best efforts. One of
us (M. R. G.) worked with a woman suffering from panic disorder and agoraphobia,
whose husband not only encouraged her to cope with panic by holding her breath
but also discouraged her from traveling! The best efforts of the therapist, unfortu-
nately, were no match for this very dominating husband.
COURSE
The conclusions one draws about the typical course and outcomes for persons with
anxiety disorders depend in large part on one’s focus. Evidence tied to the natu-
ral course of these disorders leads to a pessimistic view about their chronic nature,
whereas evidence that highlights the tremendous strides in treating these disorders
presents a more optimistic picture. At the same time, there is considerable variabil-
ity in outcomes across disorders, even using similar treatment approaches (e.g., as
described later, medication is far more helpful for panic disorder than it is for spe-
cific phobias, whereas exposure-based therapies have impressive outcomes for both

-- 110 of 498 --

90 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
specific phobias and panic disorder, with more moderate success rates for treating
social anxiety disorder).
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
The frequency of panic attacks may wax and wane over time quite dramatically
(e.g., a person may have daily attacks for a couple weeks, then far more irregularly
spaced attacks over a period of months), though these fluctuations do not seem to
occur randomly. The presence of life stressors appears to be a predictor of both the
initial onset of panic and its intensity over time (see Klauke, Deckert, Reif, Pauli,
& Domschke, 2010). Interestingly, stressors that are tied to either interpersonal dif-
ficulties or physical well-being (e.g., scary experiences with drugs) are particularly
potent risk factors.
Although the course of panic disorder and agoraphobia may show considerable
fluctuations over time, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the disorders are
chronic and disabling. For instance, Nay, Brown, and Roberson-Nay (2013) found that
remission rates for panic disorder with and without agoraphobia were 67 and 75%,
respectively, at a 3-year follow-up evaluation, with females at a stronger risk for both
incidence (odds ratio [OR] = 2.31) and relapse (OR = 2.05) in comparison to males.
Unfortunately, even among patients who attain remission, relapse is not unusual
(see Batelaan et al., 2010; Bruce et al., 2005). In a naturalistic 5-year follow-up study
of clinic outpatients with panic disorder, 38% were labeled as being in remission,
44% experienced mild panic symptoms and phobic avoidance, and 19% had relapsed
or were unchanged (Carpiniello et al., 2002). Thus, while many people in this study
showed some improvement, residual symptoms were the norm, and relapse was not
unusual.
Coinciding with this somewhat discouraging data are the impressive data on
treatment outcome, particularly for cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and pharma-
cotherapy. For instance, a meta-analysis for treatment outcomes for panic disorder
(with or without agoraphobia) indicated that CBT combined with pharmacological
treatment, CBT alone, and pharmacological treatment alone all showed clear efficacy
relative to a variety of control conditions (Bandelow, Seidler-Brandler, Becker, Wede-
kind, & Rüther, 2007).
CBT can take many forms but typically includes a combination of psychoedu-
cation, exposure therapy, cognitive restructuring, relaxation or slow deep breath-
ing, and relapse prevention (see the widely used manual by Barlow & Craske, 2006).
Initially, patients are given psychoeducation about the nature of anxiety and panic,
and the “fear-of-fear” cycle (the idea that reacting in catastrophic ways to benign
physical sensations makes those sensations more intense and fuels panic attacks).
Exposures focus on reducing avoidance behaviors in response to both internal and
external panic cues. The exposure assignments typically involve both reentering
feared situations (e.g., crowds), while learning to tolerate the anxiety without trying
to escape or avoid, and interoceptive exposure exercises, in which patients repeat-
edly expose themselves to their feared bodily sensations to learn that they can cope
with these feelings, and that their anxiety lessens as the feared consequences do not
occur. During cognitive restructuring, patients are taught to identify and reevalu-
ate their maladaptive beliefs about the consequences of anxiety and their (in)ability

-- 111 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	91
to tolerate bodily sensations. Also, in some panic treatment protocols, patients are
taught diaphragmatic breathing and/or progressive muscle relaxation as methods of
coping with stress and anxiety.
The typical length of a CBT panic control treatment protocol, as used in random-
ized clinical trials, is 10–15 weekly sessions; however, there is evidence that in some
instances, positive outcomes can be achieved in much shorter time periods (e.g., five
sessions: Otto et al., 2012; two intensive days: Deacon & Abramowitz, 2006). Efficacy
has also been found for the administration of computer-based CBT (Andrews, Cui-
jpers, Craske, McEvoy, & Titov, 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009). Both individual and group
treatments have demonstrated efficacy and are reasonable choices, though outcomes
may be slightly enhanced with individual therapy (see review in Craske & Barlow,
2008). Exposure-based therapy for agoraphobia also appears to work well in a group
format (Marchand, Roberge, Primiano, & Germain, 2009). In addition to the initial
positive outcomes immediately posttreatment (e.g., 65.6% response rate based on the
Panic Disorder Severity Scale among patents completing CBT in Aaronson et al.,
2008), the available data suggest long-lasting benefits following CBT (e.g., based on
1-year follow-up data; see review by Sánchez-Meca, Rosa-Alcázar, Marín-Martínez,
& Gómez-Conesa, 2010), though residual symptoms are certainly not unusual. Fur-
thermore, CBT appears to be a helpful treatment for patients who have not responded
to a prior medication treatment (Rodrigues et al., 2011). For more information on
empirically supported therapies for panic disorder, see the American Psychological
Association Division 12’s website on Research-Supported Psychological Treatments
(www.div12.org/diagnosis/panic-disorder) or the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence’s (NICE) guidelines website (nice.org.uk/guidance/cg113).
There is also good evidence for the efficacy of medication to manage panic
disorder (see summary of pharmacotherapy evidence and guidelines; American
Psychiatric Association, 2009). Four classes of medication have demonstrated effi-
cacy: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and benzodiazepines.
Although they are relatively comparable in their efficacy, their side effect profiles,
risk of dependence, and quality of evidence bases vary considerably. Typically, SSRIs
and SNRIs are recommended as a first-line medication treatment because they do
not lead to the serious cardiovascular and anticholinergic side effects linked with
TCAs, or the high rate of addiction that occurs with benzodiazepines. In fact, there
is considerable evidence for long-term negative outcomes with chronic use of high-
potency benzodiazepines (see Farach et al., 2012). Thus, benzodiazepine use may
be most helpful as part of a short-term addition to one of the other antidepressants
to help control symptoms while the antidepressant has a chance to take effect (Sus-
man & Klee, 2005). Even then, the challenge of tolerating the symptoms that often
accompany the subsequent discontinuation of benzodiazepines needs to be weighed
against the value of the rapid symptom relief they can provide. Fortunately, results
for the many trials with SSRIs and SNRIs indicate that there are effective, less addic-
tive medication options available (e.g., Pollack, Mangano, Entsuah, Tzanis, & Simon
[2007] found a 70% response rate based on the Panic Disorder Severity Scale among
patents completing a venlafaxine ER trial), but discontinuation of these medications
requires considerable care (and tapering is often recommended) to help manage pos-
sible return of symptoms (see American Psychiatric Association, 2009).

-- 112 of 498 --

92 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
More patients receive medication than CBT as a treatment for panic disorder
and agoraphobia, in part because treatment is often sought in primary care settings
(where medication is the norm), and in part because CBT is not yet offered in many
health care settings despite its established efficacy (see Craske & Barlow, 2008). Any
discussion of treatment– outcome for panic disorder and agoraphobia must also con-
sider the typical short- and long-term response of patients receiving a combination
of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy given how frequently this occurs. There
are still open questions about when outcomes may be enhanced by combining or
sequencing medication and CBT. However, it is clear that combining the treatments
is often not necessary and can even be detrimental, despite the seemingly intuitive
appeal of using two efficacious approaches (e.g., there is some evidence that medi-
cation, and its subsequent withdrawal, can interfere with the long-term benefits of
CBT; Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 2000; though see Bandelow et al., 2007). The
evidence does not seem to suggest that adding CBT to a medication treatment has
the same negative impact. For example, adding even single components of CBT to the
medication management offered for patients with panic disorder in a primary care
setting led to improved outcomes posttreatment and 1 year later (Craske et al., 2005).
The choice to use CBT, medication, or their combination thus depends on the
patient’s wishes, past treatment history, and so on. However, it is important to high-
light that treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia is one of the field’s success
stories in terms of positive outcomes in mental health care. As described earlier, not
all classes of medications are equal when long-term outcomes are taken into con-
sideration, and caution should be used when combining treatments, as this may
be unnecessary and unhelpful in the long run. At the same time, it is nice to have
multiple efficacious options from which to choose when offering treatment. This
is especially valuable given that not all patients respond to their first treatment, so
sequencing treatments for people who do not respond to an initial CBT or medica-
tion trial may be a useful way to think about enhancing outcomes with multiple
treatment modalities rather than simply combining treatments right away. The issue
of using single or combined treatments is also important from a cost-cutting per-
spective given the tremendous financial burden posed by care for anxiety disorders
(e.g., Baxter, Vos, Scott, Ferrari, & Whiteford, 2014). Notably, there is some indication
that CBT may be more cost-effective than medication, based on total disability costs,
work days missed, health care use, and so on (Heuzenroeder et al., 2004).
While CBT and medication approaches are the primary evidence-based options
for treating panic disorder and agoraphobia, there is also some evidence that panic-
focused, psychodynamic, twice-weekly, 12-week psychotherapy may also be help-
ful for treating panic disorder (Beutel et al., 2013; Milrod et al., 2016), though CBT
remains a more consistently effective treatment (e.g., Chambless et al., 2017). The
psychodynamic panic treatment focuses on confronting the emotional significance
attached to panic symptoms, based on the idea that patients are avoidant in part
because of difficulty separating from central attachment figures. Also significant
is that this intervention explores the role that anger plays in panic attacks, a critical
issue, as we noted earlier. It is important to gather further evidence about the efficacy
of this approach and its active components. Finally, it is notable that this therapy is
still panic-focused and time-limited, and should not be confused with more general
supportive psychotherapies that have not been found to be as efficacious as standard
panic treatments (Sánchez-Meca et al., 2010).

-- 113 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	93
Therefore, there is both good news and bad news when one examines the course
and treatment– outcome for panic disorder and agoraphobia. Studies of the longitu-
dinal course and relatively high relapse rates over time point to the need to develop
better long-term management strategies for the disorders, while the impressive CBT
and medication efficacy data suggest high treatment response rates. In reconcil-
ing these different pictures, a number of factors need to be considered. First, out-
comes vary for persons with substantial comorbidity relative to those with relatively
“cleaner” presentations of panic disorder. For instance, co-occurring depression is
associated with a worse course of illness (e.g., Bruce et al., 2005; Nay et al., 2013), and
there is mixed evidence regarding the impact of co-occurring personality disorders
(Ansell et al., 2011; Ozkan & Altindag, 2005). Second, many people are simply not
receiving treatment, or they are receiving substandard care, which may help explain
the discrepant results for the negative, naturalistic course relative to the more posi-
tive outcomes for the CBT and medication trials. Finally, panic disorder is under-
treated in both primary care (Stein et al., 2011) and mental health care settings (Bruce
et al., 2003), with few people receiving CBT or evidence-based medication types and
doses (see Wolitzky-Taylor, Zimmerman, Arch, Guzman, & Lagomasino, 2015). Thus,
while panic disorder and agoraphobia can be treated quite effectively, the field has a
long way to go to make this ideal a reality.
Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder tends to be a fairly chronic disorder with relatively low rates
of recovery and high rates of recurrence when left untreated. Estimates for the natu-
ralistic course of social anxiety disorder vary widely depending on methodological
differences across studies. For instance, retrospective cross-sectional studies indi-
cate that social anxiety disorder persists anywhere between 19 and 30 years in com-
munity samples (Kessler, Stein, & Berglund, 1998), with naturalistic recovery rates
ranging from 20 to 40% (e.g., see Ruscio et al., 2008). In a prospective study, Bruce
and colleagues (2005) found that individuals with social anxiety disorder had only
a 37% chance of achieving “recovery” over the course of 12 years (defined as being
virtually asymptomatic for at least 2 months). Of those patients with social anxiety
disorder who did recover, there was a 39% chance of a recurrence. Taken together,
research suggests that social anxiety disorder is an insidious, often unremitting dis-
order when untreated.
Fortunately, there are a variety of successful psychological interventions avail-
able for treating social anxiety disorder, including individual and group CBT.
Research generally suggests that combining both cognitive and exposure techniques
is recommended (Hofmann & Otto, 2017). Indeed, treatment typically consists of
both cognitive restructuring to evaluate beliefs that fuel social anxiety concerns,
such as fears of negative evaluation, and exposure exercises to help patients learn to
tolerate anxiety and feel more comfortable interacting socially. For instance, cogni-
tive restructuring may target the belief that one will be humiliated by performing
“inadequately.” Meanwhile, exposures generally focus on encouraging patients to
gradually confront and remain in socially threatening situations. This is achieved
through the creation of individually tailored fear hierarchies that begin with mildly
anxiety-provoking situations and end with the situations that are most feared. When
developing hierarchies, it is important to remember that avoidance associated with

-- 114 of 498 --

94 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
social anxiety disorder can take many forms, including not fully engaging with a
given situation (e.g., through excessive use of alcohol) or refusing to enter a situation
in the first place.
CBTs for social anxiety disorder are demonstrably effective; however, estimates
vary considerably in terms of how effective. In a review of five meta-analyses evaluat-
ing CBT techniques (exposure only; cognitive restructuring only; cognitive restruc-
turing and exposure; social skills training; applied relaxation), Rodebaugh, Holaway,
and Heimberg (2004) concluded that each of the CBT interventions revealed moder-
ate to large effect sizes. For more information on empirically supported treatments
for social anxiety disorder, see Division 12’s website on Research-Supported Psycho-
logical Treatments (www.div12.org/diagnosis/social-anxiety-disorder-and-public-speaking-
anxiety), the NICE guidelines website (nice.org.uk/guidance/cg159), or one of the many
meta-analyses (e.g., Acarturk, Cuijpers, van Straten, & de Graaf, 2009).
A variety of pharmacological agents have also been used to treat social anxiety
disorder. For instance, Mayo-Wilson and colleagues (2014) conducted a meta-analysis
to evaluate both psychological and pharmacological treatments for social anxiety
disorder. Results indicated that standardized mean differences (SMDs) across CBT
interventions (SMD = –1.19) and pharmacological treatments (SMDs ranging from
–0.80 to –1.01) were significantly different from the reference comparison, although
they did not differ from one another. Of the pharmacological treatments, phenelzine
(a monoamine oxidase inhibitor [MAOI]) led to the largest symptom improvements
in social anxiety symptoms, but it did not produce significantly better outcomes
than other medications included in the investigation (e.g., benzodiazepines, SSRIs,
and SNRIs). Given the problematic side effects tied to MAOIs (e.g., risk of hyperten-
sion) and benzodiazepines (e.g., physical dependence), medications such as the SSRIs
may provide a better first-line pharmacological treatment option for social anxiety
disorder (Rodebaugh et al., 2004). (For a more complete list of U.S. Food and Drug
Administration [FDA]–approved medications used to treat social anxiety disorder,
see www.drugs.com/condition/social-anxiety-disorder.html.)
To date, it is not clear whether pharmacological or psychotherapeutic interven-
tions are preferable for treating social anxiety disorder. Some studies have demon-
strated that pharmacotherapies may be more effective than CBT in the short term
(Blanco et al., 2011), and that the effects of medication on social anxiety may occur
more rapidly (Praško et al., 2006). In contrast, there is also evidence that the coping
skills learned during CBT may help patients better maintain their treatment gains in
the long term (Hollon, Stewart, & Strunk, 2006). Finally, some research indicates no
clear differences in the effectiveness of medication and CBT techniques (Roshanaei-
Moghaddam et al., 2011). There are also inconsistent findings regarding whether
combined psychological and pharmacological treatments for social anxiety disorder
are more (or less) effective than either treatment in isolation (see Canton, Scott, &
Glue, 2012), leading Turk, Heimberg, and Hope (2001) to recommend that patients
with social anxiety disorder stabilize their medication regimens prior to starting
therapy and refrain from adjusting or changing their medications during treatment.
Treatment decisions likely need to be made on a case-by-case basis, ideally in consul-
tation with both a psychiatrist and a psychologist.
Finally, there is some promising evidence for experimental anxiety reduction
interventions (termed “cognitive bias modification”) designed to train cognitive

-- 115 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	95
processing biases away from threatening cues, though the ultimate clinical utility of
this work remains unknown. For example, Amir, Weber, Beard, Bomyea, and Taylor
(2008) found that socially anxious participants trained to attend away from threat-
relevant social information experienced decreased social anxiety as assessed by an
independent rater. Similarly, Murphy, Hirsch, Mathews, Smith, and Clark (2007)
demonstrated that it is possible to experimentally manipulate catastrophic misin-
terpretations and reduce social anxiety symptoms, even with one brief session of
training.
Although meta-analyses make clear the need for strengthening the reliability
and effectiveness of cognitive bias modification effects in reducing symptoms (see
Cristea, Kok, & Cuijpers, 2015; Hallion & Ruscio, 2011), these experimental interven-
tions raise a number of intriguing theoretical and clinical implications. For instance,
in line with cognitive models, this research suggests that not only are cognitive
processing biases significantly correlated with symptoms of social anxiety but they
are also causally related. Additionally, because state anxiety is typically not directly
influenced by the training procedures, these studies challenge prior beliefs that it is
necessary to activate subjective fear or anxiety directly in order to change elements
of the fear network (see Foa & Kozak, 1986) or that verbal mediation is essential to
influence cognition and behavior (see Beck & Clark, 1997).
Specific Phobia
Data that address the naturalistic course of specific phobias are relatively sparse,
but the general impression is that the disorder in adults tends to be quite stable and
enduring without treatment (Becker et al., 2007), although there is variability across
phobia subtypes (Depla, ten Have, van Balkom, & de Graaf, 2008). Children with
specific phobias, on the other hand, often grow out of their fears (see Kim et al.,
2010). For instance, Agras, Chapin, and Oliveau (1972) found that the vast majority of
patients under age 20 with specific phobias reported improvement in their fear at a
5-year follow-up assessment. In contrast, fewer than half of adult patients reported
improvement.
The picture is quite different when one examines treatment outcome. While
individuals with specific phobias rarely present for treatment (McCabe, Ashbaugh,
& Antony, 2010), the success rate for exposure-based treatments is very high (e.g., a
meta-analysis indicated that the average person receiving treatment was better off
than approximately 85% of nontreated persons; Wolitzky-Taylor, Horowitz, Powers,
& Telch, 2008).
It is unfortunate that more people do not seek treatment given that improvement
can occur rapidly. In fact, there is evidence that a single session of exposure therapy is
effective to treat some specific phobias (see Zlomke & Davis, 2008). For specific pho-
bias in general, multi-session (vs. single-session) treatments tend to achieve slightly
more favorable results (see Wolitzky-Taylor, Horowitz, Powers, & Telch, 2008), but
even these treatments are often brief (e.g., three to eight sessions). Furthermore, the
gains made in treatment tend to be maintained for at least 1 year, though more stud-
ies with longer follow-up periods are necessary (Choy, Fyer, & Lipsitz, 2007).
The term “exposure therapies” refers to a class of behavioral approaches that are
all based on exposing phobic persons to the stimuli that frighten them. The goal is

-- 116 of 498 --

96 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
to provide usually avoidant persons an opportunity to learn that they can tolerate or
cope with the fear, which will come down on its own without avoiding or escaping
it, and that feared outcomes (e.g., that a snake will lunge, lightning will strike) often
do not come true or are not as awful as imagined. The choice of situations to encoun-
ter usually follows an individually tailored fear hierarchy that starts with mildly
anxiety-provoking situations and builds up to extremely feared situations (though in
“flooding” therapy, exposure starts with a very anxiety-provoking stimulus).
Numerous variants of exposure therapy have also been examined, and while
many have been found to work effectively, research suggests more favorable out-
comes for in vivo exposure (which involves actually confronting the feared stimuli)
than for other approaches (e.g., systematic desensitization, in which fear-evoking
images and thoughts or actual phobic stimuli are paired with relaxation or another
response that is incompatible with fear; Choy et al., 2007). Actual contact with feared
stimuli also seems to outperform other modes of exposure, such as imaginal or vir-
tual reality exposure (which uses an immersive computer program to generate a
phobic situation, e.g., a plane experiencing turbulence). Interestingly, this difference
is evident at posttreatment, but in vivo exposure’s advantage disappears at follow-
up, seemingly because those receiving the less direct exposure therapies continue to
improve after treatment ends (Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008). Another interesting (and
effective) variant on standard exposure therapy involves adding applied muscle ten-
sion to in vivo exposure for the treatment of blood–injection–injury phobia (Ayala,
Meuret, & Ritz, 2009). By adding exercises to manipulate muscle tension, patients
are able to address the decreases in blood pressure that can lead to fainting with this
phobia.
A significant challenge with exposure therapies, especially in vivo exposure, con-
cerns fairly high dropout rates and discomfort with the treatment because of the fear
associated with trying exposures (Choy et al., 2007). Thus, other treatment options
have also been examined, though far less extensively than exposure therapies, and
there are some open questions about whether benefits from these treatments that do
not include exposure reflect nonspecific treatment effects (due to attention, general
support, etc.; see Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008). Notwithstanding, cognitive therapies
presented either alone or as an augmentation to exposure therapies have received
some support, though there is considerable heterogeneity in findings across studies
and phobias types (Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008).
Finally, the evidence for medication treatment of specific phobias (e.g., use of
benzodiazepines or beta-blockers, used either alone or in combination with expo-
sure interventions) has not suggested that anti-anxiety medications consistently
add much to treatment outcomes (beyond temporarily making a particular anxiety-
provoking encounter, such as a plane flight, easier to endure; see Choy et al., 2007).
It should be noted, however, that pharmacological treatments have not been as
widely investigated for specific phobias as they have been for other anxiety disor-
ders (Kimmel, Roy-Byrne, & Cowley, 2015). One interesting possible exception to this
conclusion about medications concerns D -cycloserine, which is a partial agonist at
the N-methyl- D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor site. This medication is not designed to
reduce fear or the phobia directly; instead, it appears to enhance the pace of exposure
therapy by stimulating the amygdala and influencing how readily fear responses
are unlearned. While it is too early to determine the ultimate potential for this

-- 117 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	97
medication to enhance treatment of specific phobias, initial evidence (e.g., examin-
ing D-cycloserine-enhanced virtual reality exposure for fear of heights; Ressler et al.,
2004) has been promising (see Tart et al., 2013).
Clinical Implications
As reviewed earlier, a large and helpful literature evaluates the efficacy of various
treatments for panic and phobias. At the same time, this literature leaves open many
questions about how to best implement these interventions and what to do when
the first-line recommended treatment does not achieve maximal results. Among the
clinical implications that follow from this research review are the importance of the
therapeutic alliance and clinician’s experience, the need to make exposure therapy
more appealing to the patient, and the use of general principles of change associated
with the treatment of anxiety disorders.
Importance of the Therapeutic Alliance and Experience
We can legitimately give patients good reasons to be hopeful about exposure ther-
apy; the challenge is to get them to try it in the first place and to recognize that toler-
ating anxiety and exposing themselves to the feared situation, object, or event do not
impose any realistic danger. It is here that the therapeutic alliance is most important,
in that there needs to be a strong bond between therapist and patient, and both need
to be in agreement on the goals and methods of change (Norcross & Lambert, 2019;
Norcross & Wampold, 2019). There is no doubt that exposure can effectively reduce
avoidance and anxiety—provided that the patient remains in treatment and agrees
to engage in the therapeutic procedures. The therapy relationship can increase the
likelihood that this will happen.
As we indicated earlier, framing the therapy as a means of teaching coping
skills—where patients learn to manage and tolerate their anxiety—is particularly
important. There is also some evidence that the experience level of the therapist
can play an important role (though this has not been a consistent finding). Mason,
Grey, and Veale (2016) found that in providing CBT to individuals with panic disor-
der and social anxiety disorder, severely anxious clients achieved greater symptom
reductions with qualified therapists compared to trainee therapists, though therapist
adherence and competence were not measured (see also Huppert et al., 2001). It is not
clear whether the difference was a function of the alliance, or the use of more gen-
eral clinical skills in dealing with issues during the course of treatment, or whether
therapist adherence and competence explain these differences.
Making Exposure Therapy More Appealing
In addition to using the therapeutic relationship and gradual exposure (vs. flooding)
to make starting the exposure process easier for some patients, the use of relaxation
as a coping skill may also help patients to reduce their anxiety and obtain a sense of
control. In this regard, however, it is important to note that the literature indicates
that some patients (e.g., with panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder) experi-
ence a paradoxical increase in anxiety as a consequence of relaxation. Lilienfeld (2007)

-- 118 of 498 --

98 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
has even questioned whether relaxation training is potentially harmful in treating
some patients with panic disorder. The phenomenon of relaxation-provoked anxiety
in some patients has long been noted in the practice of behavior therapy (e.g., Gold-
fried & Davison, 1976), and there are indeed ways the skilled clinician can deal with
it. Patients who are likely to fear losing control should be forewarned that the sensa-
tions they may experience are not signs that they are losing control, but that they are
in fact learning to manage their sensations of anxiety (see Goldfried & Davison, 1994).
When utilizing relaxation techniques, it is also important to stress that the use of
relaxation should not be confused with the inability to tolerate anxiety—an idea that
clearly runs counter to the goals of exposure. Accordingly, one of the ways we intro-
duce relaxation exercises in treatment for panic disorder is by noting that relaxation
can help to reduce one’s resting level of anxiety, making panic and intense anxiety
reactions less likely in the first place.
Being Familiar with Principles of Change
In addition to ensuring that clinical interventions are informed by the findings of
basic research on anxiety and randomized clinical trials, therapists can enhance
their clinical effectiveness by being familiar with general therapeutic principles of
change (Eubanks & Goldfried, 2019; Hayes & Hofmann, 2018; Norcross & Goldfried,
2019). Woody and Ollendick (2006) have extrapolated from the research literature
a number of principles that can guide practicing therapists in implementing tech-
niques for the treatment of anxiety disorders. Although space limitations prevent
us from enumerating all of them, they include general guidelines such as fostering
cognitive change, increasing behavioral skills for coping with anxiety and reducing
avoidance, and repeatedly using emotionally evocative procedures.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Examining the prevalence rates for panic disorder and phobias highlights not only
how common these problems are but also the fascinating differences in prevalence
when comparing rates as a function of gender, age, race, ethnicity and nationality.
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Lifetime prevalence estimates for panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia,
range from 3.8 to 4.7%, with 1-year prevalence rate estimates between 1.8 and 2.4%
in Western societies (Goodwin et al., 2005, Kessler, Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky,
& Wittchen, 2012). The presence of agoraphobia without panic is less common, with
an approximately 2.5% lifetime prevalence, and a 1.7% 1-year prevalence (Kessler et
al., 2012).
The panic disorder median age of onset is 24 years of age (Kessler et al., 2005),
and the onset of panic disorder and agoraphobia appears to be less common in pre-
pubescent children (Kessler et al., 2007), with estimates of less than 0.4% in general
pediatric populations (Merikangas et al., 2010). Puberty seems to be an important
predictor of panic attacks (even beyond age), and many adolescents do experience
panic attacks (Craske et al., 2010).

-- 119 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	99
In general, panic disorder and agoraphobia appear to be less pervasive in elderly
populations (Wolitzky-Taylor, Castriotta, Lenze, Stanley, & Craske, 2010). Also, there
is some debate about the validity of using DSM criteria with older adults that have
been validated primarily in younger adult populations, especially given concerns
about high rates of medical comorbidity in older populations in which the symptoms
of medical problems may mimic anxiety symptoms (see Mohlman et al., 2012). While
panic disorder in older adults typically reflects a preexisting condition (Flint, 1994), a
later age of onset certainly does occur. New onset in older adulthood may be related
to stressful life events, such as illness or injury, other medical or psychiatric disor-
ders, or emerging dementia (see Bryant, Jackson, & Ames, 2008).
Large gender differences in panic disorder and agoraphobia have been consis-
tently reported (approximately 2:1 more women than men: see Kessler et al., 2006),
even cross-culturally (de Jonge et al., 2016). The source of the gender differences is not
entirely clear, though some have proposed that sex-based biological differences play
a role (see Craske, 2003). Gender roles that indicate it is more acceptable for women
to avoid (and for men to turn to substance abuse to self-medicate when they are emo-
tionally dysregulated) may also be contributing factors (see Robinson, Sareen, Cox,
& Bolton, 2009). Notwithstanding the gender gap in prevalence, the general course,
phenomenology, and treatment response do not vary strongly for men and women,
except that women are more likely to have severe agoraphobia (e.g., Bekker & van
Mens-Verhulst, 2007).
The data are somewhat mixed with respect to prevalence differences based on
ethnic or racial subgroups. A cross-ethnic comparison of lifetime prevalence rates
conducted by Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology Studies revealed that non-
Latinx White Americans consistently endorsed symptoms of panic disorder more
than did African Americans, Latinx Americans, and Asian Americans (5.1, 3.8, 4.1,
and 2.1%, respectively; Asnaani, Richey, Dimaite, Hinton, & Hofmann, 2010), and that
non-Latinx White Americans endorsed more panic symptoms in general, including
palpitations, in comparison to African American, Hispanic, and Asian individuals
(Asnaani, Gutner, Hinton, & Hofmann, 2009). Other data suggest that Native Ameri-
cans report significantly higher rates of panic disorder compared to White Ameri-
cans (Smith et al., 2006), and that African Americans have higher 1-year prevalence
rates of agoraphobia compared to White Americans even after researchers controlled
for demographic differences (Himle, Baser, Taylor, Campbell, & Jackson, 2009). How-
ever, other population-based studies have not found differences in panic disorder
and agoraphobia prevalence among African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and
European American groups (e.g., Kessler et al., 2006). Notably, there may be some
ethnic group differences in the presentation of panic disorder and agoraphobia. For
instance, in certain cultures, the triggers for panic attacks are specified by cultural
syndromes (e.g., in Latinx groups, shakiness is often considered a disorder of the ner-
vous system and the potential onset of an ataque de nervios; Hinton, Chong, Pollack,
Barlow, & McNally, 2008). African Americans may have a later age of onset (Lewis-
Fernández et al., 2011), and more frequently use coping strategies tied to “counting
one’s blessings” or religiosity than do European Americans (Friedman & Paradis,
2002). African Americans with panic disorder and agoraphobia also show stronger
associations with hypertension (e.g., Friedman & Paradis, 2002) and are more likely
to experience panic-like isolated sleep paralysis than do European Americans or
other groups with panic disorder and agoraphobia (Paradis & Friedman, 2005).

-- 120 of 498 --

100 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Epidemiological data across numerous countries suggest comparable lifetime
prevalence, age of onset, and gender differences for panic disorder (de Jonge et al.,
2016), indicating considerable consistency in the cross-cultural presentation of panic.
At the same time, there are some interesting cross-cultural differences in the experi-
ence of panic attacks. For instance, in Vietnamese populations, trúng gió attacks are
relatively common, sharing many symptoms of DSM-defined panic attacks, but the
attacks are linked to anticipatory anxiety regarding the pathogenic effect of winds
(see Hinton et al., 2007). Khmer refugees in the United States also experience khyâl
attacks, sometimes called “wind overload,” which include common panic symptoms
and fear of dizziness upon standing (Hinton, Hinton, Pham, Chau, & Tran, 2003).
Social Anxiety Disorder
Approximately 3–13% of individuals in Western societies have social anxiety disor-
der at some point in their lifetime (Bandelow & Michaelis, 2015). For instance, the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication Study of DSM-IV disorders found that
social anxiety disorder has a lifetime prevalence rate of 12.1%, making it one of the
most common disorders (Kessler et al., 2005). The median age of onset is 13 years,
which is consistent with other research indicating that social anxiety disorder typi-
cally develops prior to age 18 (Chavira & Stein, 2005). Along these lines, while social
anxiety disorder remains a common disorder in later life, the incidence appears to
be lower in older than in younger cohorts. For example, research investigating Cana-
dian adults age 55 and over found that the lifetime prevalence rate for social anxiety
disorder in later life was only 4.9% (Cairney et al., 2007).
Similar to many anxiety disorders, in the general population, social anxiety dis-
order appears to be more prevalent in women than in men (Asher & Aderka, 2018).
Interestingly, the sexes are more equally distributed among treatment-seeking popu-
lations (Asher, Asnaani, & Aderka. 2017), leading some researchers to speculate that
having social anxiety disorder as a man may be relatively more difficult in certain
societies (e.g., because of the impairment it can cause in work situations in societ-
ies in which men more often tend to be in leadership positions that require public
speaking; Rapee, 1995). However, women’s pattern of employment and exposure to
leadership roles have significantly changed in recent decades, making it important
to repeat these evaluations before firm conclusions are drawn. At the same time,
research suggests that among individuals with lifetime social anxiety disorder, there
are not meaningful gender differences in overall probability of treatment seeking,
age at first time of treatment seeking, or delay of treatment seeking after initial onset,
but women may be more likely to receive prescriptions for pharmacological treat-
ments (Xu et al., 2012).
When evaluating the epidemiological profile of social anxiety disorder, it is
also critical to incorporate cultural considerations. For instance, prevalence rates
for social anxiety disorder in Southeast Asian countries (Korea and Taiwan) tend to
be much lower than prevalence rates in Western countries (Hofmann, Asnaani, &
Hinton, 2010). One explanation for this discrepancy is that the expression of social
anxiety disorder may differ cross-culturally. For example, taijin kyofusho, a variant of
social anxiety common to Japan, is characterized by the fear of embarrassing or caus-
ing offense to others. Given the continuous nature of social anxiety symptoms, it is
also plausible that the threshold for receiving a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder

-- 121 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	101
differs across cultures, even though symptom profiles are the same (Rapee & Spence,
2004). Finally, it is possible that social interactions may be more “scripted” or regu-
lated in certain cultures, thereby leading to different rates of social anxiety disorder.
Specific Phobia
There is considerable variability in lifetime prevalence rates of specific phobia across
studies, with estimates ranging from 6 to 12% (Kessler, Ruscio, Shear, & Wittchen,
2009). Subclinical fears are also extremely common, with the majority of the popu-
lation reporting a significant fear (Depla et al., 2008). The most frequent phobias in
adult samples focus on animals or heights (e.g., Becker et al., 2007), though, again,
there is inconsistency across studies.
Collapsing across different types of specific phobias (animal, situational, etc.),
the mean age of onset is 8 years old (e.g., Becker et al., 2007), with considerable dif-
ferences observed across phobia subtypes. For instance, while animal and blood–
injection–injury phobias often begin in childhood, situational and height phobias
are more likely to emerge in adolescence or adulthood. There are also interesting age
differences in overall prevalence rates of specific phobias. Prevalence seems to be
highest in childhood and adolescence, peaking at age 21, at which point it follows a
fairly stable pattern across the adult lifespan, then decreases around 56 years of age
(Oosterink, de Jongh, & Hoogstraten, 2009).
As with the other anxiety disorders reviewed in this chapter, specific phobias
are consistently found to be more prevalent among women (e.g., Stinson et al., 2007),
especially for fears of snakes, thunder, darkness, and enclosed spaces (Oosterink et
al., 2009). Gender differences for phobias of heights, dentists, and flying tend to be
lower (see Rowa et al., 2006). There are many possible reasons for the higher pho-
bia prevalence among females, including some intriguing evidence that women are
both biologically and socially motivated to avoid threats more than men (see Craske,
2003). Also, more women are apt to seek treatment for specific phobias, so the gender
gap is especially pronounced in treatment-seeking samples (McLean, Asnaani, Litz,
& Hofmann, 2011).
Research examining variation in the prevalence of specific phobias across
diverse cultural, national, and ethnic groups is lacking, and available studies reach
conflicting conclusions. For instance, the National Comorbidity Survey Replication
found no significant differences in lifetime prevalence of specific phobia across
English-speaking Latinx, African American, and non-Latinx White individuals
(Himle et al., 2009). Another epidemiological study that included Spanish-speaking
Latinx individuals found significantly lower lifetime rates in Asian Americans and
Latinx individuals in comparison to non-Latinx White individuals, who did not dif-
fer from African Americans and Native Americans (Stinson et al., 2007). The content
of phobias also varies by racial/ethnic group, though data are limited. For example,
in one study, African Americans endorsed greater animal fears, whereas non-Latinx
White individuals endorsed greater blood–injection–injury fears (Chapman, Kertz,
Zurlage, & Woodruff-Borden, 2008). Not surprisingly, given variability in cultural
norms, taboos, and so forth, across countries, there is also variability in phobia
prevalence rates. In one striking example concerning a comparison of 22 countries,
phobias were higher in high and higher-middle income countries (8.0–8.1%) than in
low/lower-middle income countries (5.7%), with the highest cross-national lifetime

-- 122 of 498 --

102 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
prevalence for animal fears, and the highest differences seen for fear of flying, which
had prevalence three times higher in high-income than in low- to lower-middle-
income countries (Wardenaar et al., 2017). These data also suggest that individuals
with some college or less education compared to those who completed college, and
individuals with low and low-average income compared to those with high income,
are at higher risk of developing a specific phobia (Wardenaar et al., 2017).
Clinical Implications
Sharing a common diagnostic label is only the starting point in deciding on a treat-
ment plan; cultural and diversity issues need to be carefully considered.
Cultural and Diversity Issues in Assessment and Treatment
In treating any anxiety disorder, it is essential to consider the sociocultural context of
patients, such as their ethnic identity, age, gender expectations/roles, sexual orienta-
tion, gender identity, and acculturation. These factors should be considered through-
out case conceptualization because they will likely play a role in symptom presenta-
tion, assessment, and treatment planning. For example, patients may have specific
cultural beliefs that panic attacks reflect a punishment from God or an angry spirit.
Indeed, there exist some disconcerting examples in which the failure to take into
account the unique experiences and beliefs of certain minority groups has resulted
in diagnostic bias and inappropriate treatment. Paradis, Friedman, Lazar, Grubea,
and Kesselman (1992) found this to be the case in an outpatient clinic for Black
patients with panic disorder who had emigrated from the West Indies. The belief
system of such patients often includes the practice of voodoo, resulting in an atypi-
cal description of symptoms. The authors provide an example of a young woman
from Guyana, who came to the clinic describing the typical symptoms of panic that
followed a breakup with a boyfriend (e.g., rapid heartbeat, dizziness). In addition
to describing the traditional symptoms of panic, she added, “I feel like I’m going to
die. . . . I worry it’s not natural . . . not natural causes, evil like someone put a curse
on me . . . I’m afraid people might look at me and ridicule me because of how I look,
people might talk about me” (p. 63). The evaluating clinician gave her the diagno-
sis “schizophrenia, chronic paranoid type,” with the following justification: “The
patient’s bizarre delusion of an evil spirit inside her body, persecutory delusions of
her boyfriend plotting against her, her paranoid delusions of people thinking she is
ugly and laughing at her all speak for the diagnosis of schizophrenia, although the
onset of delusions at age 33, her normal affect, and the absence of formal thought
disorder are inconsistent with the classical presentation of schizophrenia” (p. 64).
Misdiagnoses of social anxiety among gay men similarly fail to take into account
the cultural and epidemiological context of the individuals. With the continued pres-
ence of verbal and physical harassment of sexual minorities in our society, there are
legitimate reasons that such individuals may be concerned about the opinion and
reaction of others (e.g., Pachankis, Goldfried, & Ramrattan, 2008).
Finally, when treating older adults, age may be an important consideration
throughout case conceptualization. For instance, somatic complaints may mask
anxiety problems among elderly patients with late-onset anxiety. Some older adults

-- 123 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	103
choose to describe their symptoms of anxiety as problems with sleep, for example,
because this may be perceived as a less stigmatizing way of describing their experi-
ences (Mohlman et al., 2012). Older adults may also be particularly reactive to certain
types of anxiety-provoking triggers, such as threats to physical health (Teachman &
Gordon, 2009).
COMORBIDITY
Comorbidity among the anxiety disorders is the norm rather than the exception.
Interestingly, however, the disorders are by no means uniform with respect to the
likelihood or types of co-occurring psychological and medical disorders; thus, we
evaluate each disorder in turn.
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Kessler and colleagues (2006) found that 83% of persons with panic had an additional
psychiatric disorder. As noted, rates of agoraphobia are very high, with approximately
20% of persons diagnosed with panic disorder in community samples also meeting
criteria for agoraphobia, and even higher rates have been observed in clinical settings
(Kessler et al., 2006). Comorbidity with other anxiety disorders is also quite common,
including generalized anxiety disorder, as well as social anxiety and specific phobias
(each occurring in 21–34% of individuals with panic disorder: Kessler et al., 2006).
Mood disorders, both unipolar and bipolar, also frequently co-occur with panic
and agoraphobia (Simon et al., 2004). For instance, among individuals with panic
disorder, with or without agoraphobia, the lifetime prevalence of major depression
is 35–40% (Kessler et al., 2006). Notably, analyses have revealed that panic disorder
not only increases the risk for subsequent depression, but that the treatment of panic
attacks also may reduce the risk of developing major depressive disorder, suggesting
that depression onset may follow the onset of panic disorder (vs. preceding panic;
Bittner et al., 2004). Critically, this additional diagnosis of a mood disorder is associ-
ated with a worse course for panic, with patients being one-half as likely to recover
from panic disorder (Bruce et al., 2005). Although data are limited, there is some
indication that depressive symptoms may improve spontaneously following CBT for
panic (Allen et al., 2010). All of this raises the question of whether it might be profit-
able to think of “comorbidity” as reflecting the functional relations among various
clinical problems.
Substance use also complicates the presentation of panic disorder, with around
20% of patients with panic disorder meeting criteria at some point for alcohol or
other substance abuse (Sansone, Griffith, & Sansone, 2005). In one study, approxi-
mately half of those with comorbid panic and substance use disorders developed
the panic difficulties prior to the onset of substance use, and 23% indicated use of
alcohol or drugs to help reduce anxiety symptoms (Bolton, Cox, Clara, & Sareen,
2006). Dual-diagnosis patients can be especially challenging to treat because of the
numerous ways that substance abuse interferes with treatment participation, and
there are many open questions about whether integrated or sequential treatment is
recommended (see American Psychiatric Association, 2009).

-- 124 of 498 --

104 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Rates for comorbid personality disorders can also be extremely high, with esti-
mates of 40–50% of persons with panic disorder also meeting criteria for at least
one personality disorder; typically, avoidant, obsessive– compulsive, or dependent
personality disorder (Grant et al., 2005). This comorbidity has the potential to inter-
fere with treatment when the clinician must contend with pervasive and entrenched
personality problems. Complications may be particularly likely if personality dif-
ficulties interact with the aims of exposure-based therapy (e.g., building trust and
a strong alliance with the therapist in individuals with borderline personality dis-
order, or encouraging confrontation of fears in persons with avoidant personality
disorder).
In addition to these high rates of comorbid psychiatric disorders, medical comor-
bidity is also a significant issue with panic disorder. Many symptoms of panic attacks
share features with the presentation of other, nonpsychiatric medical illnesses, such
as myocardial infarction, diabetes, arrhythmia, mitral valve prolapse, hypoglycemia,
irritable bowel syndrome, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This
apparent overlap likely contributes to the tendency of people with panic disorder to
believe they are experiencing a serious medical illness (Ratcliffe, MacLeod, & Sen-
sky, 2006) and their consequent frequent trips to the emergency room during panic
attacks (see Deacon, Lickel, & Abramowitz, 2008). Although panic attacks themselves
are not a sign of a serious medical illness, individuals with panic disorder, compared
to the general population, do have higher reported prevalence of hypertension,
angina, and other cardiac problems; ulcer disease; and thyroid disease, among other
illnesses (Meuret, Kroll, & Ritz, 2017).
Social Anxiety Disorder
There are high rates of comorbidity between social anxiety disorder and avoidant
personality disorder, with the frequency of avoidant personality disorder among
patients with social anxiety disorder ranging from 25 to 100% across a series of stud-
ies (see Hummelen, Willberg, Pedersen, & Karterud, 2007). There is also a high rate
of comorbidity between social anxiety disorder and both depression and alcohol use
disorders. In fact, according to the National Comorbidity Survey Replication, 62.9%
of individuals who met criteria for lifetime social anxiety disorder with one to four
fears had a coexisting disorder, with percentages even higher for social anxiety dis-
order with five to seven fears (75.2%), and eight to 10 fears (81.5%). Lifetime social
anxiety disorder had a significantly elevated OR for all DSM-IV disorders assessed,
including depression (OR = 4.6) and anxiety disorders (OR = 4.9; Ruscio et al., 2008).
Meanwhile, 7.2% of individuals with social anxiety disorder met criteria for alcohol
abuse, and 9.3% met criteria for alcohol dependence (Chartier, Walker, & Stein, 2003;
note that DSM-5 does not delineate between substance abuse and dependence). It is
also notable that when social anxiety disorder is comorbid with another psychologi-
cal disorder, age of onset of social fears has been found to precede age of onset of
comorbid disorders in 32% of cases with comorbid anxiety disorders, 71% of cases
with comorbid affective disorders, and 80% of cases with comorbid substance depen-
dence/abuse disorder (Chartier et al., 2003). However, this may be an artifact of the
early age of onset for social anxiety disorder, as opposed to indicating a causal rela-
tionship.

-- 125 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	105
Specific Phobia
Data from the past twenty years suggest that specific phobias often co-occur with
other specific phobias; in fact, 75.8% of individuals diagnosed with specific phobia
were found to have multiple phobias (Wittchen, Lecrubier, Beesdo, & Nocon, 2003),
and many individuals had more than three phobias. In contrast, earlier studies found
multiple specific phobias to be relatively rare (e.g., in a Swedish sample, only 18.1% of
patients with specific phobias had multiple phobias; Fredrikson, Annas, Fischer, &
Wik, 1996), leaving open questions about how measurement issues and cohort effects
may be influencing results.
Clinical Implications
Responding to Co‑Occurring Symptoms of Physical Illness
It is common for patients with panic disorder to label their physical symptoms as a
heart attack. Although this is usually a mislabeling, there nonetheless exists a some-
what higher prevalence of cardiac problems in patients with panic disorder than in
the general population. It is therefore important to help patients distinguish between
signs of a heart attack and those of a panic attack, and, when relevant, to encourage
them to get a full medical examination to determine the presence of a complicating
medical condition. When co-occurring medical illnesses are present in the context of
CBT for panic, some creativity is often required to adjust exposure exercises so that
patients can still meet the goal of eliciting fear and panic sensations while being care-
ful of medically relevant limitations (e.g., hyperventilation exercises can be modified
for patients with asthma, so they still get the feeling of shortness of breath).
Alternative Ways to View Comorbidity
As our conceptualization of psychological problems has been shaped over the years
by the ascendancy of the DSM, our thinking has changed, so that we understand
clinical problems in terms of their diagnostic category. No longer “problems in liv-
ing,” what we see clinically are “disorders.” Along with this shift, our understanding
of multiple problems is viewed in terms of “comorbidity” rather than the potential
functional relationship between problematic emotions, behaviors, and cognitions.
The labeling of comorbidity of anxiety and depression in many individuals is quite
typical, but unfortunately it does not provide the practicing therapist with guide-
lines for how to proceed. On the other hand, if one thinks in terms of the functional
relationship between anxiety and depression, it is not at all unusual to see function-
ing impaired because of anxiety and behavioral avoidance, resulting in patients feel-
ing helpless and hopeless about being able to cope with the demands of their lives.
For example, patients might receive a diagnosis of both social anxiety disorder and
depression due to the fact that they are impaired in both their social and occupa-
tional lives by behavioral avoidance, and this failure to function competently leads
to depression. Practicing therapists know this to be the case, and it is important for
research to focus more on this important clinical issue.
Notably, by focusing on principles of change (e.g., reducing avoidance of distress-
ing situations), rather than diagnoses, it becomes easier to tackle multiple problem

-- 126 of 498 --

106 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
areas simultaneously. Analogously, considering common vulnerability factors that
can account for multiple problem manifestations can be helpful in this situation. Not-
withstanding, it is often necessary to prioritize targets of therapy because not every
problem can be addressed at once. When comorbidity occurs, we generally think
about prioritizing or ordering the foci of treatment based on multiple considerations.
For instance, is improvement in one domain likely to generalize to other areas of
functioning (e.g., will reduced fears of flying likely alleviate depressive symptoms)?
What domain does the patient feel is most important to target first? Is one domain
versus another (e.g., fear of future panic vs. anhedonia in depression) more clearly
impairing functioning? Where are we most likely to effect positive change? Answer-
ing these questions is often challenging and may involve some trial and error.
ETIOLOGY
As with most (if not all) psychological disorders, a multitude of factors contributes to
the onset of panic disorder and phobias. Thus, isolating the “cause” of a disorder is
rarely a realistic goal. Instead, we can talk to patients about the levels of vulnerability
and causal factors that may interact to lead to the expression of a specific problem.
Barlow (2002) outlines a model of triple vulnerabilities. The first, a general biologi-
cal vulnerability, makes an individual more susceptible to becoming anxious. This
first level interacts with a second, general psychological vulnerability, which focuses
on a sense that the environment is uncontrollable and unpredictable. The combina-
tion of these two broad vulnerabilities can lead an individual to become extremely
fearful in situations that are not objectively dangerous (termed “false alarms”). The
third level constitutes specific psychological vulnerabilities that lead to the expression of
an identifiable anxiety disorder as a function of an individual’s particular learning
experiences about what aspects of the environment are threatening. For instance,
learning that evaluation by others can be dangerous may lead to social anxiety disor-
der, and learning that heights are hazardous may result in a specific phobia, whereas
learning to fear changes in bodily sensations may manifest as panic disorder. Given
the considerable overlap in etiological models, we highlight the common vulner-
abilities for panic disorder and phobias in this section. However, we also provide
examples of the unique ways in which these vulnerability factors manifest across
the specific disorders.
General Biological Vulnerabilities
At the biological level, family and genetic studies point to the conclusion that there
is a broad genetic basis to anxiety and related areas of emotion dysregulation (e.g.,
depression). For example, first-degree relatives of samples with anxiety disorders
have higher rates of anxiety difficulties than the relatives of nonanxious control
samples (e.g., Weissman, 1993). Similarly, the children of parents with anxiety dis-
orders have been observed to have more than nine times greater risk of having a
psychiatric disorder than the children of nonanxious control parents (see Beidel &
Turner, 1997). More specifically, the children of parents with panic disorder tend
to be more anxious than the children of nonanxious control parents (e.g., Sylvester,

-- 127 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	107
Hyde, & Reichler, 1988). These children also tend to be more depressed, pointing to
the general nature of the vulnerability (though some anxiety disorders may have a
more disorder-specific transmission, such as specific phobias; Page & Martin, 1998).
Along these lines, genetic factors appear to play a moderate but meaningful role in
the development of social anxiety disorder, explaining approximately 30–50% of the
variance in the disorder (Kendler, Karkowski, & Prescott, 1999). However, it is less
clear whether these genetic factors are specific to the development of social anxiety
disorder, as opposed to the development of mental health problems more broadly
(Kimbrel, 2008). Finally, twin studies, which help to minimize potential confounds
between genetic and nongenetic influences, also support the heritability of a gen-
eral anxiety proneness. For instance, there are higher concordance rates of anxiety
disorders in monozygotic (12–26%) than in dizygotic (4–15%) twins (Hettema, Neale,
& Kendler, 2001). Critically, the evidence to date does not point to a specific anxi-
ety gene; instead, there appear to be relatively weak contributions from an array of
genes (Smoller, Block, & Young, 2009). It is also important to highlight that many of
the studies on biological vulnerabilities do not guarantee that the finding of higher
rates of anxiety disorders among family members is due purely to genetic factors, as
opposed to other influences, such as social learning experiences.
Temperamental vulnerabilities tied to anxiety (Kampman, Viikki, & Leinonen,
2017) also seem to play a role in setting the stage for later expression of an anxi-
ety problem. For example, behavioral inhibition, “a temperamental trait observed
in infants and young children characterized by behavioral withdrawal, decreased
approach behavior, increased vigilance, and increased arousal in response to novel
and unfamiliar situations” (Kimbrel, 2008, p. 594), has been found to predict later
anxiety disorders. Persons with a stable pattern of high behavioral inhibition were
more likely to develop an anxiety disorder, especially social anxiety disorder (Fox,
Henderson, Marshall, Nichols, & Ghera, 2005), and behavioral inhibition at age 8 was
linked to increased risk for anxiety and depressive disorders at ages 16–21 (Goodwin,
Fergusson, & Horwood, 2004). Behavioral inhibition has received considerable atten-
tion as an early risk factor within the context of social anxiety disorder. For example,
Clauss and Blackford (2012) found that 43% of behaviorally inhibited children met
criteria for social anxiety disorder as compared to 12% of noninhibited children.
Numerous other biomarkers have also been linked to heightened risk for anxi-
ety disorders, though the strength of the evidence varies considerably across mark-
ers. For instance, an imbalance of the neurotransmitter serotonin has often been pro-
posed as a factor in the etiology of anxiety pathology (e.g., in panic disorder; Stein
& Hugo, 2002), but this proposal is based mostly on the effective treatment response
of anxiety to SSRIs rather than on prospective evidence. Other proposed neuropsy-
chiatric contributions, derived in part from animal models, include differences in
the anatomy of the amygdala and hippocampus, and altered stress responses with
respect to cortisol levels and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (see review by
Uhde & Singareddy, 2002).
There is also considerable evidence that certain biological triggers make panic
attacks more likely, and there is a rich tradition of eliciting panic attacks in the
laboratory by altering respiration in vulnerable individuals (e.g., through induc-
ing hyperventilation or inhaling CO2; see Barlow, 2002, Chapter 5). This has led to
the suggestion that individuals who are particularly sensitive to increased levels of

-- 128 of 498 --

108 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
CO2 may be at greater risk of developing panic attacks, an idea known as the “false-
suffocation alarm theory” (Klein, 1993), though this hypothesis has received only
mixed empirical support (see Barlow, 2002). Notably, the likelihood of cueing a panic
attack through a biochemical or respiration challenge depends in part on other bio-
logical vulnerabilities (e.g., respiratory hypersensitivity; Blechert, Wilhelm, Meuret,
Wilhelm, & Roth, 2010). Furthermore, the occurrence of panic attacks following a bio-
logical challenge is heavily influenced by other psychological vulnerabilities, such
as greater baseline experiential avoidance (e.g., Karekla, Forsyth, & Kelly, 2004) and
anxiety sensitivity (e.g., Blechert, Wilhelm, Meuret, Wilhelm, & Roth, 2013), which
brings us to the second level of vulnerabilities.
General Psychological Vulnerabilities
Interacting with general biological vulnerabilities is a set of broad psychological
vulnerabilities that set the individual up to see the world as an uncontrollable and
unpredictable place. This focus on the importance of perceived and actual control
is based partly on extensive evidence from animal models that show having mini-
mal control over the environment during early development can lead to chronic dif-
ficulties with anxiety (e.g., work with rhesus monkeys; Suomi, 2000). In humans,
an attributional style reflecting a sense that outcomes are uncontrollable, either in
general or because of personal limitations, also seems to be a risk factor (see Rear-
don & Williams, 2007). Interestingly, this cognitive style may be more common in
girls, which may contribute to the often-cited gender differences in anxiety disorder
prevalence rates. Hilt and Nolen-Hoeksema (2009) propose that this gender disparity
may be due to higher rates of negative life events during childhood and adolescence
among girls (e.g., sexual abuse), and more experiences that suggest one’s behavior
has limited impact on the environment. Other evidence that early learning experi-
ences about controllability and predictability are important follow from the finding
that parenting styles promoting a sense of control by being contingently responsive
yet not overprotective (i.e., permitting exploration) seem to protect against the devel-
opment of anxiety problems (see Murray, Creswell, & Cooper, 2009). It is important
to note that most of the evidence in humans linking uncontrollability with anxiety
is correlational given the ethical barriers to manipulating children’s environments to
enhance uncontrollability.
In addition to early learning experiences that focus on uncontrollability, stressful
life events more generally seem to enhance vulnerability. These events serve as trig-
gers for various forms of psychopathology and seem most closely implicated in anxi-
ety pathology if the events are either threatening (e.g., involvement in an accident) or
uncontrollable in some way (e.g., Eley & Stevenson, 2000). For instance, patients with
panic disorder reported a higher number of salient life events, especially those that
seemed out of their control in the 12 months before onset of panic relative to the same
time period for control participants (Klauke et al., 2010).
The interpretation of an event as negative and stressful is, of course, highly
dependent on how individuals process that event, and there is extensive evidence
that anxious individuals selectively process threatening information (see MacLeod
& Mathews, 2012). These cognitive biases are thought to maintain anxiety and dys-
functional avoidance behaviors by keeping threatening cues salient to the vulnerable

-- 129 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	109
person. For instance, the general tendency among anxious samples to interpret
ambiguous situations as threatening manifests as a focus on (mis)interpretations of
bodily sensations in panic disorder. Specifically, the cognitive model of panic attacks
was developed in part from observations of pharmacological and neurochemical
studies of agents that promoted panic attacks, but only in select individuals—those
who tended to interpret the bodily sensations induced by the agents in a disastrous
way (Clark, 1986). This led Clark to suggest that panic attacks occur because cer-
tain bodily sensations are misinterpreted as indicating a catastrophe, such as a heart
attack or loss of control. In social anxiety disorder, cognitive processing biases and
related emotional responses in social situations are thought to reinforce the idea
that social or performance situations are threatening, and that negative evaluation
is likely (Heimberg & Magee, 2014). When conversing with acquaintances at a party,
for instance, individuals with social anxiety disorder may notice the one person who
does not smile at something they have said and interpret this as evidence that they
are uninteresting.
In addition to the abundant data indicating that selective information process-
ing is associated with anxiety disorders (see MacLeod & Mathews, 2012), there is also
evidence that these information-processing biases enhance vulnerability to react
more negatively to subsequent challenging life events (e.g., MacLeod, Rutherford,
Campbell, Ebsworthy, & Holker, 2002). Similarly, “anxiety sensitivity” (the belief that
anxiety symptoms are themselves scary) and explicit threat appraisals have been
found to predict the onset of anxiety disorder symptoms (e.g., Schmidt, Zvolensky,
& Maner, 2006).
Specific Psychological Vulnerabilities
The combination of general biological and psychological vulnerabilities is thought
to enhance anxiety proneness, while an individual’s particular learning experiences
are expected to predict whether a specific type of anxiety disorder is expressed. For
instance, the emergence of panic disorder would be especially likely if the dangers of
somatic symptoms and illnesses were emphasized and reinforced during childhood
(see Barlow, 2002). Meanwhile, “sensitizing social experiences,” such as being exces-
sively teased, are thought potentially to increase the risk for developing generalized
social anxiety disorder (Kimbrel, 2008).
There is also considerable evidence that conditioning experiences can be central
to the onset of phobias (see Field, 2006), and stories of a traumatic dog bite leading to
a dog phobia are not unusual. Furthermore, Mowrer’s (1947) influential two-factor
theory includes both classical and operant conditioning mechanisms—specifically,
fear becomes a classically conditioned response to a previously neutral stimulus
through a negative conditioning event, then avoidance and escape behaviors are
operantly reinforced because of their (temporary) anxiety-reducing qualities. How-
ever, classical conditioning models are not able to explain all the varied ways that
fear acquisition can occur (i.e., lots of people who experience dog bites do not go
on to develop a phobia and many, if not most, people with phobias did not experi-
ence a bad bite). Thus, Rachman (1990) has suggested multiple pathways to acquire
specific fears. In addition to classical conditioning, a person may vicariously learn
via modeling (e.g., watching someone else be bitten by a dog), or simply through the

-- 130 of 498 --

110 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
transmission of information that a given situation is dangerous (e.g., reading about
plane crashes; see also Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006).
An additional challenge in explaining the development of fear and phobias con-
cerns the unequal distribution of fears in the population (e.g., particularly high rates
of snake and spider phobias relative to other animal phobias, despite fewer stories
of snake bites than dog bites). This has led to the suggestion that we are predis-
posed to acquire some fears very readily because it was adaptive to be fearful of
certain objects or situations in our evolutionary past. This idea, termed “biological
preparedness theory” (Seligman, 1971), has some support from nonhuman primate
studies (e.g., monkeys are more likely to exhibit fear when observing another monkey
showing fear in response to a snake than to a rabbit; Cook & Mineka, 1989), though
the broader status of preparedness theory remains controversial (see McNally, 2016).
Linked to early learning experiences, social skills and behaviors also feature
prominently in many etiological models of social anxiety disorder. For example,
Rapee and Spence (2004) draw a distinction between poor social skills and “inter-
rupted social performance,” which they define as “the interference of appropriate
social behavior due to heightened anxiety” (p. 758). According to Rapee and Spence,
interrupted social performance likely plays a larger role in the maintenance (vs.
development) of social anxiety. At extreme levels, however, interrupted social perfor-
mance may also interfere with one’s ability to obtain and nurture meaningful friend-
ships, which in turn could contribute to the development of social anxiety disorder.
It seems clear at this point that it is the interaction of a range of general and
specific biological and psychological vulnerabilities that explains why a given per-
son develops an anxiety problem. Even in the primate studies, the likelihood of fear
conditioning is dependent in part on the monkeys’ prior experience. For instance,
fear conditioning is less likely if the monkeys have previously observed nonfearful
behavior in response to the potential fear stimulus (Mineka & Cook, 1986). Thus,
updated learning models (e.g., Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006) tend to be more compre-
hensive and reflect the likely interaction of biological, cultural, and environmental
vulnerabilities, as well as particular stressors that can influence the impact of a given
learning experience.
Clinical Implications
Here, we consider the question of connecting etiology to treatment, and the diversity
of developmental pathways for a given anxiety disorder.
Connecting Etiology to Treatment
When behavioral approaches to treatment were first introduced in the late 1950s,
it was proposed that knowledge of etiology was not needed to plan treatment. It
was assumed that problematic behavior—especially anxiety—was learned, and what
the patient needed was new learning experiences. Consequently, intervention pro-
cedures were developed that focused on the current life situation, and not the past.
Although contemporary CBT continues to emphasize the here and now, a focus on
etiology can have important therapeutic benefits, especially in discussing the ongo-
ing contributions to current fears from early life experiences. Take the example of

-- 131 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	111
socially anxious individuals who were frequently berated by others for being shy.
While their anxiety may be partially a function of a biological vulnerability, a psy-
choeducational intervention could potentially allow them to reattribute one of the
“causes” of their problem to something other than themselves.
Diverse Developmental Pathways for a Given Disorder
Given that the DSM classification system is topographical and does not assess the
function associated with the symptoms for a given disorder, it can include within a
single category clinical problems that have different developmental pathways. Thus,
one individual who is anxious in social situations may have adequate social skills
but nevertheless be overly concerned about the negative reaction of others. Mean-
while, another individual may have serious deficiencies in their social skills, so their
concern about the negative reaction of others would be more realistic.
The etiological factors underlying panic can be highly idiosyncratic. For exam-
ple, one of us (M. R. G.) worked with an actress whose panic disorder caused her
considerable anxiety prior to stage performances. In conducting an assessment of the
trigger for her initial panic attack, the therapist inquired whether she had recently
undergone any surgical procedures that might have been stressful. The actress indi-
cated that she indeed had a “tummy tuck” shortly before her initial panic attack. As
the therapy progressed and as abdominal breathing was introduced as one of the
interventions, the patient indicated that she already knew how to do this and had
used this successfully throughout her career. However, when she was asked to dem-
onstrate her abdominal breathing ability, it was apparent that she was not doing it
properly; indeed, the tummy tuck interfered with her ability to engage in abdominal
breathing, likely enhancing her anxiety and setting her up to panic when she prac-
ticed this technique before going on stage.
CONCLUSION
Our goal in this chapter has been to summarize the basic and applied research on
panic disorder, social anxiety, and phobias, and to extrapolate clinical implications
from these findings to aid therapists in developing their case formulations and treat-
ment plans. In our review of the research literature on treatment, our focus has been
primarily on the cognitive-behavioral techniques that are demonstrably efficacious.
However, we also noted the very critical role of the therapeutic relationship, accep-
tance of symptoms, agreement between therapist and patient on the goals for treat-
ment, and an agreement about the specific intervention procedures. Furthermore,
treatment is not one size fits all. Practicing clinicians have always known this to be
the case, but it appears that the research literature needs to focus more on this con-
cept. For instance, research focused on cultural considerations, treatment effective-
ness in real-world settings, and therapeutic outcomes for patients with dual diagno-
ses is sorely needed.
Although there are specific procedures for particular clinical problems, it is
also important for the clinician to keep in mind the overriding principles of change
that may be reflected in the specific procedures. Among these are (1) a positive

-- 132 of 498 --

112 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
expectation that therapy will help and the presence of sufficient motivation to
participate; (2) an optimal therapeutic alliance; (3) doing what is necessary to help
patients to become better aware of what they are doing and not doing, and how that
contributes to their life problems and symptoms; (4) corrective experiences (e.g., via
exposure) that encourage new learning and result in altered emotions and behavior,
followed by changes in expectations that encourage further corrective experiences;
and (5) reevaluation of biased thinking (Eubanks & Goldfried, 2019).
Human behavior is far too varied and complex to be understood by any single
therapeutic model or procedure. If we think in terms of general principles of change
and routine monitoring of therapy progress and outcomes, we can then begin to
investigate the parameters associated with an intervention’s efficacy and effective-
ness for different patients. In pursuing such an evidenced-based approach, we can
begin to build a body of knowledge that—rather than being restricted by any single
theoretical orientation—is empirically based.
Finally, while this chapter is structured to derive clinical implications from
research findings, the clinical situation should also be thought of as the context of
discovery, whereby therapists’ clinical observations provide invaluable directions
for hypothesis generation and future research. To have a meaningful interaction
between research and practice, the bridge needs to go both ways. After a drug has
been approved by the FDA following randomized clinical trials, practitioners have
the opportunity to provide feedback to the FDA on the use of the drug in clinical
practice. The Society of Clinical Psychology, Division 12 of the American Psycho-
logical Association, established a similar mechanism, providing a two-way bridge
between research findings on empirically supported treatments and therapy expe-
riences that use these treatments in practice (www.stonybrook.edu/commcms/two-way-
bridge).
REFERENCES
Aaronson, C. J., Shear, M. K., Goetz, R. R., Allen, L. B., Barlow, D. H., White, K. S., . . . Gor-
man, J. M. (2008). Predictors and time course of response among panic disorder patients
treated with cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 418–424.
Acarturk, C., Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & de Graaf, R. (2009). Psychological treatment of
social anxiety disorder: A meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 39, 241–254.
Agras, W. S., Chapin, H. M., & Oliveau, D. C. (1972). The natural history of phobias: Course
and prognosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 26, 315–317.
Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman, J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010).
Cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety and
depression comorbidity with treatment outcome. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 32, 185–192.
Alonso, J., Angermeyer, M. C., Bernert, S., Bruffaerts, R., Brugha, T. S., Bryson, H., . . . Inves-
tigators, European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental Disorders (ESEMeD) Project.
(2004). Sampling and methods of the European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental
Disorders (ESEMeD) project. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109(Suppl. 420), 8–20.
American Psychiatric Association. (2009). Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with
panic disorder (2nd ed.). Retrieved November 11, 2019, from https://psychiatryonline.org/
pb/assets/raw/sitewide/practice_guidelines/guidelines/panicdisorder.pdf.

-- 133 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	113
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Amir, N., Weber, G., Beard, C., Bomyea, J., & Taylor, C. T. (2008). The effect of a single session
attention modification program on response to a public speaking challenge in socially
anxious individuals. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 860–868.
Andrews, G., Cuijpers, P., Craske, M. G., McEvoy, P., & Titov, N. (2010). Computer therapy for
the anxiety and depressive disorders is effective, acceptable and practical health care: A
meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 5, e13196.
Ansell, E. B., Pinto, A., Edelen, M. O., Markowitz, J. C., Sanislow, C. A., Yen, S., . . . Gunderson,
J. G. (2011). The association of personality disorders with the prospective 7-year course
of anxiety disorders. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1019–1028.
Antony, M. M. (1994). Heterogeneity among specific phobias types in DSM-IV. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, State University of New York at Albany, Albany, NY.
Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Specific phobias. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety and its
disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (pp. 380–417). New York: Guilford
Press.
Asher, M., & Aderka, I. M. (2018). Gender differences in social anxiety disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 74, 1730–1741.
Asher, M., Asnaani, A., & Aderka, I. M. (2017). Gender differences in social anxiety disorder:
A review. Clinical Psychology Review, 56, 1730–1741.
Asnaani, A., Gutner, C. A., Hinton, D. E., & Hofmann, S. G. (2009). Panic disorder, panic
attacks and panic attack symptoms across race-ethnic groups: Results of the collabora-
tive psychiatric epidemiology studies. CNS Neuroscience and Therapeutics, 15, 249–254.
Asnaani, A., Richey, J. A., Dimaite, R., Hinton, D. E., & Hofmann, S. G. (2010). A cross-ethnic
comparison of lifetime prevalence rates of anxiety disorders. Journal of Nervous and Men-
tal Disease, 198, 551–555.
Ayala, E. S., Meuret, A. E., & Ritz, T. (2009). Treatments for blood–injury–injection phobia: A
critical review of current evidence. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43, 1235–1242.
Bandelow, B., & Michaelis, S. (2015). Epidemiology of anxiety disorders in the 21st century.
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 17, 327–335.
Bandelow, B., Seidler-Brandler, U., Becker, A., Wedekind, D., & Rüther, E. (2007). Meta-analysis
of randomized controlled comparisons of psychopharmacological and psychological
treatments for anxiety disorders. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 8, 175–187.
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2006). Mastery of your panic and anxiety: Client workbook (4th ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy, imipramine, or their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 283(19), 2529–2536.
Barlow, D. H., O’Brien, G. T., & Last, C. A. (1984). Couples treatment of agoraphobia. Behavior
Therapy, 15, 41–58.
Batelaan, N. M., de Graaf, R., Spijker, J., Smit, J. H., van Balkom, A. J., Vollebergh, W. A., &
Beekman, A. T. (2010). The course of panic attacks in individuals with panic disorder
and subthreshold panic disorder: A population-based study. Journal of Affective Disorders,
121, 30–38.
Baxter, A. J., Vos, T., Scott, K. M., Ferrari, A. J., & Whiteford, H. A. (2014). The global burden of
anxiety disorders in 2010. Psychological Medicine, 44, 2363–2374.
Beck, A. T., & Clark, D. A. (1997). An information processing model of anxiety: Automatic and
strategic processes. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35(1), 49–58.
Becker, E. S., Rinck, M., Veneta, T., Kause, P., Goodwin, R., Neumer, S., & Margraf, J. (2007).

-- 134 of 498 --

114 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Epidemiology of specific phobia subtypes: Findings from the Dresden Mental Health
Study. European Psychiatry, 22(2), 69–74.
Beidel, D. C., & Turner, S. M. (1997). At risk for anxiety: I. Psychopathology in the offspring
of anxious parents. Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36,
918–924.
Bekker, M. H., & van Mens-Verhulst, J. (2007). Anxiety disorders: Sex differences in preva-
lence, degree, and background, but gender-neutral treatment. Gender Medicine, 4, S178–
S193.
Beutel, M. E., Scheurich, V., Knebel, A., Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Graf-Morgenstern, M., . . .
Subic-Wrana, C. (2013). Implementing panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy
into clinical practice. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 58, 326–334.
Bittner, A., Goodwin, R. D., Wittchen, H. U., Beesdo, K., Höfler, M., & Lieb, R. (2004). What
characteristics of primary anxiety disorders predict subsequent major depressive disor-
der? Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 618–626.
Blanco, C., Xu, Y., Schneier, F. R., Okuda, M., Liu, S. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). Predictors
of persistence of social anxiety disorder: A national study. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
45, 1557–1563.
Blechert, J., Wilhelm, F. H., Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, E. M., & Roth, W. T. (2010). Respiratory,
autonomic, and experiential responses to repeated inhalations of 20% CO2 enriched air
in panic disorder, social phobia, and healthy controls. Biological Psychology, 84, 104–111.
Blechert, J., Wilhelm, F. H., Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, E. M., & Roth, W. T. (2013). Experiential,
autonomic, and respiratory correlates of CO2 reactivity in individuals with high and low
anxiety sensitivity. Psychiatry Research, 209, 566–573.
Bolton, J., Cox, B., Clara, I., & Sareen, J. (2006). Use of alcohol and drugs to self-medicate anxi-
ety disorders in a nationally representative sample. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
194, 818–825.
Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2009). A proposal for a dimensional classification system based
on the shared features of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications for
assessment and treatment. Psychological Assessment, 21, 256–271.
Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J. R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current
and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical
sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 585–599.
Brozovich, F., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). The relationship of post-event processing to self-
evaluation of performance in social anxiety. Behavior Therapy, 42, 224–235.
Bruce, S. E., Vasile, R. G., Goisman, R. M., Salzman, C., Spencer, M., Machan, J. T., & Keller,
M. B. (2003). Are benzodiazepines still the medication of choice for patients with panic
disorder with or without agoraphobia? American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1432–1438.
Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., . . . Keller, M.
B. (2005). Influence of psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized
anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A 12-year prospective study. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1179–1187.
Bryant, C., Jackson, H., & Ames, D. (2008). The prevalence of anxiety in older adults: Method-
ological issues and a review of the literature. Journal of Affective Disorders, 109, 233–250.
Cairney, J., McCabe, L., Veldhuizen, S., Corna, L. M., Streiner, D., & Herrmann, N. (2007).
Epidemiology of social phobia in later life. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(3),
224–233.
Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage (2nd ed.). New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
Canton, J., Scott, K. M., & Glue, P. (2012). Optimal treatment of social phobia: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 8, 203–215.
Capron, D. W., Norr, A. M., Macatee, R. J., & Schmidt, N. B. (2013). Distress tolerance and

-- 135 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	115
anxiety sensitivity cognitive concerns: Testing the incremental contributions of affect
dysregulation constructs on suicidal ideation and suicide attempt. Behavior Therapy, 44,
349–358.
Carpiniello, B., Baita, A., Carta, M. G., Sitzia, R., Macciardi, A. M., Murgia, S., & Altamura, A.
C. (2002). Clinical and psychosocial outcome of patients affected by panic disorder with
or without agoraphobia: Results from a naturalistic follow-up study. European Psychiatry,
17, 394–398.
Chambless, D. L., Milrod, B., Porter, E., Gallop, R., McCarthy, K. S., Graf, E., . . . Barber, J. P.
(2017). Prediction and moderation of improvement in cognitive-behavioral and psycho-
dynamic psychotherapy for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
85, 803–813.
Chapman, L. K., Kertz, S. J., Zurlage, M. M., & Woodruff-Borden, J. (2008). A confirmatory fac-
tor analysis of specific phobia domains in African American and Caucasian American
young adults. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 763–771.
Chartier, M. J., Walker, J. R., & Stein, M. B. (2003). Considering comorbidity in social phobia.
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 38, 728–734.
Chavira, D. A., & Stein, M. B. (2005). Childhood social anxiety disorder: From understanding
to treatment. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics, 14, 797–818.
Choy, Y., Fyer, A. J., & Lipsitz, J. D. (2007). Treatment of specific phobia in adults. Clinical Psy-
chology Review, 27, 266–286.
Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Feldner, M. T., & Forsyth, J. P. (2010). Emotion regulation and the
anxiety disorders: An integrative review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assess-
ment, 32(1), 68–82.
Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., & Lohr, J. M. (2009). Disgust, fear, and the anxiety disorders: A
critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 29(1), 34–46.
Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 461–470.
Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In R. Heimberg, M.
Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment and
treatment (pp. 69–93). New York: Guilford Press.
Clauss, J. A., & Blackford, J. U. (2012). Behavioral inhibition and risk for developing social
anxiety disorder: A meta-analytic study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Ado-
lescent Psychiatry, 51, 1066–1075.
Clerkin, E. M., Werntz, A. J., Magee, J. C., Lindgren, K. P., & Teachman, B. A. (2014). Evaluating
age differences in coping motives as a mediator of the link between social anxiety symp-
toms and alcohol problems. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 28(3), 880–886.
Cook, M., & Mineka, S. (1989). Observational conditioning of fear to fear-relevant versus fear-
irrelevant stimuli in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 448–459.
Cougle, J. R., Keough, M. E., Riccardi, C. J., & Sachs-Ericsson, N. (2009). Anxiety disorders
and suicidality in the National Comorbidity Survey—Replication. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 43(9), 825–829.
Craske, M. G. (2003). Origins of phobias and anxiety disorders: Why more women than men? (BRAT
Series in Clinical Psychology). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2008). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.),
Clinical handbook of psychological disorders (pp. 1–64). New York: Guilford Press.
Craske, M. G., Golinelli, D., Stein, M. B., Roy-Byrne, P., Bystritsky, A., & Sherbourne, C. (2005).
Does the addition of cognitive behavioral therapy improve panic disorder treatment out-
come relative to medication alone in the primary-care setting? Psychological Medicine,
35(11), 1645–1654.
Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Epstein, A., Wittchen, H. U., Pine, D. S., Lewis-Fernández, R., &
Hinton, D. (2010). Panic disorder: A review of DSM-IV panic disorder and proposals for
DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 93–112.

-- 136 of 498 --

116 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., Bystritsky, A., & Yan-go, F. (2002).
Does nocturnal panic represent a more severe form of panic disorder? Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 190(9), 611–618.
Cristea, I. A., Kok, R. N., & Cuijpers, P. (2015). Efficacy of cognitive bias modification interven-
tions in anxiety and depression: Meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 7–16.
Cuijpers, P., Marks, I. M., van Straten, A., Cavanagh, K., Gega, L., & Andersson, G. (2009).
Computer-aided psychotherapy for anxiety disorders: A meta-analytic review. Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy, 38, 66–82.
Davey, G. C. L. (1992). Classical conditioning and the acquisition of human fears and phobias:
A review and synthesis of the literature. Advances in Behaviour Research and Therapy, 14,
29–66.
de Jong, P. J., Andrea, H., & Muris, P. (1997). Spider phobia in children: Disgust and fear before
and after treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35(6), 559–562.
de Jonge, P., Roest, A. M., Lim, C. C., Florescu, S. E., Bromet, E. J., Stein, D. J., . . . Al-Hamzawi,
A. O. (2016). Cross-national epidemiology of panic disorder and panic attacks in the
world mental health surveys. Depression and Anxiety, 33, 1155–1177.
Deacon, B., & Abramowitz, J. (2006). A pilot study of two-day cognitive-behavioral therapy for
panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 807–817.
Deacon, B., Lickel, J., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2008). Medical utilization across the anxiety disor-
ders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 344–350.
Depla, M. F. I. A., ten Have, M. L., van Balkom, A. J. L. M., & de Graaf, R. (2008). Specific fears
and phobias in the general population: Results from the Netherlands mental health sur-
vey and incidence study (NEMESIS). Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 43(3),
200–208.
Eifert, G. H., & Forsyth, J. P. (2005). Acceptance and commitment therapy for anxiety disorders:
A practitioner’s treatment guide to using mindfulness, acceptance, and values-based behavior
change. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Eisner, L. R., Johnson, S. L., & Carver, C. S. (2009). Positive affect regulation in anxiety disor-
ders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23(5), 645–649.
Eley, T. C., & Stevenson, J. (2000). Specific life events and chronic experiences differentially
associated with depression and anxiety in young twins. Journal of Abnormal Child Psy-
chology, 28, 383–394.
Eubanks, C. F., & Goldfried, M. R. (2019). A principle-based approach to psychotherapy inte-
gration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(3rd ed., pp. 88–104). New York: Oxford University Press.
Eysenck, M. (2014). Anxiety and cognition: A unified theory. New York: Psychology Press.
Farach, F. J., Pruitt, L. D., Jun, J. J., Jerud, A. B., Zoellner, L. A., & Roy-Byrne, P. P. (2012). Phar-
macological treatment of anxiety disorders: Current treatments and future directions.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 833–843.
Field, A. P. (2006). Is conditioning a useful framework for understanding the development and
treatment of phobias? Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 857–875.
Flint, A. J. (1994). Epidemiology and comorbidity of anxiety disorders in the elderly. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151(5), 640–649.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective informa-
tion. Psychological Bulletin, 99(1), 20–35.
Fox, N. A., Henderson, H. A., Marshall, P. J., Nichols, K. E., & Ghera, M. M. (2005). Behavioral
inhibition: Linking biology and behavior within a developmental framework. Annual
Review of Psychology, 56, 235–262.
Fredrikson, M., Annas, P., Fischer, H., & Wik, G. (1996). Gender and age differences in the
prevalence of specific fears and phobias. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34(1), 33–39.
Friedman, S., & Paradis, C. (2002). Panic disorder in African-Americans: Symptomatology and
isolated sleep paralysis. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 26, 179–198.

-- 137 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	117
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1976). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1994). Clinical behavior therapy (expanded ed.). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley.
Goldstein, A. J., & Chambless, D. L. (1978). A reanalysis of agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 9,
47–59.
Goodwin, R. D., Faravelli, C., Rosi, S., Cosci, F., Truglia, E., de Graaf, R., & Wittchen, H. U.
(2005). The epidemiology of panic disorder and agoraphobia in Europe. European Neuro-
psychopharmacology, 15, 435–443.
Goodwin, R. D., Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2004). Childhood abuse and familial vio-
lence and the risk of panic attacks and panic disorder in young adulthood. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 881–890.
Grant, B. F., Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Ruan, W. J., & Huang, B.
(2005). Co-occurrence of 12-month mood and anxiety disorders and personality disor-
ders in the US: Results from the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related
conditions. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 39(1), 1–9.
Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Dufour, M. C., Compton, W., . . . Kaplan,
K. (2004). Prevalence and co-occurrence of substance use disorders and independent
mood and anxiety disorders: Results from The National Epidemiologic Survey on Alco-
hol and Related Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 807–816.
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (1996). The neuropsychology of anxiety: Reprise. In D. A.
Hope (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1995: Perspectives on anxiety, panic, and fear
(pp. 61–134). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Gunnar, M., & Quevedo, K. (2007). The neurobiology of stress and development. Annual
Review of Psychology, 58, 145–173.
Hallion, L. S., & Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of the effect of cognitive bias modifica-
tion on anxiety and depression. Psychological Bulletin, 137, 940–958.
Harris, E. C., & Barraclough, B. (1997). Suicide as an outcome for mental disorders: A meta-
analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 170(3), 205–228.
Hayes, S. C., & Hoffman, S. G. (2018). Process-based CBT: The science and core clinical competencies
of cognitive behavioral therapy. Oakland, CA: Context Press.
Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia: Basic
mechanisms and clinical strategies. New York: Guilford Press.
Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S., Schneier, F. R., Spitzer, R. L., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1993). The issue
of subtypes in the diagnosis of social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 7(3), 249–269.
Heimberg, R. G., & Magee, L. (2014). Social anxiety disorder. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical
handbook of psychological disorders (pp. 114–154). New York: Guilford Press.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and meta-analysis of the genetic
epidemiology of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1568–1578.
Heuzenroeder, L., Donnelly, M., Haby, M. M., Mihalopoulos, C., Rossell, R., Carter, R., . . .
Vos, T. (2004). Cost-effectiveness of psychological and pharmacological interventions for
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 38(8), 602–612.
Hilt, L., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2009). The emergence of gender differences in depression in
adolescence. In S. Nolen-Hoeksema & L. Hilt (Eds.), Handbook of depression in adolescents
(pp. 111–135). New York: Routledge.
Himle, J. A., Baser, R. E., Taylor, R. J., Campbell, R. D., & Jackson, J. S. (2009). Anxiety disorders
among African Americans, blacks of Caribbean descent, and non-Hispanic whites in the
United States. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 578–590.
Hinton, D. E., Chong, R., Pollack, M. H., Barlow, D. H., & McNally, R. J. (2008). Ataque de
nervios: Relationship to anxiety sensitivity and dissociation predisposition. Depression
and Anxiety, 25, 489–495.

-- 138 of 498 --

118 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Hinton, D., Hinton, S., Pham, T., Chau, H., & Tran, M. (2003). “Hit by the wind” and temperature-
shift panic among Vietnamese refugees. Transcultural Psychiatry, 40, 342–376.
Hinton, D. E., Hinton, L., Tran, M., Nguyen, M., Nguyen, L., Hsia, C., & Pollack, M. H. (2007).
Orthostatic panic attacks among Vietnamese refugees. Transcultural Psychiatry, 44, 515–
544.
Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., & Hinton, D. E. (2010). Cultural aspects in social anxiety and
social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 1117–1127.
Hofmann, S. G., & Otto, M. W. (2017). Cognitive behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder:
Evidence-based and disorder-specific treatment techniques. New York: Routledge.
Hollon, S. D., Stewart, M. O., & Strunk, D. (2006). Enduring effects for cognitive behavior ther-
apy in the treatment of depression and anxiety. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 285–315.
Hummelen, B., Wilberg, T., Pedersen, G., & Karterud, S. (2007). The relationship between
avoidant personality disorder and social phobia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 48, 348–356.
Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001).
Therapists, therapist variables, and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a multi-
center trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 747–755.
Kampman, O., Viikki, M., & Leinonen, E. (2017). Anxiety disorders and temperament—An
update review. Current Psychiatry Reports, 21, 19–27.
Karekla, M., Forsyth, J. P., & Kelly, M. M. (2004). Emotional avoidance and panicogenic
responding to a biological challenge procedure. Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 725–746.
Kashdan, T. B., Farmer, A. S., Adams, L. M., Ferssizidis, P., McKnight, P. E., & Nezlek, J. B.
(2013). Distinguishing healthy adults from people with social anxiety disorder: Evidence
for the value of experiential avoidance and positive emotions in everyday social interac-
tions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122(3), 645–655.
Kashdan, T. B., Goodman, F. R., Machell, K. A., Kleiman, E. M., Monfort, S. S., Ciarrochi, J., &
Nezlek, J. B. (2014). A contextual approach to experiential avoidance and social anxiety:
Evidence from an experimental interaction and daily interactions of people with social
anxiety disorder. Emotion, 14, 769–781.
Kendler, K. S., Karkowski, L. M., & Prescott, C. A. (1999). Fears and phobias: Reliability and
heritability. Psychological Medicine, 29, 539–553.
Kessler, R. C., Amminger, G. P., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alonso, J., Lee, S., & Ustun, T. B. (2007).
Age of onset of mental disorders: A review of recent literature. Current Opinion in Psy-
chiatry, 20, 359–364.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 593–602.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Walters, E. E. (2006). The epide-
miology of panic attacks, panic disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 415–424.
Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2012).
Twelve-month and lifetime prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood
disorders in the United States. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21,
169–184.
Kessler, R. C., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Wittchen, H. U. (2009). Epidemiology of anxiety dis-
orders. In M. B. Stein & T. Steckler (Eds.), Behavioral neurobiology of anxiety and its treatment
(pp. 21–35). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Kessler, R. C., Stein, M. B., & Berglund, P. (1998). Social phobia subtypes in the National
Comorbidity Survey. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(5), 613–619.
Kim, S. J., Kim, B. N., Cho, S. C., Kim, J. W., Shin, M. S., Yoo, H. J., & Kim, H. W. (2010). The
prevalence of specific phobia and associated co-morbid features in children and adoles-
cents. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 629–634.

-- 139 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	119
Kimbrel, N. A. (2008). A model of the development and maintenance of generalized social
phobia. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 592–612.
Kimmel, R. J., Roy-Byrne, P. P., & Cowley, D. S. (2015). Pharmacological treatments for panic
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia, and social anxiety disorder. In P.
E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (pp. 463–506). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Klauke, B., Deckert, J., Reif, A., Pauli, P., & Domschke, K. (2010). Life events in panic disor-
der—an update on “candidate stressors.” Depression and Anxiety, 27, 716–730.
Klein, D. F. (1993). False suffocation alarms, spontaneous panics, and related conditions: An
integrative hypothesis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 306–317.
Landau, R. J. (1980). The role of semantic schemata in phobic word interpretation. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 4, 427–434.
Lang, P. J. (1985). The cognitive physiology of emotion: Fear and anxiety. In A. H. Tuma & J. D.
Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 131–170). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lang, P. J., Cuthbert, B. N., & Bradley, M. M. (1998). Measuring emotion in therapy: Imagery,
activation, and feeling. Behavior Therapy, 29, 655–674.
Lewis-Fernández, R., Hinton, D. E., Laria, A. J., Patterson, E. H., Hofmann, S. G., Craske, M.
G., . . . Liao, B. (2011). Culture and the anxiety disorders: Recommendations for DSM-V.
Focus, 9, 351–368.
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2007). Psychological treatments that cause harm. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 2, 53–70.
MacLeod, C., & Mathews, A. (2012). Cognitive bias modification approaches to anxiety. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 8(1), 189–217.
MacLeod, C., Rutherford, E., Campbell, L., Ebsworthy, G., & Holker, L. (2002). Selective attention
and emotional vulnerability: Assessing the causal basis of their association through the
experimental manipulation of attentional bias. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 107–123.
Marchand, A., Roberge, P., Primiano, S., & Germain, V. (2009). A randomized, controlled clini-
cal trial of standard, group and brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder
with agoraphobia: A two-year follow-up. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 1139–1147.
Mason, L., Grey, N., & Veale, D. (2016). My therapist is a student?: The impact of therapist expe-
rience and client severity on cognitive behavioural therapy outcomes for people with
anxiety disorders. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 44(2), 193–202.
Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S., Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K., Clark, D. M., Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S.
(2014). Psychological and pharmacological interventions for social anxiety disorder in
adults: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 368–376.
McCabe, R. E., Ashbaugh, A. R., & Antony, M. M. (2010). Specific and social phobia. In M. M.
Antony & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), Handbook of assessment and treatment planning for psychologi-
cal disorders (pp. 186–223). New York: Guilford Press.
McLean, C. P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B. T., & Hofmann, S. G. (2011). Gender differences in anxiety
disorders: Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of illness. Journal of Psy-
chiatric Research, 45, 1027–1035.
McNally, R. J. (2016). The legacy of Seligman’s “phobias and preparedness” (1971). Behavior
Therapy, 47, 585–594.
Merikangas, K. R., He, J. P., Burstein, M., Swanson, S. A., Avenevoli, S., Cui, L., . . . Swendsen,
J. (2010). Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in US adolescents: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication—Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 980–989.
Meuret, A. E., Kroll, J., & Ritz, T. (2017). Panic disorder comorbidity with medical conditions
and treatment implications. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 13, 209–240.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2012). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (3rd ed.).
New York: Guilford Press.

-- 140 of 498 --

120 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Milrod, B., Chambless, D. L., Gallop, R., Busch, F. N., Schwalberg, M., McCarthy, K. S., . . . Bar-
ber, J. P. (2016). Psychotherapies for panic disorder: A tale of two sites. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 77, 927–935.
Mineka, S., & Cook, M. (1986). Immunization against the observational conditioning of snake
fear in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 307–318.
Mineka, S., & Zinbarg, R. (2006). A contemporary learning theory perspective on the etiology
of anxiety disorders: It’s not what you thought it was. American Psychologist, 61(1), 10–26.
Mogg, K., & Bradley, B. P. (2006). Time course of attentional bias for fear-relevant pictures in
spider-fearful individuals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(9), 1241–1250.
Mohlman, J., Bryant, C., Lenze, E. J., Stanley, M. A., Gum, A., Flint, A., . . . Craske, M. G. (2012).
Improving recognition of late life anxiety disorders in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: Observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee to the
Lifespan Disorders Work Group. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 27, 549–556.
Mollema, E. D., Snoek, F. J., Ader, H. J., Heine, R. J., & van der Ploeg, H. M. (2001). Insulin-
treated diabetes patients with fear of self-injecting or fear of self-testing: Psychological
comorbidity and general well-being. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 51, 665–672.
Moscovitch, D. A., McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., Rocca, L., & Swinson, R. P. (2008). Anger
experience and expression across the anxiety disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 25(2),
107–113.
Mowrer, O. H. (1947). On the dual nature of learning: A reinterpretation of “conditioning” and
“problem solving.” Harvard Educational Review, 17, 102–148.
Murphy, R., Hirsch, C., Mathews, A., Smith, K., & Clark, D. M. (2007). Facilitating a benign
interpretation bias in a high socially anxious population. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 1517–1529.
Murray, L., Creswell, C., & Cooper, P. J. (2009). The development of anxiety disorders in child-
hood: An integrative review. Psychological Medicine, 39, 1413–1423.
Nay, W., Brown, R., & Roberson-Nay, R. (2013). Longitudinal course of panic disorder with and
without agoraphobia using the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions (NESARC). Psychiatry Research, 208, 54–61.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Watkins, E. R. (2011). A heuristic for developing transdiagnostic mod-
els of psychopathology: Explaining multifinality and divergent trajectories. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 6(6), 589–609.
Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2019). Handbook of psychotherapy integration (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 1.
Evidence-based therapist contributions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 2.
Evidence-based therapist responsiveness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Norton, P. J., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Kernels of truth or distorted perceptions: Self and observer
ratings of social anxiety and performance. Behavior Therapy, 32(4), 765–786.
Olatunji, B. O., Armstrong, T., & Elwood, L. (2017). Is disgust proneness associated with anxi-
ety and related disorders?: A qualitative review and meta-analysis of group comparison
and correlational studies. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 12(4), 613–648.
Olatunji, B. O., Forsyth, J. P., & Cherian, A. (2007). Evaluative conditioning of disgust: A sticky
form of relational learning that is resistant to extinction. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21,
820–834.
Olatunji, B. O., & McKay, D. (2009). Disorders of disgust: Assessment, theory, and treatment. Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Ollendick, T. H., White, S. W., & White, B. A. (Eds.). (2018). The Oxford handbook of clinical child
and adolescent psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Oosterink, F. M., de Jongh, A., & Hoogstraten, J. (2009). Prevalence of dental fear and phobia
relative to other fear and phobia subtypes. European Journal of Oral Sciences, 117, 135–143.

-- 141 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	121
Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Nations, K. R., Utschig, A. C., Rothbaum, B. O., Hofmann, S. G., &
Smits, J. A. (2012). Five sessions and counting: Considering ultra-brief treatment for panic
disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 29, 465–470.
Ozkan, M., & Altindag, A. (2005). Comorbid personality disorders in subjects with panic dis-
order: Do personality disorders increase clinical severity? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 46,
20–26.
Pachankis, J. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (2006). Social anxiety in young gay men. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 20, 996–1015.
Pachankis, J. E., Goldfried, M. R., & Ramrattan, M. E. (2008). Extension of the rejection sen-
sitivity construct to the interpersonal functioning of gay men. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76, 306–317.
Page, A. C., & Martin, N. G. (1998). Testing a genetic structure of blood–injury–injection fears.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 81, 377–384.
Paradis, C. M., & Friedman, S. (2005). Sleep paralysis in African Americans with panic disor-
der. Transcultural Psychiatry, 42, 123–134.
Paradis, C. M., Friedman, S., Lazar, R. M., Grubea, J., & Kesselman, M. (1992). Use of a struc-
tured interview to diagnosis anxiety disorders in a minority population. Hospital and
Community Psychiatry, 43, 61–64.
Pollack, M., Mangano, R., Entsuah, R., Tzanis, E., & Simon, N. M. (2007). A randomized con-
trolled trial of venlafaxine ER and paroxetine in the treatment of outpatients with panic
disorder. Psychopharmacology, 194, 233–242.
Praško, J., Dockery, C., Horáĉek, J., Houbova, P., Kosová, J., Klaschka, J., . . . Höschl, C. (2006).
Moclobemide and cognitive behavioral therapy in the treatment of social phobia. Neuro-
endocrinology Letters, 27, 473–481.
Rachman, S. J. (1990). Fear and courage (2nd ed.). New York: Freeman.
Rachman, S. J. (1994). The overprediction of fear: A review. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32,
683–690.
Rapee, R. M. (1995). Descriptive psychopathology of social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R.
Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and
treatment (pp. 41–66). New York: Guilford Press.
Rapee, R. M., & Lim, L. (1992). Discrepancy between self- and observer ratings of performance
in social phobics. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101(4), 728–731.
Rapee, R. M., & Spence, S. H. (2004). The etiology of social phobia: Empirical evidence and an
initial model. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 737–767.
Ratcliffe, D., MacLeod, A., & Sensky, T. (2006). Anxiety in patients who have had a myocardial
infarction: The maintaining role of perceived physical sensations and causal attribu-
tions. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 34(2), 201–217.
Reardon, J. M., & Williams, N. L. (2007). The specificity of cognitive vulnerabilities to emo-
tional disorders: Anxiety sensitivity, looming vulnerability and explanatory style. Jour-
nal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 625–643.
Reich, J. (2001). The relationship of social phobia to avoidant personality disorder. In S. G.
Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), From social anxiety to social phobia: Multiple perspectives
(pp. 148–161). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Ressler, K. J., Rothbaum, B. O., Tannenbaum, L., Anderson, P., Graap, K., Zimand, E., . . . Davis,
M. (2004). Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to psychotherapy: Use of D -cycloserine in
phobic individuals to facilitate extinction of fear. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61(11),
1136–1144.
Robinson, J., Sareen, J., Cox, B. J., & Bolton, J. (2009). Self-medication of anxiety disorders with
alcohol and drugs: Results from a nationally representative sample. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 23, 38–45.
Rodebaugh, T. L., Holaway, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2004). The treatment of social anxiety
disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 883–908.

-- 142 of 498 --

122 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Rodrigues, H., Figueira, I., Gonçalves, R., Mendlowicz, M., Macedo, T., & Ventura, P. (2011).
CBT for pharmacotherapy non-remitters—A systematic review of a next-step strategy.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 129, 219–228.
Romano, E., Tremblay, R. E., Vitaro, F., Zoccolillo, M., & Pagani, L. (2001). Prevalence of psy-
chiatric diagnoses and the role of perceived impairment: Findings from an adolescent
community sample. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 42(4),
451–461.
Roshanaei-Moghaddam, B., Pauly, M. C., Atkins, D. C., Baldwin, S. A., Stein, M. B., & Roy-
Byrne, P. (2011). Relative effects of CBT and pharmacotherapy in depression versus anxi-
ety: Is medication somewhat better for depression, and CBT somewhat better for anxi-
ety? Depression and Anxiety, 28, 560–567.
Rowa, K., McCabe, R. I., & Antony, M. M. (2006). Specific phobias. In F. Andrasik (Ed.), Compre-
hensive handbook of personality and psychopathology: Vol. 2. Adult psychopathology (pp. 154–
168). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Ruscio, A. M., Brown, T. A., Chiu, W. T., Sareen, J., Stein, M. B., & Kessler, R. C. (2008). Social
fears and social phobia in the USA: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Rep-
lication. Psychological Medicine, 38, 15–28.
Sánchez-Meca, J., Rosa-Alcázar, A. I., Marín-Martínez, F., & Gómez-Conesa, A. (2010). Psy-
chological treatment of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 37–50.
Sansone, R. A., Griffith, K. A., & Sansone, L. A. (2005). Panic disorder, alcohol and substance
abuse, and benzodiazepine prescription primary care companion. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chiatry, 7(5), 246–248.
Sarfan, L. D., Cody, M. W., & Clerkin, E. M. (2019). The mediating role of state maladaptive
emotion regulation in the relation between social anxiety symptoms and self-evaluation
bias. Cognition and Emotion, 33(2), 361–369.
Schmidt, N. B., & Trakowski, J. (2004). Interoceptive assessment and exposure in panic disor-
der: A descriptive study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 11(1), 81–92.
Schmidt, N. B., Woolaway-Bickel, K., & Bates, M. (2001). Evaluating panic-specific factors in
the relationship between suicide and panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
39(6), 635–649.
Schmidt, N. B., Zvolensky, M. J., & Maner, J. K. (2006). Anxiety sensitivity: Prospective pre-
diction of panic attacks and Axis I pathology. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 691–699.
Schneier, F. R., Foose, T. E., Hasin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Liu, S. M., Grant, B. F., & Blanco, C.
(2010). Social anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder co-morbidity in the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medicine, 40(6),
977–988.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1971). Phobias and preparedness. Behavior Therapy, 2, 307–320.
Simon, N. M., Otto, M. W., Wisniewski, S. R., Fossey, M., Sagduyu, K., Frank, E., . . . Pollack, M.
H. (2004). Anxiety disorder comorbidity in bipolar disorder patients: Data from the first
500 participants in the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder
(STEP-BD). American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2222–2229.
Smith, S. M., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Goldstein, R., Huang, B., & Grant, B. F. (2006). Race/
ethnic differences in the prevalence and co-occurrence of substance use disorders and
independent mood and anxiety disorders: Results from the National Epidemiologic Sur-
vey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medicine, 36, 987–998.
Smoller, J. W., Block, S. R., & Young, M. M. (2009). Genetics of anxiety disorders: The complex
road from DSM to DNA. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 965–975.
Stein, D. J., & Hugo, F. (2002). Neuropsychiatric aspects of anxiety disorders. In S. C. Yudofsky
& R. E. Hales (Eds.), The American Psychiatric Publishing textbook of neuropsychiatry and
clinical neurosciences (pp. 1049–1068). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.

-- 143 of 498 --

Panic Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Phobias 	123
Stein, M. B., Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G., Campbell-Sills, L., Lang, A. J., Golinelli, D., . . .
Sherbourne, C. D. (2011). Quality of and patient satisfaction with primary health care for
anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 970–976.
Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Smith, S., Goldstein, R. B., Ruan, W. J., & Grant,
B. F. (2007). The epidemiology of DSM-IV specific phobia in the USA: Results from the
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medi-
cine, 37, 1047–1059.
Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive processes in social phobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 31(3), 255–267.
Suomi, S. J. (2000). A biobehavioral perspective on developmental psychopathology. In A.
J. Sameroff, M. Lewis, & S. M. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of developmental psychopathology
(pp. 237–256). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press.
Susman, J., & Klee, B. (2005). The role of high-potency benzodiazepines in the treatment of
panic disorder. Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 7, 5–11.
Sylvester, C. E., Hyde, T. S., & Reichler, R. J. (1988). Clinical psychopathology among children
of adults with panic disorder. In D. L. Dunner, E. S. Gershon, & J. E. Barrett (Eds.), Rela-
tives at risk for mental disorders (pp. 87–102). New York: Raven Press.
Tart, C. D., Handelsman, P. R., DeBoer, L. B., Rosenfield, D., Pollack, M. H., Hofmann, S. G., . . .
Smits, J. A. (2013). Augmentation of exposure therapy with post-session administration
of D-cycloserine. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47, 168–174.
Taschereau-Dumouchel, V., Kawato, M., & Lau, H. (2020). Multivoxel pattern analysis reveals
dissociations between subjective fear and its physiological correlates. Molecular Psychia-
try, 25, 2342–2354.
Teachman, B. A., Clerkin, E. M., Cunningham, W. A., Dreyer- Oren, S., & Werntz, A. (2019).
Implicit cognition and psychopathology: Looking back and looking forward. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 123–148.
Teachman, B. A., & Gordon, T. G. (2009). Age differences in anxious responding: Older and
calmer, unless the trigger is physical. Psychology and Aging, 24, 703–714.
Teachman, B. A., Smith-Janik, S. B., & Saporito, J. (2007). Information processing biases and
panic disorder: Relationships among cognitive and symptom measures. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 45(8), 1791–1811.
Teachman, B. A., Stefanucci, J. K., Clerkin, E. M., Cody, M. W., & Proffitt, D. R. (2008). A new
mode of fear expression: Perceptual bias in height fear. Emotion, 8, 296–301.
Trower, P., Bryant, B., & Argyle, M. (1978). Social skills and mental health. London: Methuen.
Turk, C. L., Heimberg, R. G., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Social anxiety disorder. In D. H. Barlow
(Ed.), Clinical handbook of psychological disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (3rd ed.,
pp. 114–153). New York: Guilford Press.
Uhde, T. W., & Singareddy, R. (2002). Biological research in anxiety disorders. In J. J. López-
Ibor, W. Gaebel, M. Maj, & N. Sartorius (Eds.), Psychiatry as a neuroscience (pp. 237–285).
New York: Wiley.
Wallace, S. T., & Alden, L. E. (1997). Social phobia and positive social events: The price of suc-
cess. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(3), 416–424.
Wardenaar, K. J., Lim, C. C., Al-Hamzawi, A. O., Alonso, J., Andrade, L. H., Benjet, C., . . .
Gureje, O. (2017). The cross-national epidemiology of specific phobia in the World Men-
tal Health Surveys. Psychological Medicine, 47, 1744–1760.
Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., & Rodebaugh, T. L. (2008). The Fear of Positive Evaluation Scale:
Assessing a proposed cognitive component of social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
22(1), 44–55.
Weissman, M. M. (1993). Family genetic studies of panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
27(Suppl.), 69–78.
Wersebe, H., Lieb, R., Meyer, A. H., Miche, M., Mikoteit, T., Imboden, C., . . . Gloster, A. T.

-- 144 of 498 --

124 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(2018). Well-being in major depression and social phobia with and without comorbidity.
International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology, 18(3), 201–208.
Wittchen, H. U., Lecrubier, Y., Beesdo, K., & Nocon, A. (2003). Relationships among anxiety
disorders: Patterns and implications. In D. J. Nutt & J. C. Ballenger (Eds.), Anxiety disor-
ders (pp. 25–37). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B., Castriotta, N., Lenze, E. J., Stanley, M. A., & Craske, M. G. (2010). Anxi-
ety disorders in older adults: A comprehensive review. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 190–
211.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B., Horowitz, J. D., Powers, M. P., & Telch, M. J. (2008). Psychological
approaches in the treatment of specific phobias: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology
Review, 28(6), 1021–1037.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K., Zimmermann, M., Arch, J. J., De Guzman, E., & Lagomasino, I. (2015). Has
evidence-based psychosocial treatment for anxiety disorders permeated usual care in
community mental health settings? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 72, 9–17.
Woody, S. R., & Ollendick, T. H. (2006). Technique factors in treating anxiety disorders. In L.
G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 167–200).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Woody, S., & Teachman, B. A. (2000). Intersection of disgust and fear: Normative and patho-
logical views. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 7, 291–311.
Xu, Y., Schneier, F., Heimberg, R. G., Princisvalle, K., Liebowitz, M. R., Wang, S., & Blanco, C.
(2012). Gender differences in social anxiety disorder: Results from the National Epidemi-
ologic Sample on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 12–19.
Zlomke, K., & Davis, T. E., III. (2008). One-session treatment of specific phobias: A detailed
description and review of treatment efficacy. Behavior Therapy, 39, 207–223.

-- 145 of 498 --

125
Our goal in this chapter is to outline and discuss the psychopathology of obsessive–
compulsive disorder (OCD), especially as it guides implementation of treatment of
this often baffling disorder.
OCD SYMPTOM PRESENTATION AND CLASSIFICATION
OCD is characterized by two main symptoms: obsessions and compulsions (Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2013). “Obsessions” are unwanted thoughts, ideas,
images, or impulses and urges that are experienced as repugnant, threatening,
obscene, blasphemous, nonsensical, or all of these. The content of obsessions is
highly individualized and shaped by the thinker’s personal experiences, although
the general themes of obsessions can be organized into several general categories:
contamination, responsibility for harm, violence, sex, religion, and the need for order
or exactness (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2010; McKay et al., 2004). Most people with OCD
evince multiple obsessional themes and forms, and the form and content of these
may shift over time. Table 5.1 provides examples of common obsessions. Obsessions
often evoke intense distress and impairment that result from avoidance of related
situations. For example, someone with obsessions about harming hurting or killing
family members (e.g., spouse, child) may avoid loved ones and experience depressive
symptoms as a result.
Three characteristics set clinical obsessions apart from other types of repetitive
thinking (e.g., worries, daydreams). First, obsessions are experienced as unwanted
or uncontrollable, in that they intrude into consciousness (often triggered by cues or
something in the environment). Second, while personally relevant, the content of
C H A P T E R 5
Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder
Jonathan S. Abramowitz
Lynne Siqueland

-- 146 of 498 --

126 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
obsessions is incongruent with the individual’s belief system and is not the type of
thought one would normally expect oneself to have. Third, obsessions are resisted;
that is, they are accompanied by the sense that a fix is needed, so the obsession
must be “dealt with,” neutralized, or altogether avoided. The motivation to resist is
activated by the fear that if action is not taken, disastrous consequences may occur.
Compulsive rituals are the most noticeable feature of OCD and often account
for the most functional impairment. The DSM specifies that “compulsions” are moti-
vated and intentional, in contrast to mechanical or robotic repetitive behaviors, as
observed in disorders such as Tourette syndrome. Moreover, compulsions are per-
formed in response to obsessions and to reduce obsession-related distress. This is in
contrast to repetitive behaviors in addictive or impulse control disorders problems
(e.g., “sexual addiction,” trichotillomania), which are carried out because they may
produce pleasure or gratification. Examples of the most common compulsive rituals
include washing and cleaning, checking, seeking reassurance, ordering and arrang-
ing, counting, and repeating routine behaviors (e.g., stepping through a doorway,
flicking a light switch, getting up from a chair). Specific examples of common rituals
are listed in Table 5.2.
Studies on the structure of OCD symptoms consistently identify symptom
dimensions that comprise certain obsessions and compulsions, including (1) harm-
ing (aggressive obsessions and checking rituals), (2) contamination (contamination
TABLE 5.1. Common Obsessions
Category 	Examples
Contamination 	• Concerns about getting AIDS from touching a bathroom door
knob
• Fear of getting cancer from using lawn fertilizer
• Fear that “germs” will spread to others and make them ill
• Fear of getting sick from touching dirty laundry
Responsibility for harm 	• Thought that you’ve hit someone with your car without realizing it
• Doubts about whether the door is locked or the oven is turned off
• Doubts about whether you dropped pills on the floor and a child
thought they were candy and ate them
Symmetry/order 	• The need to have the environment “balanced” on the left and right
sides
• Thoughts that a parent will die if the books aren’t arranged in
alphabetical order
Sexual 	• Impulses to kiss one’s boss
• Thoughts of having sex with children or family members
• Doubts regarding whether one is homosexual or heterosexual
Violence/aggression 	• Impulses to harm loved ones
• Thoughts of injuring a vulnerable person (small child or elderly)
Religious 	• Blasphemous images of Jesus with an erection on the cross
• Doubts about whether one is “faithful enough”

-- 147 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	127
obsessions and decontamination rituals), (3) symmetry (obsessions about order or
neatness and arranging rituals), and (4) unacceptable immoral or violent thoughts
with mental rituals and neutralization (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2010). These symptom
dimensions overlap, such that someone might have, for example, both contamination
and harming symptoms. In addition, some sufferers undergo changes in their symp-
tom picture over time with changes in both obsessions or compulsions, for example,
shifting from unacceptable thoughts to symmetry concerns. Each of these symptom
dimensions also has implications for the psychological treatment of OCD because
the use (and effectiveness) of specific treatment techniques depends in part on the
patient’s symptom presentation (see treatment section).
In many instances, it is clear how compulsive rituals are intended to reduce
obsessional anxiety about particular feared consequences—for example, compul-
sively checking the stove/door locks to reduce the fears of a fire/break-in, or repetitive
handwashing rituals intended to remove feared contaminants and prevent disease.
In some cases, patients perform rituals simply to reduce a general sense of anxiety
or the sense of “incompleteness.” Compulsive rituals can also be overt behaviors or
covert mental acts aimed at preventing a negative outcome. Examples of common
mental rituals include repetition of special phrases, prayers, or numbers in a specific
manner, and ritualistically going over (mentally reviewing, analyzing) one’s behav-
ior or conversations to reassure oneself that one has not made egregious mistakes or
said anything offensive.
In addition to compulsive rituals, many people with OCD use various overt and
covert strategies that do not meet DSM-5 criteria to control, remove, or prevent their
obsessions (Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014; Ladouceur et al., 2000). Examples include
overanalyzing the meaning of obsessional thoughts, rational self-talk (i.e., to con-
vince oneself of the unimportance of the obsession), reassurance seeking, replac-
ing the obsessional thought with a “safe” thought, performing a brief behavioral act
(e.g., putting one’s hand in one’s pockets to prevent losing control), distraction, and
TABLE 5.2. Common Compulsive Rituals
Category 	Examples
Decontamination 	• Handwashing for 15 minutes at a time
• Ritualized showering routines, including washing the shower itself
• Wiping down mail and groceries before bringing them into the house
• Demanding that others wash before touching items in the house
Checking 	• Locks, windows, appliances, paperwork
• That others are safe
• Asking repeated questions of others to gain assurances
Repeating 	• Going up and down the stairs several times until an unwanted thought is
dismissed
• Getting dressed and undressed over and over, until it feels “just right”
Mental rituals 	• Repeating prayers, words, or phrases to oneself to neutralize unwanted
thoughts
• Mentally reviewing what one said or did (reassurance)

-- 148 of 498 --

128 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
thought suppression (Ladouceur et al., 2000). Because these strategies may be covert
and automatic, the individual may not even recognize these behaviors as part of
OCD. Thus, the assessment should include examples to help the individual identify
neutralization.
Avoidance is also present to some degree in most individuals with OCD, and is
intended to prevent exposure to situations that provoke obsessional thoughts and
urges to ritualize. Sometimes the aim of avoidance is to prevent specific feared con-
sequences, such as illness or harm. Other times, avoidance is used to prevent obses-
sional thoughts, such as avoiding public stairways because they evoke obsessions of
impulsively pushing people down the steps.
Differentiating OCD from Similar Disorders
Illness Anxiety Disorder and Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Illness anxiety disorder (IAD; formerly “hypochondriasis”) is a somatic symptom dis-
order characterized by a preoccupation with fears of having a serious disease (e.g.,
cancer). The intrusive health-related preoccupations in IAD have been compared
to obsessional thoughts or fears in OCD, and the repetitive attempts to seek reas-
surance in IAD, to compulsive checking rituals (e.g., Fallon, Javitch, Hollander, &
Liebowitz, 1991).
Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), which is categorized as an OCD-related disorder
in DSM-5, involves extreme concerns about one or more physical flaws that either
are not real or are so slight that others would not notice (e.g., “My nose is too large”).
The thoughts of unsightliness occur in the absence of any noticeable physi-
cal defect, are often resisted, and lead to significant anxiety about how the person
appears to others. In this way, preoccupations in BDD are functionally similar to
obsessions in OCD. To circumvent anticipated embarrassment, individuals with
BDD may avoid certain social situations or engage in behaviors aimed to reduce
distress or the visibility of their imagined defect, including excessive checking in
mirrors, grooming, and hiding the perceived defect (e.g., with large sunglasses or
a hat). Because IAD and BDD involve anxiety-provoking preoccupations and exces-
sive behaviors aimed at reducing this anxiety, these problems might be related to
OCD. In clinically distinguishing IAD and BDD from OCD, it is important to assess
the full range of obsessions and compulsions, and determine whether any health
and appearance concerns occur along with other more quintessential types of obses-
sions and compulsions. If this is the case, OCD is the proper diagnosis. If the person
appears singly obsessed with appearance or health concerns, somatic symptom dis-
order is likely the correct diagnosis.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
The main features of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) are chronic worry and tension
that are unfounded or more severe than would be expected in most people, and that
lead to insomnia and other physical symptoms, including fatigue, headaches, irrita-
bility, and hot flashes. Worries in GAD can be intrusive, unwanted, repetitive, and
highly distressing to the individual; thus, they are often mistaken for obsessions. Yet

-- 149 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	129
whereas the content of worries in GAD is focused on real-life circumstances such as
finances, social and family relationships, work, and school performance, obsessional
content in OCD does not typically concern everyday problems. Worries also tend
to involve exclusively verbal content, whereas obsessions are often experienced as
images and impulses, along with thoughts and doubts. Worry content often shifts
from one topic to another over time, whereas the focus of obsessions is typically sta-
ble. Some individuals with GAD show ritual-like reassurance-seeking and checking
behavior (e.g., calling one’s spouse repeatedly if one is late getting home); however,
these behaviors are more specific to worry content and do not neutralize anxiety in
the same way that compulsive rituals neutralize obsessions.
Obsessive–Compulsive Personality Disorder
The main features of obsessive– compulsive personality disorder (OCPD) are an enduring
pattern of perfectionism, rigidity, stubbornness, and orderliness that interferes with
task completion; preoccupation with rules, organization, and schedules, so that the
point of activities is lost; overconscientiousness and inflexibility regarding ethical or
moral issues (not accounted for by normal cultural or religious values); and excessive
devotion to work and productivity to the exclusion of friendships or leisure time
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Although some of these characteristics are
informally referred to as “compulsive” and might be found among some individu-
als with OCD, there are important differences in the function of these symptoms. In
OCD, perfectionistic behavior is provoked by fear and is resisted; the person wishes
they did not feel compelled to behave this way. In contrast, people with OCPD do
not have obsessional fears and instead perceive their “compulsive” traits as useful,
agreeable, and consistent with their worldview. Thus, when individuals do not resist
their behavior patterns and reject the suggestion of adapting a less rigid lifestyle,
OCPD is the likely diagnosis rather than OCD.
Schizophrenia and Delusional Disorders
It is important to distinguish schizophrenia and delusional disorders from OCD,
since these conditions possess superficial similarities that have led some to speculate
a relationship among them (e.g., Enright, 1996). For instance, these other conditions
may involve bizarre thoughts (i.e., “delusions”) and behavior. Yet unlike in OCD,
most people with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders do not resist their
bizarre, intrusive thoughts, and the thoughts do not produce anxiety or urges to neu-
tralize. Rather, the bizarre ideation might be believed or even defended as reasonable
(i.e., as in delusions). Other differences are that repetitive behaviors in schizophrenia
(e.g., undifferentiated or catatonic subtypes) and other psychotic disorders are point-
less motor behaviors rather than responses to obsessional anxiety. Nevertheless,
patients with OCD are sometimes misdiagnosed as having delusions or psychotic
thinking, especially if the OCD is characterized by bizarre obsessions (e.g., fear of
making a pact with the devil, intrusions about murdering loved ones). Therefore, the
unwanted nature of the thoughts and the anxiety response, in concert with the pres-
ence of avoidance and compulsions (overt and covert), must be carefully assessed, as
these features differentiate psychotic symptoms from those of OCD.

-- 150 of 498 --

130 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Clinical Implications for Understanding the Role
of Obsessions and Compulsions
The clinician should keep in mind that obsessions and rituals (including avoid-
ance and neutralizing) are functionally related—the compulsive ritual is an attempt to
reduce obsessional distress. For example, the obsession that one has mistakenly hit
a pedestrian while driving would increase anxiety and lead to the urge compulsively
to check (ritual) or ask for assurances to reduce this anxiety. It is therefore not surpris-
ing that certain types of obsessions and rituals co-occur in the following patterns: (1)
Obsessions about responsibility for harm and mistakes are associated with checking
rituals; (2) symmetry obsessions occur along with ordering and counting rituals; (3)
contamination obsessions co-occur with washing and cleaning rituals; and (4) reli-
gious, sexual, and violent obsessions often trigger mental rituals and reassurance
seeking (e.g., McKay et al., 2004).
It is also important for the clinician to understand the content and triggers of
obsessional thoughts, as well as the feared consequences predicted to result from
the obsessions. Information about the compulsive rituals and avoidance strategies
must be collected, including the individual’s rationale for deploying each type of
ritual; that is, how does the ritual prevent feared negative consequences? This under-
standing of the function of the symptoms and the relationship between obsession
and compulsion is essential to accurate diagnosis of OCD and its lack leads to fre-
quent misdiagnosis and treatment recommendations. The rationale and effective-
ness of psychological treatments for OCD hinge on this conceptualization. Finally, it
is important to determine individuals’ insight into the senselessness of their symp-
toms, since poor insight is associated with attenuated outcome (e.g., Foa, Abramow-
itz, Franklin, & Kozak, 1999).
COURSE AND ASSOCIATED FEATURES
OCD is a chronic condition with a very low rate of spontaneous remission. Left
untreated, symptoms fluctuate, with worsening during periods of increased life
stress. In a 40-year follow-up study of 144 individuals with OCD (Skoog & Skoog,
1999), 83% of this cohort had improved, and 48% no longer met diagnostic criteria
for OCD, although about half of the nonclinical individuals reported some residual
symptoms. Thus, although OCD symptoms are likely to improve with treatment, full
recovery is the exception rather than the rule. The clinical implications of this fact are
discussed in the section on treatment.
Having OCD is associated with impaired social and role functioning, troubled
romantic and family relationships, diminished academic performance, unemploy-
ment, comorbid psychological disorders, sleep and sexual problems, and increased
receipt of disability income (Koran, 2000). Despite the fact that severe OCD can lead
to functional impairment, people with OCD do not differ substantially from the
general U.S. population in terms of the rates of alcohol abuse, suicide, or marriage.
Relatives of patients with OCD also suffer, since symptoms often result in restricted
access to certain rooms, involvement of others in compulsive rituals, and difficulty
in enjoying life (e.g., the inability to enjoy a family vacation because of the sufferer’s

-- 151 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	131
obsessions and rituals; Black, Gaffney, Schlosser, & Gabel, 1998). A diagnosis of OCD
is also related to increased (non-mental-health) medical utilization.
Clinical Implications of Comorbid Conditions or Mitigating Factors
Accordingly, at the beginning and end of treatment, therapists should assess for
associated features of OCD such as mood and other anxiety disorders, interpersonal
functioning, academic and occupational performance, general quality of life, and
physiological indices such as sleep and sexual functioning. Assessment of these vari-
ables before beginning treatment helps the therapist plan for therapy that addresses,
as comprehensively as possible, the clinical problems frequently associated with
OCD. The same assessment at the end of treatment might also help therapists pre-
pare patients who might be at greater risk for relapse, especially since some of the
associated features, such as poor family functioning and mood disturbance, are
associated with greater OCD symptom severity.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Once considered a rare condition, OCD is known to affect from 2–3% of the adult
population across the world (Ruscio, Stein, Chiu, & Kessler, 2010). The disorder is
slightly more common among females than males. OCD onset is in childhood or ado-
lescence, typically begins by the age of 25, and only rarely after age 50 (Rasmussen
& Tsuang, 1986). The mean age of onset tends to be earlier in males (about 21 years of
age) than in females (22–24 years; Lensi et al., 1996).
Although most individuals with OCD do not identify clear-cut precipitants
to symptom onset, stressful or traumatic events and experiences may play a role
for some patients (Gershuny, Baer, Radomsky, Wilson, & Jenike, 2003). Symptoms
also occur at higher than expected rates among childbearing women (Abramowitz,
Schwartz, Moore, & Luenzmann, 2003; Russell, Fawcett, & Mazmanian, 2013). More-
over, the content of obsessional thoughts and rituals is clearly influenced by envi-
ronmental and sociological factors, as evidenced by the predominance of obsessions
concerning timely issues. For example, the highly prevalent contamination obses-
sions relating to gonorrhea in the 1970s have largely been replaced by fears of acquir-
ing AIDS since the mid-1980s. Similarly, individuals with religious obsessions show
concerns related to their specific religion (e.g., Jewish patients afraid of violating the
dietary laws associated with that religion).
COMORBIDITY
Individuals with OCD are at an increased risk for additional forms of psychopathol-
ogy, with depressive disorders among the most commonly co-occurring difficulties.
The lifetime prevalence of major depressive disorder (MDD) among patients with
OCD ranges from 12.4 to 60.3% cross-nationally (mean = 29%; Weissman et al., 1994)
and, for the most part, OCD predates MDD, suggesting that depressive symptoms
usually occur in response to the distress and impairment associated with OCD.

-- 152 of 498 --

132 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Depressive symptoms also seem to be more strongly related to the severity of obses-
sions than to severity of compulsions (Ricciardi & McNally, 1995). Also, coexisting
depressive symptoms are especially predictive of poor quality of life for those suf-
fering with OCD.
OCD may also be accompanied by additional anxiety disorders (e.g., Weiss-
man et al., 1994), with social phobia, panic disorder, and GAD being most commonly
reported (Nestadt et al., 2001). Estimates of comorbidity between OCD and personal-
ity disorders vary widely (from 8.7 to 87.5%), yet those personality disorders belong-
ing to the anxious cluster (e.g., obsessive– compulsive, avoidant) are more common
than those of other clusters (e.g., Steketee, Eisen, Dyck, Warshaw, & Rasmussen,
1999). We present the clinical implications of comorbid conditions, especially the
impact of mood and personality disorders, later in the chapter.
ETIOLOGY
Biological Models
The Serotonin Hypothesis
The serotonin hypothesis was the leading neurochemical theory of OCD. It pro-
posed that obsessions and compulsions arise from abnormalities in the serotonin
neurotransmitter system, specifically, a hypersensitivity of the postsynaptic sero-
tonergic receptors (Zohar & Insel, 1987). The most consistent findings in support of
this model came from the pharmacotherapy literature, which suggests that selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine) are more effective than medica-
tions with other mechanisms of action (e.g., norepineherine inhibitors) in reducing
OCD symptoms. Actual studies of biological markers—such as blood and cerebro-
spinal fluid levels of serotonin metabolites—however, largely do not support a rela-
tionship between serotonin and OCD (Bandelow et al., 2016). As a result of these
findings, contemporary biological theorists have all but abandoned the serotonin
hypothesis of OCD.
Structural Models
Structural models hypothesize that OCD symptoms are caused by neuroanatomical
abnormalities in localized brain regions, specifically the orbitofrontal–subcortical
circuits (Saxena, Bota, & Brody, 2001), which are thought to connect regions of the
brain responsible for the initiation of behaviors implemented with little conscious
awareness. There is, however, a lack of consistent evidence to support this hypoth-
esis (e.g., Bandelow et al., 2016). These models were derived from neuroimaging stud-
ies comparing brain function between people with and without OCD (for a review,
see Whiteside, Port, & Abramowitz, 2004). Although findings vary across studies, a
meta-analysis of 10 positron emission tomographic (PET) and single-photon emis-
sion computed tomographic (SPECT) studies found that relative to healthy individu-
als, those with OCD evidence more activity in the orbital gyrus and the head of the
caudate nucleus (Whiteside et al., 2004).

-- 153 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	133
Limitations of Biological Models
There are important limitations of biological models of OCD, which render these
hypotheses untenable. First, there is little correspondence between the patterns of
symptoms that patients report and the biological mechanisms proposed to account
for them; that is, there is no sufficient explanation for how neurotransmitter or neu-
roanatomical abnormalities translate into obsessions and compulsions but not into
other psychological symptoms such as eating disorder symptoms (e.g., body image
disturbance). Second, biological models are unable to explain the fact that OCD
symptoms concern some themes (e.g., fears of harming vulnerable individuals), but
not others (e.g., fears of harming those who could defend themselves). Also, why
do some people experience contamination-related obsessions, whereas others have
intrusive sexual obsessions? Finally, existing serotonin and neuroimaging studies
are correlational in design and therefore do not provide evidence that biological
abnormalities cause OCD symptoms.
Psychological Models
Learning Theory
Behavioral (learning and conditioning) models of OCD were based on Mowrer’s
(1960) two-stage theory of fear acquisition and maintenance. Obsessional fears were
thought to be acquired (Stage 1: classical conditioning) as a result of traumatic condi-
tioning experiences in which a previously neutral stimulus (the conditioned stimu-
lus, or CS) was paired with an aversive stimulus (the unconditioned stimulus, or
UCS; e.g., a traumatic experience), so that the CS comes to elicit a conditioned fear
response (CR). As a result of this associative learning process, specific situations (e.g.,
using a public bathroom), objects (e.g., door knobs), and thoughts, images, doubts, or
impulses (e.g., incestuous images) that pose no objective threat may come to evoke
obsessional fear. Stage 2 of the model (operant conditioning) proposes that avoidance
behaviors and compulsive rituals become habitual because they reduce obsessional
anxiety immediately (i.e., negative reinforcement). By the 1980s, however, limitations
of learning models had become apparent. Specifically, many people with OCD did
not describe the types of classical conditioning experiences that were thought to lead
to obsessions. Thus, additional models were sought to explain obsessional thinking.
Cognitive‑Behavioral Models
Most theorists and researchers now apply Beck’s (1976) cognitive specificity theory
of emotion to understanding the development and persistence of OCD. This model
proposes that emotional distress—such as anxiety and fear—arises not from nega-
tive or threatening situations and stimuli themselves, but from how one interprets or
appraises such stimuli. Accordingly, obsessional fears are thought to arise from inac-
curate beliefs about the importance of intrusive thoughts. Indeed, unpleasant mental
intrusions (i.e., thoughts, images, and impulses that intrude into consciousness) are a
normal and universal experience for people with and without OCD (Rachman & de
Silva, 1978). Rachman (1997) and Salkovskis (1996) have proposed that these mental

-- 154 of 498 --

134 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
intrusions develop into clinical obsessions when they are misappraised as overly sig-
nificant, threatening, harmful, or as posing a threat for which the individual is per-
sonally responsible.
A number of similar cognitive-behavioral theories have been proposed, each
emphasizing a slightly different type of belief or appraisal of intrusive thoughts.
Salkovskis (1996), for example, emphasized inflated responsibility as a key cogni-
tive bias. Rachman (1997) emphasized the overimportance of thoughts. Clark (2004)
emphasized the need to control intrusive thoughts as the main dysfunctional belief.
A comprehensive model that incorporates all of these beliefs and appraisals was
developed by the Obsessive Compulsive Cognitions Working Group (e.g., Frost &
Steketee, 2002), which identified six domains of dysfunctional beliefs that play a role
in OCD, as described in Table 5.3. To illustrate, consider an unwanted image of mur-
dering a loved one. Most people would regard such a thought as “mental noise” (i.e.,
having no harm-related implications). Such an intrusion, however, might develop
into a clinical obsession if the person appraises it as having serious consequences,
for example, “This thought means I am a dangerous person.” Such appraisals evoke
anxiety and the urge to suppress or remove the unwanted intrusion and the anxiety
using compulsive rituals or other neutralizing strategies, and to avoid reminders of
the thought (e.g., by locking away all knives), to minimize worries about disasters.
Salkovskis (1996) proposed that compulsive rituals and avoidance develop into
strong patterns because they seem to work immediately (albeit temporarily) to reduce
distress and remove the unwanted obsessional thought, and are therefore negatively
reinforced. Such behaviors, however, also prevent the person from discovering that
the feared outcome (e.g., acting on a senseless intrusive thought) is highly unlikely
TABLE 5.4. Domains of Dysfunctional Beliefs Associated with OCD as Identified
by the Obsessive–Compulsive Cognitions Working Group
Belief domain 	Description
Excessive responsibility 	Belief that one has the special power to cause and/or the duty to
prevent negative outcomes.
Overimportance of thoughts 	Belief that the mere presence of a thought indicates that the
thought is significant. For example, the belief that the thought
has ethical or moral ramifications, or that thinking the thought
increases the probability of the corresponding behavior or
event.
Need to control thoughts 	Belief that complete control over one’s thoughts is both
necessary and possible.
Overestimation of threat 	Belief that negative events are especially likely and would be
especially awful.
Perfectionism 	Belief that mistakes and imperfection are intolerable.
Intolerance for uncertainty 	Belief that it is necessary and possible to be completely certain
that negative outcomes will not occur.

-- 155 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	135
in the first place. Thus, the mistaken interpretation of the thought persists, and the
obsessional fear is maintained.
Treatment approaches derived from the biological and psychological models are
reviewed in the following section on treatment outcome.
TREATMENT OUTCOME
Cognitive-behavioral models hold the greatest promise for understanding and treat-
ing OCD symptoms, as they are the only approaches that are empirically supported
and provide a logically consistent basis for treatment. In particular, from this per-
spective, successful treatment for OCD must (1) correct maladaptive beliefs and
appraisals that lead normal intrusive thoughts to escalate into obsessional fear and (2)
terminate avoidance and compulsive rituals that prevent the correction of these mal-
adaptive beliefs. This section provides a concise description of two interventions—
exposure and response prevention (ERP) and acceptance and commitment therapy
(ACT)—that are consistent with cognitive-behavioral models and can be used on
their own or in tandem to reduce OCD symptoms. Detailed guidelines for their use
are available in various treatment manuals (e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014).
Exposure and Response Prevention
Exposure therapy comprises a set of psychological treatment procedures designed
to help individuals confront stimuli that provoke obsessional fear, but that objec-
tively pose a low risk of harm. Exposure for OCD can occur in the form of repeated
encounters with the actual feared situations (situational exposure) and imaginal
confrontation with the feared disastrous consequences of confronting these situa-
tions (imaginal exposure). For example, an individual with obsessional thoughts of
harming children might for situational exposure be asked to go to playgrounds and
schools where there are small children. The individual might also practice imagi-
nal exposure to images of harming children. A patient with fears of contamination
from disabled persons might for situational exposure shake hands with a visually
impaired or hearing-impaired individual. For imaginal exposure, the patient would
then confront thoughts of losing their vision or hearing as a result of the encounter.
During exposure tasks, individuals are helped to put their fear predictions to the
test in a range of contexts and using varied fear stimuli, so they can learn that their
obsessional triggers are in fact safe. They are also helped to learn that obsessional
anxiety and uncertainty are safe and manageable, often by observing the naturally
occurring process of habituation in which anxiety temporarily increases followed by
a natural decline in distress.
The response prevention component of treatment entails refraining from com-
pulsive rituals and other strategies that serve as an escape from obsessional fear.
Response prevention helps to prolong exposure and facilitate safety learning. In the
earlier examples, the first patient might practice refraining from any strategies they
typically use to reassure themself that they won’t act on thoughts of harming chil-
dren. The second patient would be instructed to refrain from decontamination ritu-
als such as washing.

-- 156 of 498 --

136 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Most ERP treatment manuals (e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby 2014) recommend that
ERP be conducted over the course of 12–20 sessions. The initial few sessions include
a thorough assessment of obsessions, compulsive rituals, avoidance strategies, and
anticipated consequences of confronting feared situations. This information is used
to plan the specific ERP exercises that will be pursued. The therapist also never phys-
ically restrains the individual from performing rituals; rather, the therapist helps the
person to resist these behaviors. Exposure exercises may progress gradually using
a hierarchy—a list of feared situations and thoughts arranged from the least to the
most anxiety provoking—although this not required. Beginning exposure with less
anxiety-evoking tasks increases the likelihood that the patient will learn to manage
distress and fosters confidence in the treatment. At the end of each treatment session,
the therapist instructs the patient to continue exposure for several hours and in dif-
ferent environmental contexts, without the therapist.
Numerous studies involving thousands of individuals with OCD affirm that
ERP is an effective treatment for this condition. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
show the superiority of ERP over placebo treatments such as progressive muscle
relaxation training (e.g., Fals-Stewart, Marks, & Schafer, 1993), anxiety management
training (Lindsay, Crino, & Andrews, 1997), and pill placebo (Foa et al., 2005). RCTs
also show that ERP is more effective than the antidepressant clomipramine, believed
to be the most effective form of pharmacotherapy for OCD (Foa et al., 2005). Although
patients receiving ERP typically show a 50–60% reduction in their OCD symptoms,
some residual symptoms usually remain even posttreatment (Olatunji, Davis, Pow-
ers, & Smits, 2013).
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
ACT (Hayes, Stroshal, & Wilson, 2011) is a set of techniques that can be applied in
the treatment of OCD to help individuals foster a willingness to experience their
obsessional thoughts, uncertainty, and anxiety, and respond flexibly in the presence
of these unwanted private events (Twohig et al., 2015). ACT is also used to foster
improvements in quality of life and the pursuit of things the patient values in life.
The ACT perspective on OCD is consistent with the cognitive-behavioral model pre-
viously presented, as well as with ERP—in fact, one can implement ACT along with
ERP (e.g., Twohig et al., 2015). While an important goal of both ACT and ERP is to
broaden the patient’s engagement with feared stimuli and improve quality of life,
ACT explicitly focuses on (1) fostering willingness to experience obsessional dis-
tress, (2) recognizing thoughts and feelings as neither right nor wrong (i.e., “cogni-
tive defusion”), and (3) using treatment to move toward what one values in life. Most
ACT-based techniques take the form of metaphors that are discussed in the context
of OCD and its treatment, and are referred to throughout treatment to revisit the
processes described next.
Fostering Willingness
Willingness, in this context, refers to being open to “experiencing your own experi-
ences” without trying to change, avoid, or escape them. Metaphors, such as “two
scales,” “jerk at the door,” and “tug of war with a monster” (e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby,

-- 157 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	137
2014) can be used to help the patient understand the goal of treatment as developing a
healthier (more peaceful) relationship to OCD-related inner experiences.
Defusing from Thoughts and Feelings
Defusion strategies help people with OCD give less power to their anxiety-provoking
thoughts, feelings, and body sensations. More specifically, patients are helped
to shift away from evaluating these and other internal experiences as objectively
“good,” “bad,” “dangerous,” “immoral,” and so forth. Put another way, the aim is
to use metaphors (e.g., “passengers on the bus,” “becoming the chessboard”; e.g.,
Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014) to help the individual see obsessions and anxiety for
what they really are (streams of words, passing sensations), not what they say they
are (facts or dangers). Patients get to decide for themselves how much weight to give
to particular experiences.
Moving toward Values in Life
Improving patients’ quality of life is an important outcome of ACT, and a number
of exercises can be used to help patients realize that the hard work of treatment is
worthwhile.
Research on the efficacy of ACT for OCD is in its nascent stages, but preliminary
evidence is encouraging. Twohig and colleagues (2010) found that ACT is superior to
muscle relaxation at posttreatment and at follow-up, with between-group effect sizes
of 0.77 and 0.62, respectively. Nevertheless, when Twohig and colleagues (2018) com-
pared ACT-based ERP to standard ERP, there was no evidence that ACT enhances
the effects of ERP. Thus, further research on the effects of ACT and how it may best
be used in the treatment of OCD is warranted.
Hypothesized Mechanisms of Change in Psychological Treatments
From a learning perspective, ERP provides an opportunity for the extinction of con-
ditioned fear responses. Traditionally the efficacy of ERP was understood in terms of
emotional processing theory (EPT; Foa, Huppert, & Cahill, 2006; Foa & Kozak, 1986),
which credits initial fear activation followed by habituation as the mechanisms of
improvement. The basic assumptions of EPT, however, are not well supported by the
research evidence (Craske, Treanor, Conway, Zbozinek, & Vervliet, 2014): Habitua-
tion during ERP often fails to predict long-term outcomes, and successful outcomes
may occur in the absence of habituation.
Numerous developments in research on learning and memory relevant to expo-
sure and extinction point to inhibitory learning as the mechanism of extinction (e.g.,
Craske et al., 2014). From the inhibitory learning perspective, the original danger-
based association between the conditioned and unconditioned stimulus (e.g., “Floors
cause sickness,” and “Uncertainty about the future is intolerable”) remain intact dur-
ing ERP, while competing non-danger-based associations (e.g., “Floors are generally
safe,” “Uncertainty is manageable”) are formed.
Increasing willingness to experience fear and uncertainty, as in ACT, comple-
ments the goal of inhibitory learning. To the degree that distress is accepted (e.g.,

-- 158 of 498 --

138 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
“Anxiety is a part of life, so I’m better off learning to accept it rather than trying
to fight it”), inhibitory associations can be more robustly acquired (“If fear is tol-
erable, then I can push myself to try exposure therapy and learn that I can man-
age this acceptable risk”). Increasing tolerance for experiences such as fear, disgust,
and uncertainty also reduces the likelihood that an inevitable unexpected encounter
with one of these experiences in a new context (e.g., once treatment has ended) will
lead to the return of fear and a relapse.
Pharmacotherapy
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) medication is the most widely used
pharmacological treatment for OCD. The specific agents in this class of drugs include
fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, and fluvoxamine. Clomipramine, a tri-
cyclic medication that possesses serotonergic properties, is also used in the treat-
ment of OCD. On average, relative to placebo, SSRIs produce a 20–40% reduction in
obsessions and compulsions (Rauch & Jenike, 1998). The major strengths of a phar-
macological approach to treating OCD include the convenience and the little effort
required on the individual’s part. Limitations include the relatively modest improve-
ment and likelihood of residual symptoms, high rate of nonresponse (40–60% of
patients do not show any favorable response), and the prospect of unpleasant side
effects (which can often be stabilized by adjusting the dose). Moreover, once SSRIs
are terminated, OCD symptoms typically return rapidly (Pato, Zohar-Kadouch,
Zohar, & Murphy, 1988).
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF BASIC RESEARCH FOR TREATMENT
Various aspects of the psychopathology of OCD have direct treatment implications
and can be used to establish informal guidelines regarding the use of ERP and medi-
cation, or their combination. We discuss these implications in this section.
Poor Insight
Research consistently demonstrates that relative to individuals who recognize their
obsessions and compulsions as illogical and senseless, those with poor insight into
senselessness of their symptoms show attenuated response to both ERP and phar-
macotherapy (e.g., Foa et al., 1999). It appears that patients with poor insight have
difficulty consolidating information that is inconsistent with their obsessional fears;
thus, their beliefs and expectations of danger are not modified with repeated expo-
sure to obsessional cues. Moreover, because of their extreme fear, these patients
might not engage in ERP tasks as well as do those with good insight. As a result, they
do not gain opportunities to correct strongly held inaccurate beliefs and appraisals.
The reason that poor insight hinders response to medication is not well understood,
yet the fact that both of these treatments are attenuated by poor insight suggests that
augmentation strategies are necessary. In the case of psychological treatment, some
authors suggest the use of cognitive therapy approaches to help with verbally chang-
ing beliefs and appraisals rather than using exposure alone (McKay et al., 2015).

-- 159 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	139
Severe Depression
Between 25 and 50% of patients with OCD suffer from comorbid depressive disor-
ders (Abramowitz, 2004), and studies that have examined the effects of depressive
symptoms on the outcome of ERP have revealed that relative to mildly and mod-
erately depressed patients with OCD, those with severe depression—and indeed a
diagnosis of MDD—have attenuated outcomes with ERP. Perhaps because of their
high emotional activity, severely depressed individuals fail to undergo a reduction in
anxiety/distress (i.e., habituation) that normally occurs following extended exposure
to feared stimuli. Thus, depressed patients with OCD may not learn how to feel com-
fortable in the presence of obsessionally feared situations. Motivational difficulties,
which often accompany depression, may also account for poor treatment outcome;
that is, patients may not adhere to instructions to face their fears and resist urges to
ritualize if they are extremely depressed and unmotivated to help themselves. Some
research points to the use of antidepressant medication to help depressed patients
benefit from ERP (e.g., Simpson & Liebowitz, 2005). Other authors have proposed
that the use of cognitive therapy for both OCD and depression may enhance out-
come for this group of patients (Abramowitz, 2004).
Personality Disorders
The presence of certain personality traits and personality disorders is known to hin-
der response to ERP and medication for OCD (Steketee, Chambless, & Tran, 2001).
OCPD and histrionic personality disorder traits, for example, might interfere with
developing rapport and adherence to ERP instructions. If, however, a good thera-
peutic relationship can be developed, ERP can be successful despite these traits.
Clinicians should also consider that some patients with dramatic traits gain rein-
forcement for their OCD symptoms. In such circumstances, psychological treatment
approaches are unlikely to succeed because patients do not perceive themselves as
gaining rewards for their efforts to reduce obsessions and rituals. Individuals with
personality traits in the odd cluster (e.g., schizotypal personality disorder) present a
challenge for clinicians because such patients have a reduced ability to profit from
corrective information obtained during exposure or cognitive interventions.
Clinical Implications for Treatment Planning
with Different OCD Symptom Presentations
As described earlier in this chapter, the symptoms of OCD vary considerably. Below
are some specific treatment implications for particular presentations of this clinical
disorder.
Contamination Concerns
Contamination obsessions and decontamination rituals respond well to ERP involv-
ing planned exposure to sources of contamination, contaminated objects, or “dirty”
environments. Response prevention can pose a challenge, especially if the patient
fears situations such as using the bathroom, which will be confronted multiple times

-- 160 of 498 --

140 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
per day. Ideally, response prevention should include no washing at all, although
exceptions for bathroom use and before meals can be made initially (until such items
are confronted for exposure). If the patient is reluctant to end all washing, a limited
amount of ritualizing may be permitted per day, with gradual reductions over time.
It is important for the therapist to attend closely to the actual washing methods,
which may be lengthy, detailed, or completed according to a set of “rules.”
Order and Symmetry Concerns
This symptom dimension often responds well to ERP, which emphasizes the
response prevention component, because rather than specific obsessions, there may
be only anxiety about “not feeling right” unless rituals are carried out. Exposure
may involve deliberately leaving things “not just right”—pictures hung crookedly,
books arranged in a haphazard manner, doors left open, and so forth—in which case
the urge to complete the associated ordering or arranging rituals is resisted. The
focus is on tolerating the anxiety and “not just right” feelings, and finding out they
diminish with time, even without performing compulsive rituals.
Responsibility Obsessions and Checking Rituals
Responsibility obsessions often require the use of both situational exposure to feared
situations and imaginal exposure to feared consequences. For example, a woman
afraid of hitting pedestrians while she is driving, and who checks the roadside for
bodies, might perform situational exposure to driving in areas with high pedestrian
traffic (e.g., parking lots) and subsequently imagine that she hit someone but did not
realize it. Instead of acting on her urges to return to the parking lot to check, she
would be helped to use response prevention to remain exposed to her uncertainty
and learn that her obsessional anxiety eventually subsides. ACT might also be used
directly to address the tendency to resist feelings of guilt and respond as if inflated
perceptions of responsibility are accurate.
Mental Rituals
It has long been thought that mental rituals, which are often accompanied by dis-
turbing obsessional thoughts about violence (e.g., images of stabbing loved ones),
sex (e.g., doubts about whether one is becoming gay), and religion (e.g., blasphemous
ideas), are the most difficult presentation of OCD to manage with psychological treat-
ments. In addition to the typical anxiety and fear of acting on intrusive thoughts that
seem senseless, individuals with these types of symptoms often become concerned
that their obsessions reflect their true nature (e.g., “Why would I be thinking about
this if I didn’t really feel this way?”). It can be helpful for patients to know that “bad
thought OCD” tricks them in three ways: It says this thought is important, it means
something about them as a person, and the thought requires a response. Also, their
more typical thoughts, even if about difficult content, are not accompanied by a wave
of anxiety or distress.
An important goal for the clinician is to assess carefully rituals and other strate-
gies used to respond to such obsessions, and to avoid falling into the trap of labeling

-- 161 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	141
such individuals as “pure obsessional” even if no rituals can be observed. Most likely,
patients are using covert (mental) rituals and brief neutralizing strategies in response
to their obsessions. Mental rituals can take many forms, such as replacing a “bad”
thought with a “good” one, mentally blocking a “bad” thought by imagining an X
through it, saying a prayer, repeating magic words or phrases to oneself (“God keep
them safe”), or mentally reviewing one’s behavior for evidence of the trait concerned
about. One of the most problematic rituals or reactions for patients is when they check
for or believe they experience an arousal reaction in their groin to sexual intrusions.
Exposure therapy involves confronting stimuli that trigger obsessional thoughts
(e.g., places of worship, knives), as well as imaginal confrontation with the obsession
itself, and the feared consequences of not ritualizing (e.g., thoughts and images of
molesting children). Imaginal exposure tasks usually involve first writing scripts of
the patient’s obsessional fears that incorporate varying amounts of detail to modu-
late anxiety (e.g., “I have a thought about my grandmother dying, but I don’t say a
prayer for her. As a result, she dies, it is all my fault, and my family abandons me”).
The patient is then helped to record and listen to the scenario, or simply to read
it repeatedly until habituation occurs (i.e., the scene becomes “boring” or does not
provoke anxiety). In addition, the patient is helped to refrain from rituals that would
artificially reduce the obsession and the resulting anxiety. ACT techniques can be
used to further help the patient defuse from obsessional thoughts and learn how to
persist with valued activities without allowing these obsessions to get in the way.
Engaging Patients, Motivation, and Collaboration
Most psychological therapies require engaging patients and motivating them for
treatment, but this is especially true in the treatment of OCD when trying to con-
vince patients to confront anxiety-provoking thoughts, take perceived risks, and not
engage in behaviors that they believe are essential for their own (or others’) safety.
One thing that would surprise most clinicians who do not work in a cognitive-
behavioral format is how much education alone can help with engagement and moti-
vation. Patients often say to clinicians familiar with OCD, “You really get this” or
“You know what I am talking about,” just by the questions asked and the responses
provided by the knowledgeable therapist. This knowledge increases the therapist’s
credibility and increases hope that recovery is possible.
Especially with OCD symptoms that can seem “crazy,” it is comforting that there
is some explanation about how patients get stuck and why. Fortunately, education
about how OCD works both teaches the patient about the problem and leads directly
to how to treat it. Education is essential before any treatment can begin. Talking with
patients about the fact that they have a low tolerance for uncertainty and respond
more negatively to that uncertainty or intrusive thoughts often resonates with them.
Also discussing how rituals begin and are maintained—because they work in the
short run by decreasing anxiety—teaches patients why they feel better right after
they do their rituals. Explaining that everyone would do rituals if they felt it was the
only way to keep their family safe or protected expresses empathy and understand-
ing of what the client is experiencing. Indeed, rituals may seem like a small price to
pay if they were the only way and they worked. However, patients themselves know
and report that relief is short lived, and the concern repeats and repeats.

-- 162 of 498 --

142 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
The cruel trick of OCD is that performing the ritual makes obsessional thoughts
occur more frequent and the ritual feel more necessary. The short-term relief is
traded for longer-term loss of freedom and interference with living. The other lie
of OCD is that the intense distress the patient experiences after the obsession will
continue on—that day, that night, or longer, if the ritual is not performed. Cognitive-
behavioral therapists talk to patients about retraining their brains to respond differ-
ently to the error message or danger warning, and to break the cycle between the
ritual and relief. While education is not enough, therapists who use it are continually
reminded of how important it can be. This might be especially true of OCD because
so little about it seems to make sense, and patients not only know they are doing
“crazy” things but also know how difficult it feels to stop.
One important aspect of motivation is discussing the loss of freedom and time,
and ascertaining what the patient is missing because of OCD. They may lose time for
favored activities, sleep, enjoying a meal, being able to touch or hug a family mem-
ber, travel, and so forth. Each person is different, but it is important to have incentive
to start this effective but challenging treatment, and it has to be the patient’s own
motivation. Motivational interviewing, formal or informal, can be helpful to discuss
the reasons whether to change or not. It is important to be clear that it is fine to be
ambivalent and afraid, and most clients start that way. It is also crucial to talk to
patients about what they believe about the obsessions when in a state of calm, versus
in an OCD crisis moment.
The therapist sets the tone of a collaborative venture in discussing, planning,
and designing treatment goals. Patients are told that they are in charge of the pace
and content of their exposures, since they cannot and will not be forced to do any-
thing. However, the therapist will be using their knowledge to guide treatment, to
recommend and select goals, and to push patients past their comfort zone. Indeed,
patients need to understand that if they do not feel anxiety or distress at the begin-
ning of treatment and exposures, the treatment is not working. The goal is to start
with manageable levels of anxiety and easier tasks, and build competence and confi-
dence, session by session. It can be helpful to tell patients that most people with OCD
do not feel it until they see it for themselves by doing the treatment. Patients need to
experience that the distress goes away, lowers or at the least is tolerable.
While education is very important, clinical experience suggests that patients
only begin to believe in the treatment of OCD and hope for recovery when they
do something different relative to their OCD. What patients with OCD need, in
other words, are corrective experiences, particularly about the nature of anxiety and
their ability to tolerate it. In contrast, patients with OCD can be experts at engag-
ing therapists in endless discussions and questions about their fears and obsessions.
The anticipation and concern about exposure is often the most difficult part, so it is
important to pick a small threat exposure (something as small as writing K_ _ _ for
kill) soon and get to it rather than have anxiety build and allowing avoidance by
more explaining.
A more supportive, exploratory “talk-oriented” therapy can get hijacked by
OCD, with therapists’ spending session after session providing reassurance, answer-
ing questions, reviewing past events, or trying to be logical about OCD. While the
treatment of other anxiety-related problems may benefit from supportive therapy
or logical analysis of thought styles or patterns, OCD rarely does. Indeed, what is

-- 163 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	143
helpful is to perform early exposures with therapist supervision so that the patient
can understand and experience what exposure is like, see how to address issues that
arise, and modify tasks or goals as needed.
All of these components of treatment—education, defining the motivation, and
collaboration—are essential for all therapeutic approaches to be successful. These
components are a basis for a good therapeutic alliance. These factors, in addition to
empathy and soliciting regular feedback, about the working relationship have been
found to be associated with good outcomes for empirically supported treatments
across multiple disorders. These relationship qualities are likely to be especially
essential when treatment of OCD requires clients to take risks in facing fears, and
to trust the process and the therapist to do so. Many therapists who treat OCD have
had clients say, “I did not like this process or how you pushed me but it worked and
I am glad you did.” Compliance, an additional treatment variable with in-session
and out-of-session tasks, is crucial to the success of OCD treatment and likely is far
more important than in the treatment of other anxiety disorders or other disorders
overall.
Exposure and Response Prevention
The only way to do ERP is to face feared situations and to eliminate rituals. In other
words, a cognitive-behavioral therapist might distinguish between providing ther-
apy and treating OCD. Behavioral treatment of OCD cannot involve just talking; it
has to include doing. Rather than being asked, “What can’t you do?” the patient is
often asked, “What can you do?” Doing nothing is not an option for recovery. How-
ever, any small step can provide an opening.
For all OCD thoughts, but especially for intrusive bad thoughts, OCD therapists
are teaching clients to respond differently to the presence of a thought. Simply put,
we want to have patients label thoughts as just thoughts and nothing more. OCD
often presses patients to feel they have to respond to them, do something, or get
rid of them. So we teach patients to let OCD thoughts go in and go out, as they do
with other thoughts. Do not make efforts not to think or block thoughts. That does
not work, or it makes them come more frequently. But, also, do not hang on to the
thought through actions physical or mental (use it as reason to check, analyze evi-
dence for the bad thought, review the day, or replace it with a good thought). The
ACT approaches described below can also help with this for ERP, or as an alternative
treatment approach.
While the goal of the treatment of OCD is to eliminate rituals, there are a num-
ber of ways to address this other than full-scale elimination if this is not possible.
This is where the protocol-limited research programs and independent clinical work
may diverge. Often, after the education component is completed, the patient who is
not ready to begin exposure may be “deemed inappropriate for the treatment pro-
gram.” Some research-based programs require full adherence to a planned limita-
tion of rituals (e.g., a week of no washing or limited showering); however, only some
patients can do this, and other options are available for the private practice clini-
cian. Actually, the patients who agree readily to treatment and jump in are often the
easiest to treat. It is important to tell patients that while it may be more difficult and
anxiety provoking to try to eliminate rituals (e.g., washing only before meals or after

-- 164 of 498 --

144 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
going to the bathroom), they will get faster relief. While the former may be prefer-
able, a more gradual approach is workable, and more patients may be able to comply.
For all OCD symptom presentations, there are ways to delay or modify rituals.
Many patients are more willing to consider these as first steps to delay a ritual (e.g.,
delay checking for 20 minutes). The other option is to pick one period of day to be
OCD free (e.g., “From 9:00 to 12:00 P.M., I won’t rearrange things in my kitchen”).
Also, a patient can work to reduce the frequency of the ritual (limit reassurance ques-
tions to 10 rather than usual 30 per day). Finally, a patient can “do OCD wrong” (e.g.,
use two squirts of soap instead of four, or do their full OCD prayer ritual but in a
different order).
An important component of safety learning is having a plan for what to do
when anxiety persists during and after ERP sessions. Rather than white-knuckling it
through the experience, or trying to fight the anxiety, patients should engage in daily
activities. This helps them learn that uncertainty, anxiety, and obsessional thoughts
are manageable experiences that do not have to bully the person into avoidance or
interrupt or limit their activities. Also, clients need to have their OCD treatment
plan in mind or nearby, knowing how to react rather than just waiting for it to arise
and being surprised. This often involves written notes, reminders on phones, and
so forth, since being able to remember is difficult under stress and especially in the
beginning
Implications of Client Variables for Treatment Planning
As in the predictors of outcome for other anxiety disorders, severity of disorder,
comorbidity with other psychological disorders, and overvalued ideation of OCD
thoughts are predictors of poorer outcome in OCD treatment. It may be that these
patients show slower progress, need more sessions, set more modest goals, and dem-
onstrate more modest outcomes. However, clinically, we have found with OCD that
severity may interact with motivation, such that if the OCD is very distressing or
interfering, patients are motivated to reclaim their lives or “not want to continue
like this anymore.” If the client is willing, it may be helpful to attempt treatment
even with comorbid conditions because OCD is often easier to treat and quicker to
show treatment response, which can help with hope and motivation. Very serious
depression or substance use may require alternative psychosocial and/or medication
treatments before the person has enough energy and focus to engage in the challeng-
ing work of ERP. Overvalued ideation may require more cognitive therapy before
ERP can begin. Finally, demographic variables have not been strong predictors of
response to treatments for anxiety.
Group Therapy
A few studies have examined the effectiveness of group treatment (ERP and cogni-
tive therapy) for OCD (McLean et al., 2001). One strength of a group approach is
that patients can get support and understanding, and learn that they do not suffer
alone. Education about OCD can be delivered in a didactic format, since the general
cognitive-behavioral model of OCD applies to patients across symptom dimensions.
However, the symptom heterogeneity in OCD also limits this approach. Specifically,

-- 165 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	145
different patients in the group may require individual ERP plans that cannot practi-
cally be implemented in group format, or even within a group therapy room. Still,
patients may experience vicarious learning by watching others engage and manage
feared situations, and help their cohorts to challenge mistaken beliefs. Patients can
also provide support and encouragement to each other. There are also consumer-led
support groups that supplement professional treatment or help with relapse preven-
tion.
Partner or Family Involvement in Symptoms
Individuals with OCD who live with a partner (e.g., spouse) or relatives often involve
these other people in obsessions, avoidance, and compulsive rituals. For example, a
man with contamination obsessions required that his family take showers with a
specific type of soap before coming into his bedroom. In a less direct manner, OCD
can affect friends and coworkers. People interacting with individuals with OCD
often comply with requests to follow rituals, provide reassurance, and engage in
avoidance strategies to keep their loved ones from experiencing anxiety. Because
such accommodation is akin to OCD sufferers performing rituals by themselves, it
must be targeted in treatment, and the extent to which others can be helped to cut
down on such behavior is a predictor of more successful treatment outcome. Indeed,
family accommodation is one of the strongest predictors of symptom severity and
treatment outcome for both child and adult OCD. This is not that family behavior is
the cause of the OCD, but it certainly can maintain OCD. Families and spouses can
have a very positive impact on recovery. Additional suggestions for treating OCD in
the context of family accommodation can be found in Abramowitz and colleagues
(2013). In a more global manner, low levels of social support or, in contrast, high
levels of hostility and criticism, are negative predictors of outcome and influence
relapse across multiple disorders, including anxiety disorders. Therefore, interven-
tions that increase social support and decrease negative social interactions are likely
to impact treatment outcome. These interventions need to be “responsive.” Some
families are very supportive and have low levels of OCD accommodation. Other
family work is crucial for treatment success to address impediments that are clearly
present and impactful.
Relapse Prevention
For the majority of people with OCD, treatment produces noticeable improvement
in symptoms, but residual obsessional fears, avoidance, and compulsive urges usu-
ally remain (Abramowitz, 1998). In addition, these residual symptoms are likely to
wax and wane over time, often becoming more intense during periods of stress (e.g.,
relationship difficulties, job loss). Thus, any improvement attained during treatment
should be carefully monitored to ensure that temporary lapses do not turn into full-
blown relapses. Relapse prevention programs for OCD using ERP and cognitive
therapy have been developed and tested (e.g., Hiss, Foa, & Kozak, 1994), and can be
used as a way to taper off treatment.
An important part of preventing relapse is recognizing that obsessions and com-
pulsions may be inevitable. Thus, the patient should not be surprised or frightened

-- 166 of 498 --

146 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
by such symptoms when they occur. Cognitive therapy techniques can be used to
modify any maladaptive beliefs about the recurrence of symptoms (e.g., “It’s my
fault that I’m slipping,” “I’ll be back to how I was before treatment”). Psychoedu-
cation helps patients understand that OCD is usually a chronic problem, that they
should expect symptom exacerbation during times of life stress, and that they should
interpret symptoms within this framework and use the skills they have learned dur-
ing treatment to manage these residual problems. Relapse prevention also teaches
patients to recognize when new or different obsessions and compulsions arise, and
how to view these as similar to symptoms that may already have been addressed by
recognizing any rule or “have to” behavior is OCD and to recognize the function of
the behavior or compulsion to get rid of anxiety. Indeed, rapid application of ERP
techniques can prevent symptoms from escalating or interfering with functioning.
Other Treatment Approaches
While a wealth of research evidence supports the use of ERP, pharmacotherapy, and
to a lesser extent, ACT, other forms of psychotherapy have not been evaluated for
OCD. Mindfulness approaches, often a part of ACT protocols, provide clients with a
way to notice rather than react to their thoughts or feel compelled to action, and may
therefore be a helpful tool for addressing OCD. Unfortunately, at times, therapists
who do not use empirically supported approaches end up inadvertently reinforcing
OCD symptoms. For example, therapists who repeatedly try to provide reassurance
to patients with obsessional doubts—instead of helping them face their anxiety and
learn to manage obsessional uncertainty and doubt—are helping the patient ritualize
by reassurance seeking. Others try to “help” patients overcome obsessions by trying
to stop these thoughts (e.g., by snapping a rubber band on their arm when an obses-
sion comes to mind) rather than confront them therapeutically to learn that they are
not dangerous. This “thought stopping” technique, however, is akin to mental rituals
such as thought suppression, which, as we have discussed, do not work in the long
run (i.e., obsessions return, especially when the person tries to dismiss them). Finally,
the first inclination of many therapists when they see anxious and fearful individu-
als may be to try to soothe them, perhaps by teaching them relaxation strategies
or biofeedback. Unfortunately, however, this approach is the opposite of exposure
therapy, in which the person is helped to go toward anxiety in order to learn that it is
a temporary feeling, that, although unpleasant, is not dangerous. Approaches such
as these are not consistent with the conceptual models of OCD described earlier;
therefore, they are not likely to provide patients with long-term relief from obses-
sions and compulsions.
CONCLUSION
OCD is a severe and functionally impairing condition with a heterogeneous pre-
sentation. Even the most experienced clinicians find themselves at once astounded
and baffled by the complexity of the psychopathology, the rich patterns of anxiety-
provoking thoughts and anxiety-reducing behaviors, and the severity of the impair-
ments that occur in OCD. Although a definitive cause has not been established,

-- 167 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	147
various biological and psychological models have been proposed. Yet, as with many
psychological disorders, more is understood about the symptoms of OCD than about
its etiology. Fortunately, understanding the symptoms—specifically, that obsessional
thoughts provoke anxiety and compulsive rituals are performed to reduce anxiety—
has led to tremendous breakthroughs in treatment. Exposure, response prevention,
and ACT are all effective strategies for reducing symptoms, although each comes
with its own barriers to success. Many patients achieve excellent outcomes that were
unheard of before the 1960s, but residual symptoms are still the norm. The field has,
however, begun to identify factors that may reliably predict poorer response, such
as poor insight into the senselessness of obsessional fears, severe depression, and
family hostility.
Still, important topics require further study. For example, patient readiness
programs would ensure a lower refusal or premature dropout rate. Treatments that
teach partners (and other family members) effectively how to assist with a loved
one’s ERP would also prove beneficial given the high prevalence of relational prob-
lems and symptom accommodation in families of patients with OCD. From the clini-
cal perspective, providing successful treatment for OCD can be one of the greatest
challenges a therapist may experience. Yet the fact that most patients show at least
some response to contemporary cognitive and behavioral techniques and return
to meaningful and value driven lives makes working with this patient population
highly rewarding.
REFERENCES
Abramowitz, J. S. (1998). Does cognitive-behavioral therapy cure obsessive– compulsive dis-
order?: A meta-analytic evaluation of clinical significance. Behavior Therapy, 29, 339–355.
Abramowitz, J. S. (2004). Treatment of obsessive– compulsive disorder in patients with comor-
bid major depression. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 60, 1133–1141.
Abramowitz, J. S., Baucom, D. H., Wheaton, M. G., Boeding, S., Fabricant, L. E., Paprocki, C., &
Fischer, M. S. (2013). Enhancing exposure and response prevention for OCD: A couple-
based approach. Behavior Modification, 37(2), 189–210.
Abramowitz, J. S., Deacon, B., Olatunji, B., Wheaton, M. G., Berman, N., Losardo, D., . . . Hale,
L. R. (2010). Assessment of obsessive– compulsive symptom dimensions: Development
and evaluation of the Dimensional Obsessive– Compulsive Scale. Psychological Assess-
ment, 22, 180–198.
Abramowitz, J. S., & Jacoby, R. J. (2014). Obsessive– compulsive disorder in adults. Boston: Hogrefe.
Abramowitz, J. S., Schwartz, S. A., Moore, K. M., & Luenzmann, K. R. (2003). Obsessive–
compulsive symptoms in pregnancy and the puerperium: A review of the literature.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 17, 461–478.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Bandelow, B., Baldwin, D., Abelli, M., Altamura, C., Dell’Osso, B., Domschke, K., . . . Rie-
derer, P. (2016). Biological markers for anxiety disorders, OCD and PTSD—a consensus
statement: Part I. Neuroimaging and genetics. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 17(5),
321–365.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Univer-
sities Press.
Black, D. W., Gaffney, G., Schlosser, S., & Gabel, J. (1998). The impact of obsessive– compulsive

-- 168 of 498 --

148 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
disorder on the family: Preliminary findings. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186,
440–442.
Clark, D. A. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for OCD. New York: Guilford Press.
Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., & Vervliet, B. (2014). Maximizing
exposure therapy: An inhibitory learning approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 58,
10–23.
Enright, S. (1996). Obsessive– compulsive disorder: Anxiety disorder or schizotype? In R.
Rapee (Ed.), Current controversies in the anxiety disorders (pp. 161–190). New York: Guilford
Press.
Fallon, B. A., Javitch, J. A., Hollander, E., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1991). Hypochondriasis and
obsessive– compulsive disorder: Overlaps in diagnosis and treatment. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 52, 457–460.
Fals-Stewart, W., Marks, A. P., & Schafer, J. (1993). A comparison of behavioral group therapy
and individual behavior therapy in treating obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 189–193.
Foa, E. B., Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Kozak, M. J. (1999). Feared consequences, fixity
of belief and treatment outcome in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 30,
717–724.
Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., & Cahill, S. P. (2006). Emotional processing theory: An update. In
B. O. Rothbaum (Ed.), Pathological anxiety: Emotional processing in etiology and treatment
(pp. 3–24). New York: Guilford Press.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective informa-
tion. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20–35.
Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S., Campeas, R., Franklin, M. E., . . . Tu,
X. (2005). Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of exposure and ritual prevention, clo-
mipramine, and their combination in the treatment of obsessive– compulsive disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 151–161.
Frost, R. O., & Steketee, S. (2002). Cognitive approaches to obsessions and compulsions: Theory,
assessment, and treatment. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Gershuny, B. S., Baer, L., Radomsky, A. S., Wilson, K. A., & Jenike, M. A. (2003). Connections
among symptoms of obsessive– compulsive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder:
A case series. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 1029–1041.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2011). Acceptance and commitment therapy: The
process and practice of mindful change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Hiss, H., Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1994). Relapse prevention program for treatment of
obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 801–808.
Koran, L. M. (2000). Quality of life in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 23, 509–517.
Ladouceur, R., Freeston, M. H., Rheaume, J., Dugas, M. J., Gagnon, F., Thibodeau, N., & Fournier,
S. (2000). Strategies used with intrusive thoughts: A comparison of OCD patients with
anxious and community controls. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 179–187.
Lensi, F., Cassano, G. B., Correddu, G., Ravagli, S., Kunovac, J. L., & Akiskal, H. S. (1996).
Obsessive– compulsive disorder: Familial– developmental history, symptomatology,
comorbidity and course with special reference to gender-related differences. British Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 169, 101–107.
Lindsay, M., Crino, R., & Andrews, G. (1997). Controlled trial of exposure and response pre-
vention in obsessive– compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 135–139.
McKay, D., Abramowitz, J. S., Calamari, J. E., Kyrios, M., Radomsky, A. S., Sookman, D., . . .
Wilhelm, S. (2004). A critical evaluation of obsessive– compulsive disorder subtypes:
Symptoms versus mechanisms. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 283–313.

-- 169 of 498 --

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 	149
McKay, D., Sookman, D., Neziroglu, F., Wilhelm, S., Stein, D. J., Kyrios, M., . . . Veale, D. (2015).
Efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatry
Research, 225, 236–246.
McLean, P. D., Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S., Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., . . . Ander-
son, K. W. (2001). Cognitive versus behavior therapy in the group treatment of obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 205–214.
Mowrer, O. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New York: Wiley.
Nestadt, G., Samuels, J., Riddle, M. A., Liang, K.-Y., Bienvenu, O. J., Hoehn-Saric, R., . . . Cul-
len, B. (2001). The relationship between obsessive– compulsive disorder and anxiety and
affective disorders: Results from the Johns Hopkins OCD Family Study. Psychological
Medicine, 31, 481–487.
Olatunji, B. O., Davis, M. L., Powers, M. B., & Smits, J. A. (2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy
for obsessive– compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis of treatment outcome and modera-
tors. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47(1), 33–41.
Pato, M. T., Zohar-Kadouch, R., Zohar, J., & Murphy, D. L. (1988). Return of symptoms after
discontinuation of clomipramine in patients with obsessive– compulsive disorder. Amer-
ican Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1521–1525.
Rachman, S. (1997). A cognitive theory of obsessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 793–
802.
Rachman, S., & de Silva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal obsessions. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 16, 233–248.
Rasmussen, S. A., & Tsuang, M. T. (1986). Clinical characteristics and family history in DSM-
III obsessive– compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 317–322.
Rauch, S., & Jenike, M. (1998). Pharmacological treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder.
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work. London: Oxford
University Press.
Ricciardi, J. N., & McNally, R. J. (1995). Depressed mood is related to obsessions but not com-
pulsions in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 249–256.
Ruscio, A. M., Stein, D. J., Chiu, W. T., & Kessler, R. C. (2010). The epidemiology of obsessive–
compulsive disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Molecular Psychia-
try, 15(1), 53–63.
Russell, E. J., Fawcett, J. M., & Mazmanian, D. (2013). Risk of obsessive– compulsive disorder
in pregnant and postpartum women: A meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74(4),
377–385.
Salkovskis, P. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral approaches to the understanding of obsessional
problems. In R. Rapee (Ed.), Current controversies in the anxiety disorders (pp. 103–133).
New York: Guilford Press.
Saxena, S., Bota, R. G., & Brody, A. L. (2001). Brain–behavior relationships in obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 6, 82–101.
Simpson, H., & Liebowitz, M. (2005). Combining pharmacotherapy and cognitive behavioral
therapy in the treatment of OCD. In J. Abramowitz & A. Houts (Eds.), Concepts and con-
troversies in OCD (pp. 359–376). New York: Springer Science.
Skoog, G., & Skoog, I. (1999). A 40-year follow-up of patients with obsessive– compulsive dis-
order. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 121–127.
Steketee, G. S., Chambless, D. L., & Tran, G. Q. (2001). Effects of Axis I and II comorbidity on
behavior therapy outcome for obsessive– compulsive disorder and agoraphobia. Compre-
hensive Psychiatry, 42, 76–86.
Steketee, G., Eisen, J., Dyck, I., Warshaw, M., & Rasmussen, S. (1999). Predictors of course in
obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 89, 229–238.
Twohig, M. P., Abramowitz, J. S., Bluett, E. J., Fabricant, L. E., Jacoby, R. J., Morrison, K. L.,

-- 170 of 498 --

150 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
. . . Smith, B. M. (2015). Exposure therapy for OCD from an acceptance and commit-
ment therapy (ACT) framework. Journal of Obsessive– Compulsive and Related Disorders, 6,
167–173.
Twohig, M. P., Abramowitz, J. S., Smith, B. M., Fabricant, L. E., Jacoby, R. J., Morrison, K. L.,
. . . Ledermann, T. (2018). Adding acceptance and commitment therapy to exposure and
response prevention for obsessive– compulsive disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 108, 1–9.
Twohig, M. P., Hayes, S. C., Plumb, J. C., Pruitt, L. D., Collins, A. B., Hazlett-Stevens, H., &
Woidneck, M. R. (2010). A randomized clinical trial of acceptance and commitment ther-
apy versus progressive relaxation training for obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(5), 705–716.
Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Greenwald, S., Hwu, H.-G., Kyoon Lee, C., . . .
Cross National Collaborative Group. (1994). The cross national epidemiology of obses-
sive compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 55, 5–10.
Whiteside, S. P., Port, J. D., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2004). A meta-analysis of functional neuro-
imaging in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 132, 69–79.
Zohar, J., & Insel, T. R. (1987). Obsessive– compulsive disorder: Psychobiological approaches to
diagnosis, treatment, and pathophysiology. Biological Psychiatry, 22, 667–687.

-- 171 of 498 --

151
The adverse psychological effects of being exposed to a traumatic event have been
documented for many years. Earlier conceptualizations of traumatic stress typically
regarded these reactions as transient responses that would normally abate shortly
after trauma exposure. In the first edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM; American Psychiatric Association, 1952), traumatic stress
reactions were classified as acute posttrauma responses under gross stress reaction,
and longer lasting reactions were subsumed under the anxiety or depressive neuro-
ses. A major change occurred in the third edition of the DSM (American Psychiatric
Association, 1980), in which the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
was first introduced. This formal recognition of the syndrome was partly influenced
by the need to understand and meet the needs of veterans returning from Vietnam
with PTSD reactions. Our goal in this chapter is to provide an overview of the current
state of research and clinical guidelines in acute and posttraumatic stress disorders.
In the following sections, we first describe typical symptoms, course, classification,
associated clinical features, epidemiology, comorbidity, etiology, and risk factors.
Then we review PTSD treatment, clinical implications, and principles of change in
the treatment of PTSD. We address clinical considerations throughout the text to aid
in the translation of basic research into clinical practice.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS
Posttraumatic stress disorder describes severe and persistent stress reactions after
exposure to a traumatic event (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). How one
C H A P T E R 6
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Richard A. Bryant
Abigail Powers Lott
Terence M. Keane

-- 172 of 498 --

152 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
defines “trauma” varies, and the fifth edition of the DSM has specific criteria for what
constitutes trauma exposure (see pp. 271–274 of DSM-5 for a description of trauma
and full diagnostic criteria). PTSD comprises four symptom clusters reflecting intru-
sive symptoms, avoidance symptoms, negative alterations in mood and cognitions,
and alterations in arousal and reactivity. Criterion D represents a new component
of the PTSD diagnosis with the release of DSM-5 in that it separates avoidance from
other cognitive and emotional facets of the condition. This revision was made based
on accumulating evidence that effortful avoidance was distinct from mood and
numbing symptoms (Elhai & Palmieri, 2011). Cognitive distortions are also a central
part of PTSD and symptoms that were added to the negative alterations in cognitions
and mood cluster in DSM-5 now better capture trauma-related cognitive symptoms,
including negative beliefs about oneself and the world and distorted blame of self or
others related to the event (LoSavio, Dillon, & Resick, 2017).
Acute stress disorder (ASD), a diagnosis first included in DSM-IV, was intro-
duced for two primary reasons: to describe acute stress reactions that occur in the
initial month after trauma exposure, and to identify trauma survivors who are high
risk for developing subsequent PTSD (Harvey & Bryant, 2002). A major rationale
for the introduction of this diagnosis was because PTSD can only be diagnosed at
least 1 month following trauma, and there was a diagnostic gap in the initial month
of trauma. The lack of a formal diagnosis to describe posttraumatic stress in the
initial month potentially limited some trauma survivors’ ready access to mental
health services and, in this sense, a formal diagnosis was intended to alleviate this
potential barrier to care. In part due to the fact that ASD is not a clear predictor of
who develops PTSD, the disorder was reconceptualized in DSM-5 to broaden the
required symptoms and focus on individuals with severe stress reactions in need of
immediate clinical attention (Bryant, 2018). In DSM-5, the stressor criterion (Crite-
rion A) for acute stress disorder was also changed from DSM-IV. The criterion now
requires, as with PTSD, being explicit as to whether the qualifying traumatic events
were experienced directly, witnessed, or experienced indirectly. Also, DSM-IV Cri-
terion A2 regarding the subjective reaction to the traumatic event (e.g., “the person’s
response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror”) was eliminated. Based on
evidence that acute posttraumatic reactions are very heterogeneous and that DSM-
IV’s emphasis on dissociative symptoms was too restrictive, individuals may meet
diagnostic criteria in DSM-5 for acute stress disorder if they report any nine of 14
listed symptoms in these categories: intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoid-
ance, and arousal. Support for the inclusion (and previous focus on DSM-IV) of dis-
sociative symptoms in the ASD diagnosis to predict subsequent PTSD came from
evidence demonstrating an association between “peritraumatic dissociation” (i.e.,
dissociation occurring in the immediate aftermath of a traumatic experience) and
subsequent levels of PTSD, a finding that has been replicated across numerous longi-
tudinal studies (Murray, Ehlers, & Mayou, 2002).
COURSE
There is strong evidence that most people recently exposed to a traumatic experience
commonly report posttraumatic stress reactions in the initial weeks after trauma.

-- 173 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	153
Despite the prevalence of acute stress reactions, the majority of these stress responses
are transient (Bryant, 2003; Galatzer-Levy, Huang, & Bonanno, 2018). For example,
whereas 94% of rape victims displayed sufficient PTSD symptoms 2 weeks post-
trauma to meet criteria (excluding the 1-month time requirement), 11 weeks later this
rate dropped to 47% (Rothbaum, Foa, Riggs, Murdock, & Walsh, 1992). In another
study, 70% of women and 50% of men were diagnosed with PTSD at an average of
19 days after an assault; the rate of PTSD at 4-month follow-up dropped to 21% for
women and zero for men (Riggs, Rothbaum, & Foa, 1995). Similar patterns have been
observed following motor vehicle accidents (Blanchard, Hickling, Barton, & Taylor,
1996), the New York terrorist attacks (Galea et al., 2003), and the 2004 tsunami (van
Griensven et al., 2006).
Despite a general trend for people to adapt after trauma, it is also important to
note that there are different trajectories from acute reactions to chronic PTSD. The
main exemplar of a different trajectory is delayed-onset PTSD. Delayed onset is an
uncommon response in civilian populations, although there is some evidence that
it is more common in military contexts (for a review, see Andrews, Brewin, Phil-
pott, & Stewart, 2007). Although the mechanisms underpinning delayed-onset PTSD
are not well understood, several explanations have been offered. These include the
implementation of numbing responses that inhibit expression of distress (Horowitz
& Solomon, 1975), preoccupation with more immediate needs (e.g., pain, surgery)
that distract attention from one’s symptoms (Andreasen, 2004), the increase of stress-
ors in the posttrauma period that compound the initial stress response (Bryant &
Harvey, 2002), or rising demands on cognitive resources that are required to man-
age emotional responses and then lead to increased distress (Grossman, Levin, Kat-
zen, & Lechner, 2004). There is evidence that it represents subsyndromal levels of
PTSD that accumulate over time, potentially as a function of increasing posttrau-
matic stress; that is, prospective evidence indicates that cases described as delayed
onset actually display elevated levels of posttraumatic stress in the initial period
after the trauma (Andrews et al., 2007; Horesh, Solomon, Keinan, & Ein-Dor, 2013).
Interesting evidence on this issue emerged in a study on the trajectory of adaptation
after Hurricane Katrina, which indicated that rates of PTSD actually increased over
time following Hurricane Katrina (Kessler et al., 2008). It is possible that the lengthy
periods of relocation, lack of housing, and loss of basic infrastructures resulted in
increased psychological strain, which led to rising rates of PTSD. As mentioned ear-
lier, delayed-onset PTSD appears to be more common in military settings than in
civilian contexts, with accumulating evidence from military populations that sol-
diers do not appear to have PTSD immediately after deployment but do develop the
disorder months later (Andrews et al., 2007; Horesh, Solomon, Keinan, & Ein-Dor,
2013). One possibility is that the relief of leaving the immediate context of threat
and the attention given to soldiers in the immediate postdeployment environment
result in a period of minimal posttraumatic stress; however, as time passes, they are
increasingly aware of the negative aftereffects of their trauma.
It is also worth noting that our understanding of the course of traumatic stress
has become more sophisticated in recent years, as studies have included multiple
time points that allow closer analysis of the course of PTSD over time. For example,
one large study of traumatic injury patients revealed that rather than following a
linear course, at least half of people who have PTSD at one time may not have it at

-- 174 of 498 --

154 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
a subsequent assessment—and then have a worsening of their condition at another
subsequent assessment (Bryant, O’Donnell, Creamer, McFarlane, & Silove, 2013).
This evidence highlights that PTSD can be a dynamic condition that tends to fluctu-
ate according to current life stressors. The course of PTSD has also been the subject
of many studies that have used latent growth mixture modeling, which allows iden-
tification of classes of individual variation over time and describes distinct classes
of trajectory. These studies have reliably demonstrated (1) a resilient class that con-
sistently shows few PTSD symptoms, (2) a recovery class with initial distress then
gradual remission, (3) a delayed reaction class with initial low symptom levels but
increased symptoms over time, and (4) a chronic distress class with consistently high
PTSD levels (Bryant et al., 2015; deRoon-Cassin et al., 2010; Galatzer-Levy et al., 2018).
There is also evidence using network analysis that PTSD as a cohesive construct
develops in the months after trauma exposure; this statistical approach focuses
on relationships between symptoms, which shows that PTSD symptoms are more
loosely interconnected in the acute posttrauma phase, and become more cohesively
interrelated in the following months (Bryant et al., 2017).
This convergent evidence underscores the challenges of predicting subsequent
PTSD from acute reactions because PTSD does not appear to follow a linear course.
Although there is evidence of an association between elevated PTSD symptoms in
the acute phase and development of later PTSD (Jehel, Paterniti, Brunet, Duchet, &
Guelfi, 2003; Karstoft, Galatzer-Levy, Statnikov, & Shalev, 2015; Shalev & Freedman,
2005), these reported associations do not provide us with adequate cutoffs to reli-
ably determine who will develop PTSD. One way of improving possible early detec-
tion of who will develop PTSD comes from a consortium that recently combined
2,473 trauma survivors from 10 longitudinal studies that used a likelihood estimate
approach (Shalev et al., 2019). This study revealed that if a patient reported elevated
PTSD severity, female gender, less than secondary-level education, and history of
interpersonal trauma, that person had a 34% greater likelihood of developing PTSD
than someone without these risk factors. The type of trauma is also a critical factor to
consider, with assaultive injuries being particularly predictive of subsequent devel-
opment of PTSD (Lowe et al., 2020).
CLASSIFICATION
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
In the discussions preceding DSM-5, considerable attention was devoted to the clas-
sification of PTSD, in terms of both where it belongs in the broader spectrum of
psychiatric disorders and its own definition. One important decision was to reclas-
sify PTSD in a new category of trauma-related and stressor-related disorders (rather
than with the anxiety disorders, where it appeared in DSM-IV). Debate focused on
the possibility of identifying a subset of anxiety disorders termed “fear circuitry dis-
orders” that arise after a traumatic/stressful event. Some experts proposed that this
category would include PTSD, panic disorder/agoraphobia, social anxiety disorder,
and specific phobia (Andrews, Charney, Sirovatka, & Regier, 2009). Although there is
some evidence that aversive or traumatic experiences do precede onset of panic dis-
order (Manfro et al., 1996) and social phobia (McCabe, Antony, Summerfeldt, Liss, &
Swinson, 2003), other evidence suggests a different pattern (Rapee, Litwin, & Barlow,

-- 175 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	155
1990). There is also strong evidence that a range of other disorders develop after
trauma exposure. Depression is a commonly observed psychological disorder in sur-
vivors of traumatic events, along with various anxiety disorders (Bonde et al., 2016;
Knowles, Sripada, Defever, & Rauch, 2019; Rytwinski, Scur, Feeny, & Youngstrom,
2013). After the Oklahoma City bombing, 22% of people suffered depression, 9% had
alcohol use disorder, 7% suffered panic disorder, 4% had generalized anxiety disor-
der, and 2% had drug use disorder; overall, 30% of people had a psychiatric disorder
other than PTSD (North et al., 1999). In another study of over 1,000 traumatic injury
survivors, depression was the most common disorder (16%), followed by generalized
anxiety disorder (11%), agoraphobia (9%), and PTSD (9%) (Bryant et al., 2010). These
patterns highlight that PTSD is not the only condition that can develop following
trauma. However, the evidence that these other disorders are not distinctive to the
aftermath of trauma is not consistent with their being part of a fear circuitry cat-
egory. Another challenge is that the fear circuitry construct does not give adequate
attention to other emotions associated with PTSD, including sadness, grief, anger,
guilt, and shame (Friedman, Resick, Bryant, & Brewin, 2011).
One line of research supporting the fear circuitry category comes from neu-
roimaging research. The prevailing model of fear circuitry posits that these disor-
ders are characterized by impaired medial prefrontal cortex activation, which leads
to excessive amygdala response, and this network is responsible for fear reactivity
(Charney, 2003). An increasing body of evidence indicates that whereas fear circuitry
disorders tend to be characterized by excessive amygdala reactivity, and to a lesser
extent impaired regulation of that response by the medial prefrontal cortex (e.g.,
Shin & Liberzon, 2010), different neural networks appear to be involved in nonfear
circuitry anxiety disorders (e.g., Duval, Javanbakht, & Liberzon, 2015; Rauch et al.,
2007). It is important to acknowledge the heterogeneity of PTSD as a disorder and
its components beyond fear-based symptoms. For example, in considering the anhe-
donic symptoms of PTSD, deficits in reward processing for individuals with PTSD
have also been found (see Nawijn et al., 2015, for a review). Additionally, there is
evidence for the dissociative subtype characterized by increased activation of medial
prefrontal regions and hyperinhibition of the amygdala and other limbic regions
(Lanius, Brand, Vermetten, Frewen, & Spiegel, 2012).
Although we have thus far focused primarily on the diagnosis of PTSD based
on DSM-5, it is important to note differences between how PTSD is represented
in DSM-5 and in the 11th revision of the International Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems (ICD-11; World Health Organization [WHO], 2019), and how
that may affect case conceptualization and treatment. As mentioned earlier, DSM-5
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) includes 20 symptoms and four symptom
clusters: intrusions, active avoidance, negative alterations in cognitions and mood,
and arousal. A dissociative subtype reflecting the presence of either derealization
or depersonalization is also included. The ICD-11 has a narrower definition of PTSD
than does the DSM-5. Specifically, PTSD includes only six symptoms, categorized
into three core symptom clusters: intrusions, avoidance of trauma-related thoughts
and behaviors, and an ongoing sense of threat (hyperarousal and startle response)
(Maercker et al., 2013). The symptoms must cause significant functional impairment
and have been present for several weeks. A major goal of the revision to ICD-11 PTSD
criteria was to reduce symptom overlap with other disorders and focus on symptoms
that best discriminate PTSD from other disorders (Brewin et al., 2017). There has

-- 176 of 498 --

156 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
been some evidence that the ICD-11 definition of PTSD better fits data across varied
trauma types and reduces comorbidity with depression in comparison to the DSM-5
definition of PTSD (Hansen, Hyland, Armour, Shevlin, & Elklit, 2015; Morina, van
Emmerik, Andrews, & Brewin, 2014). Other research suggests that the narrow ICD-
11 definition of PTSD may result in underdiagnosis of PTSD and may miss individu-
als in need of treatment (Hafstad, Thoresen, Wentzel-Larsen, Maercker, & Dyb, 2017;
Wisco et al., 2016).
Complex PTSD (CPTSD) is a new diagnosis in ICD-11 characterized by distur-
bances in self-organization that often result from exposure to chronic trauma that
cannot be easily escaped (e.g., childhood sexual abuse, intimate partner violence,
torture) (Maercker et al., 2013). The ICD-11 CPTSD diagnosis requires the presence
of PTSD based on the three ICD-11 symptom clusters described earlier and includes
three additional symptom clusters related to disturbances in self-organization,
including affect dysregulation, negative self-concept, and difficulties in relation-
ships (Cloitre, Garvert, Brewin, Bryant, & Maercker, 2013; WHO, 2019). CPTSD was
first introduced by Herman (1992), who described the impact of repeated traumatic
stressors on self-organization that can develop uniquely from PTSD symptoms. The
ICD-11 CPTSD diagnosis stems from the DSM-IV disorder of extreme stress not
otherwise specified (DESNOS) diagnosis (van der Kolk, Roth, Pelcovitz, Sunday, &
Spinazzola, 2005). Numerous studies have supported CPTSD as a distinct disorder
(Brewin et al., 2017; Cloitre et al., 2013). However, there remains controversy over the
clinical utility of CPTSD beyond other disorders with overlapping symptoms, such
as PTSD and borderline personality disorder (Jowett, Karatzias, Shevlin, & Albert,
2020; Wolf et al., 2015), and as a result, CPTSD was not included as a diagnosis in
DSM-5 (Resick et al., 2012).
Acute Stress Disorder
Since its introduction, the ASD diagnosis has been widely criticized for several rea-
sons. In terms of describing acute posttraumatic stress, approaches that focus on fear
responses alone may neglect other psychological reactions (Isserlin, Zerach, & Solo-
mon, 2008). In contrast to ASD, the construct of acute stress reactions described in
ICD-11 (WHO, 2019) conceptualizes acute stress reaction as a transient reaction that
can be evident immediately after the traumatic event and usually resolves within
2–3 days after trauma exposure. This transient reaction may include a range of emo-
tional, cognitive, behavioral, or somatic reactions. Importantly, acute stress reaction
is no longer included as a diagnosis in ICD-11, but instead is included in the factors
influencing health section in the context of problems associated with harmful or
traumatic events. This change was made in part in order to normalize reactions to
trauma, while still allowing for clinical intervention as a response to amorphous
acute stress reaction as needed (Maercker et al., 2013). It is important to note that
ICD-11 does not hold the same 1-month posttrauma requirement for PTSD diagnosis
as DSM-5, so the need to address symptoms within the first month following trauma
exposure may be somewhat reduced.
A secondary goal of the ASD diagnosis is to discriminate between recent trauma
survivors who are experiencing transient stress reactions and those who are suffer-
ing reactions that will persist into long-term PTSD. A large number of prospective
studies have assessed trauma survivors for ASD in the initial month after trauma

-- 177 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	157
and subsequently assessed for PTSD months or years later (for a review, see Bryant,
2011). Across these studies, at least half of trauma survivors with ASD subsequently
meet criteria for PTSD. In contrast, the majority of survivors who eventually devel-
oped PTSD did not initially meet ASD criteria. This pattern suggests that if a major
goal of ASD is to predict who will subsequently develop PTSD, it is failing to identify
half of those who will meet criteria for PTSD at some later time.
DSM-5 reformulated the construct of ASD so that its basis is not solely as a state
that predicts PTSD. Evidence over the past two decades suggests that ASD does not
seem to be able to identify the majority of people who develop PTSD upon exposure
to a traumatic event (Bryant, Friedman, Spiegel, Ursano, & Strain, 2011). For the cur-
rent DSM edition, the goal is to describe severe acute stress reactions that may or
may not be transient responses but might nonetheless benefit from mental health
interventions. The ASD definition now requires that the patient satisfy a minimum
of nine out of a total 14 potential symptoms in recognition that ASD presentations
are heterogeneous.
Clinical Considerations with Classification
Since trauma is so ubiquitous and certain types of trauma exposure are related to
increased risk for PTSD, it is important to assess for trauma exposure and related
PTSD symptoms in clinical assessments to ensure that something critical is not
missed. As described earlier, PTSD is not the only psychological disorder to develop
as a result of trauma, so an individual’s presenting concern may not include trauma-
specific symptoms. Clinicians should keep in mind that the client’s understanding of
the potential connectedness between psychological symptoms and trauma exposure
may vary. Additionally, the dynamic nature of PTSD means that symptoms may
come and go, and may be influenced by changing environmental factors or stress.
When asking about trauma exposure, it is helpful to ask about specific traumas and
obtain enough information to understand broadly what happened without asking
for so much detail as to unnecessarily retraumatize the individual during the assess-
ment process. As described later, a major component of trauma-focused treatment
is going into significant detail about the trauma memory; however, in the context of
initial clinical assessment and case conceptualization, that level of detail is unnec-
essary. If a patient is sharing significant detail early on, it can be helpful to praise
their openness and acknowledge that there will be later opportunities to go into
detail, while gently redirecting to the goals of the assessment sessions. Exact diagno-
sis will clearly depend on the classification system that is used; however, it is help-
ful to remember that even clinically significant subthreshold symptoms that cause
functional impairment can be addressed in the context of trauma-focused treatment.
ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES
There is much evidence that PTSD is linked to a wide range of other mental health
and psychosocial problems, both of which contribute to impaired functioning and
also compound the PTSD itself. PTSD has been linked to a large range of impairment
indicators, including difficulties with employment, homelessness, social engage-
ment, intimate partner relationships, and parenting, as well as poorer self-rated

-- 178 of 498 --

158 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
health and higher utilization of medical services (Rodriguez, Holowka, & Marx,
2012; Tuerk et al., 2013). Impairment is associated with a wide range of PTSD symp-
toms (Ross, Murphy, & Armour, 2018), although there is evidence that avoidance and
numbing are the PTSD symptoms that most contribute to impairment (Shea, Vuja-
novic, Mansfield, Sevin, & Liu, 2010). There is convergent evidence that trauma expo-
sure is linked to a range of poor physical health outcomes, and it appears that this
effect can be largely attributed to PTSD (Schnurr, Wachen, Green, & Kaltman, 2014).
Several mechanisms have been proposed for this relationship, including biological
(e.g., increased cardiovascular reactivity, altered hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
[HPA] activity), behavioral (e.g., increased substance use, smoking), and psychologi-
cal (e.g., chronic depression, hostility) factors that may impair health (Friedman &
McEwen, 2004). PTSD is also linked to impaired sleep function (Germain, McKeon,
& Campbell, 2017); not only do nightmares and hyperarousal lead to sleep distur-
bance, but also sleep disturbance immediately prior to trauma exposure enhances
risk for PTSD (Bryant, Creamer, O’Donnell, Silove, & McFarlane, 2010). Finally, it is
important to note that suicide risk is increased with PTSD across veteran and civilian
populations (Gradus, 2018; Krysinska & Lester, 2010). The association between PTSD
and suicide is complex, and the issue of suicide risk in PTSD is particularly relevant
because of the elevated rates of suicidality in other mental disorders (e.g., depression)
that are highly comorbid with PTSD.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Population studies have shown that the majority of people in the community have
been exposed to traumatic stressors. The U.S. National Comorbidity Survey indi-
cated that 61% of randomly sampled adults reported exposure to a traumatic stressor
(Kessler, Sonnega, Hughes, & Nelson, 1995). More recent national- and community-
level assessments indicate that closer to 90% of adults are exposed to a traumatic
stressor (Breslau, 2009; Kilpatrick et al., 2013). Despite the frequency of exposure to
potentially traumatizing events, relatively few people actually develop PTSD. For
example, the National Comorbidity Survey revealed that only 20.4% of the women
and 8.2% of the men ever developed PTSD (Kessler et al., 1995). Similarly, based on
DSM-5 criteria, the National Stressful Events Survey revealed that only 12.8% of the
women and 5.7% of the men had developed PTSD (Kilpatrick et al., 2013). Consistent
evidence supports greater risk for the development of PTSD in women than men that
is not attributable to type or frequency of trauma exposure (Breslau, 2009); although
factors increasing women’s risk are not fully understood, there is growing evidence
of the importance of neurobiological differences that may contribute to women’s
increased risk (Pineles, Hall, & Rasmusson, 2017).
Prevalence rates are not the same everywhere. Across countries and cultural
settings there is marked variability in the occurrence of PTSD. The World Mental
Health Survey has conducted the most global analysis of PTSD rates, and this study
found that DSM-IV-defined PTSD (12-month prevalence rates) was higher in high-
income countries (Northern Ireland = 3.8%; United States = 2.5%; New Zealand =
2.1%) than in low-income countries (Columbia = 0.3%; Mexico = 0.3%) (Karam et al.,
2014). These studies indicate that the normative response following trauma exposure
is to adapt to the experience and to not develop PTSD.

-- 179 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	159
There is good evidence that PTSD risk is associated with different types of trau-
matic events. The risk for PTSD is lower following natural disasters (5–10%) relative
to sexual assault (>40%) (Creamer, Burgess, & McFarlane, 2001; Kessler et al., 1995).
Also, interpersonal violence typically is associated with higher risk for PTSD, and
particularly following sexual violence (Forbes et al., 2012, 2014). The World Mental
Health Survey reported that organized, physical, or sexual violence increased risk
for PTSD (Liu et al., 2017). In short, a person is more likely to develop PTSD when
they experience prolonged and severe trauma. This includes individuals living in
civil conflict and refugees (Charlson et al., 2019). Military combat is also associated
with increased risk for PTSD (Kilpatrick et al., 2013).
It is worth noting that comparing prevalence rates across studies is difficult
because of methodological differences, different patterns in trauma exposure, vari-
ability in access to health care, and cultural distinctiveness in the definition of post-
traumatic symptoms. Accordingly, to address the role of race and ethnicity in PTSD,
it is important to consider racial and ethnic variation in similar settings, with expo-
sure to comparable traumatic events. In this context, there are different prevalence
rates across racial and ethnic groupings. For example, in the wake of the September
11, 2001, terrorist attack in New York, Hispanic, Black, and other racial and ethnic/
minority individuals were more likely than White individuals to develop PTSD
(Adams & Boscarino, 2005; DiGrande et al., 2008). Of note, a recent review shows evi-
dence of increased conditional risk for PTSD in Latinx adults (Alcántara, Casement,
& Lewis-Fernandez, 2013). In addition to civilian samples, there is also evidence in
military samples that minorities are particularly at risk of PTSD development (Sch-
lenger et al., 1992; Smith, Goldstein, & Grant, 2016). It is difficult to identify the reason
for this pattern; it may be attributable to lower socioeconomic status and associated
resource availability to manage trauma, the ongoing chronic stress of racial discrimi-
nation, or cultural differences in expressing and coping with adversity (Ruef, Litz,
& Schlenger, 2000). Evidence of lifetime rates of PTSD as high as 50% in low-income
urban minority communities (Gillespie et al., 2009) highlights how critical it is to
understand the intersection between sociocultural factors that increase risk and
ensure that interventions are developed to target those at highest risk.
Clinical Considerations for Epidemiology
There is significant awareness of the need to treat PTSD and other trauma-related
symptoms in veterans, and many resources have been put toward these efforts.
However, for other at-risk groups, such as low-income minority individuals, aware-
ness and resources are more limited. While stigma and barriers exist for treatment
engagement in both veterans and civilians, these are particularly present for civil-
ians who often are unaware that PTSD is something other than a “war-related” prob-
lem. For those working in settings that serve underserved and underprivileged com-
munities, trauma-informed care and screening for trauma and PTSD are critical.
COMORBIDITY
There is overwhelming evidence that PTSD is more often associated with other psychi-
atric disorders than occurring as the sole diagnosis. Lifetime comorbidity prevalence

-- 180 of 498 --

160 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
rates with PTSD have been reported in at least two-thirds of cases (Kessler et al., 1995).
Recent estimates in veterans with PTSD show similar rates (Smith et al., 2016). The
major overlap is between PTSD and depression, anxiety disorders, and substance use
disorders. Although it is possible that a degree of comorbidity may be attributed to
overlapping symptoms between PTSD and both depressive and anxiety disorders,
evidence indicates that there is marked comorbidity with these disorders and PTSD,
even when researchers control for this overlap (Flory & Yehuda, 2015). There is also
considerable comorbidity with personality disorders (Smith et al., 2016). PTSD has fre-
quently been shown to be comorbid with borderline personality disorder, which argu-
ably is not surprising, as there is often a significant trauma history in the profiles of
those with borderline personality disorder (Golier et al., 2003). There is also significant
overlap between PTSD and antisocial personality disorder (Sareen, Stein, Cox, & Has-
sard, 2004); it has been suggested that the antisocial tendencies may precede the PTSD,
and that dangerous behaviors may predispose the person to suffer traumatic events.
Two major mechanisms have been proposed to explain these high rates of
comorbidity. One pathway may involve people developing a psychiatric disorder,
which predisposes them to experiencing trauma and associated PTSD. The other
pathway is the primary onset of PTSD, which leads to simultaneous or subsequent
comorbid disorders. It appears that a significant proportion of comorbid cases reflect
the development of PTSD after the initial onset of another disorder (Breslau, 2009).
Anxiety disorders and substance use disorders may be particularly influential in
increasing risk for trauma exposure and PTSD (e.g., Stein et al., 2002). There is also
strong evidence that much comorbidity development follows PTSD onset, implying
that PTSD can increase the likelihood of developing distinct disorders (Breslau, 2009;
Perkonigg, Kessler, Storz, & Wittchen, 2000). One important consequence of PTSD is
increased substance use, which has been conceptualized as a form of self-medication
and can lead to marked long-term dysfunction in the context of chronic PTSD (Hawn,
Cusack, & Amstadter, 2020; Ouimette, Read, Wade, & Tirone, 2010).
ETIOLOGY
Learning and Biological Theories of PTSD
Biological models of PTSD have predominantly focused on fear conditioning concepts
to explain the genesis and maintenance of PTSD (Milad, Rauch, Pitman, & Quirk,
2006). Fear conditioning models posit that when a traumatic event (unconditioned
stimulus) occurs, people typically respond with fear (unconditioned response). It is
argued that the strong fear elicited by the trauma will lead to strong associative
conditioning between the fear and the events surrounding the trauma. As remind-
ers of the trauma occur (conditioned stimuli), people then respond with fear reac-
tions (conditioned response). It is postulated that release of stress neurochemicals
(including norepinephrine and epinephrine) in the context of the traumatic experi-
ence results in very strong conditioning and overconsolidation of trauma memories
(Rauch, Shin, & Phelps, 2006). This model proposes that successful recovery from
trauma involves extinction learning, in which repeated exposure to trauma remind-
ers or memories results in new learning that these reminders no longer signal threat
(Davis & Myers, 2002).

-- 181 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	161
In support of these proposals, there is evidence that people who eventually
develop PTSD display elevated resting heart rates (Shalev et al., 1998) and respiration
rates (Bryant, Creamer, O’Donnell, Silove, & McFarlane, 2008) in the initial days after
trauma. There have been reports that other indices of elevated arousal in the imme-
diate posttrauma phase are associated with subsequent PTSD, such as lower gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels (Vaiva et al., 2006). Psychophysiological studies
during the acute trauma phase have also explored the responses of individuals using
their own recollections of the trauma as the eliciting stimulus. A study of patients
in the Emergency Department posttrauma found that higher skin conductance
response during a bedside trauma interview was predictive of the development of
chronic PTSD (Hinrichs et al., 2019). Other paradigms using trauma narratives in the
acute trauma phase also find larger psychophysiological responses, including heart
rate and skin conductance among those who go on to develop PTSD (Goodman &
Griffin, 2018; Gutner et al., 2010). Importantly, psychophysiological response (acous-
tic startle response, skin conductance) is also an indicator of treatment response in
trauma-focused treatment (Maples-Keller et al., 2019; Wangelin & Tuerk, 2015).
Biological models propose that PTSD occurs when the amygdala is hyperre-
sponsive to fear-related stimuli and there is a concomitant lack of “top-down” inhi-
bition from the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC; Rauch et al., 2006). There is reduced
MPFC recruitment in PTSD during fear processing, particularly in rostral anterior
cingulate cortex (Hayes, Hayes, & Mikedis, 2012; Shin et al., 2005). There is also evi-
dence for increased amygdala response to fear stimuli in PTSD (see review by Patel,
Spreng, Shin, & Girard, 2012), although individuals with the dissociative subtype of
PTSD may not show this pattern and instead show hyperinhibition of the amygdala
and other limbic regions (Lanius et al., 2012). Impairment in hippocampal activation
is also implicated in individuals with PTSD, representing deficits in memory and in
the ability to use contextual cues appropriately in the context of fear learning (Joshi,
Duval, Kubat, & Liberzon, 2020). It is worth noting that trauma-focused therapy is
conceptualized as a form of extinction learning, in which conditioned fear responses
are inhibited by learning of new, safe associations (Rothbaum & Davis, 2003). In
this context, it is interesting to note that the same neural networks implicated in
extinction learning are also involved in successful cognitive-behavioral treatment
(CBT; described in the treatment section below). The neural mechanisms implicated
in extinction learning (i.e., MPFC–amygdala network) have been shown to predict
positive response to CBT in patients with PTSD in both functional (Bryant, Felming-
ham, Kemp, et al., 2008) and structural (Bryant, Felmingham, Whitford, et al., 2008)
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Furthermore, as patients with PTSD success-
fully respond to CBT, they are better able to recruit the MPFC during fear processing
(Felmingham et al., 2007; Shou et al., 2017).
Cognitive Models of PTSD
Cognitive models of PTSD posit that the development and maintenance of PTSD
rely heavily on two processes: (1) maladaptive appraisals of the trauma and its after-
math, and (2) disturbances in autobiographical memory (Ehlers & Clark, 2000). These
models posit that trauma memories are encoded in a fragmented manner because
of the elevated arousal that occurs at the time of trauma. It is proposed that the

-- 182 of 498 --

162 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
disorganized nature of these memories precludes a coherent narrative, and this can
impede adaptive processing of the experience and limit the extent to which the trau-
matic experience can be placed in the context of other nontraumatic memories the
person may retrieve. It is also proposed that the manner in which people appraise
the traumatic event, their responses to it, and their environment after the trauma are
pivotal in terms of perpetuating their sense of threat or sense of vulnerability.
There is a great body of evidence supporting this model. Individuals with PTSD
have an attentional bias to threat stimuli (e.g., Fani et al., 2012; McNally, Kaspi, Rie-
mann, & Zeitlin, 1990; Naim et al., 2015; Powers et al., 2019), are deficient in recalling
specific positive memories (McNally, Lasko, Macklin, & Pitman, 1995; Schönfeld &
Ehlers, 2017), and engage in maladaptive thoughts about how they responded to the
trauma or to future negative events that may happen to them (Dekel, Peleg, & Solo-
mon, 2013; Warda & Bryant, 1998; Zuj et al., 2017). Catastrophic appraisals about the
experience shortly after the trauma are also predictive of subsequent PTSD (Ehlers,
Mayou, & Bryant, 1998; Nixon & Bryant, 2005).
RISK FACTORS
The robust finding that only a minority of trauma survivors develop PTSD raises
the issue about variables that increase risk for PTSD development. In terms of pre-
existing risk factors, certain biological and cognitive characteristics (e.g., HPA axis
dysfunction, pretrauma cognitive biases), prior psychological disturbance, fam-
ily history of psychological disorders, childhood maltreatment, and female gender
are predictive of PTSD development (Bomyea, Risbrough, & Lang, 2012; Brewin,
Andrews, & Valentine, 2000; Trickey, Siddaway, Meiser-Stedman, Serpell, & Field,
2012). Recent studies in trauma patients have also indicated that higher levels of emo-
tion dysregulation at the time of trauma exposure increases risk for the development
of PTSD independent of co-occurring psychiatric symptoms (Forbes et al., 2020; Pen-
cea et al., 2020). In terms of factors associated with the trauma, a major predictor of
PTSD is the nature of the traumatic event itself. The more one is exposed to threat
and to grotesque or distressing events, the more likely one is to develop PTSD (Bre-
slau, 2009; Brewin et al., 2000). As noted earlier in the discussion of ASD, there is
considerable evidence that peritraumatic responses can predict subsequent PTSD.
Symptom severity, including dissociation, reexperiencing, avoidance, and arousal,
several weeks after exposure can be predictive of subsequent PTSD. Consistent with
cognitive models, there is evidence that catastrophic appraisals of the stressor and
of one’s reactions to the stressor influence whether chronic PTSD develops (Ehlers et
al., 1998). In relation to posttrauma factors, there is evidence that self-reported levels
of low social support and the presence of ongoing stressors are important predictors
of PTSD (Brewin et al., 2000; Nillni et al., 2013).
Most of the literature on risk factors for PTSD has been limited by inferring
risk on the basis of data collected retrospectively after trauma exposure; this data
can be confounded by mood biases in retrospective reports. In more recent years,
researchers have focused on populations with high risk for trauma exposure and
have assessed these people prior to trauma exposure, with subsequent follow-up
after trauma exposure. A systematic review (DiGangi et al., 2013) of all prospective

-- 183 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	163
studies from 1991 to 2013 that included measures both pre- and posttrauma expo-
sure, found that lower cognitive ability, negative cognitive bias, personality charac-
teristics (e.g., neuroticism, hostility), prior psychopathology and trauma exposure,
higher levels of physiological arousal, negative family environment, poor social sup-
port, and poverty all increased risk for PTSD. Recent evidence with soldiers pre- and
postdeployment indicates related patterns. For example, predeployment neuroticism
and dissociation are associated with postdeployment development of PTSD (Ponce
de León, Andersen, Karstoft, & Elklit, 2018). Lower levels of heart rate variability
(HRV) predeployment predict higher levels of PTSD postdeployment (Minassian et
al., 2015). Additionally, certain attention biases predeployment, namely, cognitive
avoidance of threat-related stimuli, are predictive of greater PTSD symptoms post-
deployment even in the context of less war zone stress (Beevers, Lee, Wells, Ellis,
& Telch, 2011). There is also evidence that the tendency to engage in catastrophic
thinking before trauma exposure predicts subsequent PTSD in firefighters (Bryant
& Guthrie, 2005, 2007).
Twin studies indicate the role of genetic contribution, in that heritability accounts
for up to 30% of the variance in PTSD symptoms (True et al., 1993). It is important to
note, however, that the genetic influences on PTSD are common to other (frequently
comorbid with PTSD) disorders, including depression, other anxiety disorders, and
substance use (Koenen et al., 2008; Smoller, 2016). Using MRI to study monozygotic
co-twins, Gilbertson and colleagues (2002) found that Vietnam veterans with PTSD
were characterized by smaller hippocampi than those without PTSD, but that the
co-twins of veterans with PTSD (who had not served in Vietnam) had hippocampi
that were just as small. These findings suggest that small hippocampal volume may
constitute a vulnerability factor for PTSD among people exposed to trauma, sup-
ported by a recent treatment study demonstrating that smaller hippocampal volume
is not the result of trauma exposure and does not increase with successful PTSD
treatment (van Rooij et al., 2015). There is evidence that genetic differences may
influence the development of PTSD, although clear understanding of genetic risk
has been hampered by small sample sizes and varying results in candidate gene
studies (see Sheerin, Lind, Bountress, Nugent, & Amstadter, 2017 for a review). For
example, while it is the most widely studied polymorphisms, meta-analyses of the
serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) have found no overall association with PTSD,
although it may be important in consideration of potential gene × environment inter-
actions with level of trauma exposure (Armbruster et al., 2009; Gressier et al., 2013;
Navarro-Mateu, Escámez, Koenen, Alonso, & Sánchez-Meca, 2013). Candidate genes
involved in the regulation of the HPA axis such as FK-506 binding protein (FKBP5;
Watkins et al., 2016) and PACAP (pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide,
coded by ADCYAP1 gene, associated with estrogen response) (Stevens et al., 2014)
may be important to risk for PTSD. Genomewide association studies (GWAS) offer an
unbiased approach to test associations of genetic variants across the entire genome
with a construct of interest, and there have been numerous GWAS studies of PTSD
to date (see Daskalakis, Rijal, King, Huckins, & Ressler, 2018, for a review). Epigenetic
research on PTSD is also promising and may help us to better understand the ways
that trauma exposure (among other environmental stressors) impact outcomes of
DNA through changes to the epigenome, which then confer risk for the development
of PTSD (Howie, Rijal, & Ressler, 2019).

-- 184 of 498 --

164 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
It is increasingly clear that function of the inflammatory system is also impor-
tant to consider in relation to PTSD (Michopoulos, Powers, Gillespie, Ressler, & Jova-
novic, 2017). In the context of trauma exposure, the immune system is activated and
with chronic exposure can become dysregulated; immune function and HPA axis
function are closely interconnected, and the dysregulation of both are implicated in
PTSD. While accumulative evidence shows immune dysregulation in PTSD (Passos
et al., 2015), the directionality of the association remains unclear. Numerous prospec-
tive studies have shown that higher levels of inflammation pretrauma are associated
with increased risk of PTSD posttrauma (see Michopoulos et al., 2017, for a review).
There is also evidence that people’s capacity for conditioning may be a risk factor
for PTSD development. One study compared startle responses in pairs of Vietnam
combat veterans and their non-combat-exposed monozygotic twins (Orr et al., 2003).
Orr and colleagues (2003) found evidence of more slowly habituating skin conduc-
tance to startle responses in veterans with PTSD and their non-combat-exposed co-
twins compared to veterans without PTSD and their non-combat-exposed co-twins.
This finding suggests that more slowly habituating skin conductance responses to
startle stimuli may represent a pretrauma vulnerability factor for PTSD. A prospec-
tive study of newly recruited firefighters indicated that skin conductance and eye-
blink electromyographic (EMG) startle responses before trauma exposure in a cohort
of trainees predicted acute stress reactions after subsequent trauma exposure (Guth-
rie & Bryant, 2005). Other research indicates that impaired extinction learning prior
to trauma exposure is predictive of subsequent posttraumatic stress in firefighters
and paramedics (Guthrie & Bryant, 2006).
TREATMENT
Chronic PTSD
The treatment of choice for chronic PTSD is trauma-focused psychotherapy. Com-
prehensive treatment based on systematic reviews of the evidence including guide-
lines from the U.K. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2018), the U.S. Veterans
Department/Department of Defense (VA/DoD, 2017), the U.S. Institute of Medicine
(2011), the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (Phoenix Aus-
tralia, 2013), the American Psychological Association (2017), and the International
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (Bisson et al., 2019) have reached this conclusion.
A similar conclusion has been drawn from major meta-analyses (Bradley, Greene,
Russ, Dutra, & Westen, 2005; Cusack et al., 2016). Importantly, trauma-focused psy-
chotherapy has been shown to be efficacious across different trauma-exposed popu-
lations, including survivors of traumatic injury and assault (Bryant, Moulds, et al.,
2008), sexual assault (Foa, Rothbaum, Riggs, & Murdock, 1991), combat (Castillo et
al., 2016; Schnurr et al., 2003), terrorist attacks (Duffy, Gillespie, & Clark, 2007), and
child sexual abuse (McDonagh et al., 2005).
The major form of trauma-focused psychotherapy, CBT, usually commences
with psychoeducation about the trauma responses, then focuses on three major
strategies: anxiety management, exposure, and cognitive restructuring. In psycho-
education, the patient is informed about common symptoms following a traumatic
event and the way in which the core symptoms will be treated during the course of

-- 185 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	165
therapy. Anxiety management techniques aim to reduce anxiety through a range
of techniques that may include breathing retraining, relaxation skills, and self-talk.
Exposure therapy usually involves both imaginal and in vivo exposure. Imaginal
exposure typically requires patients to imagine their traumatic experience vividly
for prolonged periods, usually for at least 30 minutes. The therapist asks patients
to provide a narrative of their traumatic experience in a way that emphasizes all
relevant details, including sensory cues and affective responses. In vivo exposure
involves graded exposure to feared stimuli, in which patients are asked to remain in
close proximity to mildly fearful reminders of the trauma, then repeat this exercise
with increasingly fearful situations until they feel comfortable with most reminders
of their experience. Exposure may be therapeutic because of habituation of anxiety,
integration of corrective information, knowledge that the trauma is a discrete event
that is no longer threatening, and self-mastery through management of exposure
(Rothbaum & Schwartz, 2002). Cognitive restructuring involves teaching patients
to identify and evaluate the evidence for negative automatic thoughts, as well as
helping them to evaluate their beliefs about the trauma, the self, the world, and the
future. In most controlled trials, CBT programs usually require eight to 14 sessions
conducted on an individual basis.
The majority of studies indicate that treatments incorporating exposure either to
trauma memories or situations that remind the individual of trauma are beneficial.
There is some debate over the relative contributions of different CBT components,
although evidence of the specific comparable contributions of various components of
CBT remains insufficient (Cusack et al., 2016). Several studies suggest that exposure
and cognitive restructuring provide comparable treatment gains, and others indi-
cate that combining cognitive restructuring with exposure does not provide addi-
tive effects above beyond exposure alone (Foa et al., 2005). There is some evidence
that the addition of cognitive restructuring may enhance the effect of exposure (Bry-
ant et al., 2003, 2008). The overall finding that other CBT components do not mark-
edly enhance exposure suggests that exposure is a critical ingredient in facilitating
recovery from PTSD (Cahill, Rothbaum, Resick, & Follette, 2009). Because exposure
typically includes a form of cognitive reframing in which the therapist discusses
the mastery of exposure to trauma reminders, it seems that the change mechanisms
involved in both exposure and cognitive restructuring may overlap. In summary,
the largest body of evidence supports the use of exposure-based CBT that typically
employs exposure to trauma memories and feared situations that result in a sense of
safety or mastery over those stimuli.
Prolonged exposure (PE) is a variant of CBT and has received strong support
for its effectiveness in treating PTSD across varied populations for a range of trauma
types (Cusack et al., 2016; Powers, Halpern, Ferenschak, Gillihan, & Foa, 2010). PE is
a manualized treatment that includes many of the components already described
earlier but with one major difference, in that there is not an explicit cognitive restruc-
turing component. The goal of PE is to alter fear structures so that they are no longer
problematic; thus, the imaginal and in vivo exposures are focused on activating the
fear structure and incorporating new corrective information into the structure (Wat-
kins, Sprang, & Rothbaum, 2018). While PE generally is provided in eight to 15 ses-
sions, reduced formats (five sessions in primary care settings) (Rauch, Cigrang, Aus-
tern, Evans, & Strong Star Consortium, 2017) and application in intensive outpatient

-- 186 of 498 --

166 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
program settings (e.g., Zalta et al., 2018) have been developed and showed promise
for improving outcomes.
Another variant of trauma-focused CBT, cognitive processing therapy (CPT),
was developed as a form of cognitive therapy to address the specific cognitive
responses of survivors of sexual assault (Resick & Schnicke, 1993); since its devel-
opment CPT has shown effectiveness for a wide range of trauma types (Watkins et
al., 2018). In CPT, attention is focused on reframing unrealistic beliefs about safety,
trust, control, esteem, and intimacy. Originally, CPT also engaged trauma memories
by requiring the patient to write detailed accounts of the trauma and relating these
accounts to the therapist. However, a trial that compared (1) full CPT, (2) the writing
component, and (3) the cognitive component found that the writing component did
not provide any additive gain over the cognitive element (Resick et al., 2008) led to
the removal of the written narrative component in the most recent manual (Resick,
Monson, & Chard, 2016). CPT and PE have shown similar effectiveness, and both are
recommended as frontline psychotherapy approaches for PTSD.
A third variant of CBT is eye movement desensitization and reprocessing
(EMDR). This treatment differs from CBT insofar as it requires patients to focus their
attention on a traumatic memory, while simultaneously visually tracking the thera-
pist’s finger as it is moved across their visual field, then to engage in restructuring of
the memory (Shapiro, 1995). The patient is asked to identify more adaptive or posi-
tive thoughts related to the memory or traumatic experience, and to again track the
therapist’s fingers. Although the specific mechanisms by which eye movements are
purported to enhance treatment gains are not well specified, moving one’s eyes after
engaging the trauma memory is intended to facilitate information processing (Sha-
piro & Maxfield, 2002). Across a series of controlled trials, EMDR has been shown
to be an effective treatment for PTSD relative to wait list and to perform comparably
to standard CBT. Accordingly, it is recommended, along with trauma-focused CBT,
PE, and CPT, as a frontline treatment in a number of treatment guidelines (Phoe-
nix Australia, 2013; VA/DoD, 2017). In evaluating EMDR, however, it is important to
note that eye movements are not pivotal in the treatment effects of EMDR (Phoenix
Australia, 2013). This conclusion is supported by evidence from studies that manipu-
lated eye movement, in addition to other strategies, and found that the eye move-
ments themselves were not important in relieving the symptoms relative to the other
components of EMDR (Foley & Spates, 1995). Additionally, the Australian National
Health and Medical Research council (NHMRC) guidelines concluded that EMDR
was as efficacious as CBT only when EMDR also included in vivo exposure (Phoenix
Australia, 2013).
There has been concern that CBT techniques may not be appropriate for patients
with symptoms consistent with ICD-11 CPTSD. On the premise that patients with
severe emotion regulation deficits may have difficulty managing the emotional
demands of exposure-based therapy, attempts have been made to prepare these
patients for trauma-focused CBT approaches by teaching them skills to regulate
emotions and improve interpersonal relations. These skills involve distress toler-
ance, labeling emotions, and emotion management, as well as interpersonal compo-
nents related to maladaptive schemas, assertiveness, and flexibility in interpersonal
engagement. One approach designed specifically to treat CPTSD is skills training in

-- 187 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	167
affective and interpersonal regulation (STAIR; Cloitre, Koenen, Cohen, & Han, 2002).
Two randomized trials have now demonstrated that this modified form of CBT is
efficacious in treating CPTSD, and there is evidence that it is more effective than
standard CBT for patients with CPTSD (Cloitre et al., 2010). Considering that people
who suffer more severe traumatic exposures, and often endure prolonged childhood
trauma, can have difficulty regulating emotions, this approach appears to augment
the efficacy of CBT. Overlap exists between CPTSD and borderline personality dis-
order, and dialectical behavior therapy with PE (DBT-PE) has shown promise in
improving outcomes for individuals with comorbid borderline personality disorder
and PTSD (Harned, Korslund, Foa, & Linehan, 2012). It is important to acknowledge
that while research regarding STAIR continues (Oprel et al., 2018), current evidence
for a phase-based approach to treating CPTSD is limited and general guidelines
remain for the use of frontline treatment approaches (De Jongh et al., 2016), while
balancing patient preferences and service availability.
An important caveat exists for the support for trauma-focused CBT. Although it is
without doubt the best treatment we have for PTSD, and most patients respond posi-
tively, between one-third and one-half of patients are not responsive to this approach
and continue to experience ongoing symptoms (Bradley et al., 2005; Loerinc et al.,
2015). This has led to many attempts to augment trauma-focused CBT, and these
have typically tried to promote extinction processes in combination with exposure
therapy. Pharmacological agents to achieve this have included the partial glutama-
tergic agonist D-cycloserine (DCS), which has yielded mixed findings in enhancing
the benefits of trauma-focused CBT (de Kleine, Hendriks, Kusters, Broekman, & van
Minnen, 2012; Litz et al., 2012; Rothbaum et al., 2014); glucocorticoid administration
to facilitate extinction, which has been shown in one pilot study to augment trauma-
focused CBT (Yehuda et al., 2015) but has not been proven in full trial; yohimbine,
which was found in one study that combined administration with trauma-focused
CBT to yield no effect for yohimbine at follow-up; and MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-
methamphetamine), which has been shown in several pilot studies to augment the
effects of trauma-focused CBT but not replicated in proper trials (Mithoefer et al.,
2018; Ot’alora et al., 2018). Other studies have employed brain stimulation techniques,
such as transcranial direct current stimulation and transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion, but they currently lack adequate evidence (Kozel et al., 2018). Overall, although
some of these approaches appear to show promise and deserve further investigation,
the current evidence does not support these approaches (Lebois, Seligowski, Wolff,
Hill, & Ressler, 2019).
CBT for Children
Compared to studies of adults, relatively less attention has been given to treatment
of childhood PTSD. In general terms, children appear to experience PTSD as often
as adults. Some differences across developmental stages have been shown, partic-
ularly in young children (Scheeringa, Myers, Putnam, & Zeanah, 2012). In DSM-5
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013), PTSD diagnosis is the same for children
over the age of 6, although some of the symptoms allow for different presentation
(e.g., repetitive play with themes or aspects of the trauma as a component of intrusive

-- 188 of 498 --

168 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
symptoms). For children age 6 and younger, there is a new developmental subtype of
PTSD: PTSD in children 6 years and younger. Treatment programs for children often
modify CBT by integrating strategies that teach regulation of affect or behavior,
including parents in treatment, adapting treatment delivery to the developmental
stage of the child, and placing strong emphasis on rapport factors between therapist
and patient (Cohen, Mannarino, Deblinger, & Berliner, 2009). Consistent with the
adult literature, available trials support the conclusion that trauma-focused psycho-
therapy, and in particular, trauma-focused CBT for children and adolescents is the
treatment of choice for childhood PTSD (de Arellano et al., 2014; Dorsey et al., 2017;
Jensen, Holt, & Ormhaug, 2017).
Global Early Interventions
A major debate that has persisted over recent years concerns the merits of inter-
vening shortly after a traumatic event potentially to prevent PTSD. For many years,
psychological debriefing has been the most common approach immediately after
trauma exposure, and critical incident stress debriefing (CISD) was arguably the
most common variant of this approach (Mitchell, 1983). In the original iteration of this
strategy, a debriefing session that typically occurred within 48 hours of the trauma
involved education about trauma reactions; required participants to describe what
occurred and their cognitive, emotional, and physical responses to the event; and
provided suggestions for stress reduction (Mitchell & Everly, 1996). Although dif-
ficult to assess because of the many uncontrollable factors that exist in a postdisaster
setting, a series of studies have compared trauma survivors who received CISD and
those who did not receive the intervention (Rose, Brewin, Andrews, & Kirk, 1999).
Systematic reviews of these studies indicate that people who receive CISD did not
have better outcomes than those who do not (Rose, Bisson, & Wessely, 2001). Fur-
thermore, some tentative evidence indicates that very distressed people who receive
debriefing immediately after a trauma may subsequently have worse PTSD symp-
toms than those who do not receive debriefing (Hobbs, Mayou, Harrison, & Worlock,
1996). It has been suggested that requiring people to ventilate their emotions within
days of trauma exposure may hasten arousal and strengthen their trauma memories,
which may impede natural recovery (McNally, Bryant, & Ehlers, 2003). In the wake
of this evidence, the field has moved toward recognition that single-session inter-
ventions after trauma may not be sufficient to avert subsequent PTSD. At present,
the most common alternative to debriefing is psychological first aid (PFA; Young,
2006), which attempts to assist adaptation by ensuring that patients’ needs are met,
facilitating problem solving, reducing acute arousal, and accessing social supports.
PFA attempts to enhance coping skills in the immediate aftermath of a disaster with-
out causing undue distress by directing the survivor to revisit the traumatic experi-
ence. Importantly, PFA has not yet been tested, and one obstacle to evaluation is that
PFA does not have clearly stated goals or outcomes. Therefore, it is not a standard-
ized intervention that is amenable to controlled evaluation (Dieltjens, Moonens, Van
Praet, De Buck, & Vandekerckhove, 2014; Fox et al., 2012). Whereas CISD explicitly
attempts to reduce subsequent PTSD, PFA assists coping rather than serving a sec-
ondary prevention role.

-- 189 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	169
Targeted Early Interventions
In contrast to interventions provided to all trauma survivors shortly after exposure,
there has also been a focus on interventions for survivors who are deemed to be at
high risk for developing PTSD. The focus of most of these studies has been on trauma
survivors who display ASD in the first month after trauma exposure because of evi-
dence that these individuals are more likely than other survivors to develop chronic
PTSD (Bryant, 2003). Attempts at secondary prevention have typically modified
standard CBT approaches by abridging them to five or six sessions. The common fac-
tor across interventions for ASD/acute PTSD is that their trauma-focused exposure
approach involves imaginal or in vivo exposure. Across a series of controlled trials,
there is now convergent evidence that exposure-based CBT provided within a month
of trauma exposure prevents PTSD in the majority of cases relative to nondirective
counseling (Bryant, Mastrodomenico, et al., 2008). These treatment gains have been
shown to maintain up to four years after treatment (Bryant et al., 2006). Addition-
ally, providing CBT to trauma survivors with acute PTSD in the initial months after
trauma exposure results in reduced levels of PTSD at subsequent time points (Ehlers
et al., 2003). There is also preliminary evidence of the benefits of a three-session
modified PE for individuals immediately posttrauma, with the intervention initi-
ated bedside in the Emergency Department (Rothbaum et al., 2012). Since many indi-
viduals show natural recovery, it is critical that reliable early risk factors for PTSD
directly following trauma exposure in Emergency Department settings are identi-
fied to improve targeted early intervention approaches (Maples-Keller et al., 2020).
Overall, the evidence indicates that exposure-based therapies are indicated for early
intervention with people with ASD/acute PTSD.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF CHANGE
This review has highlighted the heterogeneity of PTSD. The potential variability and
complexity of PTSD highlights how clinicians need to be cognizant of the various
techniques from evidence-supported research that can be administered to posttrau-
matic presentations. One of the first decisions is whether a patient is appropriate for
exposure-based therapy. Although it is the treatment of choice, some patients may
not be able to manage it appropriately for several reasons. Patients who are poten-
tially psychotic, severely suicidal, or substance dependent may be better managed
initially with medication, skills-based interventions (e.g., STAIR, PE), or programs
specifically designed for comorbid PTSD and substance use disorders (i.e., Seeking
Safety), until these conditions are adequately controlled. Any condition that may
undermine extinction learning during exposure should be managed prior to expo-
sure.
Table 6.1 presents a summary of principles and related strategies that can be
applied to the variety of PTSD presentations, and the sequence in which one imple-
ments these strategies is usually determined by several factors. As always, with any
clinical intervention, any presentation that poses a risk for a patient (e.g., self-harm,
reckless behavior) needs to be addressed first.

-- 190 of 498 --

170 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Having ensured the safety of the patient, the next principle is to sequence those
strategies that lead to generalized improvement. In the context of PTSD, it is often
understood that many of the related problems, including depression, panic symp-
toms, sleep disturbance, or substance use, may be exacerbated by the symptoms of
PTSD. In fact, these related problems often diminish following successful treatment
of the PTSD; accordingly, treatment should focus on exposure and cognitive restruc-
turing strategies, with the expectation that reduction of trauma-related distress will
generalize to improvements in other domains. If residual problems remain, then
specific techniques can be applied to these remaining problems (e.g., sleep hygiene,
panic). In the case of patients who have panic disorder, the clinician who wants to
reduce the likelihood of full panic attacks in the course of exposure can conduct
interoceptive exposure prior to exposure.
TABLE 6.1. Principles of Change and Treatment Choices
Principle 	Treatment strategy
Understanding of trauma reactions 	Psychoeducation and normalization of symptoms
Enhancing distress tolerance 	Emotion regulation skills training (breathing
retraining, emotion labeling, mindfulness)
Extinction learning of trauma memory 	Prolonged imaginal exposure
Extinction of situational reminders 	In vivo exposure
Modifying maladaptive appraisals of the
trauma or one’s response
Cognitive restructuring
Managing harmful substance use 	Initially provide exposure to reduce source of
self-medication. Give medication and implement
behavioral control and motivational interviewing to
address substance abuse
Reducing sleep disturbance 	Address nightmares through imaginal exposure and,
if necessary, implement a sleep hygiene regimen to
reduce sleep-incompatible behaviors
Reducing rumination on trauma
or one’s response
Prolonged exposure to minimize ruminative
response, motivational interviewing to understand
the impact of rumination, and distraction or
mindfulness to manage rumination
Managing anger 	Motivational interviews concerning the benefits
and costs of anger, cognitive restructuring of beliefs
driving anger, and mindfulness practice to reduce
anger-related thoughts
Addressing comorbid depression 	Prolonged exposure to reduce PTSD symptoms,
cognitive restructuring to address self-esteem
and hopelessness beliefs, and event scheduling to
increase positive activities

-- 191 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	171
Another common comorbidity to consider in treatment is traumatic brain injury.
These cases pose a challenge for exposure because they typically involve some
degree of amnesia of the event that triggered the disorder. In mild traumatic brain
injury, there are usually islands of memory that allow exposure to be administered
in the normal manner (Bryant, Moulds, Guthrie, & Nixon, 2003). In more severe cases
of brain injury, when there is often no discursive memory of the trauma, patients
often experience psychological or physiological distress in response to reminders
of the trauma, without actually recalling the event (Bryant, Marosszeky, Crooks, &
Gurka, 2000). In these cases, it is more useful to focus on in vivo rather than imaginal
exposure because situational factors tend to be the major triggers of fear.
It is also crucial to determine whether the patient is ready to allocate sufficient
resources to therapy. It is common in the posttraumatic period, especially in the acute
phase, for the trauma survivor to be challenged with a range of environmental and
personal demands, including pain, surgery, legal processes, housing disturbance, or
ongoing threat. PTSD is also associated with a range of functional challenges, such as
employment problems, health difficulties, marital and interpersonal problems, sleep,
and sexual dysfunction; thus, systematic assessment of these clinical features should
be used in order to determine whether patients can focus appropriately on therapy
when they are attempting to manage the demands of their environment. There is
growing support for the use of comprehensive services that include both evidence-
based therapies and social work services within the same program in medical set-
tings in which high volumes of acute trauma patients are seen (e.g., Trauma Recovery
Centers). In order to respond most effectively to clients’ needs and to reduce possible
interference to therapy, some of these issues may need to be addressed before and/or
during exposure-based therapy. These issues should also be assessed at the end of
successful exposure-based treatment to determine whether additional interventions
are necessary to improve clients’ health and functioning.
CONCLUSION
Much has been learned about human response to psychological trauma since the
introduction of the PTSD diagnosis. In the wake of large-scale natural and man-
made disasters, interpersonal and community violence exposure, and the continu-
ing effects of war, research continues to shed light on the biological, cognitive, and
social factors that influence the different trajectories of response to trauma. Evidence
emerging from these studies continues to shape policy and practice to enhance the
ways we attempt to prevent, assess, and treat PTSD. There is no doubt that traumatic
experiences will continue to affect people at a very frequent rate, and it is critical that
we constantly adopt scientific approaches to help people respond to these events in
ways that enhance adaptation.
REFERENCES
Adams, R. E., & Boscarino, J. A. (2005). Differences in mental health outcomes among whites,
African Americans, and Hispanics following a community disaster. Psychiatry: Interper-
sonal and Biological Processes, 68(3), 250–265.

-- 192 of 498 --

172 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Alcántara, C., Casement, M. D., & Lewis-Fernandez, R. (2013). Conditional risk for PTSD
among Latinos: A systematic review of racial/ethnic differences and sociocultural expla-
nations. Clinical Psychology Review, 33(1), 107–119.
American Psychiatric Association. (1952). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychological Association. (2017). Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in adults. Washington, DC: Author.
Andreasen, N. C. (2004). Acute and delayed posttraumatic stress disorder: A history and some
issues. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161(8), 1321–1323.
Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., Philpott, R., & Stewart, L. (2007). Delayed-onset posttraumatic
stress disorder: A systematic review of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry,
164(9), 1319–1326.
Andrews, G., Charney, D. S., Sirovatka, P. J., & Regier, D. A. (Eds.). (2009). Stress-induced and
fear circuitry disorders: Refining the research agenda for DSM-V. Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Association.
Armbruster, D., Moser, D. A., Strobel, A., Hensch, T., Kirschbaum, C., Lesch, K. P., & Brocke, B.
(2009). Serotonin transporter gene variation and stressful life events impact processing
of fear and anxiety. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 12(3), 393–401.
Beevers, C. G., Lee, H.-J., Wells, T. T., Ellis, A. J., & Telch, M. J. (2011). Association of prede-
ployment gaze bias for emotion stimuli with later symptoms of PTSD and depression in
soldiers deployed in Iraq. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 735–741.
Bisson, J. I., Berliner, L., Cloitre, M., Forbes, D., Jensen, T. K., Lewis, C., . . . Riggs, D. S. (2019).
The international society for traumatic stress studies new guidelines for the prevention
and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder: Methodology and development process.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 32(4), 475–483.
Blanchard, E. B., Hickling, E. J., Barton, K. A., & Taylor, A. E. (1996). One-year prospective fol-
low-up of motor vehicle accident victims. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34(10), 775–786.
Bomyea, J., Risbrough, V., & Lang, A. J. (2012). A consideration of select pre-trauma factors as
key vulnerabilities in PTSD. Clinical Psychology Review, 32(7), 630–641.
Bonde, J. P., Utzon-Frank, N., Bertelsen, M., Borritz, M., Eller, N., Nordentoft, M., . . . Rugulies,
R. (2016). Risk of depressive disorder following disasters and military deployment: Sys-
tematic review with meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 208(4), 330–336.
Bradley, R., Greene, J., Russ, E., Dutra, L., & Westen, D. (2005). A multidimensional meta-
analysis of psychotherapy for PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(2), 214–227.
Breslau, N. (2009). The epidemiology of trauma, PTSD, and other posttrauma disorders.
Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, 10(3), 198–210.
Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Valentine, J. D. (2000). Meta-analysis of risk factors for posttrau-
matic stress disorder in trauma-exposed adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 68(5), 748–766.
Brewin, C. R., Cloitre, M., Hyland, P., Shevlin, M., Maercker, A., Bryant, R. A., . . . Rousseau,
C. (2017). A review of current evidence regarding the ICD-11 proposals for diagnosing
PTSD and complex PTSD. Clinical Psychology Review, 58, 1–15.
Bryant, R. A. (2003). Early predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
53(9), 789–795.
Bryant, R. A. (2011). Acute stress disorder as a predictor of posttraumatic stress disorder: A
systematic review. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 233–239.

-- 193 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	173
Bryant, R. A. (2018). The current evidence for acute stress disorder. Current Psychiatry Reports,
20(12), 111.
Bryant, R. A., Creamer, M., O’Donnell, M., Forbes, D., McFarlane, A. C., Silove, D., & Hadzi-
Pavlovic, D. (2017). Acute and chronic posttraumatic stress symptoms in the emergence
of posttraumatic stress disorder: A network analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 74, 135–142.
Bryant, R. A., Creamer, M., O’Donnell, M., Silove, D., Clark, C. R., & McFarlane, A. C. (2010).
The psychiatric sequelae of traumatic injury. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 312–320.
Bryant, R. A., Creamer, M., O’Donnell, M., Silove, D., & McFarlane, A. C. (2008). A multisite
study of initial respiration rate and heart rate as predictors of posttraumatic stress disor-
der. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(11), 1694–1701.
Bryant, R. A., Creamer, M., O’Donnell, M., Silove, D., & McFarlane, A. C. (2010). Sleep distur-
bance immediately prior to trauma predicts subsequent psychiatric disorder. Sleep, 33(1),
69–74.
Bryant, R. A., Felmingham, K., Kemp, A., Das, P., Hughes, G., Peduto, A., & Williams, L. (2008).
Amygdala and ventral anterior cingulate activation predicts treatment response to cog-
nitive behaviour therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder. Psychological Medicine, 38(4),
555–561.
Bryant, R. A., Felmingham, K., Whitford, T. J., Kemp, A., Hughes, G., Peduto, A., & Williams,
L. M. (2008). Rostral anterior cingulate volume predicts treatment response to cognitive-
behavioural therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatry and Neurosci-
ence, 33(2), 142–146.
Bryant, R. A., Friedman, M. J., Spiegel, D., Ursano, R., & Strain, J. (2011). A review of acute
stress disorder in DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 28(9), 802–817.
Bryant, R. A., & Guthrie, R. M. (2005). Maladaptive appraisals as a risk factor for posttraumatic
stress: A study of trainee firefighters. Psychological Science, 16(10), 749–752.
Bryant, R. A., & Guthrie, R. M. (2007). Maladaptive self-appraisals before trauma exposure
predict posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75(5),
812–815.
Bryant, R. A., & Harvey, A. G. (2002). Delayed-onset posttraumatic stress disorder: A prospec-
tive evaluation. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 36(2), 205–209.
Bryant, R. A., Marosszeky, J. E., Crooks, J., & Gurka, J. A. (2000). Posttraumatic stress disorder
after severe traumatic brain injury. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157(4), 629–631.
Bryant, R. A., Mastrodomenico, J., Felmingham, K. L., Hopwood, S., Kenny, L., Kandris, E., . . .
Creamer, M. (2008). Treatment of acute stress disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(6), 659–667.
Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M. L., Guthrie, R. M., Dang, S. T., Mastrodomenico, J., Nixon, R. D., . . .
Creamer, M. (2008). A randomized controlled trial of exposure therapy and cognitive
restructuring for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 76(4), 695–703.
Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M., Guthrie, R., & Nixon, R. D. (2003). Treating acute stress disorder fol-
lowing mild traumatic brain injury. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(3), 585–587.
Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M. L., Nixon, R. D. V., Mastrodomenico, J., Felmingham, K., & Hop-
wood, S. (2006). Hypnotherapy and cognitive behaviour therapy of acute stress disorder:
A 3-year follow-up. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(9), 1331–1335.
Bryant, R. A., Nickerson, A., Creamer, M., O’Donnell, M., Forbes, D., Galatzer-Levy, I., . . .
Silove, D. (2015). Trajectory of post-traumatic stress following traumatic injury: 6-year
follow-up. British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 417–423.
Bryant, R. A., O’Donnell, M. L., Creamer, M., McFarlane, A. C., & Silove, D. (2013). A multisite
analysis of the fluctuating course of posttraumatic stress disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 70,
839–846.

-- 194 of 498 --

174 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Cahill, S. P., Rothbaum, B. O., Resick, P. A., & Follette, V. M. (2009). Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for adults. In E. B. Foa, T. M. Keane, M. J. Freidman, & J. A. Cohen (Eds.), Effec-
tive treatments for PTSD: Practice guidelines from the International Society of Traumatic Stress
Studies (pp. 139–222). New York: Guilford Press.
Castillo, D. T., Chee, C. L., Nason, E., Keller, J., C’de Baca, J., Qualls, C., . . . Keane, T. M. (2016).
Group-delivered cognitive/exposure therapy for PTSD in women veterans: A random-
ized controlled trial. Psychological Trauma, 8(3), 404–412.
Charlson, F., van Ommeren, M., Flaxman, A., Cornett, J., Whiteford, H., & Saxena, S. (2019).
New WHO prevalence estimates of mental disorders in conflict settings: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet, 394, 240–248.
Charney, D. S. (2003). Neuroanatomical circuits modulating fear and anxiety behaviors. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 108, 38–50.
Cloitre, M., Garvert, D. W., Brewin, C. R., Bryant, R. A., & Maercker, A. (2013). Evidence for
proposed ICD-11 PTSD and complex PTSD: A latent profile analysis. European Journal of
Psychotraumatology, 4(1), Article 20706.
Cloitre, M., Koenen, K. C., Cohen, L. R., & Han, H. (2002). Skills training in affective and inter-
personal regulation followed by exposure: A phase-based treatment for PTSD related to
childhood abuse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70(5), 1067–1074.
Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, K. C., Nooner, K., Zorbas, P., Cherry, S., Jackson, C. L., . . . Pet-
kova, E. (2010). Treatment for PTSD related to childhood abuse: A randomized controlled
trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(8), 915–924.
Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., Deblinger, E., & Berliner, L. (2009). Cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy for children and adolescents. In E. B. Foa, T. M. Keane, M. J. Friedman, & J. A. Cohen
(Eds.), Effective treatments for PTSD: Practice guidelines from the International Society of Trau-
matic Stress Studies (pp. 223–244). New York: Guilford Press.
Creamer, M., Burgess, P., & McFarlane, A. C. (2001). Post-traumatic stress disorder: Findings
from the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-being. Psychological
Medicine, 31, 1237–1247.
Cusack, K., Jonas, D. E., Forneris, C. A., Wines, C., Sonis, J., Middleton, J. C., . . . Greenblatt, A.
(2016). Psychological treatments for adults with posttraumatic stress disorder: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 43, 128–141.
Daskalakis, N. P., Rijal, C. M., King, C., Huckins, L. M., & Ressler, K. J. (2018). Recent genetics
and epigenetics approaches to PTSD. Current Psychiatry Reports, 20(5), 30.
de Arellano, M. A. R., Lyman, D. R., Jobe-Shields, L., George, P., Dougherty, R. H., Daniels,
A. S., . . . Delphin-Rittmon, M. E. (2014). Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy
for children and adolescents: Assessing the evidence. Psychiatric Services, 65(5), 591–602.
De Jongh, A., Resick, P. A., Zoellner, L. A., Van Minnen, A., Lee, C. W., Monson, C. M., . . .
Feeny, N. (2016). Critical analysis of the current treatment guidelines for complex PTSD
in adults. Depression and Anxiety, 33(5), 359–369.
de Kleine, R. A., Hendriks, G.-J., Kusters, W. J. C., Broekman, T. G., & van Minnen, A. (2012).
A randomized placebo-controlled trial of D-cycloserine to enhance exposure therapy for
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 71, 962–968.
Dekel, S., Peleg, T., & Solomon, Z. (2013). The relationship of PTSD to negative cognitions:
A 17-year longitudinal study. Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 76(3), 241–
255.
deRoon-Cassini, T. A., Mancini, A. D., Rusch, M. D., & Bonanno, G. A. (2010). Psychopathol-
ogy and resilience following traumatic injury: A latent growth mixture model analysis.
Rehabilitation Psychology, 55, 1–11.
Dieltjens, T., Moonens, I., Van Praet, K., De Buck, E., & Vandekerckhove, P. (2014). A systematic
literature search on psychological first aid: Lack of evidence to develop guidelines. PLOS
ONE, 9(12), e114714.

-- 195 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	175
DiGangi, J. A., Gomez, D., Mendoza, L., Jason, L. A., Keys, C. B., & Koenen, K. C. (2013). Pre-
trauma risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder: A systematic review of the litera-
ture. Clinical Psychology Review, 33(6), 728–744.
DiGrande, L., Perrin, M. A., Thorpe, L. E., Thalji, L., Murphy, J., Wu, D., . . . Brackbill, R. M.
(2008). Posttraumatic stress symptoms, PTSD, and risk factors among lower Manhat-
tan residents 2–3 years after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 21(3), 264–273.
Dorsey, S., McLaughlin, K. A., Kerns, S. E., Harrison, J. P., Lambert, H. K., Briggs, E. C., . . .
Amaya-Jackson, L. (2017). Evidence base update for psychosocial treatments for children
and adolescents exposed to traumatic events. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psy-
chology, 46(3), 303–330.
Duffy, M., Gillespie, K., & Clark, D. M. (2007). Post-traumatic stress disorder in the context of
terrorism and other civil conflict in Northern Ireland: Randomised controlled trial. Brit-
ish Medical Journal, 334(7604), 1147.
Duval, E. R., Javanbakht, A., & Liberzon, I. (2015). Neural circuits in anxiety and stress disor-
ders: A focused review. Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management, 11, 115–126.
Ehlers, A., & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 38(4), 319–345.
Ehlers, A., Clark, D. M., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, M., Herbert, C., & Mayou,
R. (2003). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive therapy, a self-help booklet, and
repeated assessments as early interventions for posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 60(10), 1024–1032.
Ehlers, A., Mayou, R. A., & Bryant, B. (1998). Psychological predictors of chronic posttrau-
matic stress disorder after motor vehicle accidents. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107(3),
508–519.
Elhai, J. D., & Palmieri, P. A. (2011). The factor structure of posttraumatic stress disorder: A
literature update, critique of methodology, and agenda for future research. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 25(6), 849–854.
Fani, N., Tone, E. B., Phifer, J., Norrholm, S. D., Bradley, B., Ressler, K. J., . . . Jovanovic, T.
(2012). Attention bias toward threat is associated with exaggerated fear expression and
impaired extinction in PTSD. Psychological Medicine, 42(3), 533–543.
Felmingham, K., Kemp, A., Williams, L., Das, P., Hughes, G., Peduto, A., & Bryant, R. (2007).
Changes in anterior cingulate and amygdala after cognitive behavior therapy of post-
traumatic stress disorder. Psychological Science, 18(2), 127–129.
Flory, J. D., & Yehuda, R. (2015). Comorbidity between post-traumatic stress disorder and
major depressive disorder: Alternative explanations and treatment considerations. Dia-
logues in Clinical Neuroscience, 17(2), 141–150.
Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., Cahill, S. P., Rauch, S. A. M., Riggs, D. S., Feeny, N. C., & Yadin, E.
(2005). Randomized trial of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder with
and without cognitive restructuring: Outcome at academic and community clinics. Jour-
nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73(5), 953–964.
Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B. O., Riggs, D. S., & Murdock, T. B. (1991). Treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder in rape victims: A comparison between cognitive-behavioral procedures
and counseling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59(5), 715–723.
Foley, T., & Spates, C. R. (1995). Eye movement desensitization of public-speaking anxiety:
A partial dismantling. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26(4), 321–
329.
Forbes, C. N., Tull, M. T., Rapport, D., Xie, H., Kaminski, B., & Wang, X. (2020). Emotion dys-
regulation prospectively predicts posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity 3
months after trauma exposure. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 33, 1007–1016.
Forbes, D., Fletcher, S., Parslow, R., Phelps, A., O’Donnell, M., Bryant, R. A., . . . Creamer, M.

-- 196 of 498 --

176 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(2012). Trauma at the hands of another: Longitudinal study of differences in the post-
traumatic stress disorder symptom profile following interpersonal compared with non-
interpersonal trauma. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 73, 372–376.
Forbes, D., Lockwood, E., Phelps, A., Wade, D., Creamer, M., Bryant, R. A., . . . O’Donnell, M.
(2014). Trauma at the hands of another part 2: Distinguishing PTSD patterns following
intimate and non-intimate interpersonal and non-interpersonal trauma in a nationally
representative sample. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 75, 147–153.
Fox, J. H., Burkle, F. M., Bass, J., Pia, F. A., Epstein, J. L., & Markenson, D. (2012). The effective-
ness of psychological first aid as a disaster intervention tool: Research analysis of peer-
reviewed literature from 1990–2010. Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 6(3),
247–252.
Friedman, M. J., & McEwen, B. S. (2004). Posttraumatic stress disorder, allostatic load, and
medical illness. In P. P. Schnurr & B. L. Green (Eds.), Trauma and health: Physical health
consequences of exposure to extreme stress (pp. 157–188). Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association.
Friedman, M. J., Resick, P. A., Bryant, R. A., & Brewin, C. R. (2011). Considering PTSD for DSM-
V. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 750–769.
Galatzer-Levy, I. R., Huang, S. H., & Bonanno, G. A. (2018). Trajectories of resilience and dys-
function following potential trauma: A review and statistical evaluation. Clinical Psychol-
ogy Review, 63, 41–55.
Galea, S., Vlahov, D., Resnick, H., Ahern, J., Susser, E., Gold, J., . . . Kilpatrick, D. (2003). Trends
of probable post-traumatic stress disorder in New York City after the September 11 ter-
rorist attacks. American Journal of Epidemiology, 158, 514–524.
Germain, A., McKeon, A. B., & Campbell, R. L. (2017). Sleep in PTSD: Conceptual model and
novel directions in brain-based research and interventions. Current Opinion in Psychol-
ogy, 14, 84–89.
Gilbertson, M. W., Shenton, M. E., Ciszewski, A., Kasai, K., Lasko, N. B., Orr, S. P., & Pitman,
R. K. (2002). Smaller hippocampal volume predicts pathological vulnerability to psycho-
logical trauma. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1242–1247.
Gillespie, C., Bradley, B., Mercer, K., Smith, A., Conneely, K., Gapen, M., & Ressler, K. (2009).
Trauma exposure and stress-related disorders in inner city primary care patients. Gen-
eral Hospital Psychiatry, 31, 505–514.
Golier, J. A., Yehuda, R., Bierer, L. M., Mitropoulou, V., New, A. S., Schmeidler, J., . . . Siever,
L. J. (2003). The relationship of borderline personality disorder to posttraumatic stress
disorder and traumatic events. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(11), 2018–2024.
Goodman, B. F., & Griffin, M. G. (2018). Prospectively predicting PTSD status with heart rate
reactivity and recovery in interpersonal violence survivors. Psychiatry Research, 259,
270–276.
Gradus, J. L. (2018). Posttraumatic stress disorder and death from suicide. Current Psychiatry
Reports, 20(11), 98.
Gressier, F., Calati, R., Balestri, M., Marsano, A., Alberti, S., Antypa, N., & Serretti, A. (2013).
The 5-HTTLPR polymorphism and posttraumatic stress disorder: A meta-analysis. Jour-
nal of Traumatic Stress, 26(6), 645–653.
Grossman, A. B., Levin, B. E., Katzen, H. L., & Lechner, S. (2004). PTSD symptoms and onset
of neurologic disease in elderly trauma survivors. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neu-
ropsychology, 26, 698–705.
Guthrie, R. M., & Bryant, R. A. (2005). Auditory startle response in firefighters before and after
trauma exposure. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(2), 283–290.
Guthrie, R. M., & Bryant, R. A. (2006). Extinction learning before trauma and subsequent post-
traumatic stress. Psychosomatic Medicine, 68(2), 307–311.

-- 197 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	177
Gutner, C. A., Pineles, S. L., Griffin, M. G., Bauer, M. R., Weierich, M. R., & Resick, P. A. (2010).
Physiological predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 23(6),
775–784.
Hafstad, G., Thoresen, S., Wentzel-Larsen, T., Maercker, A., & Dyb, G. (2017). PTSD or not
PTSD?: Comparing the proposed ICD-11 and the DSM-5 PTSD criteria among young
survivors of the 2011 Norway attacks and their parents. Psychological Medicine, 47(7),
1283–1291.
Hansen, M., Hyland, P., Armour, C., Shevlin, M., & Elklit, A. (2015). Less is more?: Assessing
the validity of the ICD-11 model of PTSD across multiple trauma samples. European Jour-
nal of Psychotraumatology, 6(1), 28766.
Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., Foa, E. B., & Linehan, M. M. (2012). Treating PTSD in sui-
cidal and self-injuring women with borderline personality disorder: Development and
preliminary evaluation of a dialectical behavior therapy prolonged exposure protocol.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(6), 381–386.
Harvey, A. G., & Bryant, R. A. (2002). Acute stress disorder: A synthesis and critique. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 128(6), 886–902.
Hawn, S. E., Cusack, S. E., & Amstadter, A. B. (2020). A systematic review of the self-medication
hypothesis in the context of posttraumatic stress disorder and comorbid problematic
alcohol use. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 33, 699–708.
Hayes, J. P., Hayes, S. M., & Mikedis, A. M. (2012). Quantitative meta-analysis of neural activ-
ity in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biology of Mood and Anxiety Disorders, 2(1), 9.
Herman, J. L. (1992). Complex PTSD: A syndrome in survivors of prolonged and repeated
trauma. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 5(3), 377–391.
Hinrichs, R., van Rooij, S. J. H., Michopoulos, V., Schultebraucks, K., Winters, S., Maples-Keller,
J., . . . Jovanovic, T. (2019, April 24). Increased skin conductance response in the immedi-
ate aftermath of trauma predicts PTSD risk. Chronic Stress, 3. [Epub ahead of print]
Hobbs, M., Mayou, R., Harrison, B., & Worlock, P. (1996). A randomised controlled trial of
psychological debriefing for victims of road traffic accidents. British Medical Journal,
313(7070), 1438–1439.
Horesh, D., Solomon, Z., Keinan, G., & Ein-Dor, T. (2013). The clinical picture of late-onset
PTSD: A 20-year longitudinal study of Israeli war veterans. Psychiatry Research, 208(3),
265–273.
Horowitz, M. J., & Solomon, G. F. (1975). A prediction of delayed stress response syndromes
in Vietnam veterans. Journal of Social Issues, 31, 67–80.
Howie, H., Rijal, C. M., & Ressler, K. J. (2019). A review of epigenetic contributions to post-
traumatic stress disorder. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 21(4), 417–428.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). Clinical practice guidelines we can trust. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
Isserlin, L., Zerach, G., & Solomon, Z. (2008). Acute stress responses: A review and synthesis
of ASD, ASR, and CSR. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 78(4), 423–429.
Jehel, L., Paterniti, S., Brunet, A., Duchet, C., & Guelfi, J. D. (2003). Prediction of the occurrence
and intensity of post-traumatic stress disorder in victims 32 months after bomb attack.
European Psychiatry, 18, 172–176.
Jensen, T. K., Holt, T., & Ormhaug, S. M. (2017). A follow-up study from a multisite, random-
ized controlled trial for traumatized children receiving TF-CBT. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 45(8), 1587–1597.
Joshi, S. A., Duval, E. R., Kubat, B., & Liberzon, I. (2020). A review of hippocampal activation
in post-traumatic stress disorder. Psychophysiology, 57(1), e13357.
Jowett, S., Karatzias, T., Shevlin, M., & Albert, I. (2020). Differentiating symptom profiles of
ICD-11 PTSD, complex PTSD, and borderline personality disorder: A latent class analysis

-- 198 of 498 --

178 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
in a multiply traumatized sample. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment,
11, 36–45.
Karam, E. G., Friedman, M. J., Hill, E. D., Kessler, R. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Petukhova, M.,
. . . Koenen, K. C. (2014). Cumulative traumas and risk thresholds: 12-month PTSD in the
World Mental Health (WMH) surveys. Depression and Anxiety, 31, 130–142.
Karstoft, K. I., Galatzer-Levy, I. R., Statnikov, A., & Shalev, A. Y. (2015). Bridging a translational
gap: Using machine learning to improve the prediction of PTSD. BMC Psychiatry, 15,
Article 30.
Kessler, R. C., Galea, S., Gruber, M. J., Sampson, N. A., Ursano, R. J., & Wessely, S. (2008).
Trends in mental illness and suicidality after Hurricane Katrina. Molecular Psychiatry,
13(4), 374–384.
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in
the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 1048–1060.
Kilpatrick, D. G., Resnick, H. S., Milanak, M. E., Miller, M. W., Keyes, K. M., & Friedman, M.
J. (2013). National estimates of exposure to traumatic events and PTSD prevalence using
DSM-IV and DSM-5 criteria. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26(5), 537–547.
Knowles, K. A., Sripada, R. K., Defever, M., & Rauch, S. A. (2019). Comorbid mood and anxiety
disorders and severity of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms in treatment-seeking
veterans. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 11(4), 451–458.
Koenen, K. C., Fu, Q. J., Ertel, K., Lyons, M. J., Eisen, S. A., True, W. R., . . . Tsuang, M. T. (2008).
Common genetic liability to major depression and posttraumatic stress disorder in men.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 105(1–3), 109–115.
Kozel, F. A., Motes, M. A., Didehbani, N., DeLaRosa, B., Bass, C., Schraufnagel, C. D., . . . Hart,
J., Jr. (2018). Repetitive TMS to augment cognitive processing therapy in combat veterans
of recent conflicts with PTSD: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Affective Disorders,
229, 506–514.
Krysinska, K., & Lester, D. (2010). Post-traumatic stress disorder and suicide risk: A systematic
review. Archives of Suicide Research, 14(1), 1–23.
Lanius, R. A., Brand, B., Vermetten, E., Frewen, P. A., & Spiegel, D. (2012). The dissociative sub-
type of posttraumatic stress disorder: Rationale, clinical and neurobiological evidence,
and implications. Depression and Anxiety, 29(8), 701–708.
Lebois, L. A. M., Seligowski, A. V., Wolff, J. D., Hill, S. B., & Ressler, K. J. (2019). Augmentation
of extinction and inhibitory learning in anxiety and trauma-related disorders. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 1–28.
Litz, B. T., Salters-Pedneault, K., Steenkamp, M. M., Hermos, J. A., Bryant, R. A., Otto, M. W.,
& Hofmann, S. G. (2012). A randomized placebo-controlled trial of D -cycloserine and
exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 46,
1184–1190.
Liu, H., Petukhova, M. V., Sampson, N. A., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alonso, J., Andrade, L. H., . . .
World Health Organization World Mental Health Survey Collaborators. (2017). Associa-
tion of DSM-IV posttraumatic stress disorder with traumatic experience type and his-
tory in the World Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys. JAMA Psychiatry,
74, 270–281.
Loerinc, A. G., Meuret, A. E., Twohig, M. P., Rosenfield, D., Bluett, E. J., & Craske, M. G. (2015).
Response rates for CBT for anxiety disorders: Need for standardized criteria. Clinical
Psychology Review, 42, 72–82.
LoSavio, S. T., Dillon, K. H., & Resick, P. A. (2017). Cognitive factors in the development, main-
tenance, and treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder. Current Opinion in Psychology,
14, 18–22.
Lowe, S. R., Ratanatharathorn, A., Lai, B. S., van der Mei, W., Barbano, A. C., Bryant, R. A., . . .

-- 199 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	179
Schnyder, U. (2020). Posttraumatic stress disorder symptom trajectories within the first
year following emergency department admissions: Pooled results from the International
Consortium to predict PTSD. Psychological Medicine. [Epub ahead of print]
Maercker, A., Brewin, C. R., Bryant, R. A., Cloitre, M., Ommeren, M., Jones, L. M., . . . Rous-
seau, C. (2013). Diagnosis and classification of disorders specifically associated with
stress: Proposals for ICD-11. World Psychiatry, 12(3), 198–206.
Manfro, G. G., Otto, M. W., McArdle, E. T., Worthington, J. J., III, Rosenbaum, J. F., & Pollack,
M. H. (1996). Relationship of antecedent stressful life events to childhood and family
history of anxiety and the course of panic disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 41(2),
135–139.
Maples-Keller, J. L., Post, L. M., Price, M., Goodnight, J. M., Burton, M. S., Yasinski, C. W., . . .
Rothbaum, A. O. (2020). Investigation of optimal dose of early intervention to prevent
posttraumatic stress disorder: A multiarm randomized trial of one and three sessions of
modified prolonged exposure. Depression and Anxiety, 37(5), 429–437.
Maples-Keller, J. L., Rauch, S. A., Jovanovic, T., Yasinski, C. W., Goodnight, J. M., Sherrill, A.,
. . . Rothbaum, B. O. (2019). Changes in trauma-potentiated startle, skin conductance,
and heart rate within prolonged exposure therapy for PTSD in high and low treatment
responders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 68, Article 102147.
McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., Summerfeldt, L. J., Liss, A., & Swinson, R. P. (2003). Preliminary
examination of the relationship between anxiety disorders in adults and self-reported
history of teasing or bullying experiences. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 32(4), 187–193.
McDonagh, A., Friedman, M., McHugo, G., Ford, J., Sengupta, A., Mueser, K., . . . Descamps,
M. (2005). Randomized trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy for chronic posttraumatic
stress disorder in adult female survivors of childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 73(3), 515–524.
McNally, R. J., Bryant, R. A., & Ehlers, A. (2003). Does early psychological intervention pro-
mote recovery from posttraumatic stress? Psychological Science, 4, 45–79.
McNally, R. J., Kaspi, S. P., Riemann, B. C., & Zeitlin, S. B. (1990). Selective processing of threat
cues in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99(4), 398–402.
McNally, R. J., Lasko, N. B., Macklin, M. L., & Pitman, R. K. (1995). Autobiographical memory
disturbance in combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Ther-
apy, 33, 619–630.
Michopoulos, V., Powers, A., Gillespie, C. F., Ressler, K. J., & Jovanovic, T. (2017). Inflammation
in fear-and anxiety-based disorders: PTSD, GAD, and beyond. Neuropsychopharmacology,
42(1), 254–270.
Milad, M. R., Rauch, S. L., Pitman, R. K., & Quirk, G. J. (2006). Fear extinction in rats: Implica-
tions for human brain imaging and anxiety disorders. Biological Psychology, 73(1), 61–71.
Minassian, A., Maihofer, A. X., Baker, D. G., Nievergelt, C. M., Geyer, M. A., & Risbrough, V. B.
(2015). Association of predeployment heart rate variability with risk of postdeployment
posttraumatic stress disorder in active-duty marines. JAMA Psychiatry, 72(10), 979–986.
Mitchell, J. T. (1983). When disaster strikes: The critical incident stress debriefing process.
Journal of Emergency Medical Services, 8, 36–39.
Mitchell, J. T., & Everly, G., Jr. (1996). Critical incident stress debriefing: An operations manual for the
prevention of traumatic stress among emergency services and disaster workers (Vol. 2). Ellicott
City, MD: Chevron.
Mithoefer, M. C., Mithoefer, A. T., Feduccia, A. A., Jerome, L., Wagner, M., Wymer, J., . . . Doblin,
R. (2018). 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-assisted psychotherapy for
post-traumatic stress disorder in military veterans, firefighters, and police officers: a ran-
domised, double-blind, dose-response, phase 2 clinical trial. Lancet Psychiatry, 5, 486–497.
Morina, N., van Emmerik, A. A., Andrews, B., & Brewin, C. R. (2014). Comparison of DSM-IV

-- 200 of 498 --

180 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
and proposed ICD-11 formulations of PTSD among civilian survivors of war and war
veterans. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 27(6), 647–654.
Murray, J., Ehlers, A., & Mayou, R. A. (2002). Dissociation and post-traumatic stress disorder:
Two prospective studies of road traffic accident survivors. British Journal of Psychiatry,
180, 363–368.
Naim, R., Abend, R., Wald, I., Eldar, S., Levi, O., Fruchter, E., . . . Adler, A. B. (2015). Threat-
related attention bias variability and posttraumatic stress. American Journal of Psychiatry,
172(12), 1242–1250.
National Institute of Clinical Excellence. (2005). The management of PTSD in adults and children
in primary and secondary care. Wiltshire, UK: Cromwell Press.
Navarro-Mateu, F., Escámez, T., Koenen, K. C., Alonso, J., & Sánchez-Meca, J. (2013). Meta-
analyses of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphisms and post-traumatic stress disorder. PLOS
ONE, 8(6), e66227.
Nawijn, L., van Zuiden, M., Frijling, J. L., Koch, S. B., Veltman, D. J., & Olff, M. (2015). Reward
functioning in PTSD: A systematic review exploring the mechanisms underlying anhe-
donia. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 189–204.
Nillni, Y. I., Nosen, E., Williams, P. A., Tracy, M., Coffey, S. F., & Galea, S. (2013). Unique and
related predictors of major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and their
comorbidity following Hurricane Katrina. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 201(10),
841–847.
Nixon, R. D., & Bryant, R. A. (2005). Are negative cognitions associated with severe acute
trauma responses. Behaviour Change, 22(1), 22–28.
North, C. S., Nixon, S. J., Shariat, S., Mallonee, S., McMillen, J. C., Spitznagel, E. L., & Smith, E.
M. (1999). Psychiatric disorders among survivors of the Oklahoma City bombing. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 282(8), 755–762.
Oprel, D., Hoeboer, C., Schoorl, M., De Kleine, R., Wigard, I., Cloitre, M., . . . Van der Does,
W. (2018). Improving treatment for patients with childhood abuse related posttraumatic
stress disorder (IMPACT study): Protocol for a multicenter randomized trial comparing
prolonged exposure with intensified prolonged exposure and phase-based treatment.
BMC Psychiatry, 18(1), Article 385.
Orr, S. P., Metzger, L. J., Laska, N. B., Macklin, M. L., Hu, F. B., Shalev, A. Y., . . . Harvard/Veter-
ans Affairs Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Twin Study Investigators. (2003). Physiologic
responses to sudden, loud tones in monozygotic twins discordant for combat exposure:
Association with posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 283–288.
Ot’alora, G. M., Grigsby, J., Poulter, B., Van Derveer, J. W., Giron, S. G., Jerome, L., . . . Doblin,
R. (2018). 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy for treatment
of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder: A randomized phase 2 controlled trial. Journal
of Psychopharmacology, 32, 1295–1307.
Ouimette, P., Read, J. P., Wade, M., & Tirone, V. (2010). Modeling associations between post-
traumatic stress symptoms and substance use. Addictive Behaviors, 35(1), 64–67.
Passos, I. C., Vasconcelos-Moreno, M. P., Costa, L. G., Kunz, M., Brietzke, E., Quevedo, J., . . .
Kauer-Sant’Anna, M. (2015). Inflammatory markers in post-traumatic stress disorder: A
systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. Lancet Psychiatry, 2(11), 1002–1012.
Patel, R., Spreng, R. N., Shin, L. M., & Girard, T. A. (2012). Neurocircuitry models of posttrau-
matic stress disorder and beyond: A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(9), 2130–2142.
Pencea, I., Munoz, A. P., Maples-Keller, J., Fiorillo, D., Schultebraucks, K., Galatzer-Levy, I., . . .
Powers, A. (2020). Emotion dysregulation is associated with increased prospectie risk for
chronic PTSD development. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 121, 222–228.
Perkonigg, A., Kessler, R. C., Storz, S., & Wittchen, H. U. (2000). Traumatic events and

-- 201 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	181
post-traumatic stress disorder in the community: Prevalence, risk factors and comorbid-
ity. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 101(1), 46–59.
Phoenix Australia. (2013). Australian guidelines for the treatment of acute stress disorder and post-
traumatic stress disorder. Melbourne, Australia: Author.
Pineles, S. L., Hall, K. A. A., & Rasmusson, A. M. (2017). Gender and PTSD: Different pathways
to a similar phenotype. Current Opinion in Psychology, 14, 44–48.
Ponce de León, B., Andersen, S., Karstoft, K.-I., & Elklit, A. (2018). Pre-deployment dissocia-
tion and personality as risk factors for post-deployment post-traumatic stress disorder
in Danish soldiers deployed to Afghanistan. European Journal of Psychotraumatology, 9(1),
Article 1443672.
Powers, A., Fani, N., Murphy, L., Briscione, M., Bradley, B., Tone, E. B., . . . Jovanovic, T. (2019).
Attention bias toward threatening faces in women with PTSD: Eye tracking correlates by
symptom cluster. European Journal of Psychotraumatology, 10(1), Article 1568133.
Powers, M. B., Halpern, J. M., Ferenschak, M. P., Gillihan, S. J., & Foa, E. B. (2010). A meta-
analytic review of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical Psychol-
ogy Review, 30(6), 635–641.
Rapee, R. M., Litwin, E. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Impact of life events on subjects with panic
disorder and on comparison subjects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147(5), 640–644.
Rauch, S. A., Cigrang, J., Austern, D., Evans, A., & Consortium, S. S. (2017). Expanding the
reach of effective PTSD treatment into primary care: Prolonged exposure for primary
care. Focus, 15(4), 406–410.
Rauch, S. L., Shin, L. M., & Phelps, E. A. (2006). Neurocircuitry models of posttraumatic stress
disorder and extinction: Human neuroimaging research—past, present, and future. Bio-
logical Psychiatry, 60(4), 376–382.
Rauch, S. L., Wedig, M. M., Wright, C. I., Martis, B., McMullin, K. G., Shin, L. M., . . . Wilhelm,
S. (2007). Functional magnetic resonance imaging study of regional brain activation dur-
ing implicit sequence learning in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
61(3), 330–336.
Resick, P. A., Bovin, M. J., Calloway, A. L., Dick, A. M., King, M. W., Mitchell, K. S., . . . Wolf,
E. J. (2012). A critical evaluation of the complex PTSD literature: Implications for DSM-5.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 25(3), 241–251.
Resick, P. A., Galovski, T. E., Uhlmansiek, M. O., Scher, C. D., Clum, G. A., & Young-Xu, Y.
(2008). A randomized clinical trial to dismantle components of cognitive processing
therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in female victims of interpersonal violence.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(2), 243–258.
Resick, P. A., Monson, C. M., & Chard, K. M. (2016). Cognitive processing therapy for PTSD: A
comprehensive manual. New York: Guilford Press.
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive processing therapy for sexual assault victims: A
treatment manual. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Riggs, D. S., Rothbaum, B. O., & Foa, E. B. (1995). A prospective examination of symptoms
of posttraumatic stress disorder in victims of nonsexual assault. Journal of Interpersonal
Violence, 10(2), 201–214.
Rodriguez, P., Holowka, D. W., & Marx, B. P. (2012). Assessment of posttraumatic stress
disorder-related functional impairment: A review. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and
Development, 49(5), 649–666.
Rose, S., Bisson, J., & Wessely, S. (2001). Psychological debriefing for preventing posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 3, CD000560.
Rose, S., Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Kirk, M. (1999). A randomized controlled trial of indi-
vidual psychological debriefing for victims of violent crime. Psychological Medicine, 29(4),
793–799.

-- 202 of 498 --

182 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Ross, J., Murphy, D., & Armour, C. (2018). A network analysis of DSM-5 posttraumatic stress
disorder and functional impairment in UK treatment-seeking veterans. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 57, 7–15.
Rothbaum, B. O., & Davis, M. (2003). Applying learning principles to the treatment of post-
trauma reactions. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1008, 112–121.
Rothbaum, B. O., Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Murdock, T., & Walsh, W. (1992). A prospective exami-
nation of post-traumatic stress disorder in rape victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 5(3),
455–475.
Rothbaum, B. O., Kearns, M. C., Price, M., Malcoun, E., Davis, M., Ressler, K. J., . . . Houry, D.
(2012). Early intervention may prevent the development of posttraumatic stress disorder:
A randomized pilot civilian study with modified prolonged exposure. Biological Psychia-
try, 72(11), 957–963.
Rothbaum, B. O., Price, M., Jovanovic, T., Norrholm, S. D., Gerardi, M., Dunlop, B., . . . Ressler,
K. J. (2014). A randomized, double-blind evaluation of D -cycloserine or alprazolam com-
bined with virtual reality exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in Iraq and
Afghanistan war veterans. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 640–648.
Rothbaum, B. O., & Schwartz, A. C. (2002). Exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress disor-
der. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 56(1), 59–75.
Ruef, A. M., Litz, B. T., & Schlenger, W. E. (2000). Hispanic ethnicity and risk for combat-
related posttraumatic stress disorder. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology,
6(3), 235–251.
Rytwinski, N. K., Scur, M. D., Feeny, N. C., & Youngstrom, E. A. (2013). The co-occurrence
of major depressive disorder among individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder: A
meta-analysis. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26(3), 299–309.
Sareen, J., Stein, M. B., Cox, B. J., & Hassard, S. T. (2004). Understanding comorbidity of anxiety
disorders with antisocial behavior—findings from two large community surveys. Jour-
nal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 192(3), 178–186.
Scheeringa, M. S., Myers, L., Putnam, F. W., & Zeanah, C. H. (2012). Diagnosing PTSD in early
childhood: An empirical assessment of four approaches. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 25(4),
359–367.
Schlenger, W. E., Kulka, R. A., Fairbank, J. A., Hough, R. L., Jordan, B. K., Marmar, C. R.,
& Weiss, D. S. (1992). The prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorder in the Vietnam
generation: A multimethod, multisource assessment of psychiatric disorder. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 5(3), 333–363.
Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Foy, D. W., Shea, M. T., Hsieh, F. Y., Lavori, P. W., . . . Bernardy,
N. C. (2003). Randomized trial of trauma-focused group therapy for posttraumatic stress
disorder: Results from a Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 60(5), 481–489.
Schnurr, P. P., Wachen, J. S., Green, B. L., & Kaltman, S. (2014). Trauma exposure, PTSD, and
physical health. In M. J. Friedman, T. M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.), Handbook of PTSD:
Science and practice (p. 502–521). Guilford Press.
Schönfeld, S., & Ehlers, A. (2017). Posttraumatic stress disorder and autobiographical memo-
ries in everyday life. Clinical Psychological Science, 5(2), 325–340.
Shalev, A. Y., & Freedman, S. (2005). PTSD following terrorist attacks: A prospective evalua-
tion. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1188–1191.
Shalev, A. Y., Gevonden, M., Ratanatharathorn, A., Laska, E., van der Mei, W. F., Qui, W., . . .
International Consortium to Predict PTSD. (2019). Estimating the risk of PTSD in recent
trauma survivors: Results of the International Consortium to Predict PTSD (ICPP). World
Psychiatry, 18, 77–87.
Shalev, A. Y., Sahar, T., Freedman, S., Peri, T., Glick, N., Brandes, D., . . . Pitman, R. K. (1998). A

-- 203 of 498 --

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 	183
prospective study of heart rate response following trauma and the subsequent develop-
ment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(6), 553–559.
Shapiro, F. (1995). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles, protocols, and
procedures. New York: Guilford Press.
Shapiro, F., & Maxfield, L. (2002). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR):
Information processing in the treatment of trauma. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58(8),
933–946.
Shea, M. T., Vujanovic, A. A., Mansfield, A. K., Sevin, E., & Liu, F. (2010). Posttraumatic stress
disorder symptoms and functional impairment among OEF and OIF National Guard
and Reserve veterans. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 23(1), 100–107.
Sheerin, C. M., Lind, M. J., Bountress, K. E., Nugent, N. R., & Amstadter, A. B. (2017). The
genetics and epigenetics of PTSD: Overview, recent advances, and future directions.
Current Opinion in Psychology, 14, 5–11.
Shin, L. M., & Liberzon, I. (2010). The neurocircuitry of fear, stress, and anxiety disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 35(1), 169–191.
Shin, L. M., Wright, C. I., Cannistraro, P. A., Wedig, M. M., McMullin, K., Martis, B., . . . Rauch,
S. L. (2005). A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of amygdala and medial
prefrontal cortex responses to overtly presented fearful faces in posttraumatic stress dis-
order. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(3), 273–281.
Shou, H., Yang, Z., Satterthwaite, T. D., Cook, P. A., Bruce, S. E., Shinohara, R. T., . . . Sheline, Y.
I. (2017). Cognitive behavioral therapy increases amygdala connectivity with the cogni-
tive control network in both MDD and PTSD. NeuroImage: Clinical, 14, 464–470.
Smith, S. M., Goldstein, R. B., & Grant, B. F. (2016). The association between post-traumatic
stress disorder and lifetime DSM-5 psychiatric disorders among veterans: Data from
the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions-III (NESARC-III).
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 82, 16–22.
Smoller, J. W. (2016). The genetics of stress-related disorders: PTSD, depression, and anxiety
disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 41(1), 297–319.
Stein, M. B., Höfler, M., Perkonigg, A., Lieb, R., Pfister, H., Maercker, A., & Wittchen, H. U.
(2002). Patterns of incidence and psychiatric risk factors for traumatic events. Interna-
tional Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 11(4), 143–153.
Stevens, J. S., Almli, L. M., Fani, N., Gutman, D. A., Bradley, B., Norrholm, S. D., . . . Glover,
E. M. (2014). PACAP receptor gene polymorphism impacts fear responses in the amyg-
dala and hippocampus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 111(8),
3158–3163.
Trickey, D., Siddaway, A. P., Meiser-Stedman, R., Serpell, L., & Field, A. P. (2012). A meta-
analysis of risk factors for post-traumatic stress disorder in children and adolescents.
Clinical Psychology Review, 32(2), 122–138.
Tuerk, P. W., Wangelin, B., Rauch, S. A., Dismuke, C. E., Yoder, M., Myrick, H., . . . Acierno, R.
(2013). Health service utilization before and after evidence-based treatment for PTSD.
Psychological Services, 10(4), 401–409.
True, W. R., Rice, J., Eisen, S. A., Heath, A. C., Goldberg, J., Lyons, M. J., & Nowak, J. (1993).
A twin study of genetic and environmental contributions to liability for posttraumatic
stress symptoms. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 257–264.
Vaiva, G., Boss, V., Ducrocq, F., Fontaine, M., Devos, P., Brunet, A., . . . Thomas, P. (2006).
Relationship between posttrauma GABA plasma levels and PTSD at 1-year follow-up.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(8), 1446–1448.
van der Kolk, B. A., Roth, S., Pelcovitz, D., Sunday, S., & Spinazzola, J. (2005). Disorders of
extreme stress: The empirical foundation of a complex adaptation to trauma. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 18(5), 389–399.

-- 204 of 498 --

184 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
van Griensven, F., Chakkraband, M. L. S., Thienkrua, W., Pengjuntr, W., Cardozo, B. L., Tan-
tipiwatanaskul, P., . . . Thailand Post-Tsunami Mental Health Study Group. (2006). Men-
tal health problems among adults in tsunami-affected areas in southern Thailand. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Association, 296(5), 537–548.
van Rooij, S., Kennis, M., Sjouwerman, R., Van Den Heuvel, M., Kahn, R., & Geuze, E. (2015).
Smaller hippocampal volume as a vulnerability factor for the persistence of post-
traumatic stress disorder. Psychological Medicine, 45(13), 2737–2746.
Veterans Administration/Department of Defense. (2017). VA/DoD clinical practice guideline
for the management of posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder. Retrieved
from www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/mh/ptsd/vadodptsdcpgfinal012418.pdf.
Wangelin, B. C., & Tuerk, P. W. (2015). Taking the pulse of prolonged exposure therapy: Physi-
ological reactivity to trauma imagery as an objective measure of treatment response.
Depression and Anxiety, 32(12), 927–934.
Warda, G., & Bryant, R. A. (1998). Cognitive bias in acute stress disorder. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 36(12), 1177–1183.
Watkins, L. E., Han, S., Harpaz-Rotem, I., Mota, N. P., Southwick, S. M., Krystal, J. H., . . .
Pietrzak, R. H. (2016). FKBP5 polymorphisms, childhood abuse, and PTSD symptoms:
Results from the National Health and Resilience in Veterans Study. Psychoneuroendocri-
nology, 69, 98–105.
Watkins, L. E., Sprang, K. R., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2018). Treating PTSD: A review of evidence-
based psychotherapy interventions. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 12, 258.
Wisco, B. E., Miller, M. W., Wolf, E. J., Kilpatrick, D., Resnick, H. S., Badour, C. L., . . . Friedman,
M. J. (2016). The impact of proposed changes to ICD-11 on estimates of PTSD prevalence
and comorbidity. Psychiatry Research, 240, 226–233.
Wolf, E. J., Miller, M. W., Kilpatrick, D., Resnick, H. S., Badour, C. L., Marx, B. P., . . . Friedman,
M. J. (2015). ICD-11 complex PTSD in US national and veteran samples: Prevalence and
structural associations with PTSD. Clinical Psychological Science, 3(2), 215–229.
World Health Organization. (2019). International statistical classification of diseases and related
health problems (11th ed.). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Yehuda, R., Bierer, L. M., Pratchett, L. C., Lehrner, A., Koch, E. C., & Van Manen, J. A., . . .
Hildebrandt, T. (2015). Cortisol augmentation of a psychological treatment for warfight-
ers with posttraumatic stress disorder: Randomized trial showing improved treatment
retention and outcome. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 51, 589–597.
Young, B. H. (2006). The immediate response to disaster: Guidelines for adult psychological
first aid. In E. C. Ritchie, P. J. Watson, & M. J. Friedman (Eds.), Interventions following mass
violence and disasters: Strategies for mental health practice (pp. 134–154). New York: Guilford
Press.
Zalta, A. K., Held, P., Smith, D. L., Klassen, B. J., Lofgreen, A. M., Normand, P. S., . . . Pollack, M.
H. (2018). Evaluating patterns and predictors of symptom change during a three-week
intensive outpatient treatment for veterans with PTSD. BMC Psychiatry, 18(1), 242.
Zuj, D. V., Palmer, M. A., Gray, K. E., Hsu, C.-M. K., Nicholson, E. L., Malhi, G. S., . . . Felming-
ham, K. L. (2017). Negative appraisals and fear extinction are independently related to
PTSD symptoms. Journal of Affective Disorders, 217, 246–251.

-- 205 of 498 --

185
This chapter presents an overview of the clinical features and implications, risk fac-
tors, and treatment of four eating disorders: anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia ner-
vosa (BN), binge-eating disorder (BED), and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
(ARFID).
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS, COURSE, COMORBIDITY, AND ASSOCIATED FEATURES
Anorexia Nervosa
AN is characterized by failure to maintain a minimally acceptable weight (e.g., a
body mass index [BMI] of less than 18.5 kg/m2, failure to meet expected growth in
youth) and intense fear of being or becoming fat. The revision of the World Health
Organization’s (2019) International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD-11) also notes that rapid weight loss (e.g., >20% of total body weight
within 6 months) may satisfy the low weight guideline as long as other diagnostic
requirements are met (Claudino et al., 2019). Patients with AN also place undue value
on their own body shape or weight, and they deny that their low weight is a seri-
ous health concern. Females with AN commonly experience an interruption in men-
strual activity, but as this does not meaningfully distinguish clinical status, it is not
an essential diagnostic feature. There are two subtypes of AN—one for patients who
regularly engage in binge-eating or purging behaviors while underweight, and the
other for patients who simply restrict their food intake. ICD-11 also includes a sever-
ity qualifier to ensure that individuals can retain the AN diagnosis until a “full and
lasting recovery is achieved” (e.g., “healthy weight and the cessation of behaviors
C H A P T E R 7
Eating Disorders
Deborah R. Glasofer
Alexandra F. Muratore
Evelyn Attia
Kathleen M. Pike

-- 206 of 498 --

186 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
leading to weight loss independent of the provision of treatment”; Claudino et al.,
2019).
Psychological symptoms associated with AN include depression, anxiety,
insomnia, and increased obsessionality. These symptoms have also been observed
in non-eating-disordered individuals undergoing an induced state of semistarvation
and in the case of AN are often secondary to underweight status (Attia, 2010). Medi-
cal complications of AN include cardiac abnormalities, osteopenia or osteoporosis,
and endocrine disturbances. Electrolyte imbalances may be present, including hypo-
kalemia in individuals with vomiting or laxative use, and hyponatremia in those
who ingest large amounts of liquids (Attia, 2010).
AN is a serious psychiatric illness associated with increased morbidity and
mortality. Over the long term, while approximately one-half of the individuals with
AN achieve full recovery, approximately one-third remain partially symptomatic,
and approximately one-fifth remain chronically ill. A meta-analysis of 35 published
studies describing mortality rates for AN determined the crude mortality rate to be
5.1 deaths per 1,000 person-years (Arcelus, Mitchell, Wales, & Nielsen, 2011). Mortal-
ity estimates rise for patients who require hospitalization, with as much as a sixfold
increase in comparison to the general population. The cause of death in AN is equally
or more likely to be suicide than to be medical problems secondary to compromised
nutritional status (Papadopoulos, Ekbom, Brandt, & Ekselius, 2009).
High rates of depression, dysthymia, social phobia, generalized anxiety disorder,
specific phobia, and obsessive– compulsive disorder (OCD) are commonly reported
in clinical samples (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Individuals with AN
report elevated lifetime alcohol use disorder that typically begins after onset of AN;
however, the rate of alcohol use disorder for individuals with AN, restricting sub-
type (AN-R), is significantly lower than for individuals with AN, binge-eating/purg-
ing subtype (AN-B/P), BN, or BED (Bulik et al., 2004).
AN is associated with personality traits including perfectionism, obsessive–
compulsiveness, neuroticism, negative emotionality, harm avoidance, low self-
directedness, low cooperativeness, and avoidant personality disorder (Cassin & von
Ranson, 2005). Individuals with AN-R report high levels of constraint and persis-
tence and low levels of novelty seeking, though these features are not ubiquitous.
Perfectionism and harm avoidance are traits that appear to be premorbid to AN,
enduring even after recovery (Strober et al., 2006).
AN can also be associated with a range of psychosocial problems. Significant
interpersonal problems or stressors often occur in the year prior to onset of AN
and cumulatively increase risk for AN (Pike et al., 2008). Individuals with AN often
report social isolation and lack of pleasure in interpersonal relationships, and the
majority of women with AN report dramatically decreased sexual interest and plea-
sure (Zemishlany & Weizman, 2008). Adults with AN are likely to report lower rates
of employment than non-eating-disordered peers given the all-consuming nature of
the disorder. This is particularly true during the acute stages of the disorder; how-
ever, for individuals with long-standing AN and for those with significant comorbid
psychopathology, employment remains a problem even following recovery (Hjern,
Lindberg, & Lindblad, 2006).
For many, the impact of the disorder can be pervasive and long-lasting; however,
most follow-up studies of AN have been conducted with individuals who pursued

-- 207 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	187
intensive treatment and are therefore likely to represent a more severely ill subset.
Among those with AN who develop their eating disorder in adolescence, and for
whom the disorder is not enduring, associated psychopathology and related prob-
lems are accordingly more limited. Even for those with more long-standing AN, cer-
tain interpersonal problems and personality dimensions (and even disorders) can
improve with recovery from AN. Thus, clinicians should be careful not to overinter-
pret personality disorders and interpersonal problems during the acute stage of AN,
but rather should monitor an individual’s clinical presentation, including these fea-
tures, and address them as an integrated part of the clinical work.
Bulimia Nervosa
Individuals with BN engage in repeated binge-eating episodes and use compensa-
tory behaviors, such as self-induced vomiting or taking laxatives or other pills, over
at least a period of several months. An episode of binge eating involves taking in an
objectively large amount of food (i.e., an amount that most people would agree is
large) and simultaneously experiencing a sense of loss of control over eating. Accord-
ing to ICD-11, it is not necessary to consume an objectively large amount of food
during a binge-eating episode; this definitional change is likely to expand the num-
ber of individuals diagnosed with BN (and reduce the number with an other speci-
fied feeding and eating disorder; Claudino et al., 2019). Patients with BN overvalue
body shape and weight. The medical complications associated with BN are primarily
related to the deleterious effects of purging. The most common problems are ero-
sion of dental enamel, swollen salivary glands, edema, electrolyte abnormalities, and
esophageal tears (Mehler, Birmingham, Crow, & Jahraus, 2010).
Given the lack of agreement on definitions of remission, recovery, and relapse in
BN (Shapiro et al., 2007), the evaluation of outcome for this patient population remains
problematic. A longitudinal study reported that approximately 75% of female college
students diagnosed with BN by structured interview were in remission at 20-year
follow-up (Keel & Klump, 2003). In treatment-seeking samples, between 40 and
45% of patients achieve full recovery, 27% experience symptom improvement, and
14–23% remain chronically ill in the long term (Quadflieg & Fichter, 2019; Steinhau-
sen & Weber, 2009). The most common diagnostic crossover is from BN to another
specified (or unspecified) feeding and eating disorder, followed by AN, then BED
(Quadflieg & Fichter, 2019; Steinhausen & Weber, 2009). Crude mortality rates for
individuals with BN are generally lower than those in AN (Papadopoulos et al.,
2009), with one meta-analysis finding the crude mortality rate in BN to be 1.7 per
1,000 person-years (Arcelus et al., 2011).
Among individuals with a lifetime history of BN, mood and anxiety disorders
are common; approximately 43–75% of patients with BN report comorbid mood dis-
orders (Duncan et al., 2005; Fichter & Quadflieg, 2004), while approximately 68%
experience some form of anxiety or OCD (Kaye, Bulik, Thornton, Barbarich, & Mas-
ters, 2004). Depressive symptoms endorsed by individuals with BN may include dis-
tress about binge-eating episodes, and negative affect or emotion dysregulation may
also be associated with the onset of aberrant eating (Fischer, Smith, & Cyders, 2008;
Roberto, Grilo, Masheb, & White, 2010). Compared to people with AN, those with BN
are more likely to report a lifetime history of an alcohol use disorder (46.1%); similar

-- 208 of 498 --

188 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
to AN, the majority of individuals with BN who develop an alcohol use disorder do
so subsequent to the onset of their eating disorder (Bulik et al., 2004).
A high percentage of individuals with BN also meet criteria for comorbid per-
sonality disorders, with borderline and avoidant personality disorders being most
common (Rø, Martinsen, Hoffart, & Rosenvinge, 2005). Impulsivity and, more spe-
cifically, negative urgency, is commonly associated with BN and is significant in pre-
dicting treatment outcome (Fischer et al., 2008). Suicide attempts are not uncommon
in individuals with BN, with one study reporting that 26.9% of women with a life-
time history of BN have attempted suicide. However, the rate of completed suicides
for individuals with BN is reported to be lower than that for those with AN.
Individuals with BN report significant difficulties in relationships, and inter-
personal problems are correlated with treatment outcome (Hartmann, Zeeck, & Bar-
rett, 2010). However, in comparison to those with AN, individuals with BN are much
more likely to be able to continue working and to be socially engaged in their peer
communities, even while symptomatic.
Binge‑Eating Disorder
BED is characterized by recurrent episodes of binge eating that occur in the absence
of any compensatory behaviors. As in BN, there is a disagreement about diagnostic
standards, with DSM-5 requiring the presence of objectively large binge episodes
for a BED diagnosis, but ICD-11 including intake of both objective and subjective
amounts of food with loss of control (Claudino et al., 2019). Binge eating in the context
of BED is accompanied by significant emotional distress and is further distinguished
from normal eating by features such as eating quickly, until uncomfortably full, or
when not hungry. BED has no diagnostic criterion specifying the cognitive feature
of undue influence of body shape or weight on self-evaluation. However, individuals
with BED tend to report more concern with body shape and weight than overweight
(Grilo, Masheb, & White, 2010) and normal-weight (Goldschmidt et al., 2010) controls.
The degree of overvaluation reported by BED patients is similar to that reported by
individuals with BN (Grilo et al., 2010). Body shape and weight concerns indicate a
more severe variant of BED associated with greater psychosocial impairment (Gold-
schmidt et al., 2010).
Individuals with BED are more likely than those without the disorder to be
obese (Hudson, Hiripi, Pope, & Kessler, 2007), but they can also be distinguished
reliably from non-eating-disordered obese individuals (Wonderlich, Gordon, Mitch-
ell, Crosby, & Engel, 2009). When compared to weight-matched individuals without
BED, those with BED endorse significantly more eating disorder psychopathology
and lower quality of life (Wonderlich et al., 2009). BED is associated with co-occurring
medical problems such as diabetes, irritable bowel syndrome, and fibromyalgia
(Olguin et al., 2017), and psychological correlates, such as depressive symptoms and
low self-esteem (Hrabosky, Masheb, White, & Grilo, 2007). A meta-analysis of BED
studies from 2004 to 2009 reported a cumulative mortality rate of 0.5%, but more data
are needed from studies with longer follow-up periods (Keel & Brown, 2010).
The course of BED appears quite distinct from that of AN, and although BED
shares core features with BN and diagnostic crossover can occur, there are also
clear differences in risk, course, and outcome. Individuals with BED who receive

-- 209 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	189
treatment are more likely to experience symptom reduction and less likely to experi-
ence diagnostic crossover (Wonderlich et al., 2009).
Compared to obese controls, individuals with BED show higher rates of mood
and personality disorders, with depression as the most commonly reported (lifetime
rate of 50–60%) (Wonderlich et al., 2009). Negative affect, state anxiety, anxiety dis-
orders, and alcohol use disorders are also elevated in clinical samples (Dingemans,
Danner, & Parks, 2017). The degree of psychopathology reported by individuals with
BED appears to be associated with the eating disorder, not degree of obesity (Wilfley,
Citrome, & Herman, 2016).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
ARFID, as its name suggests, is an eating disorder defined by highly restrictive
eating and is associated with significant medical and psychosocial consequences.
Added to the eating disorders section in DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association,
2013) and soon to be added to ICD-11 (Claudino et al., 2019), ARFID is a reformulation
of DSM-IV’s and ICD-10’s feeding disorder of infancy and early childhood (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994). The age-of-onset criterion was removed because indi-
viduals of all ages can have clinically significant avoidant/restrictive eating, and it
does not always begin in childhood. Unlike those with AN, individuals with ARFID
attribute their food avoidance or restrictive eating to sensory features (e.g., texture,
color), fears related to the process of eating (e.g., choking, vomiting), and/or a lack of
interest (e.g., low hunger, lack of pleasure of eating) rather than body shape or weight
concern. ARFID is not synonymous with picky eating. Though roughly 25% of youth
experience feeding or eating problems (Benjasuwantep, Chaithirayanon, & Eiamu-
domkan, 2013), ARFID is distinguished by its severity and persistence.
Although DSM-5 offers a clear definition of ARFID, this diagnostic group is
rather heterogeneous. ARFID patients appear more likely to be younger, male, and
to have a higher incidence of comorbid psychiatric and medical disorders compared
to those with other eating disorders (Norris, Spettigue, & Katzman, 2016). Common
comorbid psychiatric disorders shared with AN, BN, and BED include anxiety dis-
orders, OCD, and depression. Unlike the other eating disorders, autism spectrum
disorders, oppositional defiant disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
may more commonly co-occur.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Global Burden of Disease and Prevalence
It is widely recognized that eating disorders occur across culture, socioeconomic
class, and race (Claudino et al., 2019), with risk being a function of biological, envi-
ronmental, cultural, and psychological factors. The Global Burden of Disease (GBD)
study has dramatically enhanced our understanding of the worldwide distribution
and burden of eating disorders. Utilizing the metric of disability-adjusted life-years
(DALYs), the GBD study provides rates of hundreds of health conditions and an esti-
mate of burden based on an algorithm that incorporates years lived with the dis-
order, years of life lost due to the disorder, and associated degree of impairment.

-- 210 of 498 --

190 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Current GBD estimates comparing AN and BN to 306 other health conditions indi-
cate that combined, these disorders were the 12th leading cause of DALYs in females
ages 15–19 in high-income countries, responsible for 2.2% of all DALYs. Globally,
this ranking did not change a great deal between 1990 and 2013; however, within
low- and middle-income countries, AN and BN increased from 58th to 46th (Erskine,
Whiteford, & Pike, 2016). This higher ranking is largely a function of improvements
in preventing and treating other communicable diseases in these countries, which
shifted the proportion of total burden attributed to eating disorders (Hoek, 2016).
The number of DALYs per 100,000 members of the population is highest in Europe
(Erskine et al., 2016). Despite lower prevalence rates, given the large populations
of India and China, along with the United States, these countries have the highest
contributions of total DALYs caused by eating disorders among women ages 15–49
(Thomas, Lee, & Becker, 2016).
Epidemiological estimates are largely derived from studies in Western Europe
and North America. Epidemiological data from Asia and Pacific Island countries
remain scarce (Thomas et al., 2016); the same holds true for Latin America (Kolar,
Rodriguez, Chams, & Hoek, 2016) and even more so for Africa (van Hoeken, Burns,
& Hoek, 2016).
Anorexia Nervosa
AN, while a severe psychiatric illness, is also relatively uncommon, and rates
appear to be relatively stable in high-income countries, with the exception of a noted
increase among females ages 15–19 (Smink, van Hoeken, & Hoek, 2013). Estimates of
incidence and prevalence of AN may be complicated by the rarity of the illness and
patient characteristics (i.e., secrecy/denial around symptoms that may interfere with
accurate reporting; Grilo, 2006). With changes in the formal diagnostic criteria of
AN, individuals who had previously met criteria for eating disorder not otherwise
specified (EDNOS) are now more likely to be diagnosed with AN, but the overall
rates do not actually appear to be increasing (Mustelin et al., 2016). The most recent
studies in Europe show that AN affects 1–4% of women in Europe; in the United
States, the prevalence rate is approximately 0.8% in adults and 0.3% in adolescents
(Swanson, Crow, Le Grange, Swendsen, & Merikangas, 2011; Udo & Grilo, 2018). Best
estimates indicate the disorder affects one-tenth as many males as females (Udo &
Grilo, 2018). Rates of AN remain low in Africa (van Hoeken et al., 2016), consistent
with the absence of cases in both a large-scale prevalence study among Black women
in the United States (Striegel-Moore et al., 2003) and a large study of incidence among
the majority Black population of Curaçao (Hoek et al., 2005; van Hoeken et al., 2016).
Bulimia Nervosa
Estimates of the prevalence of BN suggest it is a slightly more common disorder than
AN. Hoek and van Hoeken’s (2003) epidemiological review described a 1.0% aggre-
gated prevalence rate for BN (range = 0.0–4.5%), with higher rates for more broadly
defined BN (Hail & Le Grange, 2018). Studies based on surveys of large, nationally
representative, U.S. samples have yielded similar rates in adolescents and lower
rates (0.28%) in adults, with a slightly higher ratio of men affected than seen in AN

-- 211 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	191
(Swanson et al., 2011; Udo & Grilo, 2018). The wide variation of prevalence estimates
may be attributed to changing definitions of the illness since its introduction (Crow
& Brandenburg, 2010). Given the secrecy and ease of hiding bulimic behaviors, inci-
dence rates are generally considered to be underestimates (Grilo, 2006); however,
there does appear to be reduced incidence over the past few decades (Smink et al.,
2013).
Nationally, research suggests that BN may be more prevalent among Latinos
and Blacks than non-Latino Whites (Marques et al., 2011). Associated distress with
bulimic symptoms may vary cross-culturally, with preliminary data suggesting
binge eating as the best predictor of distress among Whites, Blacks, and Latinos,
in contrast with vomiting as the most salient predictor of distress among Asians
(Franko, Becker, Thomas, & Herzog, 2007). Cross-cultural variations support the
development of flexibility within the classification system to promote cultural sensi-
tivity and allow for phenomenological distinctions (Becker, 2007).
BN has also been described in a variety of non-Western cultures (Nobakht &
Dezhkam, 2000; Pike & Mizushima, 2005). Unlike in AN, the transmission of West-
ern ideals (e.g., thin beauty) and economic factors (e.g., an abundance of food avail-
able for binge eating) is thought to play an important role in the prevalence of BN in
non-Western cultures (Keel & Klump, 2003).
Binge‑Eating Disorder
BED is estimated to affect 1.6% of adolescents and between 0.8 and 2.8% of adults
(Hudson et al., 2007; Swanson et al., 2011; Udo & Grilo, 2018). In addition to being
more common than either AN or BN, BED is associated with later age of onset and
longer duration (Hudson et al., 2007). Full and subthreshold BED is more commonly
seen in adolescent (0.8–2.6%) and adult (1.9–2.0%) males than is AN or BN, though the
available data indicate that full-syndrome BED is still more common in women (Udo
& Grilo, 2018). Prevalence estimates range from 2 to 5% in obese community sam-
ples, and as high as 30% among individuals seeking bariatric surgery or alternative
weight loss treatments (de Zwaan, 2001; Kalarchian et al., 2007). In a sample of over-
weight and obese veterans seeking assistance with weight management, estimates
were higher, with 78.2% of individuals reporting binge eating, though these findings
are based on self-report data and likely capture both sub- and full-threshold symp-
toms (Higgins et al., 2013). Relative to other eating disorders, BED is known to be
more prevalent across a variety of racial and ethnic groups (Wonderlich et al., 2009).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
There has been little epidemiological research on ARFID to date. In a population-
based survey of individuals at least 15 years old, the 3-month point prevalence of
ARFID was 0.3% (Hay et al., 2017), placing it in a range comparable to AN and BN.
In a school-based survey of children ages 8–13 in Switzerland, 3.2% of students
reported features consistent with a diagnosis of ARFID (Kurz, van Dyck, Drem-
mel, Munsch, & Hilbert, 2015). Medical record review studies have looked at the
rates of ARFID in specialty services, reporting estimates ranging from 5 to 22.5%
in pediatric or adolescent medicine eating disorders programs (Nicely, Lane-Loney,

-- 212 of 498 --

192 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Masciulli, Hollenbeak, & Ornstein, 2014; Norris et al., 2014), and a 1.5% prevalence
rate in a pediatric gastroenterology specialty clinic (Eddy et al., 2015). It appears that
a greater number of males than females are affected by ARFID relative to AN and
BN. Even less is known about the prevalence of ARFID across different racial and
ethnic groups. However, the disorder has been described in adolescents and adults
receiving eating disorders treatment in Japan (Nakai, Nin, Noma, Teramukai, &
Wonderlich, 2016; Tanaka et al., 2015).
ETIOLOGY
The empirical literature on the etiology of eating disorders is still limited, with few
reports utilizing prospective and experimental research designs that could identify
directional and causational effects. Several case– control studies have identified risk
correlates (Fairburn et al., 1998; Karwautz et al., 2001; Pike et al., 2008; Striegel-Moore
et al., 2005). These studies offer the advantage of examining actual clinical cases, but
they are subject to potential reporting bias given that the data are gathered retro-
spectively from individuals with eating disorders. However, the majority of prospec-
tive and experimental studies of eating disturbance are limited because they do not
examine true cases of eating disorders (for a review, see Jacobi, Hayward, de Zwaan,
Kraemer, & Agras, 2004).
In 1986, Striegel-Moore, Sliberstein, and Rodin posed the following set of heu-
ristic questions to guide the study of the development of eating disorders: Why now?
Why women? Why some women and not others? These questions reflect several
important understandings of risk for eating disorders (Striegel-Moore et al., 1986).
First, eating disorders are a contemporary problem; prevalence rates have increased
during the past century in Western cultures, and rates of eating psychopathology
continue to increase across the globe (Becker, Thomas, & Pike, 2009). Second, gender
is perhaps the most significant and unequivocal risk factor for eating disorders, par-
ticularly AN and BN. Finally, despite widespread sociocultural and environmental
factors, only a small percentage of individuals actually develop significant eating
disturbances, implying that individual risk factors are essential to understanding
why some individuals develop eating psychopathology while others from the same
environmental context do not.
Why Now?
At the broadest level, sociocultural factors set the general stage of risk. Sociocultural
studies of the development of eating disorders suggest a complex interplay between
increased abundance in the food supply (especially highly palatable, caloric foods),
increased sedentary lifestyles, and societal overvaluation of a thin beauty ideal
(Brownell, 2010). In addition, as societies modernize and industrialize, traditional
gender roles are often put in flux. It has been argued that the dynamic of social tran-
sition increases risk for eating disorders at the broadest level because such societal
flux increases the developmental challenges of coming of age given the lack of role
models and societal norms to guide the course (Katzman & Lee, 1997).

-- 213 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	193
Why Women?
In addition to biological vulnerabilities that likely predispose women to develop eat-
ing disorders, environmental factors associated with industrialization and modern-
ization have profoundly impacted women’s place in society. Across the globe, issues
of women’s roles and rights have been at the forefront of much societal change, and
although this has ushered forth many positive changes in women’s roles, a concomi-
tant phenomenon has been the rise in societal overvaluation of a thin beauty ideal
for women. The confluence of these factors results in significant pressure conveyed
by family, peers, and mass media to achieve an unrealistic ideals within a social
context associated with increased caloric consumption and reduced energy expendi-
ture. To the extent that an individual internalizes the thin beauty ideal, the tension
that ensues has been shown to be associated with increased body dissatisfaction and
dieting, and prospective studies suggest that body dissatisfaction and dieting are
significant risk factors for eating psychopathology, particularly bulimic symptom-
atology (Stice & Agras, 1998).
Why Some Women and Not Others?
Exposure to particular life events, individual characteristics, and genetic differences
and vulnerabilities have been examined in an attempt to identify why particular
individuals are at increased risk for the development of eating disorders.
The genetics data suggest some biological heritability of risk for AN, BN, and
BED; however, it is unclear what the genetic vulnerability is, whether it is the same
across eating disorders, and what degree of variance is accounted for by genetic fac-
tors in an etiological model (Bulik, Kleiman, & Yilmaz, 2016). It appears that one
biological component of risk centers on weight regulation. Individuals with AN may
have a biology that can sustain extreme weight loss that the majority of the popula-
tion could not tolerate. Those with BED and BN are more likely to have a history of
being overweight. There are likely other biological factors that contribute to risk;
however, without the existence of specific biological or genetic markers, studies must
identify variables that may further be explored in terms of both biological and envi-
ronmental transmission.
In terms of the development of AN, no prospective and experimental stud-
ies exist to inform the discussion of risk factors. Case– control studies suggest that
perfectionism, negative affectivity, family discord and high parental demands, and
childhood physical and sexual abuse are potential risk correlates in the developmen-
tal history reported by individuals in treatment for AN (Fairburn, Cooper, Doll, &
Welch, 1999; Karwautz et al., 2001; Pike et al., 2008). Interestingly, individuals with
AN do not report a long history of weight and shape concerns; instead, the salience
of these factors appears to be greatest in the year immediately preceding the onset of
their eating psychopathology. In fact, it may be that dieting and weight concern are
more accurately understood as prodromal correlates of AN rather than potential risk
factors. Moreover, it is possible that the risk factors identified to date are most rel-
evant to individuals with long-standing AN given that the existing data are derived
from studies of individuals with enduring pathology.

-- 214 of 498 --

194 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
It is commonly understood that a combination of biological vulnerabilities inter-
act with certain environmental exposures to increase risk for AN. For example, a
majority of girls engage in dieting at some point during adolescence. In the case of
AN, it may be that dieting and weight loss trigger a certain biological vulnerability
among individuals who also have some anxious and perfectionistic traits, such that
they would be able to lose and sustain significant weight loss when others could not.
In the case of BN, extant data converge to suggest that genetic vulnerability,
childhood obesity, weight concern, negative body image and dieting, sexual abuse,
and adverse family factors (including parental obesity, parental mood or substance
abuse disorder, and highly critical parenting), along with individual factors of social
anxiety, negative affectivity, low self-esteem, impulsivity, and externalizing behav-
iors may contribute to increased risk (Fairburn et al., 1998; Jacobi et al., 2004; Stice,
2001).
BED shares with BN the common feature of binge eating at the core of the syn-
drome; thus, certain risk correlates also appear to be common across these disor-
ders. In particular, childhood obesity, adverse family factors (including family dis-
cord, high parental demands, and parental history of mood and substance disorder),
mood disorder, and negative affectivity have been identified as risk correlates in
case– control studies (Fairburn et al., 1998; Striegel-Moore et al., 2005). It is likely that
both biological and environmental factors contribute to increased risk for childhood
obesity, which is often associated with teasing and body dissatisfaction.
Of note, many of the possible risk factors associated with eating disorders may
be shared with other psychiatric disorders. For example, childhood abuse increases
risk for not only eating disorders but also anxiety and mood disorders (Jonas et al.,
2011). Yet unlike the presence of a certain cellular abnormality that indicates without
a doubt the presence of a particular cancer, the correlates associated with eating dis-
turbances represent increased risk but do not definitively determine the presence of
an eating disorder.
MULTIVARIATE MODELS OF ONSET AND MAINTENANCE OF EATING DISORDERS
It is widely recognized that eating disorders are multidetermined and that the fac-
tors contributing to their onset are not necessarily those that contribute to mainte-
nance of the disorder. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) interventions emphasize
this point (Fairburn, Marcus, & Wilson, 1993). These models maintain that certain
variables likely increase risk during a developmentally vulnerable period of time
(e.g., overvaluation of shape and/or weight), and that other variables contribute to the
persistence of the eating psychopathology (e.g., strict dietary rules). Specific compo-
nents of the eating disorders (e.g., severe weight loss, binge eating and purging) have
significant biological, behavioral, and psychological effects that serve to complicate
the clinical picture and perpetuate the disturbance. CBT and other evidence-based
treatments for eating disorders largely focus on identifying maintenance factors
based on the tenet that addressing these issues first results in the most significant
and tangible clinical improvement initially. Resolution of the acute issues brings
clarity of vision in analyzing the more distal, developmental factors because by the

-- 215 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	195
time the individual presents for treatment, the eating disorder has often taken on a
life of its own. Cognitive-behavioral theory maintains that achieving some symptom
resolution offers immediate relief and increases the patient’s sense of self-efficacy.
Long-standing issues can then be more readily addressed once eating disorder main-
tenance behaviors have sufficiently resolved.
Although CBT was initially developed for patients with BN, Fairburn intro-
duced an enhanced version of CBT (CBT-E) proposed to be “transdiagnostic,” in
that it focuses on commonalities among the eating disorders (Fairburn, 2008). The
core treatment is similar to that in the earlier manual (Fairburn, Marcus, et al., 1993),
with two substantial changes. First, there is a reformulated strategy and method
for addressing dysfunctional thought processes regarding the overvaluation body
shape and weight. Second, a new treatment module tackles “mood intolerance” as
a trigger of aberrant eating episodes. The core focus on eating disorder symptoms
is supplemented by flexible, personalized use of modules to address maintaining
mechanisms theorized to perpetuate the illness, including low self-esteem, clini-
cal perfectionism, and interpersonal difficulties. Given the additional mechanisms
addressed throughout treatment, CBT-E is proposed to be a more suitable treatment
for particularly complex cases (de Jong, Schoorl, & Hoek, 2018). As we discuss in
more detail later, CBT and CBT-E have strong empirical support in the field.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS, TREATMENT PLANNING,
AND EVIDENCE‑BASED TREATMENT OF EATING DISORDERS
Anorexia Nervosa
Individuals with AN are unlikely to present with complaints about their change
in weight or nutritional intake. They may be identified on routine medical assess-
ment or may present for evaluation following concern expressed by family, friends,
coworkers, or coaches. Evaluation is challenging because of the thought content fre-
quently associated with the illness, including a belief that one is fat or would become
fat with weight gain, and a denial of the seriousness of the low weight state. Life
events and psychological traits that were present before the onset of eating behav-
ioral change are part of a comprehensive evaluation, but the clinician should use
caution in making any causal hypotheses regarding the development of the eating
disorder. Evaluation should include detailed assessment of daily food and beverage
intake, weight history (e.g., lifetime highest–lowest weights; time course of signifi-
cant weight changes; associated changes in menstrual status), body image concerns,
and exercise routines. Assessments should include direct questioning about purging
behaviors, including vomiting, as well as the use of laxatives, diuretics, and diet pills
in traditional pharmaceutical, as well as alternative, preparations. Parallel history
from family members may be necessary. In younger patients, weight loss may not
be present; rather, the diagnosis may be made if expected goals for weight gain and
growth are not met (Rosen, 2010). Evaluation will likely include medical assessment,
including vital signs such as heart rate, blood pressure, and temperature, in addition
to height and weight. Low weight patients will frequently have changes consistent
with a hypometabolic state, and both these findings and other physical signs can be

-- 216 of 498 --

196 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
useful indicators of the severity of illness. Some patients are concerned enough about
these changes that they are willing to consider engaging in weight restoration. Even
in the context of significant low weight, laboratory assessments may not identify
abnormalities. Clinicians should not be reassured by these results because total body
levels of micronutrients and minerals may not be reflected in blood tests.
Case formulation should include a narrative that helps the patient understand
the emergence and perpetuation of symptoms. The narrative should include the
patient’s predisposing factors such as preillness anxiety or obsessionality, family his-
tory of an eating disorder, dieting behaviors, or activities (e.g., athletics, modeling)
that may reinforce leanness. Dietary changes, even those that the patient dismisses
as distinct from the formal eating disorder, such as lists of disliked foods, recently
acquired vegetarian practices, gluten sensitivity and food allergies, should be con-
sidered as possible symptoms of the illness itself. Patients should be informed about
the physical and psychological risks of malnutrition, including the development or
intensification of distressing symptoms such as depression, anxiety, and social iso-
lation. Basic principles of nutritional rehabilitation should be reviewed, such as the
fact that individuals usually require 1,800–2,400 kcal (kilocalories) for weight main-
tenance, and that 3,500 kcal above maintenance requirements are necessary in order
to gain 1 pound. Patients (and families) may have to hear this repeatedly in order to
process the fact that nutritional plans must include 500–1,000 kcal/day above mainte-
nance requirements in order to gain 1–2 pounds per week.
Treatment plans need to emphasize weight restoration and normalization of eat-
ing behaviors. After evaluation of illness severity, available psychosocial supports,
prior treatment history, and treatment availability, evaluations should conclude with
recommendations for treatment type and setting. Patients, and their families, when-
ever possible, should participate in treatment planning. Most treatments include
a team of clinicians with medical, psychological, and nutritional expertise. Target
weight goals (and the rationale for these recommendations) should be provided,
along with explicit expectations about rate of weight gain and plans for weight mon-
itoring. Once a recommended weight has been achieved, goals can be reevaluated
to incorporate weight maintenance. Psychoeducation about normal fluctuations in
weight and healthy weight ranges often is required.
Clearly, treatment can be both challenging and complicated, and the lack of
clear empirical support for any single treatment approach may be a result of different
factors, including several difficulties inherent to treating this clinical group (Attia,
2010). Associated features of AN, such as the ego-syntonic nature of the disorder
and the medical complications that can arise during treatment, can have profound
implications on patient motivation, compliance, and outcome. Ambivalence about
recovery and denial about the seriousness of the problem can be framed as symp-
tomatic of the illness and should be explicitly addressed at the onset of treatment and
repeatedly as needed.
Treatment research in individuals with AN is complicated by their varying needs
in terms of intensity of services and the tendency for patients to be withdrawn from
outpatient treatment for a higher level of care (Bulik, Berkman, Brownley, Sedway,
& Lohr, 2007). The rarity of the illness also makes it challenging to recruit adequate
samples for rigorous study. Overall, psychotherapeutic interventions for AN target
either acute treatment for underweight or the prevention of relapse to a low weight.

-- 217 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	197
Family Therapy
Evidence supports the use of family-based treatment of adolescents with AN, though
only a handful of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been completed. One
type of family-based therapy (FBT), also called the Maudsley approach because of its
origins at the Maudsley Hospital in England (Russell, Szmukler, Dare, & Eisler, 1987),
stands out from the empirical database. FBT assumes that normal adolescent devel-
opment has been disturbed by the presence of the eating disorder; thus, parents’
involvement in treatment is essential to this therapeutic intervention (Lock & Le
Grange, 2012). Parents temporarily oversee the refeeding process, and once success-
ful in this task, gradually return an age-appropriate degree of control and autonomy
back to the patient. After eating and weight have normalized, treatment focuses on
feelings underlying the disordered behaviors and the developmental issues that may
have been ignored due to the illness. This treatment modality is best suited to those
under age 18, who live at home with their families, and whose families are able to set
aside other issues in the service of treating the eating disorder. The entire household
(e.g., parents, siblings, child care providers) is typically involved and must be com-
mitted to the approach and the day-to-day mealtime routines.
Overall, this and other family-based treatments are considered the “gold stan-
dard” for adolescents with AN (Lebow et al., 2018). Moreover, existing data suggest
long-term benefit of FBT (Loeb & Le Grange, 2009). One study of adolescents receiv-
ing FBT observed that 78% of patients no longer met criteria for an eating disor-
der at 36-month follow-up (Paulson-Karlsson, Engstrom, & Nevonen, 2009). Studies
comparing subtle variations of FBT suggest that parental involvement may be the
most salient feature of the treatment, prompting the development of parent-focused
treatment (PFT; Hughes, Sawyer, Loeb, & Le Grange, 2015). RCTs comparing PFT
to FBT have consistently found PFT to yield greater reduction in symptoms and
increased remission rates (Hughes, Sawyer, Accurso, Singh, & Le Grange, 2019). The
evaluating clinician must consider carefully whether parents and patients can be
adequately committed to this psychotherapy and, accordingly, what interventions
to employ.
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
CBT, pioneered by Beck (1976), has demonstrated efficacy for a wide range of psy-
chiatric illnesses (Hofmann, Asnaani, Vonk, Sawyer, & Fang, 2012). As previously
described, CBT was initially adapted for patients with BN and found to be effica-
cious (CBT-BN; Fairburn, 1981); it has since evolved into CBT-E.
A central tenet of the CBT model of AN (CBT-AN) is that symptoms are main-
tained by the interaction between disturbances in thoughts and behaviors that
impact eating and weight control. Though available data on CBT-AN remain lim-
ited, there is some indication that this approach may be of use preventing relapse in
weight-restored patients: Studies comparing CBT-AN to alternative approaches have
consistently reported lower rates of premature dropout and longer time to relapse
in weight-restored individuals receiving CBT (Agras, 2019; Galsworthy-Francis &
Allan, 2014). Despite this, meta-analyses examining CBT-AN suggest its efficacy is
not consistently superior to other treatments (Galsworthy-Francis & Allan, 2014).

-- 218 of 498 --

198 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
CBT-AN’s efficacy in treating acute AN is somewhat ambiguous. In the first
published case series, Cooper and Fairburn (1984) reported that two patients did
well, one showed some improvement, and two did not benefit. Although subsequent
RCTs have found no differences in outcome for underweight patients receiving CBT-
AN compared to other treatments (Galsworthy-Francis & Allan, 2014), a trial com-
paring CBT-AN with specialist supportive clinical management in a sample of adults
with severe and enduring AN found CBT-AN to yield greater social adjustment and
symptom reduction at 6- and 12-month follow-up (Touyz et al., 2013). While there is
minimal evidence to support this approach over others, existing studies in this sub-
group are limited by the methodological problems outlined previously.
Research on CBT-E for AN remains relatively limited, though early reports sug-
gest its suitability for a substantial proportion of patients, with reports of up to 96%
of patients successfully completing treatment (Dalle Grave, El Ghoch, Sartirana, &
Calugi, 2016). There is some indication that this approach yields increased weight
and decreased symptoms among the majority of patients (60–80%) who complete
treatment (Dalle Grave et al., 2016) and that gains are relatively well maintained a
year after treatment completion (Frostad et al., 2018). Among patients with severe
AN (defined as those with BMI < 16 kg/m2), 50% successfully completed outpatient
CBT-E, and 71.4% of these individuals had a substantial increase and maintenance of
BMI up to 12 months later (Frostad et al., 2018). The guidelines for eating disorders
therefore now recommend CBT-E as a first-line treatment for adults with AN.
Additional Approaches
Given the limited evidence in support of any single psychotherapeutic intervention
for AN, clinical researchers have adapted treatments originally studied in other
patient populations, such as cognitive remediation therapy (CRT), exposure therapy
and response prevention (EX/RP), and acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)
for use in this population.
Developed as an intervention for patients with impaired cognitive functioning
due to brain lesions, CRT aims to identify and strengthen impaired cognitive processes
through repetitive cognitive and behavioral exercises (Tchanturia & Hambrook, 2010).
The therapy addresses areas of relative cognitive weakness, based on neuropsycho-
logical assessment, neuroimaging findings, and studies comparing individuals with
AN to healthy counterparts. Areas of impairment include “set shifting” (to transition
easily back and forth between tasks or mental sets) or “cognitive flexibility” (to adapt
behavior to changing demands in the environment), and “central coherence” (holistic
information processing whereby details are integrated and put in a broader context).
In CRT, patients work on versions of different tasks to address inflexibility in thinking
and overly detailed processing biases (for details, see Tchanturia & Hambrook, 2010).
CRT appears to yield improvement on neuropsychological measures in patients with
AN (Tchanturia, Lloyd, & Lang, 2013) and may reduce treatment attrition rates relative
to CBT (Dahlgren & Rø, 2014). Preliminary results from RCTs suggest that when com-
bined with treatment as usual, CRT may enhance certain outcomes, including improve-
ments in eating disorder psychopathology and quality of life (Dahlgren & Rø, 2014).
In EX/RP for AN, disturbances in eating behavior are explicitly targeted. This
intervention, predicated on patients’ learning through experience that anticipated

-- 219 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	199
negative consequences do not occur (or can be managed) when a fearful stimulus
is approached, is the psychotherapy of choice for OCD, posttraumatic stress disor-
der, and some anxiety disorders (Kaczkurkin & Foa, 2015). In EX/RP for AN, the
avoidance of food likely to produce weight gain is hypothesized to result from anxi-
ety. Rigid dietary rules and ritualized eating behaviors (e.g., eating slowly, cutting
food in small pieces) are conceptualized as strategies to avoid or minimize distress
around eating (Steinglass et al., 2011, 2014). To promote experiential learning, EX/RP
for AN utilizes session time to put the patient in direct contact with feared foods and
eating situations. In an open case series, Steinglass and colleagues (2012) observed
increased caloric intake during a laboratory meal following a brief trial of EX/RP. An
RCT of EX/RP and CRT in inpatients showed that EX/RP was associated with better
intake in a laboratory meal; furthermore, improvement in intake was associated with
improvement in eating-related anxiety (Steinglass et al., 2014).
ACT (Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 2002) emphasizes a need for psychological flex-
ibility and acceptance of the human experience. In this approach, eating disorders
are conceptualized as a means of avoiding unpleasant experiences. ACT aims to shift
a patient’s perspective on how to instead approach and accept these experiences. In
case series and larger samples incorporating ACT into existing treatments, improve-
ments in weight and symptom severity are comparable with treatment as usual
(Juarascio et al., 2013; Parling, Cernvall, Ramklint, Holmgren, & Ghaderi, 2016). ACT
holds promise but is not currently considered superior to other treatments.
Bulimia Nervosa
While individuals with BN are more likely than individuals with AN to present
with clear interest in symptom resolution, it is not unusual for them to delay their
presentation because of shame. All comprehensive psychological evaluations should
include questions about eating, body shape, and weight concerns, and individuals
who report concerns in these areas should be asked about binge-eating and purg-
ing behaviors. As with AN, assessment should include gathering information about
typical overall eating pattern (and associated dietary rules) and binge episodes (e.g.,
amounts/types of food, context/triggers). Patients with BN may report an escalating
pattern of binge and purge frequency. They may even have had an earlier period of
restrictive food intake and may have previously met full criteria for AN. Younger
patients may report less frequent binge eating and purging. Self-induced vomiting at
any frequency should be identified as a problem and addressed in the evaluation and
treatment plan. Assessments for BN should include questions about social function-
ing because patients may eat secretively, or pair restrictive eating when alone with
apparently “normal” eating with friends, accompanied by purging following a fuller
meal. Patients should be made aware of the risks of frequent vomiting, including
dental erosion and decay, and electrolyte instability associated with serious medical
risks, such as cardiac arrhythmia or seizures. Individuals who abuse laxatives may
develop significant difficulties with intestinal motility, as well as fluid and electro-
lyte abnormalities.
As symptoms are often the source of great shame, patients should be commended
for speaking honestly and seeking help. Patients require education about the cycle of
thoughts and behaviors that frequently perpetuate symptoms and need support in

-- 220 of 498 --

200 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
order to break this cycle, introduce healthier eating behaviors, and manage anxiety
about whether eating without purging can be accomplished without feared weight
gain. Treatment planning should include education about effective treatments for
BN, including psychotherapy and antidepressant medication. Regular medical eval-
uation should be required if patients continue to be notably symptomatic.
There has been great progress in the development and rigorous empirical study
of several psychotherapies for BN in the past two decades. This body of research
has identified substantial differences in the effectiveness of distinct psychotherapies,
allowing for clearly delineated treatment guidelines (Grilo, 2006). In contrast to AN,
the prognosis for patients with BN who receive adequate treatment is good. Approxi-
mately 50% of individuals with BN who receive manual-based CBT, for example,
achieve either near or full remission of symptoms that appears to be maintained
over time (Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). Given the robust empirical database of
treatment research in BN, in 2017 the U.K.’s National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) updated their recommended list of evidence-based treatment
guidelines, designating CBT-guided self-help (CBT-GSH) as the treatment of choice,
followed by CBT-E.
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
CBT targets behavioral disturbances by prescribing a regular pattern of eating, pro-
viding problem-solving skills to cope with high-risk situations, and teaching cogni-
tive restructuring to modify problematic body shape and weight beliefs (Fairburn,
Marcus, et al., 1993).
RCTs of CBT-BN support its efficacy in helping patients achieve abstinence from
or a decreased frequency of binge–purge behaviors. Consistent with the approach’s
conceptual model, the reduction in dietary restraint achieved by CBT partly medi-
ates the intervention’s efficacy in eliminating binge eating and purging (Wilson,
Fairburn, Agras, Walsh, & Kraemer, 2002). CBT has been demonstrated to be superior
to other psychological treatments in the short term and to antidepressant medica-
tions for achieving abstinence from bulimic symptoms (Linardon, Wade, de la Pie-
dad Garcia, & Brennan, 2017).
By addressing difficulties external to the eating disorder (as described earlier),
CBT-E may be an effective treatment for complex or severe cases, though there does
not appear to be a consistent difference between the focused and broad versions
(Thompson-Brenner et al., 2016). Studies do provide relatively robust support for
CBT-E as an effective treatment, yielding global symptom reduction and significantly
improved outcomes when compared with psychoanalytic psychotherapy, interper-
sonal psychotherapy (IPT), and wait-list control (de Jong et al., 2018). Despite this,
CBT-E has relatively high attrition rates, and there is preliminary evidence to suggest
alternatives, such as integrative cognitive–affective therapy, may also be effective (de
Jong et al., 2018).
GUIDED SELF‑HELP USING CBT
Despite the effectiveness of CBT in the treatment of BN, access to this modal-
ity of treatment remains limited (Wilson et al., 2007). CBT-GSH was developed to

-- 221 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	201
overcome barriers in treatment dissemination. It combines a self-help manual with
limited, brief “therapy” sessions administered by health care providers with differ-
ing degrees of expertise and experience.
Interpersonal Psychotherapy
Originally developed as a short-term, structured psychotherapy for depression
(Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984), IPT has been adapted for BN
by Fairburn and colleagues (Fairburn, Jones, Peveler, Hope, & O’Connor, 1993). IPT
for BN does not overtly focus on the modification of disturbed eating behaviors or
overvaluation of shape and weight. Binge eating is theorized to occur as a response
to interpersonal disturbances and consequent negative mood (Fairburn, Jones, et al.,
1993). Thus, the primary emphasis of IPT is on helping patients identify and address
interpersonal problems hypothesized to maintain the eating disorder. Treatment
goals evolve from the four domains of interpersonal problems, as outlined by Kler-
man and colleagues (1984)—grief, interpersonal role disputes, role transitions, and
interpersonal deficits—and encourage mastery of current social roles, as well as
adjustment to evolving interpersonal situations (Wilfley et al., 2002). Eating disorder
symptoms are linked consistently back to their role in the perpetuation or mainte-
nance of the patient’s interpersonal domain of focus (Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2010).
IPT has some empirical support and therefore might be considered an alternative
to CBT. However, RCTs show this approach to be less effective than CBT in reducing
bulimic symptoms by the end of the active phase of treatment (Agras, Walsh, Fair-
burn, Wilson, & Kraemer, 2000; Fairburn et al., 1991) and rates of remission are higher
in CBT-E (Fairburn et al., 2015). Nevertheless, studies have shown that individuals
receiving either treatment report a similar degree of improvement in bulimic symp-
toms at follow-up. Thus, there appear to be clear temporal differences in response to
treatment, with IPT taking longer to achieve its effects than CBT (Fairburn, Jones, et
al., 1993; Wilson et al., 2002). Proponents of IPT assert that if delivered in such a way
that interpersonal problems are repeatedly linked to the maintenance of the eating
disorder, response to IPT may occur more rapidly (Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2010).
Additional Approaches
Given the need for psychological treatments to address a broader range of individu-
als with BN (Wilson et al., 2007), dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) and FBT for BN
have garnered increased interest. Some attention has also been paid to leveraging
technology to increase access to evidence-based care.
DBT, developed to treat borderline personality disorder (Linehan, 1993), is an
empirically supported treatment that focuses primarily on affect regulation and
development of adaptive coping strategies and interpersonal skills. The skills taught
in DBT, including mindfulness, distress tolerance, and emotional regulation, may
be a particularly good match for the high levels of negative affect frequently experi-
enced by patients with BN (Safer, Telch, & Agras, 2001; Wilson et al., 2007). Findings
from initial trials suggest that DBT for BN can yield a large reduction of bulimic
symptoms. Rigorous studies comparing DBT to an active treatment are needed to
better evaluate its efficacy.

-- 222 of 498 --

202 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
The Maudsley form of family therapy described previously has also been
adapted to meet the needs of younger patients with BN. Research suggests that FBT
is useful in reducing bulimic symptoms (Le Grange, Crosby, Rathouz, & Leventhal,
2007). While previous studies suggested FBT may not be more effective than other
approaches, more recent findings indicate that when compared to CBT for adoles-
cents, FBT for BN results in greater abstinence from binge eating and purging at end
of treatment and 6-month follow up (Le Grange, Lock, Agras, Bryson, & Jo, 2015).
Beyond meeting the needs of a broader range of patients with BN, there has been
a growing interest in telemedicine as a strategy to reach more individuals and pro-
vide cost-effective treatment. Internet-based CBT has shown promise for individuals
with anxiety disorders (Andersson, 2009). Some data suggest telemedicine CBT-BN
yields outcomes greater than control conditions and is comparable to face-to-face
CBT, but findings are mixed (Loucas et al., 2014; Pittock, Hodges, & Lawrie, 2018).
More research is needed to address logistical considerations in delivering telemedi-
cine, including the use of smartphone apps, and to identify possible long-term differ-
ences in outcome between this and other treatment modalities.
Binge‑Eating Disorder
BED is the most prevalent eating disorder and occurs in many individuals who pres-
ent for treatment for other psychiatric disorders, and in some who present at obesity
clinics and other medical venues. Therefore, individuals with mood disorders, psy-
chotic disorders, anxiety disorders, and obesity should be assessed for binge eating.
Treatment planning for BED requires patient education and participation. It is not
synonymous with weight loss treatment, and treatments that effectively decrease
bingeing may not be associated with weight loss. Psychotherapy for BED is often one
of several treatment components that overweight or obese individuals with BED may
want to consider in moving toward improved eating and health.
Multiple therapeutic modalities show promise. Initial treatment studies came
from the field of obesity, where mixed findings led to concern that behavioral weight
loss interventions and calorically restrictive diets might be unsuitable for obese indi-
viduals endorsing features of eating disorders (Yanovski, 1993). For the many obese
individuals with BED, there continues to be debate in the eating disorder and obesity
fields as to whether weight status or eating disorder symptoms should be first-line
treatment goals (Krysanski & Ferraro, 2008). Given limited data supporting mainte-
nance of significant weight loss following behavioral weight loss, targeting a reduc-
tion in binge eating initially may allow for a slow, modest weight loss following BED
treatment (Krysanski & Ferraro, 2008). However, research including long-term follow-
up is limited. Additionally, more studies comparing obese and nonobese individuals
with BED are warranted to clarify the extent to which the eating disorder diagnosis
offers clinically relevant information in relation to obesity (Wonderlich et al., 2009).
The clinical concerns of practitioners treating obese individuals with BED
inspired research on psychological treatments adapted from those for BN. Currently,
CBT-GSH enjoys the designation as the treatment of choice for BED by the U.K.’s
NICE. In considering the treatment needs of individuals with BED, however, it is
important to bear in mind that these patients struggle across domains (e.g., binge
eating, attitudinal features of eating disorders, general psychological symptoms and
distress, and, at times, obesity with its associated health risks; Grilo, 2006).

-- 223 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	203
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
Treatment studies evaluating CBT for BED (CBT-BED) have typically relied upon
the manual developed by Fairburn, Marcus, and colleagues (1993) for the treatment
of BN. Patients are encouraged to challenge negative cognitions related to having a
larger body size and to develop structured, healthy eating patterns, with an empha-
sis on moderation of amounts and types of foods. Adjustments to the theoretical
understanding of maintenance mechanisms recognize key differences between the
disorders, namely, the absence of inappropriate compensatory behaviors and more
generally chaotic, less restrictive eating characteristic of BED (Grilo, 2006).
In RCTs of CBT-BED, substantial reductions in binge eating, and general and
eating-disordered psychopathology are evident posttreatment and at follow-up (Wil-
fley et al., 2002). Though CBT interventions do not reliably result in substantial or
sustained weight loss, they yield greater reductions in binge eating than behavioral
weight loss (Iacovino, Gredysa, Altman, & Wilfley, 2012). CBT is generally associated
with good treatment completion rates, reduction in binge-eating episodes in more
than half of patients, and improvement in psychosocial functioning and mood. CBT
has proven more effective than pharmacological treatments as a stand-alone treat-
ment and as an adjunct to behavioral weight loss treatment (Iacovino et al., 2012).
While data clearly and consistently support its use, little is known about how
CBT-BED produces its effects. Some have proposed that the current CBT model pays
insufficient attention to low levels of dietary restraint, high negative affect, and eat-
ing in response to emotion characteristic of individuals with this eating disorder
(Wilson et al., 2007). A review of recent research on CBT-E provides evidence that
this is also an effective treatment for BED and results in faster treatment response
and higher remission rates than IPT (de Jong et al., 2018).
GUIDED SELF‑HELP USING CBT
Similar to what we described for BN, self-help based on the CBT model of eating dis-
orders has been studied extensively, primarily using the Fairburn (1995) manual. Sev-
eral investigations have tested CBT-GSH and pure self-help approaches (for a com-
plete list, see Sysko & Walsh, 2008); in BED, data suggest some advantage of CBT-GSH
over pure self-help (Iacovino et al., 2012). In one study, 10 sessions of CBT-GSH deliv-
ered by beginning psychology graduate students with limited therapy experience
proved to be as effective in reducing BED symptoms as 20 sessions of IPT conducted
by intensively trained and supervised doctoral-level psychologists (Wilson, Wilfley,
Agras, & Bryson, 2010), providing further support that CBT-GSH may be a viable,
appropriate intervention with advantages in dissemination and cost-effectiveness.
Interpersonal Psychotherapy
IPT for BED (Wilfley et al., 2002) is based on IPT for depression (Klerman et al., 1984)
and BN (Fairburn, Jones, et al., 1993). Although connections are made throughout
therapy between interpersonal events and binge eating, the treatment does not
overtly address eating behavior. Instead, patients’ work focuses on making changes
in specifically identified problematic areas of interpersonal functioning. In adapting
IPT for BED, Wilfley and colleagues (2002) developed a group format. In group IPT,

-- 224 of 498 --

204 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
patients are encouraged to use the group to decrease isolation, enable the formation
of relationships, and practice new communication skills. The group format provides
a unique environment for participants, who may otherwise keep eating behaviors
hidden due to guilt and shame (Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2010).
At present, NICE (2017) guidelines for BED do not designate IPT as a treatment
of choice, possibly because of the paucity of RCTs investigating this approach rela-
tive to those of CBT-based treatments. Still, research underscores the potential util-
ity of an IPT approach in a subgroup of patients known to suffer across domains of
functioning (Grilo, 2006). In the largest RCT to date, IPT was found to be superior
to behavioral weight loss in patients with low self-esteem at 2-year follow-up, and
superior to CBT-GSH in patients with low self-esteem and high eating disorder psy-
chopathology (Wilson et al., 2010). While this suggests that IPT holds promise as a
treatment for a subset of individuals with BED, it remains secondary to CBT-based
approaches.
Additional Approaches
Over the past several years, ACT’s theoretical basis has been used to inform novel
treatments for BED. For example, an acceptance-based behavioral treatment (ABBT)
for BED, designed to combine acceptance-based principles from ACT and DBT with
behavioral strategies from CBT, has been found effective in reducing global eating
disorder symptoms, including binge-eating frequency (Juarascio, Manasse, Schum-
acher, Espel, & Forman, 2017). Despite this, the reported binge-eating abstinence
rates following this treatment suggest it is comparable to CBT (Pisetsky, Schaefer,
Wonderlich, & Peterson, 2019). In a study of the feasibility and acceptability of ABBT
combined with behavioral weight loss to target both binge eating and weight loss in
overweight and obese adults with BED, patients were able to concurrently achieve
minimal weight loss while managing eating disorder symptoms (Evans, Murray,
Muratore, Lantz, & Juarascio, 2019). ACT may be a suitable treatment for BED, but it
requires additional investigation.
Another treatment approach with preliminary support is DBT (Linehan, 1993).
DBT has led to a greater reduction of binge-eating frequency and decreased eating-
disordered psychopathology compared to no treatment, and has been associated with
greater initial efficacy and fewer treatment dropouts when compared with an active
comparison group therapy (Iacovino et al., 2012; Wilson, 2011). Although symptom
reduction appears to be maintained at follow-up (Wilson et al., 2010), findings sug-
gest DBT is not superior to CBT or CBT-GSH (Chen et al., 2017) and, when delivered
in routine practice settings, may be associated with increased attrition rates (Klein,
Skinner, & Hawley, 2012).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Unlike individuals with other types of eating disorders, those with ARFID experi-
ence a problematic eating pattern that is not motivated by body shape or weight
concerns. Concerns about appearance and weight may be absent or within a normal
range. Differential diagnoses of ARFID and AN can be tricky because the clinical
presentation of both disorders can involve low weight, and individuals with AN

-- 225 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	205
may deny or minimize fear of fat, or body image or weight concerns. However, those
with ARFID who are underweight sometimes describe feeling unhappy about being
thin and endorse feeling proud of or happy about weight gain during treatment.
Moreover, the foods preferred by individuals with ARFID tend to be energy-dense,
high-fat, and high-carbohydrate. Food restriction or avoidance is often guided by
principles related to color or texture, or due to lack of interest in food and eating,
rather than macronutrient content. Compared to individuals with AN, those with
ARFID consume a daily diet with a significantly lower ratio of protein (Thomas &
Eddy, 2018). Weight trajectories over time offer another possible distinction between
ARFID and AN. Those with low-weight ARFID tend to have been at chronically low
weight prior to seeking treatment, rather than describing an acute period of weight
loss (Strandjord, Sieke, Richmond, & Rome, 2015).
Assessment of ARFID includes careful detailing about typical eating patterns,
with an emphasis on clarifying which foods are overly relied on or avoided. Col-
lateral information from parents or other individuals close to the patient is helpful.
Evaluation should also include inquiries about the rationale for food restriction or
avoidance, with questions about sensory sensitivity, fear of aversive consequences,
disinterest in eating, and psychosocial impairment. Finally, assessment of the medi-
cal sequelae of restrictive eating is essential. This involves measurement of height
and weight, consideration of the growth trajectory in children and adolescents, and
assessment of vitamin deficiencies and use of supplements.
The current evidence base for ARFID treatment primarily comprises case
reports, case series, chart reviews, and a few controlled trials in young children.
Hospital-based refeeding programs appear to be helpful for children and adoles-
cents with low-weight ARFID and medical instability (Thomas, Wons, & Eddy, 2018).
Outpatient psychological treatments are currently being studied, but results have
not yet been published.
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
Common components of CBT for ARFID include regular eating, self-monitoring
of food intake, exposure (to new foods and feared eating-related situations) and
response prevention, relaxation training, and behavioral experiments (Thomas et al.,
2018). The proposed disorder-specific CBT model hypothesizes that some individu-
als have a biological predisposition to sensory sensitivity (e.g., heightened response
to unfamiliar tastes and smells), fear of aversive consequences such as choking or
vomiting (e.g., high trait anxiety), and/or lack of interest in food or eating (e.g., low
hedonic appetite). Individuals with this predisposition may be particularly apt to
developing negative feelings about food and assumptions about eating that lead to
the restriction or avoidance of foods. For example, someone with ARFID may think,
“Whenever I try a bite of an apple, I gag because it tastes so terrible, so I will probably
not like any fruit,” and over time repeatedly rely on items from any other food group,
limiting opportunities for exposure and putting them at risk for compromised nutri-
tional status.
CBT for ARFID (CBT-AR; Thomas & Eddy, 2018) is a 20- to 30-session interven-
tion being evaluated in individuals age 10 and up (through adulthood) that aims to
(1) provide education, (2) normalize intake by increasing food volume and variety,

-- 226 of 498 --

206 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
and (3) address variants of avoidant/restrictive eating using systematic desensitiza-
tion to novel foods, guided exposures to feared eating situations, and/or interocep-
tive exposure to bloating, fullness or nausea.
Family‑Based Therapy
FBT for ARFID is similar to FBT for AN, in that parents are empowered to take
charge of feeding. However, it differs in that parents are additionally explicitly
tasked with helping their children increase dietary variety with repeated exposure
to novel foods and, depending on the subtype of ARFID, involvement of other family
members may not be required (Lock et al., 2019). In addition, a key focus in FBT for
ARFID is helping caregivers to counter what may be long-standing accommodations
that have been made to disordered eating behaviors.
MEDICATION USE
Anorexia Nervosa
Currently, there is no clearly established role for medication use in the treatment
of acute AN. Given the prevalence of AN symptoms that are commonly responsive
to medication in other clinical populations (e.g., depression, anxiety, and obses-
sionality), several classes of medication (e.g., antidepressants, anxiolytics, appetite-
enhancing drugs) have been examined in patients with AN in small RCTs (Hay &
Claudino, 2012), without effect on weight or psychological symptoms. Investigators
have theorized that the lack of treatment response across these medication classes
may result from physiological changes that accompany malnutrition. Generally, psy-
chological symptoms improve significantly with weight restoration alone (Meehan,
Loeb, Roberto, & Attia, 2006). Recently, however, a large, multisite study comparing
the atypical antipsychotic medication olanzapine to placebo found that this medica-
tion assists in achieving modest weight gain for outpatients (Attia et al., 2019), con-
firming reports from prior smaller studies (Attia et al., 2011; Bissada, Tasca, Barber,
& Bradwejn, 2008).
Several studies have also considered the utility of medication for relapse pre-
vention in weight-restored patients. Despite initial reports that fluoxetine might be
helpful (Kaye et al., 2001), a large RCT observed fluoxetine to be no more beneficial
than placebo in preventing relapse during the first year after hospitalization among
patients receiving CBT (Walsh, Sysko, & Parides, 2006). However, once patients have
achieved and maintained normal weight for some time, a medication evaluation may
be warranted to assess for persistent co-occurring symptoms.
Bulimia Nervosa
Medication treatment for BN should be considered when an individual prefers a
medication approach, in the case of poor or partial response to CBT, or when CBT is
unavailable. Generally, medication trials have demonstrated that a variety of medi-
cation classes are superior to placebo in reducing binge–purge behavior (Bacaltchuk
& Hay, 2003; Shapiro et al., 2007). Fluoxetine is commonly tried first, as it is the

-- 227 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	207
only medication with a specific indication for the treatment of BN by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA; Broft, Berner, & Walsh, 2010). Psychotherapists are
advised to collaborate with prescribing physicians to monitor bulimic symptoms
if patients are using or are deciding to come off medication as part of treatment.
Patients should be monitored for symptom relapse after discontinuing medication.
Binge‑Eating Disorder
Most, but not all, controlled medication studies for BED have observed a signifi-
cant advantage for medication versus placebo in the short-term reduction of binge
eating (Reas & Grilo, 2008). Investigations have largely evaluated the efficacy of
different antidepressants, an anticonvulsant (topiramate), and weight loss medica-
tions including orlistat and sibutramine. Recently, the stimulant lisdexamfetamine
has been identified as superior to placebo in both its effect on binge frequency and
weight change (McElroy et al., 2017), leading to FDA approval for its use in BED and
representing the only medication that has received this indication. There does not
appear to be substantial difference in the efficacy of these different agents relative
to placebo in treating BED psychopathology (Grilo, 2006). Fluoxetine has also been
associated with improvement in depressive symptoms in the short term (Devlin et
al., 2005) and at follow-up (Devlin, Goldfein, Petkova, Liu, & Walsh, 2007) for indi-
viduals with BED. Not surprisingly, the use of obesity medication has been observed
to result in more clinically meaningful weight loss concomitant with a reduction in
binge frequency (Wilfley et al., 2008). A comprehensive meta-analysis of BED phar-
macotherapy studies also determined that orlistat and topiramate offer enhanced
weight loss as adjunctive treatment to CBT and behavioral weight loss (Reas & Grilo,
2008). Thus, medication might be recommended as part of a multidisciplinary treat-
ment approach for BED, particularly for those who are significantly overweight or
suffering from additional psychological problems.
TREATMENT MOTIVATION
The issue of motivation for treatment is embedded in the previous discussion of
treatment approaches. As described, individuals with AN most frequently do not
self-present for treatment, and the ego-syntonic nature of the disorder is perhaps
its most dramatic and particularly challenging clinical feature (comparable to indi-
viduals with substance abuse disorders). Because investment in an excessively low
weight is core to AN, treatment interventions must address motivational issues
from the start. One of the particularly salient components of the FBT approach is to
engage parents to assist with and lead in the recovery process, until their child is in a
healthier state, such that the child is aligned with and able to assume responsibility
for recovery. In the case of BN and BED, goals regarding weight loss may compete
with recovery from the eating disorder. For ARFID, fear of or disinterest in particu-
lar foods can impact the stamina required for consistent, repeated exposure trials.
Long-term success of eating disorders treatment ultimately depends on the patient’s
sense of ownership about the treatment goals and commitment to recovery goals.
Clinicians’ creativity (e.g., finding meaningful metaphors as patients grapple with

-- 228 of 498 --

208 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
ambivalence) and flexibility (e.g., developing and operationalizing mutually agreed-
upon intermediate goals while working toward long-term goals) may enhance thera-
peutic alliance and motivation for change.
THE PROCESS OF CHANGE IN EVIDENCE‑SUPPORTED TREATMENTS
There is increasing interest in the field of psychotherapy research in exploring treat-
ment mechanisms and identifying factors that may contribute to behavioral change
in the context of successful treatment. While Castonguay and Beutler (2005) have
outlined participant, technique, and clinical relationship factors that should be con-
sidered in examining principles of therapeutic change associated with evidence sup-
ported treatments, very little has been written about such principles associated with
treatments for eating disorders. Treatment elements relevant to CBT that may repre-
sent principles for change include the challenge of cognitive distortions about body
shape and weight, as well as the reinforcement of structured, healthy eating behav-
iors. Elements relevant to IPT and possibly reflective of principles of change associ-
ated with this approach include encouragement of normal socialization, cessation of
social isolation, and development of communication skills to improve relationships
and decrease eating in response to emotion. Elements relevant to FBT for AN and
ARFID include structured eating and changing the environment to make eating and
weight gain more likely.
Several investigators have examined variables that may predict treatment out-
come or serve as mediators for change. Across studies of different treatments, early
treatment response appears to predict both shorter- and longer-term outcomes.
Specifically, improvement in binge eating and purging during the first 4 weeks of
CBT or IPT treatment (Agras et al., 2000), as well as during the first few weeks of
antidepressant treatment (Walsh et al., 2006), predicts symptom remission at the
end of treatment for individuals with BN. While it is unclear whether there is some-
thing inherently different (and more likely to remit) about the individuals who
respond quickly to treatment, these findings suggest that treatment should empha-
size behavioral change and that individuals who do not experience symptom reso-
lution early in a treatment course may need a change in the intervention. Relat-
edly, in an analysis of variables thought possibly to mediate treatment response,
Wilson and colleagues (2002) found that improvement in dietary restraint mediated
improvement in binge eating in patients with BN receiving either CBT or IPT in a
randomized trial. This finding was surprising, as normalization of eating behav-
iors was a direct treatment focus in CBT and not IPT, yet normalization of restraint
appeared to be a mediator of both therapeutic approaches, questioning whether the
mechanisms of therapeutic effect for these two seemingly different treatments are
really so different (Wilson et al., 2002). Among weight-restored individuals with
AN, consumption of a diet higher in variety and caloric density predicts likelihood
of maintaining normal weight during the year following acute weight restoration.
Taken together, these findings on predictors and mediators of outcome indirectly
suggest that normalizing eating behavior is central to better outcomes in eating
disorder treatments.

-- 229 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	209
TREATMENT INTENSITY
Available services for treating patients with eating disorders range from varying
levels of outpatient care (e.g., weekly or biweekly psychotherapy, nutritional coun-
seling, psychiatric care) to intensive outpatient, residential, and inpatient programs.
Because specialized programs are not available in all geographic regions, it can be
difficult to access appropriate care. Nonetheless, we present guidelines below for
how clinicians might choose the most appropriate level of care based on patients’
clinical status. Relevant available data on treatment intensity are included.
Anorexia Nervosa
While the specific mechanism responsible for psychological changes in individuals
with AN remains uncertain, the improved nutritional state that accompanies refeed-
ing is presumed to enable better cognitive functioning and emotional regulation
(Attia & Walsh, 2009). Therefore, weight restoration is an essential primary treat-
ment goal. However, because patients with acute AN have considerable difficulty
gaining weight outside of a highly structured treatment, many of those who seek
treatment are ultimately guided to an inpatient or residential treatment program
(Guarda, 2008).
Admission to an inpatient unit is recommended for adult patients who have lost
a substantial amount of weight, particularly if the weight loss has been rapid, and for
those whose weight is extremely low for their height (e.g., <75% ideal body weight;
Attia & Walsh, 2009). Inpatient treatment may also be appropriate for youth with
AN who do not gain the expected amount of weight for their height and age (Attia
& Walsh, 2009). Some clinicians may be reluctant to recommend inpatient treatment,
but data suggest that outcome is better if inpatient treatment is pursued before the
onset of medical instability secondary to low weight (Yager, 2007).
The limited availability of specialized inpatient units that treat eating disorders,
together with the significant expense of hospital treatments and challenges of third-
party reimbursement, often make it difficult for patients to find appropriate hospi-
tal programs or to stay in hospital programs for as long as may be recommended.
Changes in U.S. health care economics have dramatically shortened hospital stays,
and the limited weight gain achieved by patients with AN on inpatient units raises
the question of whether shorter stays and lower discharge weights may contribute to
higher relapse rates (Wiseman, Sunday, Klapper, Harris, & Halmi, 2001).
As hospital programs have become less available, newly developed residential
and structured behavioral day treatment programs have filled the gap. To date, clini-
cal outcome information from residential treatment programs is limited, and while
many programs provide some data on their websites as part of promotional market-
ing efforts, this information has not typically been through a rigorous peer review
process (Attia, Blackwood, Guarda, Marcus, & Rothman, 2016; Guarda, Wonderlich,
Kaye, & Attia, 2018). Structured day treatment programs have demonstrated some
efficacy in helping patients to normalize weight, albeit at a more modest pace. One
uncontrolled comparison of specialized inpatient versus day treatment behavioral
programs observed an average weight gain in patients of approximately 4 pounds

-- 230 of 498 --

210 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
per week and 2 pounds per week, respectively (Guarda, 2008). Overall, outcomes
from specialized day treatment programs are strongly associated with treatment
intensity. More successful programs require treatment participation at least 5 days
per week, 8 hours per day (Olmsted, Kaplan, & Rockert, 2003). While intensive, struc-
tured programming helps in the short-term management of AN, the long-term ben-
efit remains unknown (Attia & Walsh, 2009).
Outpatient treatment for acute AN may be considered for adolescents whose
families are committed to FBT aimed at weight restoration (Lock & Le Grange, 2012).
Otherwise, outpatient intervention is typically indicated for the prevention of relapse
following weight restoration in a structured setting or for patients with symptoms
of AN that are at borderline diagnostic threshold (e.g., individuals at approximately
85% ideal body weight with associated features of AN). Weekly psychotherapy is
an opportunity for patients to normalize their attitudes about weight, body shape,
and eating behavior. Outpatient appointments also provide an opportunity for cli-
nicians to monitor the weight status. If patients are unable to achieve or sustain a
healthy weight range, clinicians should recommend an increase in session frequency
to twice per week, adjunctive nutritional counseling sessions, or a structured behav-
ioral program.
Bulimia Nervosa
Many patients with uncomplicated BN do not require hospitalization. Depending on
the frequency of binge–purge behaviors and severity of associated symptoms, clini-
cians should consider biweekly psychotherapy appointments. In a standard course
of CBT-BN, for example, it is recommended to start with two scheduled sessions per
week for the first month of treatment to help patients implement self-monitoring
techniques, adopt a regular eating pattern, and break the binge–purge cycle (Fair-
burn, Marcus, et al., 1993). In initial biweekly IPT sessions, the clinician completes a
detailed analysis of the interpersonal context in which the eating disorder has been
developed and maintained (Agras et al., 2000). After the early phase of treatment,
with some symptom remission, psychotherapy sessions may occur weekly, then
bimonthly.
If a patient with BN does not respond to an adequate trial of outpatient psycho-
therapy, a higher level of care should be considered. Additional indications for more
structured treatment include severely impairing symptoms that have not responded
to adequate trials of psychotropic medication, serious concurrent medical problems,
or psychiatric conditions requiring an inpatient treatment independent of the eating
disorder (Yager, 2007).
Though inpatient treatment has long been recognized as the viable alternative
to outpatient care for treatment-resistant BN, day treatment is an alternative along
the continuum of care. Day treatment programs offer a cost-effective alternative to
receive care in a more structured setting, while maintaining contact with the natu-
ral environment (Zipfel et al., 2002). In one RCT of inpatient treatment versus day
treatment for patients with severe, chronic BN, inpatient and day treatment were
observed to be equally effective in reducing bulimic symptoms and general psy-
chopathology at discharge and 3-month follow-up (Zeeck et al., 2009). By 12-month
follow-up, day treatment demonstrated an advantage in sustained improvement in

-- 231 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	211
binge frequency and bulimic cognitions, but no differences in purging behavior or
general psychopathology. This study offers some evidence that day treatment may
provide patients with the skills needed for alleviation of symptoms and the opportu-
nity to apply and possibly generalize skills at home.
Binge‑Eating Disorder
Individuals with BED who seek treatment typically express several treatment goals,
including the cessation of binge eating, the development of healthy eating patterns,
and (frequently) weight loss (Devlin et al., 2007). While there is growing evidence that
those with BED show greater amelioration of binge eating and associated psychopa-
thology with specialty eating disorder treatment rather than nonspecific weight loss
interventions (Wonderlich et al., 2009), there are no data regarding the relative utility
of more versus less intensive treatment for this group.
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Individuals with ARFID commonly present to medical providers and are generally
referred to eating disorder specialists only when low weight, nutritional deficiency,
or serious psychosocial disturbance is present. As there is less of an evidence base
for treatment, treatment approaches and settings for ARFID are usually those con-
sidered for other eating disorders, especially those developed for low-weight AN.
For example, individuals with ARFID who need medical stabilization and weight
restoration are often referred to inpatient or residential programs. Less medically
acute cases are usually managed as outpatients by a team of clinicians.
CONCLUSION
Although the knowledge base regarding prevalence and treatment for eating disor-
ders is continually evolving, sufficient research exists to guide treatment at many
points of care for individuals with AN, BN, and BED. Treatment research for ARFID
is nascent, but clinical trials are under way. Eating disorders clinicians must rely on
professional experience and practice when data fail to inform treatment decisions.
One of the challenges for the field is harnessing this clinical experience in a way that
furthers an empirically informed approach to care. The complementary challenge is
dissemination of study findings, so that clinicians in practice remain up to date on
recommendations derived from the empirical research. Relatedly, expanding train-
ing opportunities in evidence-based treatments will greatly enhance our capacity to
assist individuals with eating disorders most effectively in their journey to recovery.
REFERENCES
Agras, W. S. (2019). Cognitive behavior therapy for the eating disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 42(2), 169–179.
Agras, W. S., Walsh, T., Fairburn, C. G., Wilson, G. T., & Kraemer, H. C. (2000). A multicenter

-- 232 of 498 --

212 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
comparison of cognitive-behavioral therapy and interpersonal psychotherapy for buli-
mia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(5), 459–466.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Andersson, G. (2009). Using the Internet to provide cognitive behaviour therapy. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 47(3), 175–180.
Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality rates in patients with
anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders: A meta-analysis of 36 studies. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 68(7), 724–731.
Attia, E. (2010). Anorexia nervosa: Current status and future directions. Annual Review of Med-
icine, 61, 425–435.
Attia, E., Blackwood, K., Guarda, A. S., Marcus, M. D., & Rothman, D. J. (2016). Marketing
residential treatment programs for eating disorders: A call for transparency. Psychiatric
Services, 67(6), 664–666.
Attia, E., Kaplan, A. S., Walsh, B. T., Gershkovich, M., Yilmaz, Z., Musante, D., & Wang, Y.
(2011). Olanzapine versus placebo for out-patients with anorexia nervosa. Psychological
Medicine, 41(10), 2177–2182.
Attia, E., Steinglass, J. E., Walsh, B. T., Wang, Y., Wu, P., Schreyer, C., . . . Marcus, M. D. (2019).
Olanzapine versus placebo in adult outpatients with anorexia nervosa: A randomized
clinical trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 176(6), 449–456.
Attia, E., & Walsh, B. T. (2009). Behavioral management for anorexia nervosa. New England
Journal of Medicine, 360(5), 500–506.
Bacaltchuk, J., & Hay, P. (2003). Antidepressants versus placebo for people with bulimia ner-
vosa. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD003391.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. Oxford, UK: International Uni-
versities Press.
Becker, A. (2007). Culture and eating disorders classification. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 40(Suppl. 3), S111–S116.
Becker, A., Thomas, J. J., & Pike, K. M. (2009). Should non-fat-phobic anorexia nervosa be
included in DSM-V? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 42(7), 620–635.
Benjasuwantep, B., Chaithirayanon, S., & Eiamudomkan, M. (2013). Feeding problems in
healthy young children: Prevalence, related factors and feeding practices. Pediatric
Reports, 5(2), 38–42.
Bissada, H., Tasca, G. A., Barber, A. M., & Bradwejn, J. (2008). Olanzapine in the treatment of
low body weight and obsessive thinking in women with anorexia nervosa: A randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(10), 1281–1288.
Broft, A., Berner, L. A., & Walsh, B. T. (2010). Pharmacotherapy for bulimia nervosa. In C. M.
Grilo & J. E. Mitchell (Eds.), The treatment of eating disorders: A clinical handbook (pp. 388–
401). New York: Guilford Press.
Brownell, K. D. (2010). The humbling experience of treating obesity: Should we persist or
desist? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(8), 717–719.
Bulik, C. M., Berkman, N. D., Brownley, K. A., Sedway, J. A., & Lohr, K. N. (2007). Anorexia
nervosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(4), 310–320.
Bulik, C. M., Kleiman, S. C., & Yilmaz, Z. (2016). Genetic epidemiology of eating disorders.
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29(6), 383–388.
Bulik, C. M., Klump, K. L., Thornton, L., Kaplan, A. S., Devlin, B., Fichter, M. M., . . . Kaye, W.
H. (2004). Alcohol use disorder comorbidity in eating disorders: A multicenter study.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65(7), 1000–1006.

-- 233 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	213
Cassin, S. E., & von Ranson, K. M. (2005). Personality and eating disorders: A decade in review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 25(7), 895–916.
Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2005). Principles of therapeutic change that work. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Chen, E., Cacioppo, J., Fettich, K., Gallop, R., McCloskey, M. S., Olino, T., & Zeffiro, T. A. (2017).
An adaptive randomized trial of dialectical behavior therapy and cognitive behavior
therapy for binge-eating. Psychological Medicine, 47(4), 703–717.
Claudino, A. M., Pike, K. M., Hay, P., Keeley, J. W., Evans, S. C., Rebello, T. J., . . . Reed, G. M.
(2019). The classification of feeding and eating disorders in the ICD-11: Results of a field
study comparing proposed ICD-11 guidelines with existing ICD-10 guidelines. BMC
Medicine, 17(1), 93.
Cooper, P. J., & Fairburn, C. G. (1984). Cognitive behaviour therapy for anorexia nervosa: Some
preliminary findings. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 28(6), 493–499.
Crow, S., & Brandenburg, B. (2010). Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment planning in bulimia
nervosa. In C. M. Grilo & J. E. Mitchell (Eds.), The treatment of eating disorders: A clinical
handbook (pp. 28–43). New York: Guilford Press.
Dahlgren, C. L., & Rø, Ø. (2014). A systematic review of cognitive remediation therapy for
anorexia nervosa—development, current state and implications for future research and
clinical practice. Journal of Eating Disorders, 2(1), 26.
Dalle Grave, R., El Ghoch, M., Sartirana, M., & Calugi, S. (2016). Cognitive behavioral therapy
for anorexia nervosa: An update. Current Psychiatry Reports, 18(1), 2.
de Jong, M., Schoorl, M., & Hoek, H. W. (2018). Enhanced cognitive behavioural therapy for
patients with eating disorders: A systematic review. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 31(6),
436–444.
de Zwaan, M. (2001). Binge eating disorder and obesity. International Journal of Obesity and
Related Metabolic Disorders, 25(Suppl. 1), S51–S55.
Devlin, M. J., Goldfein, J. A., Petkova, E., Jiang, H., Raizman, P. S., Wolk, S., . . . Walsh, B.
T. (2005). Cognitive behavioral therapy and fluoxetine as adjuncts to group behavioral
therapy for binge eating disorder. Obesity Research, 13(6), 1077–1088.
Devlin, M. J., Goldfein, J. A., Petkova, E., Liu, L., & Walsh, B. T. (2007). Cognitive behavioral
therapy and fluoxetine for binge eating disorder: Two-year follow-up. Obesity (Silver
Spring), 15(7), 1702–1709.
Dingemans, A., Danner, U., & Parks, M. (2017). Emotion regulation in binge eating disorder:
A review. Nutrients, 9(11), 1274.
Duncan, A. E., Neuman, R. J., Kramer, J., Kuperman, S., Hesselbrock, V., Reich, T., & Bucholz,
K. K. (2005). Are there subgroups of bulimia nervosa based on comorbid psychiatric dis-
orders? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37(1), 19–25.
Eddy, K. T., Thomas, J. J., Hastings, E., Edkins, K., Lamont, E., Nevins, C. M., . . . Becker, A. E.
(2015). Prevalence of DSM-5 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder in a pediatric gas-
troenterology healthcare network. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(5), 464–470.
Erskine, H. E., Whiteford, H. A., & Pike, K. M. (2016). The global burden of eating disorders.
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29(6), 346–353.
Evans, B. C., Murray, H. B., Muratore, A. F., Lantz, E. L., & Juarascio, A. S. (2019). Developing
an acceptance-based behavioral weight loss treatment for individuals with binge eating
pathology: A preliminary proof of concept study and clinical case series. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 26(2), 395–410.
Fairburn, C. G. (1981). A cognitive behavioural approach to the treatment of bulimia. Psycho-
logical Medicine, 11(4), 707–711.
Fairburn, C. G. (1995). Overcoming binge eating. New York: Guilford Press.
Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders. New York: Guilford Press.
Fairburn, C. G., Bailey-Straebler, S., Basden, S., Doll, H. A., Jones, R., Murphy, R., . . . Cooper, Z.

-- 234 of 498 --

214 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(2015). A transdiagnostic comparison of enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT-E)
and interpersonal psychotherapy in the treatment of eating disorders. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 70, 64–71.
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., & Welch, S. L. (1999). Risk factors for anorexia ner-
vosa: Three integrated case– control comparisons. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(5),
468–476.
Fairburn, C. G., Doll, H. A., Welch, S. L., Hay, P. J., Davies, B. A., & O’Connor, M. E. (1998). Risk
factors for binge eating disorder: A community-based, case– control study. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55(5), 425–432.
Fairburn, C. G., Jones, R., Peveler, R. C., Carr, S. J., Solomon, R. A., O’Connor, M. E., . . . Hope,
R. A. (1991). Three psychological treatments for bulimia nervosa: A comparative trial.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 48(5), 463–469.
Fairburn, C. G., Jones, R., Peveler, R. C., Hope, R. A., & O’Connor, M. (1993). Psychotherapy
and bulimia nervosa: Longer-term effects of interpersonal psychotherapy, behavior ther-
apy, and cognitive behavior therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50(6), 419–428.
Fairburn, C. G., Marcus, M. D., & Wilson, G. T. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for binge
eating and bulimia nervosa: A comprehensive treatment manual. In C. G. Fairburn & G.
T. Wilson (Eds.), Binge eating: Nature, assessment, and treatment (pp. 361–404). New York:
Guilford Press.
Fichter, M. M., & Quadflieg, N. (2004). Twelve-year course and outcome of bulimia nervosa.
Psychological Medicine, 34(8), 1395–1406.
Fischer, S., Smith, G. T., & Cyders, M. A. (2008). Another look at impulsivity: A meta-analytic
review comparing specific dispositions to rash action in their relationship to bulimic
symptoms. Clinical Psychology Review, 28(8), 1413–1425.
Franko, D. L., Becker, A. E., Thomas, J. J., & Herzog, D. B. (2007). Cross-ethnic differences
in eating disorder symptoms and related distress. Internation Journal of Eating Disorders,
40(2), 156–164.
Frostad, S., Danielsen, Y. S., Rekkedal, G. Å., Jevne, C., Dalle Grave, R., Rø, Ø., & Kessler, U.
(2018). Implementation of enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT-E) for adults with
anorexia nervosa in an outpatient eating-disorder unit at a public hospital. Journal of Eat-
ing Disorders, 6, 12.
Galsworthy-Francis, L., & Allan, S. (2014). Cognitive behavioural therapy for anorexia ner-
vosa: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 34(1), 54–72.
Goldschmidt, A. B., Hilbert, A., Manwaring, J. L., Wilfley, D. E., Pike, K. M., Fairburn, C. G.,
. . . Striegel-Moore, R. H. (2010). The significance of overvaluation of shape and weight in
binge eating disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(3), 187–193.
Grilo, C. M. (2006). Eating and weight disorders. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Grilo, C. M., Masheb, R. M., & White, M. A. (2010). Significance of overvaluation of shape/
weight in binge-eating disorder: Comparative study with overweight and bulimia ner-
vosa. Obesity (Silver Spring), 18(3), 499–504.
Guarda, A. S. (2008). Treatment of anorexia nervosa: Insights and obstacles. Physiology and
Behavior, 94(1), 113–120.
Guarda, A. S., Wonderlich, S., Kaye, W., & Attia, E. (2018). A path to defining excellence in
intensive treatment for eating disorders. International Jurnal of Eating Disorders, 51(9),
1051–1055.
Hail, L., & Le Grange, D. (2018). Bulimia nervosa in adolescents: Prevalence and treatment
challenges. Adolescent Health, Medicine and Therapeutics, 9, 11–16.
Hartmann, A., Zeeck, A., & Barrett, M. S. (2010). Interpersonal problems in eating disorders.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43(7), 619–627.
Hay, P., & Claudino, A. M. (2012). Clinical psychopharmacology of eating disorders: A research
update. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 15(2), 209–222.

-- 235 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	215
Hay, P., Mitchison, D., Collado, A. E. L., Gonzalez-Chica, D. A., Stocks, N., & Touyz, S. (2017).
Burden and health-related quality of life of eating disorders, including avoidant/restric-
tive food intake disorder (ARFID), in the Australian population. Journal of Eating Disor-
ders, 5, 21.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2002). Review of acceptance and commitment
therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice,
9(2), 164–166.
Higgins, D. M., Dorflinger, L., MacGregor, K. L., Heapy, A. A., Goulet, J. L., & Ruser, C. (2013).
Binge eating behavior among a national sample of overweight and obese veterans. Obe-
sity (Silver Spring), 21(5), 900–903.
Hjern, A., Lindberg, L., & Lindblad, F. (2006). Outcome and prognostic factors for adolescent
female in-patients with anorexia nervosa: 9- to 14-year follow-up. British Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 189, 428–432.
Hoek, H. W. (2016). Review of the worldwide epidemiology of eating disorders. Current Opin-
ion in Psychiatry, 29(6), 336–339.
Hoek, H. W., van Harten, P. N., Hermans, K. M., Katzman, M. A., Matroos, G. E., & Susser, E.
S. (2005). The incidence of anorexia nervosa on Curaçao. American Journal of Psychiatry,
162(4), 748–752.
Hoek, H. W., & van Hoeken, D. (2003). Review of the prevalence and incidence of eating dis-
orders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 34(4), 383–396.
Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., Vonk, I. J. J., Sawyer, A. T., & Fang, A. (2012). The efficacy of
cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
36(5), 427–440.
Hrabosky, J. I., Masheb, R. M., White, M. A., & Grilo, C. M. (2007). Overvaluation of shape
and weight in binge eating disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75(1),
175–180.
Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H. G., Jr., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The prevalence and correlates
of eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry,
61(3), 348–358.
Hughes, E. K., Sawyer, S. M., Accurso, E. C., Singh, S., & Le Grange, D. (2019). Predictors of
early response in conjoint and separated models of family-based treatment for adoles-
cent anorexia nervosa. European Eating Disorders Review, 27(3), 283–294.
Hughes, E. K., Sawyer, S. M., Loeb, K. L., & Le Grange, D. (2015). Parent-focused treatment.
In K. L. Loeb, D. Le Grange, & J. Lock (Eds.), Family therapy for adolescent eating and weight
disorders: New applications (pp. 59–71). New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Iacovino, J. M., Gredysa, D. M., Altman, M., & Wilfley, D. E. (2012). Psychological treatments
for binge eating disorder. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14(4), 432–446.
Jacobi, C., Hayward, C., de Zwaan, M., Kraemer, H. C., & Agras, W. S. (2004). Coming to terms
with risk factors for eating disorders: Application of risk terminology and suggestions
for a general taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 130(1), 19–65.
Jonas, S., Bebbington, P., McManus, S., Meltzer, H., Jenkins, R., Kuipers, E., . . . Brugha, T.
(2011). Sexual abuse and psychiatric disorder in England: Results from the 2007 Adult
Psychiatric Morbidity Survey. Psychological Medicine, 41(4), 709–719.
Juarascio, A., Manasse, S. M., Schumacher, L., Espel, H., & Forman, E. M. (2017). Developing
an acceptance-based behavioral treatment for binge eating disorder: Rationale and chal-
lenges. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 24(1), 1–13.
Juarascio, A., Shaw, J., Forman, E., Timko, C. A., Herbert, J., Butryn, M., . . . Lowe, M. (2013).
Acceptance and commitment therapy as a novel treatment for eating disorders: An ini-
tial test of efficacy and mediation. Behavior Modification, 37(4), 459–489.
Kaczkurkin, A. N., & Foa, E. B. (2015). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders: An
update on the empirical evidence. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 17(3), 337–346.

-- 236 of 498 --

216 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Kalarchian, M. A., Marcus, M. D., Levine, M. D., Courcoulas, A. P., Pilkonis, P. A., Ringham,
R. M., . . . Rofey, D. L. (2007). Psychiatric disorders among bariatric surgery candidates:
Relationship to obesity and functional health status. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164(2),
328–334; quiz 374.
Karwautz, A., Rabe-Hesketh, S., Hu, X., Zhao, J., Sham, P., Collier, D. A., & Treasure, J. L. (2001).
Individual-specific risk factors for anorexia nervosa: A pilot study using a discordant
sister-pair design. Psychological Medicine, 31(2), 317–329.
Katzman, M. A., & Lee, S. (1997). Beyond body image: The integration of feminist and trans-
cultural theories in the understanding of self starvation. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 22(4), 385–394.
Kaye, W. H., Bulik, C. M., Thornton, L., Barbarich, N., & Masters, K. (2004). Comorbidity of
anxiety disorders with anorexia and bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry,
161(12), 2215–2221.
Kaye, W. H., Nagata, T., Weltzin, T. E., Hsu, L. K., Sokol, M. S., McConaha, C., . . . Deep, D.
(2001). Double-blind placebo-controlled administration of fluoxetine in restricting- and
restricting-purging-type anorexia nervosa. Biological Psychiatry, 49(7), 644–652.
Keel, P. K., & Brown, T. A. (2010). Update on course and outcome in eating disorders. Interna-
tional Journal of Eating Disorders, 43(3), 195–204.
Keel, P. K., & Klump, K. L. (2003). Are eating disorders culture-bound syndromes?: Implica-
tions for conceptualizing their etiology. Psychological Bulletin, 129(5), 747–769.
Klein, A. S., Skinner, J. B., & Hawley, K. M. (2012). Adapted group-based dialectical behaviour
therapy for binge eating in a practicing clinic: Clinical outcomes and attrition. European
Eating Disorders Review, 20(3), e148–e153.
Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B., & Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal psycho-
therapy of depression. New York: Basic Books.
Kolar, D. R., Rodriguez, D. L., Chams, M. M., & Hoek, H. W. (2016). Epidemiology of eating
disorders in Latin America: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 29(6), 363–371.
Krysanski, V. L., & Ferraro, F. R. (2008). Review of controlled psychotherapy treatment trials
for binge eating disorder. Psychological Reports, 102(2), 339–368.
Kurz, S., van Dyck, Z., Dremmel, D., Munsch, S., & Hilbert, A. (2015). Early-onset restrictive
eating disturbances in primary school boys and girls. European Child and Adolescent Psy-
chiatry, 24(7), 779–785.
Le Grange, D., Crosby, R. D., Rathouz, P. J., & Leventhal, B. L. (2007). A randomized controlled
comparison of family-based treatment and supportive psychotherapy for adolescent
bulimia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(9), 1049–1056.
Le Grange, D., Lock, J., Agras, W. S., Bryson, S. W., & Jo, B. (2015). Randomized clinical trial
of family-based treatment and cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescent bulimia ner-
vosa. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 54(11), 886–894.
Lebow, J., Sim, L., Crosby, R. D., Goldschmidt, A. B., Le Grange, D., & Accurso, E. C. (2018).
Weight gain trajectories during outpatient family-based treatment for adolescents with
anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders. [Epub ahead of print]
Linardon, J., Wade, T. D., de la Piedad Garcia, X., & Brennan, L. (2017). The efficacy of cognitive-
behavioral therapy for eating disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 85(11), 1080–1094.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York:
Guilford Press.
Lock, J., & Le Grange, D. (2012). Treatment manual for anorexia nervosa: A family-based approach
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Lock, J., Robinson, A., Sadeh-Sharvit, S., Rosania, K., Osipov, L., Kirz, N., . . . Utzinger, L.
(2019). Applying family-based treatment (FBT) to three clinical presentations of avoidant/

-- 237 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	217
restrictive food intake disorder: Similarities and differences from FBT for anorexia ner-
vosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 52(4), 439–446.
Loeb, K. L., & Le Grange, D. (2009). Family-based treatment for adolescent eating disorders:
Current status, new applications and future directions. International Journal of Child and
Adolescent Health, 2(2), 243–254.
Loucas, C. E., Fairburn, C. G., Whittington, C., Pennant, M. E., Stockton, S., & Kendall, T. (2014).
E-therapy in the treatment and prevention of eating disorders: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 63, 122–131.
Marques, L., Alegria, M., Becker, A. E., Chen, C.-N., Fang, A., Chosak, A., & Diniz, J. B. (2011).
Comparative prevalence, correlates of impairment, and service utilization for eating dis-
orders across US ethnic groups: Implications for reducing ethnic disparities in health
care access for eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(5), 412–420.
McElroy, S. L., Hudson, J. I., Gasior, M., Herman, B. K., Radewonuk, J., Wilfley, D., & Busner,
J. (2017). Time course of the effects of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate in two phase 3, ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in adults with binge-eating disorder.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 50(8), 884–892.
Meehan, K. G., Loeb, K. L., Roberto, C. A., & Attia, E. (2006). Mood change during weight res-
toration in patients with anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 39(7),
587–589.
Mehler, J. E., Birmingham, C. L., Crow, S., & Jahraus, J. P. (2010). Medical complications of
eating disorders. In C. M. Grilo & J. E. Mitchell (Eds.), The treatment of eating disorders: A
clinical handbook (pp. 66–80). New York: Guilford Press.
Mustelin, L., Silen, Y., Raevuori, A., Hoek, H. W., Kaprio, J., & Keski-Rahkonen, A. (2016). The
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa may change its population prevalence
and prognostic value. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 77, 85–91.
Nakai, Y., Nin, K., Noma, S., Teramukai, S., & Wonderlich, S. A. (2016). Characteristics of avoid-
ant/restrictive food intake disorder in a cohort of adult patients. European Eating Disorders
Review, 24(6), 528–530.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2017). Eating disorders: Recognition and treat-
ment (NICE Guideline No. 69). London: Author.
Nicely, T. A., Lane-Loney, S., Masciulli, E., Hollenbeak, C. S., & Ornstein, R. M. (2014). Preva-
lence and characteristics of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder in a cohort of young
patients in day treatment for eating disorders. Journal of Eating Disorders, 2(1), 21.
Nobakht, M., & Dezhkam, M. (2000). An epidemiological study of eating disorders in Iran.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 28(3), 265–271.
Norris, M. L., Robinson, A., Obeid, N., Harrison, M., Spettigue, W., & Henderson, K. (2014).
Exploring avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder in eating disordered patients: A
descriptive study. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(5), 495–499.
Norris, M. L., Spettigue, W. J., & Katzman, D. K. (2016). Update on eating disorders: Current
perspectives on avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder in children and youth. Neuro-
psychiatric Disease and Treatment, 12, 213–218.
Olguin, P., Fuentes, M., Gabler, G., Guerdjikova, A. I., Keck, P. E., & McElroy, S. L. (2017). Medi-
cal comorbidity of binge eating disorder. Eating and Weight Disorders, 22(1), 13–26.
Olmsted, M. P., Kaplan, A. S., & Rockert, W. (2003). Relative efficacy of a 4-day versus a 5-day
day hospital program. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 34(4), 441–449.
Papadopoulos, F. C., Ekbom, A., Brandt, L., & Ekselius, L. (2009). Excess mortality, causes
of death and prognostic factors in anorexia nervosa. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194(1),
10–17.
Parling, T., Cernvall, M., Ramklint, M., Holmgren, S., & Ghaderi, A. (2016). A randomised trial
of acceptance and commitment therapy for anorexia nervosa after daycare treatment,
including five-year follow-up. BMC Psychiatry, 16(1), 272.

-- 238 of 498 --

218 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Paulson-Karlsson, G., Engstrom, I., & Nevonen, L. (2009). A pilot study of a family-based treat-
ment for adolescent anorexia nervosa: 18- and 36-month follow-ups. Eating Disorders,
17(1), 72–88.
Pike, K. M., Hilbert, A., Wilfley, D. E., Fairburn, C. G., Dohm, F. A., Walsh, B. T., & Striegel-
Moore, R. (2008). Toward an understanding of risk factors for anorexia nervosa: A case–
control study. Psychological Medicine, 38(10), 1443–1453.
Pike, K. M., & Mizushima, H. (2005). The clinical presentation of Japanese women with
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: A study of the Eating Disorders Inventory–2.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37(1), 26–31.
Pisetsky, E. M., Schaefer, L. M., Wonderlich, S. A., & Peterson, C. B. (2019). Emerging psycho-
logical treatments in eating disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 42(2), 219–229.
Pittock, A., Hodges, L., & Lawrie, S. M. (2018). The effectiveness of internet-delivered cog-
nitive behavioural therapy for those with bulimic symptoms: A systematic review: A
review of iCBT treatment for bulimic symptoms. BMC Research Notes, 11(1), 748.
Quadflieg, N., & Fichter, M. M. (2019). Long-term outcome of inpatients with bulimia
nervosa—Results from the Christina Barz Study. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
52(7), 834–845.
Reas, D. L., & Grilo, C. M. (2008). Review and meta-analysis of pharmacotherapy for binge-
eating disorder. Obesity (Silver Spring), 16(9), 2024–2038.
Rø, O., Martinsen, E. W., Hoffart, A., & Rosenvinge, J. (2005). Two-year prospective study of
personality disorders in adults with longstanding eating disorders. International Journal
of Eating Disorders, 37(2), 112–118.
Roberto, C. A., Grilo, C. M., Masheb, R. M., & White, M. A. (2010). Binge eating, purging, or
both: Eating disorder psychopathology findings from an Internet community survey.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43(8), 724–731.
Rosen, D. S. (2010). Identification and management of eating disorders in children and adoles-
cents. Pediatrics, 126(6), 1240–1253.
Russell, G. F., Szmukler, G. I., Dare, C., & Eisler, I. (1987). An evaluation of family therapy in
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44(12), 1047–1056.
Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Agras, W. S. (2001). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for buli-
mia: A case report. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 30(1), 101–106.
Shapiro, J. R., Berkman, N. D., Brownley, K. A., Sedway, J. A., Lohr, K. N., & Bulik, C. M. (2007).
Bulimia nervosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Inter-
national Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(4), 321–336.
Smink, F. R., van Hoeken, D., & Hoek, H. W. (2013). Epidemiology, course, and outcome of eat-
ing disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 26(6), 543–548.
Steinglass, J. E., Albano, A. M., Simpson, H. B., Carpenter, K., Schebendach, J., & Attia, E.
(2012). Fear of food as a treatment target: Exposure and response prevention for anorexia
nervosa in an open series. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 45(4), 615–621.
Steinglass, J. E., Albano, A. M., Simpson, H. B., Wang, Y., Zou, J., Attia, E., & Walsh, B. T. (2014).
Confronting fear using exposure and response prevention for anorexia nervosa: A ran-
domized controlled pilot study. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(2), 174–180.
Steinglass, J. E., Sysko, R., Glasofer, D., Albano, A. M., Simpson, H. B., & Walsh, B. T. (2011).
Rationale for the application of exposure and response prevention to the treatment of
anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(2), 134–141.
Steinhausen, H. C., & Weber, S. (2009). The outcome of bulimia nervosa: Findings from one-
quarter century of research. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(12), 1331–1341.
Stice, E. (2001). Risk factors for eating pathology: Recent advances and future directions. In R.
H. Striegel-Moore & L. Smolak (Eds.), Eating disorders: Innovative directions in research and
practice (pp. 51–73). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

-- 239 of 498 --

Eating Disorders 	219
Stice, E., & Agras, W. S. (1998). Predicting onset and cessation bulimic behaviors during ado-
lescence: A longitudinal grouping analysis. Behavior Therapy, 29(2), 257–276.
Strandjord, S. E., Sieke, E. H., Richmond, M., & Rome, E. S. (2015). Avoidant/restrictive food
intake disorder: Illness and hospital course in patients hospitalized for nutritional insuf-
ficiency. Journal of Adolescent Health, 57(6), 673–678.
Striegel-Moore, R. H., Dohm, F. A., Kraemer, H. C., Taylor, C. B., Daniels, S., Crawford, P. B., &
Schreiber, G. B. (2003). Eating disorders in white and black women. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 160(7), 1326–1331.
Striegel-Moore, R. H., Fairburn, C. G., Wilfley, D. E., Pike, K. M., Dohm, F. A., & Kraemer, H.
C. (2005). Toward an understanding of risk factors for binge-eating disorder in black
and white women: A community-based case– control study. Psychological Medicine, 35(6),
907–917.
Striegel-Moore, R. H., Silberstein, L. R., & Rodin, J. (1986). Toward an understanding of risk
factors for bulimia. American Psychologist, 41(3), 246–263.
Strober, M., Freeman, R., Lampert, C., Diamond, J., Teplinsky, C., & DeAntonio, M. (2006). Are
there gender differences in core symptoms, temperament, and short-term prospective
outcome in anorexia nervosa? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 39(7), 570–575.
Swanson, S. A., Crow, S. J., Le Grange, D., Swendsen, J., & Merikangas, K. R. (2011). Prevalence
and correlates of eating disorders in adolescents: Results from the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication Adolescent Supplement. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(7), 714–723.
Sysko, R., & Walsh, B. T. (2008). A critical evaluation of the efficacy of self-help interventions
for the treatment of bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 41(2), 97–112.
Tanaka, S., Yoshida, K., Katayama, H., Kohmura, K., Kawano, N., Imaeda, M., . . . Ozaki, N.
(2015). Association of Beck Depression Inventory score and Temperament and Character
Inventory-125 in patients with eating disorders and severe malnutrition. Journal of Eating
Disorders, 3, Article 36.
Tanofsky-Kraff, M., Wilfley, D. E., Young, J. F., Mufson, L., Yanovski, S. Z., Glasofer, D. R., . . .
Schvey, N. A. (2010). A pilot study of interpersonal psychotherapy for preventing excess
weight gain in adolescent girls at-risk for obesity. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
43(8), 701–706.
Tchanturia, K., & Hambrook, D. (2010). Cognitive remediation therapy for anorexia nervosa.
In C. M. Grilo & J. E. Mitchell (Eds.), The treatment of eating disorders: A clinical handbook
(pp. 130–149). New York: Guilford Press.
Tchanturia, K., Lloyd, S., & Lang, K. (2013). Cognitive remediation therapy for anorexia ner-
vosa: Current evidence and future research directions. International Journal of Eating Dis-
orders, 46(5), 492–495.
Thomas, J. J., & Eddy, K. T. (2018). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder: Children, adolescents, and adults. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, J. J., Lee, S., & Becker, A. E. (2016). Updates in the epidemiology of eating disorders in
Asia and the Pacific. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29(6), 354–362.
Thomas, J. J., Wons, O. B., & Eddy, K. T. (2018). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of avoidant/
restrictive food intake disorder. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 31(6), 425–430.
Thompson-Brenner, H., Shingleton, R. M., Thompson, D. R., Satir, D. A., Richards, L. K., Pratt,
E. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2016). Focused vs. broad enhanced cognitive behavioral therapy
for bulimia nervosa with comorbid borderline personality: A randomized controlled
trial. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 49(1), 36–49.
Touyz, S., Le Grange, D., Lacey, H., Hay, P., Smith, R., Maguire, S., . . . Crosby, R. D. (2013).
Treating severe and enduring anorexia nervosa: A randomized controlled trial. Psycho-
logical Medicine, 43(12), 2501–2511.

-- 240 of 498 --

220 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Udo, T., & Grilo, C. M. (2018). Prevalence and correlates of DSM-5-defined eating disorders
in a nationally representative sample of U.S. adults. Biological Psychiatry, 84(5), 345–354.
van Hoeken, D., Burns, J. K., & Hoek, H. W. (2016). Epidemiology of eating disorders in Africa.
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29(6), 372–377.
Walsh, B. T., Sysko, R., & Parides, M. K. (2006). Early response to desipramine among women
with bulimia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 39(1), 72–75.
Wilfley, D. E., Citrome, L., & Herman, B. K. (2016). Characteristics of binge eating disorder in
relation to diagnostic criteria. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 12, 2213–2223.
Wilfley, D. E., Crow, S. J., Hudson, J. I., Mitchell, J. E., Berkowitz, R. I., Blakesley, V., & Walsh, B.
T. (2008). Efficacy of sibutramine for the treatment of binge eating disorder: A random-
ized multicenter placebo-controlled double-blind study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
165(1), 51–58.
Wilfley, D. E., Welch, R. R., Stein, R. I., Spurrell, E. B., Cohen, L. R., Saelens, B. E., . . . Matt, G.
E. (2002). A randomized comparison of group cognitive-behavioral therapy and group
interpersonal psychotherapy for the treatment of overweight individuals with binge-
eating disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59(8), 713–721.
Wilson, G. T. (2011). Treatment of binge eating disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America,
34(4), 773–783.
Wilson, G. T., Fairburn, C. C., Agras, W. S., Walsh, B. T., & Kraemer, H. (2002). Cognitive-
behavioral therapy for bulimia nervosa: Time course and mechanisms of change. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70(2), 267–274.
Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007). Psychological treatment of eating disor-
ders. American Psychologist, 62(3), 199–216.
Wilson, G. T., Wilfley, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W. (2010). Psychological treatments of
binge eating disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67(1), 94–101.
Wiseman, C. V., Sunday, S. R., Klapper, F., Harris, W. A., & Halmi, K. A. (2001). Changing
patterns of hospitalization in eating disorder patients. International Journal of Eating Dis-
orders, 30(1), 69–74.
Wonderlich, S. A., Gordon, K. H., Mitchell, J. E., Crosby, R. D., & Engel, S. G. (2009). The valid-
ity and clinical utility of binge eating disorder. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
42(8), 687–705.
World Health Organization. (2019). International statistical classification of diseases and related
health problems (11th rev.). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Yager, J. (2007). Assessment and determination of initial treatment approaches for patients
with eating disorders. In J. Yager & P. S. Powers (Eds.), Clinical manual of eating disorders
(pp. 31–68). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Yanovski, S. Z. (1993). Binge eating disorder: Current knowledge and future directions. Obe-
sity Research, 1(4), 306–324.
Zeeck, A., Weber, S., Sandholz, A., Wetzler-Burmeister, E., Wirsching, M., & Hartmann, A.
(2009). Inpatient versus day clinic treatment for bulimia nervosa: A randomized trial.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 78(3), 152–160.
Zemishlany, Z., & Weizman, A. (2008). The impact of mental illness on sexual dysfunction.
Advances in Psychosomatic Medicine, 29, 89–106.
Zipfel, S., Reas, D. L., Thornton, C., Olmsted, M. P., Williamson, D. A., Gerlinghoff, M., . . . Beu-
mont, P. J. (2002). Day hospitalization programs for eating disorders: A systematic review
of the literature. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 31(2), 105–117.

-- 241 of 498 --

221
In this chapter, we review the basic and applied literature on substance-related and
addictive disorders. In the first section, we survey what is known about the psy-
chopathology of these disorders—their nature and causes. In the second section,
we summarize the current knowledge about effective psychological and biological
interventions for these disorders. Although basic findings are generally covered in
the first section and clinical/applied findings are generally covered in the second
section, we highlight throughout the chapter how basic psychopathology research
can and should help practitioners better address their clients’ needs.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS
The phrase “nosology necessarily precedes etiology” is often uttered but seldom fol-
lowed. If one cannot define and measure a problem, then one cannot understand
it. If one cannot understand it, then the interventions applied will at best be cha-
otically effective, if at all. Furthermore, the reasons a treatment (be it biological or
psychological) is efficacious or not will be incompletely understood. Addictive disor-
ders seem to have a definitional advantage over much other pathology because they
imply the excessive use of a substance or expression of a behavior, both of which
appear to be external and measurable. Unfortunately, however, the task of defining
these problems is not so simple. First, addictive disorders include 10 classes of drugs,
many with subcategories (e.g., various hallucinogens) and one recognized behav-
ioral addiction (i.e., gambling disorder). Diagnostically, all substances problems
must further be distinguished into substance use disorders and substance-induced
C H A P T E R 8
Substance‑Related
and Addictive Disorders
Robert O. Pihl
Sherry H. Stewart
Ioan Tiberiu Mahu

-- 242 of 498 --

222 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
disorders. For substance use disorders, there are 11 symptoms cited as criteria in
the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-
5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) that include difficulties controlling use,
social impairments resulting from use, use in risky situations, and pharmacological
symptoms of dependence (i.e., tolerance and withdrawal). The essential feature is
continued use of the substance despite significant negative consequences of use. An
examination of DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) criteria for gambling
disorder reveals nine symptoms, many of which closely map onto the symptoms for
substance use disorder. In the cases of both substance use disorder and gambling
disorder, the number of these criteria applicable is taken to determine the disorder’s
severity. A “substance-induced disorder” refers to a mental disorder (e.g., depres-
sion) that develops within a month of taking or withdrawing a particular substance.
This makes substance use a possible etiological factor for most mental disorders. In
fact, the exclusion criterion that refers to symptoms not simply being secondary to
physiological effects caused by a substance is one that is fundamental to most other
DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) definitions.
Perusal of the list of symptoms makes it apparent that the amount of the drug
consumed, or amount of time or money spent gambling, is not an issue unless it
leads to “clinically significant impairment or distress.” This phrase can reflect
myriad issues—including potentially serving as a projective test of the examiner.
Regarding drugs, even the old standbys of physiological tolerance and withdrawal
(which, again, are measurable) can be ignored, and the focus can instead shift to psy-
chological dependence. Hence, the heterogeneity and relative severity of the addic-
tive disorders are not well served by these concepts. Instead, we are dealing with a
plethora of differential disorders, all of which involve considerable clinical judgment
and multiple pathways to the diagnostic endpoint. Thus, to assume the applicability
of a single intervention would be a gross oversimplification.
Additionally, the list of addictive substances is legion. DSM-5 (American Psychi-
atric Association, 2013) lists several classes of drugs: alcohol; sympathomimetic, such
as amphetamines; caffeine; cannabis; cocaine; hallucinogens; inhalants; nicotine;
opioids; phencyclidine; and sedatives/anxiolytics. These divisions are problematic
because they are neither mutually exclusive (e.g., phencyclidine contains elements of
both a sympathomimetic and a hallucinogen) nor collectively exhaustive. Prescribed
medications, over-the-counter medications, and basically any substance used for the
purpose of intoxication can be considered a candidate for a substance use disorder.
The disorder can develop even if an individual is not using the drug for intoxicating
purposes (e.g., using benzodiazepines to treat insomnia or narcotics for pain man-
agement).
Finally, we come to the changes incorporated in DSM-5 (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Shifting focus beyond substances to addictive disorders, in part
driven by similarities in both the definition and behaviors (including neurocorre-
lates) has opened a plethora of future additions to the nomenclature. Currently in the
psychiatric bullpen (i.e., in the DSM-5 section “Conditions for Further Study”) are
Internet gaming disorder (which is included in the 11th edition of the International
Classification of Diseases [ICD]) and caffeine use disorders. Pertinent diagnostic con-
cerns for this extraordinarily robust class of disorders are prevalence, course, associ-
ated clinical features, high rates of comorbidity, etiology, and treatment.

-- 243 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	223
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The prevalence of these disorders is assessed periodically in epidemiological studies.
However, conclusions depend on the time period and the epidemiological survey to
which one attends. The determination of prevalence is at best a moving target, com-
plicated by the ephemeral aspects of drug/gambling availability, legality, and popu-
larity. Thus, when, where, and to whom these surveys were administered are criti-
cal to understanding the results. For example, the current opioid epidemic is rather
specific to North America and even certain states/provinces. Furthermore, the Sub-
stance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration’s (SAMHSA; 2019) yearly
National Survey on Drug Use and Health for 2018 showed opioid users decreased
1.1 million, while methamphetamine use increased. Also, during this same period,
the use of e-cigarettes declined among adults but rose among adolescents (Dai &
Leventhal, 2019), with the latter sure to decline given the introduction of restrictive
laws. Overall, addictive disorders can be viewed as the most common of all mental
disorders (see Table 8.1, which compares 12-month and lifetime prevalence of alcohol
use disorder with that for generalized anxiety disorder and depression). Sex also
matters, with rates for most addictions higher for males (see Table 8.1, which also
compares 12-month and lifetime prevalence of alcohol use disorder across sex). Also,
age is important for most drug use disorders, with the peak at 18–29 years with 12
month and lifetime prevalence rates of 26.7 and 37.0%, respectively. Finally, some
subsets of the population show higher prevalence rates than others. Native Ameri-
cans, for example, have relatively high 12-month and lifetime prevalence rates of
alcohol addiction of 19.2 and 43.4%, respectively (Grant et al., 2015). Regarding gam-
bling disorder, a lifetime prevalence of 1.0% is frequently quoted from a worldwide
prevalence range of 0.4–4.0%, and like most addictive disorders, the prevalence is
higher among young adults and males (Black & Shaw, 2019).
Surveys of college students have shown that drug use and resultant problems
are rampant, particularly for alcohol. Recent survey data (National Institute on Alco-
hol Abuse and Alcoholisma, 2019) are sobering: 1,519 deaths, 696,000 assaults, 97,000
TABLE 8.1. Past‑Year and Lifetime Prevalence Data for DSM‑5
Alcohol Use Disorders, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and Depression
12-month 	Lifetime
Alcohol use disordera 	13.9% 	29.1%
Males 	17.6% 	36.0%
Females 	10.4% 	22.7%
Peak (ages 18–29) 	26.7% 	37.0%
Native Americans 	19.2% 	43.4%
Generalized anxiety disorderb 	1.8% 	3.7%
Major depressive disorderc 	10.4% 	20.6%
Note. Based on nationally representative data reported by aGrant et al.
(2015), bRuscio et al. (2017), and cHasin et al. (2018).

-- 244 of 498 --

224 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
sexual assaults, 150,000 health problems, a 25% negative effect on academics, and
an increase in suicide attempts. Binge drinking is particularly problematic in this
population, with almost 10% of students reporting consumption of 10 or more drinks
in a row. Other drug use is also an issue; for example, 60% of students with prescrip-
tion drugs for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) divert their drugs to
others. As for cigarettes, the prevalence of adult smokers in the United States has
decreased dramatically since the 1950s, when smokers constituted over one-half of
all men and one-fourth of all women. Currently, approximately 10% are daily smok-
ers, although 21% vape nicotine. The addictive power of nicotine and other chemical
constituents in tobacco (there are over 4,000 chemical compounds in cigarettes, 50 of
which are known to cause cancer) is exemplified by the difficulty smokers experi-
ence in quitting despite dire circumstances. For example, over half of smokers in a
tobacco treatment program with cancer continued smoking (Cinciripini et al., 2019).
Marijuana (aka cannabis), the most commonly consumed drug after alcohol, has
been used by 45% of people in the United States over the age of 12. In terms of other
drugs (SAMHSA, 2019), data indicate the following use rates in the past 12 months:
psychotherapeutics (i.e., prescription stimulants, tranquilizers, and sedatives) (6.6%),
cocaine (2.3%), hallucinogens (1.5%), inhalants (0.8%), and heroin (0.1%). In terms
of gambling, the prevalence of gambling disorder in one study was 10.3% of active
gamblers, who in turn are 8.5% of the population (Rennert et al., 2014). It is essential
to remember that use and misuse are not necessarily the same thing—even water can
be an intoxicant when consumed in excessive quantities, supporting the adage that
“too much of anything can lead to the suppression of something.” Furthermore, the
popularity of a specific drug is often relative to time and place.
COURSE
Although dogmas such as “one drink, one drunk” often proliferate when consider-
ing the course of substance misuse, this simplicity tends to flourish in direct pro-
portion to our ignorance. Complexity is the rule. Which drug (or behavior), used
how and how much, with whom, under what conditions, and most significantly, by
whom, all impact the course of the addictive disorder. Hence, diagnostic issues are
not trivial. For substance use disorders, the class of drug misused must be consid-
ered. With cocaine and the opiates, for example, many months after an individual
has ceased use, strong cravings can be stimulated by situations previously associ-
ated with taking the drug. Thus, statistics indicate that as high as 80% of individuals
treated for cocaine addiction relapse within a year. And with gambling disorder,
not all types of gambling are equally harmful; electronic gambling machines (i.e.,
slots and video lottery terminals) appear to be associated with more severe problems
and a different course than other forms of gambling (MacLaren, Harrigan, & Dixon,
2012). The route of administration of the drug also needs to be considered. Smoking
or injecting cocaine is far more nefarious than snorting, thus impacting severity and
course. Also, with whom the drug is used can impact course. The individual who
misuses alcohol socially or succumbs to illegal drug use only among peers is likely
to have a less severe course than the solitary, “first thing in the morning” consumer.
Another example of variation in course within a drug class is illustrated by a large
national trajectory study of 18- to 26-year-olds for drinking, smoking, and marijuana

-- 245 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	225
use (Sher, Jackson, & Steinley, 2011). Consistent with other reports, four differential
trajectories were determined: chronic high use, late-onset use, developmentally lim-
ited use, and low use. Predictably, the chronic-high-use group displayed the stron-
gest risk characteristics (delinquency and sensation seeking), as well as co-usage of
other drugs. Thus, understanding course necessitates the understanding of individ-
ual etiology. However, among surveyed individuals with lifetime alcohol use disor-
ders, only 19.8% received any treatment. These alarming statistics are a major cause
for concern.
ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES
The high prevalence of substance use and gambling disorders resonates in a mul-
titude of negative direct and indirect ramifications. Numerous studies and public
campaigns have made the relationship among alcohol intoxication, driving, and acci-
dents well known. Less well known is the fact that alcohol is present in the perpetra-
tor, and to a lesser degree in the victim, in 30–50% of all murders, assaults, rapes,
and domestic violence cases (Gutwinski, Heinz, & Heinz, 2018). More generally, con-
tinued drug misuse and excessive gambling can both obviate and exacerbate coping
with daily problems in living, hence increasing the addictive behavior in an ever-
increasing spiral of destruction, with the endpoint of destructiveness too often being
suicide. Individuals with substance use disorders are at a six- to 10-fold increased
risk for suicidal behavior, particularly when the substance use disorder is comor-
bid with personality disorders and depression. Similar relations are known to exist
between gambling disorder and suicide (Martinotti et al., 2017; Petry & Kiluk, 2012).
Additionally, a drug such as alcohol is frequently used at the time of the suicidal act,
adding a degree of disinhibition to finalize an ongoing perturbation.
Death is a frequent concomitant of the opioid epidemic. At its height in 2017,
there were 47,600 deaths in the United States attributed to overdose. Overall, for that
year, drugs killed around 70,000 individuals in the United States, which is double
the deaths from car accidents and gun deaths. Fentanyl, a synthetic opioid that is
approximately 50 times stronger than heroin and often a contaminant in heroin, is
often responsible. As of 2016, synthetic opioids were present in 45.9% of all opioid-
related overdose deaths in the United States, eclipsing prescription opioids as the
most commonly involved drug in overdose fatalities (Jones, Einstein, & Compton,
2018).
Alcohol problems not only impact social functioning but they also have severe
health consequences. Although worldwide risk is 7.7 per 1,000 for babies to suffer
from fetal alcohol spectrum disorders, the rate for affected children in special pop-
ulations (e.g., special education, children in care, correctional, clinical, and Indig-
enous) is 10–40 times higher (Popova, Lange, Shield, Burd, & Rehm, 2019). For 2016,
alcohol use was ranked seventh for global burden of disease in terms of premature
death and disability, affecting a wide range of medical conditions that differ by age
and gender (Griswold et al., 2018). Interestingly, ancient societies were well aware of
the burden of excessive consumption: The ancient Egyptians were the first to order
abstinence.
The consequences of smoking are also well known to all, including addicted
smokers. Smoking is currently the most preventable cause of disease and death

-- 246 of 498 --

226 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
in North America. In spite of the graphic, “in-your-face” warning labels that are
required on cigarette packs in Canada, during cold Canadian winters, throngs of
intelligent individuals can be seen puffing away outdoors in huddled circles like
musk oxen during an arctic blizzard. Of course, smokers not only hurt their own
health and longevity, but they also compromise the health and longevity of others
in the form of secondhand smoke. The infant offspring of smokers have five times
more tobacco toxins in their urine than do controls. Children of smokers are also
more likely to suffer myriad negative health effects such as asthma, and to smoke
as adolescents (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2014). In fact, most
addictive disorders result in secondhand harms. Alcohol, for example, affects 1 in
5 adults because of someone else’s drinking (Nayak et al., 2019) with rates of sec-
ondhand harms even higher among college students (Thompson, Davis-MacNevin,
Teehan, Stewart, & Caring Campus Research Team, 2017).
Increased social problems and deteriorating health for the user and others is just
the beginning of a potential list of possible negative ramifications of misusing vari-
ous drugs. There is not an aspect of who we are that cannot be affected. For example,
a picture of a limp alcohol bottle is often used to illustrate sexual dysfunction as
an associated feature of heavy drinking. The same is true for smoking, most illegal
drugs, and many commonly prescribed medications, most notably the selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors. Even drugs thought to enhance sexual experience (e.g.,
some stimulants, ecstasy, cannabis) over time can result in a deterioration of sexual
functioning. Furthermore, heavy episodic use of drugs by young adults, interacting
with self-regulation difficulties and sensation seeking, can increase the prevalence
of risky sexual behavior. Sleep is another area often impacted by heavy drug use.
Stimulant misusers’ disrupted sleep patterns rival those of the bipolar patient in an
acute manic phase. Alcohol, which is often taken to promote sleep and is beneficial
for falling asleep, actually disturbs the many chemical processes that control sleep
and can result in sleep deprivation. Furthermore, heavy drinking can narrow air
passages, thus promoting and exacerbating sleep apnea. Even use of alcohol, ciga-
rettes, and cannabis by teens has respective odds ratios for insufficient sleep of 1.64,
1.45, and 1.52, respectively (McKnight-Eily et al., 2011). Sleep deprivation diminishes
most waking activities, with school and work performance being obvious activities
that suffer. Increasingly, employers are eliminating illegal drug users from the work-
force through mandatory drug testing. Additionally, statistics show that heavy users
of even legal drugs have increased absenteeism, health problems, and accidents on
the job.
Drugs present severe direct and indirect consequences. In regard to direct rami-
fications, both the type and the degree vary between drugs. For example, when com-
pared to alcohol, drugs such as opiates result in fewer negative health consequences
if one does not consider indirect effects. Indirect effects are another matter. First,
criminalization of some drugs results in de facto expulsion from normal society.
Second, these drugs pose an increased risk of overdose and death, due primarily
to the lack of quality control and the manner of consumption typically associated
with them. And, finally, individuals addicted to these drugs often resort to criminal
behavior to maintain their addiction. In the United States, drug offenses account
for 451,000 incarcerations (Sawyer & Wagner, 2019). There has been a preference for
viewing addiction as criminal behavior rather than a mental illness, a position that
is slowly changing.

-- 247 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	227
In accordance with the adage “Pharmacology is the art of selective poisoning,”
most drugs, when used heavily, have negative neurological sequelae. Such effects
are well known for alcohol, methamphetamine, and ecstasy. Recent concern is for
the use of cannabis and risk for psychoses. Evolving studies have shown there is a
relationship, although limited to high dosage and heavy use, in genetically vulner-
able adolescents (Di Forti et al., 2019). These drug-related effects add to the confusion
in determining the possible brain bases for addictive behaviors, since cause and con-
sequence of use obviously confuse the interpretation of any research finding with
individuals suffering from addiction.
In summary, in this section, we have reviewed a large number of associated
clinical features that frequently are seen in individuals with addictive disorders,
including physical health ramifications, social and interpersonal problems, sleep
difficulties, sexual problems, suicidality, and impairments in work and school func-
tioning. In clinical practice, these associated features must be assessed at baseline, in
addition to assessment of the addictive disorder symptoms, for treatment planning
with individual clients. These associated features should be monitored throughout
the course of treatment to ensure that clients are responding as their addictive disor-
der symptoms improve. Some of these associated features may require independent
treatment if they are not merely secondary consequences of the addictive behavior.
COMORBIDITY
Addictive disorders seldom occur in isolation. Rather, it is often the case that more
than one drug is abused (“homotypic comorbidity”) and/or the addictive disorder
co-occurs with another diagnosable mental disorder (“heterotypic comorbidity”).
For example, according to the National Epidemiologic Survey of Alcohol and Related
Conditions (NESARC; Grant, 2014), while controlling for sociodemographic factors,
alcohol use disorder shows significant heterotypic comorbidity with mood, anxiety,
bipolar, and antisocial personality disorders, for both 12-month and lifetime rates
(see Table 8.2). However, 12-month data may be more accurate with respect to actual
temporal co-occurrence, as the disorders are likely to be less contemporaneous over
a lifetime. In terms of homotypic co-occurrence, NESARC found that over the past
year, 29% of individuals with alcohol use disorders had misused other drugs. The
percentages for drug use disorders were as follows: 9.9%, cannabis; 2.4%, opioids;
TABLE 8.2. Comorbidity with Alcohol Use Disorders
12-month (OR) 	Lifetime (OR)
Drug use disorder 	3.3 	4.1
Mood disorder 	1.3 	1.5
Anxiety disorder 	1.1 	1.3
Bipolar I disorder 	1.4 	2.0
Antisocial personality disorder 	1.6 	1.9
Note. OR, odds ratio. Based on NESARC-III nationally representative data
reported by Grant et al. (2015), controlling for sociodemographic conditions.

-- 248 of 498 --

228 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
2.5%, cocaine; 1.3%, hallucinogens; and 1.2%, amphetamines (Falk, Hsiao-Ye, &
Hiller-Sturmhöfel, 2008).
“Polydrug use,” in which substances are used concomitantly, is also quite com-
mon. For example, 58% of heavy drinkers smoke (Hughes, Sathe, & Spagnola, 2009),
and the correlation between cocaine and alcohol dependence is .84 (Helzer & Pryz-
beck, 1988). These relationships are hardly random. While cocaine addicts often say
that they drink to “come down,” the combination of cocaine and alcohol produces
coca ethylene, which temporarily is more excitatory than either cocaine or alcohol
taken alone. So much for self-report! Certain situations, such as rave attendance, vir-
tually guarantee polydrug use. Furthermore, recent trends, such as using energy
drinks and stimulants (mostly alcohol) to enhance the high are common, particularly
among youth (Marczinski & Fillmore, 2014).
Traditionally, it has been assumed that the comorbidity of disorders emanates
when one disorder leads to a second or third disorder, and/or when there is a com-
mon underlying risk factor for the disorders. In the case of addictive disorders there
are four possibilities. Addictive disorders lead to other disorders; other disorders
lead to addictive disorders; addictive disorders and other disorders bidirectionally
increase risk; or addictive disorders and other disorders have common underlying
risk factors. In clinical practice, where addictive disorders are typically both under-
diagnosed and undertreated, there seems to be a preference for the model in which
other disorders increase vulnerability to addictive disorders. Even when this model
is true, however, it is possible that the addictive behavior can function to maintain
the “primary” disorder and, therefore, lack of diagnosis and treatment for the addic-
tive disorder can undermine the therapeutic endeavor. For example, a person starts
misusing a drug because of depression, but the ramifications of the drug use inevi-
tably result in dysphoria, which promotes the continuation of depression, creating
a vicious cycle in which one disorder maintains the other over time. Order of onset
data is one way that researchers have examined this issue. A 25-year longitudinal
birth cohort study in New Zealand determined that in both men and women, alcohol
problems preceded depression, after controlling for confounding factors (Ferguson,
Boden, & Harwood, 2009). In contrast, a literature review concluded that depres-
sion more often precedes alcohol problems among women, suggesting there may
be important gender differences in this chicken– egg question (Sabourin & Stewart,
2009).
Perhaps the most significant error in current practice is the pervasive blind-
ness to common underlying vulnerabilities that, very often, should be the focus of
treatment. One study by Conrod, Pihl, Steward, and Dongier (2000) demonstrates
this point. Women with substance use disorder from the general population (n = 298)
completed a large battery of psychological tests and symptom rating scales. A factor
analysis followed by a cluster analysis yielded four distinct clusters: anxiety sensi-
tivity, hopelessness, sensation seeking, impulsivity, and low personality risk. Strong
relationships were found between the cluster into which each woman fell, the type
of drug on which each was dependent, and their co-occurring mental disorder (see
Table 8.3). Recent work shows that the relation between these same personality pro-
files and specific forms of substance misuse is true even at later stages of addiction
(Mahu et al., 2019).
Behavioral profiles with extremes of externalizing and internalizing behaviors
have been linked to substance misuse, further supporting the notion of differential

-- 249 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	229
pathways. For example, sons of patients with alcohol use disorder, who are known
to be at four to nine times increased risk for developing the disorder themselves,
often display externalizing patterns. When compared to controls, they, as a group,
have been found to display autonomic hyperreactivity to stress and novelty, reduced
academic achievement, relative deficits on cognitive tests, and generally impaired
behavioral regulation (Pihl, 2010). How these profiles and other risk factors, such as
parents’ antisocial behavior or poor parenting, or mothers’ depression, or peer rela-
tionships, impact risk is the topic of etiology.
ETIOLOGY
From the previous discussion, it should be eminently clear that addictive disorders
represent differential disorders with a potentially large number of distinct etiological
pathways. This fact needs to be actively considered in any treatment. Additionally,
one needs to underscore the likely interaction between various pathways to abuse.
The knowledge of these pathways is essential for clinicians, since their interventions
should be based on what they think is wrong. The fact that most addicted individu-
als are never treated, and even when treated, that clinicians tend to focus their treat-
ment on a co-occurring disorder of which they are more knowledgeable, is due to a
lack of understanding regarding differential etiology. Alcohol is a prime example of
this and is therefore featured in the following sections. However, irrespective of the
type of addiction, etiological information exists on genetic, biochemical, behavioral,
and social levels.
TABLE 8.3. Overview of Conrod, Pihl, et al.’s (2000) Cluster Analysis of Women with Substance
Use Disorder
DSM-III-R diagnosis
Anxiety–
sensitivity 	Hopelessness
Sensation
seeking 	Impulsivity
Anxiolytic dependence 	3.0 	1.7 	0.6 	0.3
Opioid dependence 	1.3 	2.9 	1.1 	0.2
Alcohol dependence 	0.5 	1.2 	4.3 	2.7
Cocaine dependence 	1.5 	0.5 	1.2 	1.8
Recurrent depression 	1.8 	1.9 	0.9 	0.4
Major depressive episode 	1.1 	2.7 	0.8 	0.7
Simple phobia 	2.1 	2.6 	0.9 	0.9
Generalized anxiety disorder 	1.9 	1.5 	1.0 	0.3
Somatization disorder 	5.8 	1.6 	0.4 	0.1
Panic disorder/agoraphobia 	1.5 	2.1 	0.8 	0.7
Social phobia 	1.7 	2.6 	0.5 	0.9
Antisocial personality disorder 	1.4 	0.5 	0.5 	2.8
Note. Odds ratios are calculated for each subtype relative to the risk within the remaining sample. Boldface
values indicate significant effects tested using Pearson’s chi-square. Adapted from data in Conrod, Pihl, et al.
(2000).

-- 250 of 498 --

230 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Genes
The explosive growth in molecular genetics has heightened enthusiasm for discov-
ery of the specific genes implicated in the heritability findings of traditional fam-
ily, twin, and adoption studies for practically all mental disorders. In the area of
addictions, genetics work has covered all existing drugs and gambling. The sheer
complexity of determining suspect genes is illustrated by the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA)–sponsored association study of tobacco and alcohol use in 1.2
million participants (Liu et al., 2019). A broad range of behavior on which drug-using
individuals differ (e.g., age at initiation of use, amount consumed, related diseases,
life events), was ascertained and correlated in a genomewide investigation. Four
hundred six genome locations with 566 genetic variants were determined. The vari-
ants involved implicate the importance of many of the addictive behavior chemical
systems. Although the findings are viewed as a starting point for further study, one
is left with the feeling of searching for a needle in a heap of needles. Furthermore,
there is epigenetics, the study of heritable changes in gene expression, with the pos-
sibility of a myriad of phenotypic expressions. The best potential for epigenetic work
is with individuals already affected by an addictive disorder in ascertaining how
changes in gene functioning occurs as a result of excessive drug use or excessive
engagement in an addictive behavior and how that contributes to resistance to treat-
ment. Stimulant addiction has been shown to alter DNA methylation and noncoding
ribonucleic acids (RNAs) that affect brain reward regions (Kalda & Zharkovsky, 2015;
Massart et al., 2015). Although we know that genes are significant and derived heri-
tability estimates are substantial, the difficulty in isolating genes is an issue. What is
relevant is that possibly involved genes are known to function in cellular signaling
(both between and within cells), brain development, cell adhesion, and varying cell
functions. Exactly how these genes contribute to vulnerability, in whom, and for
what, remain complex, unanswered questions.
The Brain and Addiction
Various drugs and addictive behaviors have differential effects on brain functioning.
Furthermore, pharmacokinetics, such as dose and route of administration, greatly
affect responsivity. For example, injecting or smoking stimulants (e.g., cocaine) result
in a significantly more robust response than snorting them. Furthermore, individual
differences in the baseline functioning of these brain systems, related to genetic vul-
nerability, among other possibilities, is thought to greatly determine the level and
maintenance of response. Models organized according to theoretical system group-
ings provide some explanatory power. The cue for the reward–psychomotor activation
system (which primarily involves the mesocorticolimbic dopamine system), the anx-
iety/threat/inhibition system (which is mediated primarily by gamma-aminobutyric
acid [GABA] and involves an extended limbic network from the amygdala through
the orbitofrontal cortex), and the cognitive control system (which primarily involves
not only the prefrontal cortex but also includes pathways to and from the cerebellum
through the limbic system)—as well as their interactions—represent relevant mod-
els. Of course, these putative systems are highly complex, involving numerous neu-
rotransmitters and neuromodulators that individually and collectively also impact

-- 251 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	231
addiction. The cue for reward system is activated by stimulants, the threat system is
inhibited by anxiolytics, and the cognitive system can be both dampened and facili-
tated by various drugs. Numerous imaging studies have revealed that when partici-
pants are challenged with alcohol, amphetamine, cocaine, or gambling stimuli, the
cue for reward system is activated via dopamine release. This activation is associated
with feelings of euphoria, energy, and general positive affect. Hence, it is easy to see
why these drugs/behaviors are misused (at least initially) and why stimuli associ-
ated with this experience of reward are easily conditioned to elicit craving. Simi-
lar hedonic responses to cigarette smoking have been reported and are also related
to the release of dopamine, although the brain area involved is not precisely the
same as for other stimulants (Barrett, Boileau, Okker, Pihl, & Dagher, 2004). Notably,
individuals who are more at risk for developing problems with stimulants due to
family history or the presence of particular biological markers display a dopamine
response with greater amplitude than that of controls, and with repeated drug expo-
sure both conditioned and sensitized dopamine responses are developed (Leyton,
2007). These findings support the proposition of individual differential sensitivities
to drug effects and, hence, differential likelihoods to develop addictions.
Furthermore, these stimulant responders are distinct from controls and threat-
sensitive individuals in that they exhibit less amygdala activation in response to
fearful stimuli (Glahn, Lovallo, & Fox, 2007) and show general orbitofrontal activa-
tion instead (Heitzig, Nigg, Yau, Zubita, & Zucker, 2008). Indeed, a recent functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study showed how specific brain responses are
affected differentially by an intoxicating dose of alcohol in two high-risk personality
groups that were prospectively linked to addiction 3 years later (Abu Shakra et al.,
2018; see Figure 8.1). Anxiety-sensitive participants who transitioned to substance use
disorder within 3 years showed greater amygdala activation to negative faces in an
emotional processing task under placebo; these responses were reversed by alcohol,
suggesting sensitivity to alcohol as an anxiolytic. In contrast, sensation seekers (par-
ticularly males) who transitioned to substance use disorder showed alcohol dampen-
ing of responses to a social stress test in the orbital frontal cortex, which might por-
tend heightened lack of behavioral control and increased impulsivity. These results
illustrate differential pathways and risk parameters even for the same drug.
Apparent in the previous study was the distinct differential responsivity by
sex for sensation seekers. Addictive problems worldwide have generally been more
prevalent in males than females. There are also sex differences in the mechanisms of
reward and addiction (Becker & Chartoff, 2019) which are relevant to the tendency
for females to abuse anxiolytics and males alcohol and stimulants.
A less well-recognized yet particularly important point in developing motivation
for change in any kind of therapy is the recognition that drug use/misuse has ben-
efits for the individual. Clearly, two of the previous models are based on reinforcing
aspects of drug use. Drugs can lubricate social functioning, provide identification for
the adolescent, self-medicate dysphoric/anxious states, promote strong positive feel-
ings, and improve cognitive functioning. With respect to the latter, college students
with prescriptions for stimulant drugs, supposedly for the treatment of ADHD, are
highly likely to sell these drugs to others (Darredeau, Barrett, Jardin, & Pihl, 2007).
These drugs have pharmacological profiles similar to cocaine and therefore produce
indistinguishable effects. These stimulant drugs are often used as study aids among

-- 252 of 498 --

232 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
the university population (Chinneck et al., 2018). This raises the intriguing question
of whether this form of performance enhancement can be considered cheating.
An ongoing interactive circularity affects brain functioning and gene expres-
sion. We are increasingly learning that what we think about and how we cope with
various environmental events determines the activity of genes and brain function-
ing. There is a growing number of examples of how cognitive-behavioral interven-
tions and placebo drugs alter brain function, often producing brain images that illus-
trate those factors thought to be causative of the disorder. Importantly, this means
that risk, irrespective of genetic–brain susceptibility, can be altered– controlled by
a strong cognitive–inhibitory propensity. For example, individuals who display a
particular high-risk response when challenged with alcohol can have that biological
response muted by a prior learning experience (Brunelle & Pihl, 2007).
FIGURE 8.1. Prospective association between region of interest (ROI) activations to emo-
tionally challenging material and escalating alcohol and/or illicit drug use. a–d: Mean
parameter estimates (arbitrary units, a.u.) of amygdala (AMYG) activity in response
to negative (fearful, angry, disgusted, and sad) versus neutral faces (a–b) and medial
orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC) activity in response to acute social stress versus a control
condition (c–d) in high-anxiety–sensitivity subjects (HASS) and high-sensation-seeking
subjects (HSSS) who classified as transitioners (TRA) and nontransitioners (non-TRA) to
substance use problems within 3-years after the fMRI testing under alcohol (dark bars)
and placebo (light bars) conditions. **p ≤ .0125 (Bonferroni adjusted alpha); *p ≤ .02. Error
bars indicate standard error of the mean. From Abu Shakra et al. (2018). Reprinted with
permission from Elsevier.

-- 253 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	233
Cognitive Factors
These factors play a role both in the etiology and consequences of addiction. As
noted in the previous section on the brain and addiction, some misused substances
have positively reinforcing consequences, with use associated with positive feel-
ings, while others have negatively reinforcing consequences, such as anxiolytic or
analgesic effects, or reductions in social inhibitions. Social learning theory posits
that these positive and negative reinforcement effects of substance use are learned
through direct and indirect experiences. Expectancies about the outcomes of engag-
ing in substance use are then formed. Expectancies can be thought of as “if–then”
statements regarding the expected outcome of a behavior such as substance use (e.g.,
“If I were to drink alcohol, then I would feel very calm and relaxed”). Basic research
has repeatedly shown that expectancies can influence postdrug consumption behav-
ior over and above actual drug effects and that outcome expectancies exert power-
ful influences on subsequent addictive behavior (e.g., Stewart, Stewart, Yi, & Ellery,
2015). Outcome expectancies often develop before children have even had any direct
experiences with substances through observation of parents’ or peers’ substance use
and advertising and media influences.
Another important cognitive variable in the social learning model of substance
use disorders is self-efficacy expectancies (i.e., belief that one can cope successfully
without using substances, or that one has the ability to refuse the drug if offered).
For example, a woman who does not believe she has the skills to relax on her own,
without the use of substances, may be particularly prone to developing a substance
use disorder following conflict with her partner. Prospective research has shown
that lack of drink refusal self-efficacy in teens is predictive of problem drinking 1
year later (Connor, George, Gullo, Kelly, & Young, 2011). According to social learning
theory, self-efficacy expectancies and outcome expectancies may interact: When pos-
itive outcome expectancies are combined with low levels of self-efficacy, substance
use is particularly likely to occur. Thus, both outcome expectancies and self-efficacy
expectancies should be targeted in addiction treatment.
In addition to self-efficacy and outcome expectancies, which can be considered
explicit or controlled cognitive processes, are the influences of relatively more auto-
matic or implicit cognitive processes. For example, people with addictive disorders
have been shown to have their attention automatically drawn toward, or to have dif-
ficulty disengaging their attention from, cues relevant to their addiction (e.g., a bottle
of pills for a prescription drug misuser) (Field & Cox, 2008). As another example, due
to conditioning, relatively automatic memory associations can develop between the
addictive behavior cue and approach (e.g., gambling stimuli and approach behav-
ior; Boffo et al., 2018). Thus, exposure to cues can automatically trigger the addic-
tive behavior beyond the individual’s conscious awareness, explaining why many
people with addictive disorders subjectively experience lapses as having occurred
without a conscious decision to engage in the addictive behavior (Stacy & Wiers,
2010). Such automatic cognitive processes predict addictive behaviors and related
problems above and beyond measures of conscious, effortful cognitive processes
such as expectancies (Stewart et al., 2015).
Cognitions affected by heavy drug use often serve to promote resistance to
treatment and promote recidivism. Lower brain volume is a frequent concomitant of

-- 254 of 498 --

234 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
substance dependence. In a mega-analysis (i.e., a meta-analysis of individual patient
data), the same was found for many brain regions related to impulse control, par-
ticularly for alcohol (Mackey et al., 2019). Furthermore, genetic vulnerability interacts
with heavy use, resulting in the promulgation of severe mental disorders. Even mod-
erate cognitive effects (e.g., drug-induced decrements in recall memory, perceptual
reasoning, working memory, and inhibition; see Figure 8.2) add to the vicious circle
of addiction (Morin et al., 2019).
FIGURE 8.2. Between-subject and within-subject (concurrent and lagged) relationships
between cannabis use frequency and cognitive performance (working memory errors,
perceptual reasoning performance, delayed memory recall performance, and inhibitory
control errors) in adolescents. Lagged effects were calculated starting in eighth grade. For
working memory, performance was measured by counting the number of times a previ-
ously chosen stimulus was selected on a given trial (i.e., spatial working memory errors);
lower scores indicate better performance. For perceptual reasoning and delayed memory
recall, performance was calculated as a score, with higher scores indicating better per-
formance. For inhibitory control, performance was measured by counting the number of
commission errors across both conditions of the task; lower scores indicate better perfor-
mance. From Morin et al. (2019). Reprinted with permission from American Psychiatric
Association Publishing.

-- 255 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	235
Stress
The roles of stress in contributing to the onset and maintenance of addictive disor-
ders have received considerable research attention over the years. Animal models
have shown that early stress can lead to enduring changes in neurotransmitter sys-
tems (e.g., dopamine) within limbic brain structures that contribute to a propensity
to self-administer large amounts of drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, and alco-
hol. One mouse study indicated that early stress led to higher operant responding for
alcohol in adulthood, an effect mediated by alterations in dopamine and glutamate
neurotransmission (Campbell, Szumlinksi, & Kippin, 2009).
Stress can also trigger relapse to substance misuse in individuals who have
recovered from a substance use disorder. Interestingly, stress activates dopamine
release in a manner akin to the dopamine release observed in response to drug
administration (Leyton, 2007). This stress-induced dopamine release can act as a
conditioned cue, triggering drug craving, drug seeking, and ultimately drug relapse.
Psychological treatments should focus on helping the client develop alternative skills
for coping with stress and teaching techniques to deal with stress-induced urges to
use, in order to prevent relapse. In terms of implications for pharmacotherapies, cau-
tion is required as drugs targeting the stress response work, but in turn are addictive
themselves.
Social–Cultural–Familial Factors
The cultural variation in drug use and response is profound, even among groups
with the same genetic heritage. For example, as opposed to the typical finding of
increased aggressiveness when intoxicated, there are cultures in which people in fact
show significantly less aggression when under the influence (MacAndrew & Edger-
ton, 1969). In areas of the world where cocaine and heroin are grown, misuse is min-
iscule in comparison to North American and European societies. Clearly, our mass
consumption, individualistic, hedonistic, and competitive culture plays a significant
role in addictive behaviors. Whereas genetics–biological studies typically begin with
families with histories of substance use disorder, within society are more at-risk
subcultures, or those that are relatively immune to the disorder, despite equivalent
biological vulnerability. Populations at higher risk for addictive disorders than the
general population include adolescents, the ghettoized poor, the disenfranchised,
males, and the less educated. Religiosity, on the other hand, has consistently been
shown to reduce risk significantly. One’s family and peers represent small societies
with concomitant beliefs and attitudes. This is important given that parental and
peer modeling are powerful inducements in initiating and maintaining addictive
behaviors. A recent meta-analysis shows that members of romantic couples signifi-
cantly influence one another’s drinking behavior (Muyingo et al., 2020). It seems this
may occur at least partly because couple members influence each other’s reasons for
drinking which in turn influence the individual’s use patterns (Kehayes, Mackin-
non, Sherry, Leonard, & Stewart, 2019). Numerous studies have indicated significant
roles of parental, peer, and romantic partner factors with respect to alcohol, ciga-
rette, and even illicit drug use. In a recent review, Tael-Öeren, Naughton, and Sutton
(2019) concluded that the less restrictive the parenting, the more likely was children’s

-- 256 of 498 --

236 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
alcohol use onset, degree of use, and intoxication. Yet another familial aspect of drug
taking also deserves consideration: the propensity to treat all problems with drugs.
This societal tendency de facto teaches avoidance without coping. Chemical agents
offer an immediate remedy for the slightest twinge in one’s psyche. Overall, family
plays a crucial role in substance misuse. For this reason, therapy with adolescents
with addictive disorders often requires family involvement to deal with not only the
issues and angst of the adolescent but also family attitudes and practices. Similarly,
couples and network approaches to addiction are often indicated given the previ-
ously noted social influences on many addictive behaviors.
Interactions
It would be inadequate to assume that any of the earlier sections on etiology is sin-
gularly explanatory. Cause is a multifactorial, multilevel, interactional process. For
example, certain personality profiles increase the likelihood of addiction. In a large
twin study, Big Five characteristics of high Neuroticism, low Agreeableness, and low
Conscientiousness predicted addiction to nicotine, cannabis, and gambling (Dash et
al., 2019). Gene expression is altered by environmental events, and vice versa. Antiso-
cial behavior—a common precursor to substance misuse—can result from just such a
scenario. Caspi and colleagues (2002) showed that a polymorphism of a gene related
to antisocial behavior had an effect if the individual was maltreated as a child. In this
case, the specific genotype putatively altered sensitivity to environmental events,
ultimately resulting in the phenotypic expression of antisocial behavior. Drugs can
have a similar effect. Adolescent rats in a situation producing binge drinking as
adults displayed epigenetic protein changes in the amygdala (40% fewer neuronal
connections) and, subsequently, behaviorally expressed anxiety (Kyzar, Zhang, &
Pandey, 2019).
Gene– environment effects can also be influenced by social and historical con-
texts. The heritability of smoking increased from zero for men born before 1910 to
60% for those born after 1940, as smoking became less of a normative behavior. This
example shows that heritability estimates are subject to change over time (Board-
man, Blalock, & Pampel, 2010). Then there are the learned associations that develop
by virtue of drug taking. For instance, Volkow and colleagues (2006) showed, in a
positron emission tomography (PET) study, that when those with a cocaine addiction
watch a video of cocaine being used, they release significantly more dopamine than
when watching a video about nature. Prosaically put, “You can take the drug from
the addict but the craving lives on.”
TREATMENT
Just as there are myriad etiological factors and multiple pathways to the develop-
ment of addictive disorders, there are also numerous approaches to treating these
disorders. For some with severe physiological dependence on a substance, treatment
may begin withdrawal management–medical care to reduce uncomfortable or even
dangerous withdrawal symptoms as a client reduces or ceases use of the addictive
substance. For example, benzodiazepines may be used to manage insomnia, agita-
tion, or anxiety, or to reduce the risk of dangerous seizures with alcohol withdrawal

-- 257 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	237
(World Health Organization [WHO], 2009). However, withdrawal management is
not used for all drugs (e.g., not required for those with opioid use disorder who are
commencing methadone treatment; see below). Since relapse rates for withdrawal
management are extremely high, it should be considered a first step rather than a
stand-alone treatment (Bruneau et al., 2018; WHO, 2009). Various other medications
are available to target the different brain systems involved in addiction described
earlier. And given the importance of social factors in addiction etiology, as well as
the powerful roles of cognition and learning, a variety of cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy (CBT) techniques have been advanced to assist those with addictive disorders.
Family, couple, and network therapies have been developed and evaluated in the
treatment of this set of disorders given the etiological and maintaining roles of fam-
ily and peer network factors discussed earlier. We examine each of these approaches
and evidence for their efficacy across a variety of addictive disorders. We conclude
by considering some general principles of change in the treatment of individuals
with addictive disorders.
Although we do have effective treatments that help many people with addic-
tive disorders, available treatments could be much more effective. Unfortunately, as
noted earlier, many people with substance use and gambling disorders fail to seek
treatment. Recent data suggest that only about 10% of Americans who need treatment
for a substance use disorder ever receive it (Lipari, Park-Lee, & Van Horn, 2016). Simi-
larly, only 7–12% of those with a lifetime gambling disorder ever seek formal treat-
ment or attend Gamblers Anonymous (GA; Slutske, 2006). And when those with an
addictive disorder do seek treatment, positive treatment gains are not always lasting.
Rates of relapse are alarmingly high for substance use disorders (40–60% in the first
year after treatment; NIDA, 2009) and even higher with gambling disorder (Collier,
2008; Smith et al., 2015). We discuss efforts to remedy this situation, such as relapse
prevention approaches to help those with addictive disorders maintain their treat-
ment gains in the longer term. And we consider efforts to better match treatments
(whether biomedical or psychosocial) to the underlying pathways to addictive dis-
orders, in attempts to improve outcomes. Since one barrier to treatment engagement
can be individuals’ failure to recognize they have a problem and need to change, we
begin with an approach designed to get people with addictive disorders to commit
to the work required to overcome an addiction.
Motivational Interviewing
The first step in recovery from an addictive disorder is for affected individuals to rec-
ognize that they do have a problem with the substance/behavior and need assistance
to overcome the problem. People with addictive disorders, however, arrive at treat-
ment at different “stages of change” or states of readiness to tackle their addictive
behavior (Amodeo et al., 2011). They may arrive at treatment in the precontemplation
(e.g., attending treatment session due to partner’s threat of leaving) or contemplation
stage (e.g., just beginning to consider that they have a problem with substances or
gambling) rather than the preparation or action stages required for successful treat-
ment (Amodeo et al., 2011). A therapist cannot help people who are not yet ready to
change their addictive behavior; in fact, one of the main barriers identified by addic-
tions treatment staff to effectively implementing skills-based treatments such as CBT
(described below) is client “resistance” (Amodeo et al., 2011). In fact, research has

-- 258 of 498 --

238 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
shown that if clients’ readiness to change their addictive behavior is low, the treat-
ment outcome is less than optimal (Gonzalez, Schmitz, & DeLaune, 2006).
Poor engagement with treatment among clients with addictive disorders, as evi-
denced by signs such as failure to complete homework, medication noncompliance,
or missed therapy sessions, has traditionally been viewed by therapists as evidence
of “resistance” (Westra & Dozois, 2006). However, others have suggested that these
behaviors may be signs of ambivalence about change (Miller & Rose, 2015). On the
one hand, those with addictive disorders are attracted to addictive behaviors for
their many reinforcing properties (e.g., stimulants’ or gambling’s activating effects
in the brain reward system; anxiolytic drugs’ dampening of the threat system). On
the other hand, they are aware of the severe negative consequences of continued
engagement in the addictive behavior, such as financial and relationship troubles,
health issues, and problems with employers. Some argue that this ambivalence must
be resolved before the client can commit to a more active treatment, such as the bio-
logical or psychological treatments we discuss next in this chapter.
A specific psychological technique called “motivational interviewing” (Miller
& Rose, 2015) has been developed to help those with addictive disorders improve
their motivation to change and move toward a stage in which they are ready to put
in the effort required to change their addictive behavior. Motivational interviewing
is directed at exploring and resolving ambivalence about change in order to increase
clients’ engagement with the treatment process, enhance compliance, and ultimately
improve response rates. In motivational interviewing, the therapist encourages cli-
ents to explore their own feelings and thoughts about the possibility of changing
their addictive behaviors (Westra & Dozois, 2006). For example, the therapist uses
techniques to steer clients toward talking less about continuing their addictive
behavior and more about change (called “sustain talk” and “change talk”).
Motivational interviewing can be used as a stand-alone intervention or as a
“prelude” (i.e., brief preparatory intervention) prior to other treatments such as CBT
or biological treatments (see below). When used as a stand-alone intervention, the
notion is that many clients actually have the tools to make changes in their addic-
tive behavior, and all they need to be able to make the necessary changes is to
resolve their ambivalence. When used as a prelude, once the ambivalence is resolved
through motivational interviewing, other treatments are used to provide the client
with the skills to make those changes (Arkowitz & Westra, 2004; Bux & Irwin, 2006).
When brief courses of motivational interviewing are used as preludes, very prom-
ising outcomes can be achieved, including improved treatment attendance (Burke,
Arkowitz, & Menchola, 2003). Motivational interviewing appears more effective
when used as a prelude to CBT than when used as a stand-alone treatment (Burke et
al., 2003). In short, motivational interviewing is a valuable technique in the treatment
of addictive disorders, including gambling disorders (Yakovenko, Quigley, Hemmel-
garn, Hodgins, & Ronksley, 2015), particularly when used as a prelude to other, more
active, skills-based interventions (O’Connor & Stewart, 2010). One such set of skills-
based interventions is CBT.
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
In this section, we discuss CBT broadly as incorporating behavioral, cognitive, so-
called “third-wave” interventions involving mindful awareness and acceptance, and

-- 259 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	239
computerized cognitive retraining. CBT is a commonly used, time-limited, and effi-
cacious form of psychotherapy that is based on classical conditioning, operant learn-
ing, and social learning theories. In addition to the empirical support for CBT, there
is also high client satisfaction with CBT for addictive disorders (Donovan, Kadden,
DiClemente, & Carroll, 2002).
As noted earlier, social learning theory (Bandura, 1977) emphasizes the roles
of outcome expectancies and self-efficacy expectancies in contributing to addictive
behaviors. Given the importance of outcome expectancies, one CBT technique to treat
addictive disorders is “expectancy challenge”—helping the client gather evidence
against, and critically evaluate the veracity and utility of, these expected positive
consequences of engaging in alcohol/drug use or gambling. A meta-analysis showed
that expectancy challenge reduces not only positive alcohol outcome expectancies
but also alcohol use and the frequency of heavy drinking, at least in the short-term
(Scott-Sheldon, Terry, Carey, Garey, & Carey, 2012). Self-efficacy expectancies are
enhanced through techniques such as training in drink/drug refusal skills, which
can specifically increase individuals’ belief in their ability to refuse the substance
if it is offered (Connor et al., 2011). More generally, in CBT, self-efficacy is enhanced
through coping skills training (discussed next) because greater knowledge and expe-
rience with adaptive coping skills can increase clients’ belief in their ability to cope
without engaging in the addictive behavior.
Coping skills training, a core component of CBT for addictive disorders, is
designed to remediate any skills deficits and to enhance clients’ sense of self-
efficacy. Clients are taught specific cognitive and behavioral techniques they can
employ when faced with triggers and associated classically conditioned cravings
to use the substance in their daily lives. These triggers can be intrapersonal (e.g.,
positive–negative mood states, stress) or interpersonal (e.g., romantic conflict). To
counter interpersonal triggers, clients may be taught assertiveness and drink/drug
refusal skills. To counter intrapersonal triggers, clients are taught skills such as urge
management, stress reduction, distress tolerance, and increasing pleasant activities
(Bornovalova, Gratz, Daughters, Hunt, & Lejuez, 2012; Monti, Kadden, Rohsenow,
Cooney, & Abrams, 2002).
CBT approaches also focus on countering the powerful reinforcing effects of
addictive behavior. In contingency management, which is grounded in operant con-
ditioning theory, abstinence is rewarded with a non-drug reinforcer (e.g., vouchers
that can be traded for rewards of value). Meta-analyses suggest that contingency
management is an effective treatment with moderate-sized effects; however, it does
tend to work better for some substances (e.g., cocaine, opioids) than others (e.g.,
tobacco) (Dutra et al., 2008; Prendergast, Podus, Finney, Greenwell, & Roll, 2006).
Another common component in CBT for addictive disorders is cue exposure
(Monti et al., 2002). According to classical conditioning theory, certain cues such as
specific internal states (e.g., stress) or people/places/things become strongly associ-
ated with the addictive behavior. Exposure to these cues can come to trigger a con-
ditioned craving to use the substance. Cue exposure involves repeatedly exposing
clients to cues that typically trigger their substance use, and not allowing clients
to engage in substance use in response to the resultant urges. Clients are taught
to cope with these conditioned urges without the use of substances. The repeated
exposure should reduce the strength of the urges elicited in response to future cues.
While systematic reviews conclude that we lack consistent positive evidence of the

-- 260 of 498 --

240 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
effectiveness of cue exposure in the treatment of substance use disorders generally
(e.g., Conklin & Tiffany, 2002), a recent meta-analysis comparing cue exposure to
other active treatments for alcohol use disorder did suggest superiority of cue expo-
sure on total drinking and latency to relapse. Results also suggested that cue expo-
sure has the best effects when combined with skills training for managing urges
(Mellentin et al., 2017).
More recent developments in CBT for addictive disorders include components
involving mindful awareness and acceptance. For example, clients are taught skills
in “urge surfing”—noticing and accepting urges to engage in the addictive behavior,
without fighting or giving in to the urges, and learning to let them pass (Witkiewitz,
Marlatt, & Walker, 2005). One trial compared urge surfing to urge suppression for
managing cigarette cravings during exposure to smoking cues. Both strategies were
associated with reductions in amount of smoking and increases in self-efficacy for
coping with smoking urges from pre- to posttreatment, but only urge surfing was
associated with improvements in negative affect (Rogojanski, Vettese, & Antony,
2011). Recent meta-analyses show that such mindfulness-based approaches are
highly effective in reducing frequency and quantity of substance misuse, craving,
substance-related problems and stress severity, and in increasing abstinence rates
(Korecki, Schwebel, Votaw, & Witkiewitz, 2020; Li, Howard, Garland, McGovern, &
Lazar, 2017).
The treatment goal in CBT is selected by the client in collaboration with the
therapist, be it abstinence or controlled use (Sobell & Sobell, 1993). Both treatment
goals appear to be equally effective, at least in the treatment of problem drinking
(Walters, 2000). However, neither can be considered a cure given the high relapse
rates noted earlier.
Given these high relapse rates, CBT for addictive disorders typically includes
techniques focused on “relapse prevention” (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985). “Lapses”—
times when the individual striving for abstinence uses the drug or gambles, or when
the person striving for controlled use engages in heavy substance use or excessive
gambling—are dealt with as occurrences from which the person can recover (Hen-
dershot, Witkiewitz, George, & Marlatt, 2011). People undergoing CBT for an addic-
tive disorder are encouraged to see the lapse as a learning experience rather than
as the beginning of an inevitable road to relapse (Hodgins, Currie, el-Guebaly, &
Diskin, 2007; Witkiewitz et al., 2005).
Another recent development in CBT for addictive disorders stems from dual-
process models of addiction (Stacy & Wiers, 2010), which contend that in addition to
focusing on altering controlled cognitive processes such as expectancies, we need to
retrain automatic associations and automatic attentional biases that independently
drive addictive behaviors. For example, an individual who has a cannabis use dis-
order and automatically associates cannabis with approach behavior can be taught,
through repeated computerized cognitive retraining, to instead automatically asso-
ciate cannabis with avoidance (Sherman, Baker, Squeglia, & McRae-Clark, 2018).
Or a person with a gambling disorder could be taught to attend away from, rather
than toward, gambling cues. While cognitive retraining is potentially effective as
an adjunctive treatment for addictive disorders (Gladwin, Wiers, & Wiers, 2016), a
recent systematic review suggests that there is more evidence for therapeutic benefits
of approach bias modification than for attentional bias modification in alcohol use
disorder (Batschelet, Stein, Tschuemperlin, Soravia, & Moggi, 2020).

-- 261 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	241
Social Context Interventions
Given the important role of sociocultural factors in addictive disorders, another
trend in treatment of addictions involves recognition of how clients’ broader social
community, including friends’ and family members’ behaviors and communication
styles, contributes to the development and maintenance of their addictive behav-
iors. Instead, clients’ social contexts can be used to advantage in motivating and
promoting change in their addictive behaviors (Stewart & Conrod, 2005). In family
therapy with adolescent substance misusers, family attitudes and practices relative
to substance use are a treatment target (Kaminer & Slesnick, 2006). As another exam-
ple, communication difficulties that contribute to problematic beliefs that maintain
addictive behaviors are a therapy target in a couple therapy approach for alcohol
use disorder based on behavioral principles (Fals-Stewart, O’Farrell, Birchler, Cor-
dova, & Kelley, 2005) and in a couple therapy approach for gambling disorder based
on family therapy principles (Lee & Awosoga, 2015). Family members may also be
taught helpful ways to assist clients with treatment compliance (e.g., taking their
medications to treat their addictive disorder; Fals-Stewart et al., 2005). Similarly,
in the community reinforcement approach (Meyers, Villanueva, & Smith, 2005), a
spouse, friend, or relative who is not a substance misuser is recruited to participate
in relationship therapy to help substance-misusing clients improve their relation-
ship skills. In addition, new recreational and social activities are used to help the
client replace substance use with socially reinforcing activities (Meyers et al., 2005).
Similarly, network therapy involves clients’ family members and close friends in the
treatment process (Galanter, 2015).
Social context is also a very important component of the most popular model
for the treatment of substance abuse, namely, the 12-step approach first developed
by AA, and now extended to other addictive disorders (e.g., Narcotics Anonymous
[NA], GA; see Schuler et al., 2016). Specifically, the social support provided through
group meetings may be one important key to the efficacy of this approach (Barlow,
Durand, Stewart, & Lalumiere, 2012). According to Kelly, Magill, and Stout (2009),
AA’s efficacy may also stem from the ability of the group process to improve clients’
coping skills, motivation to change, and self-efficacy. However, the reliance of the
12-step approach on spirituality and its adoption of a disease model of addiction
can be stumbling blocks for many. Thus, while AA and other 12-step treatments
such as NA and GA can be very helpful for many (Donovan, Ingalsbe, Benbow, &
Daley, 2013), other treatments are needed for the large numbers of clients who do not
respond to this approach (Barlow et al., 2012).
Treatment Matching in Psychotherapy
Given the marked heterogeneity in substance-misusing clients and the unique path-
ways to addictive disorders highlighted at the outset of this chapter, recent efforts
have been made to match treatments to the particular needs of individual clients.
One such “treatment matching” approach focused on matching on substance-
abusing clients’ personality traits and reasons for substance use (Conrod, Stewart,
et al., 2000). The personality profiles targeted in this approach were the four we dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter as motivating substance use, but for different reasons:
anxiety sensitivity, hopelessness, impulsivity, and sensation seeking. Motivational

-- 262 of 498 --

242 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
enhancement and CBT techniques were used to create specific brief treatments for
each type of substance misuser. Sensation seekers were taught skills to help them
meet their needs for excitement in less risky ways than via substance misuse, whereas
anxiety-sensitive substance misusers were taught cognitive and behavioral skills
that manage anxiety better than substance misuse. Twenty years ago, in the first
study to test this approach, adult women substance abusers recruited from the com-
munity were randomly assigned to receive one of the following three interventions:
(1) a motivation-matched intervention involving personality-specific motivational
and coping skills training (e.g., an anxiety-sensitive person, receiving an interven-
tion specifically designed for anxiety-sensitive substance abusers); (2) a motivation-
mismatched intervention targeting a theoretically different personality profile (e.g.,
an anxiety-sensitive substance abuser receiving an intervention designed for a sen-
sation seeker); or (3) a motivational control intervention in which clients watched
a film about substance misuse, then had a supportive discussion with a therapist.
At 6-month follow-up, only the matched intervention was superior to the motiva-
tional control in reducing the frequency and severity of problematic substance use
(Conrod, Stewart, et al., 2000). This approach also has been shown to be effective
in reducing alcohol use and misuse in young people (Conrod, Stewart, Comeau,
& Maclean, 2006) and to delay the onset of cannabis use (Mahu, Doucet, O’Leary-
Barrett, & Conrod, 2015) when delivered in a group context in schools. Moreover,
this approach shows promise in treating symptoms of several mental health dis-
orders that are commonly comorbid with substance use disorders (Castellanos &
Conrod, 2006) and in treating gambling disorder (M. Stewart et al., 2016). These
results indicate potential for treatment-matching approaches that match clients to
interventions at the level of personality and motivational risk factors for addictive
behaviors (Barlow et al., 2012).
Biological Treatments
In addition to the myriad psychosocial treatments for addictive disorders discussed
so far, numerous biological approaches are also available. Some of the available med-
ications block the pleasurable effects of the drug, while others create an aversive
reaction when the drug is ingested. We look next at a few commonly used medica-
tions in the treatment of various forms of addictive disorder.
Aversive Treatment
One method for treating people with substance use disorders is for the clinician
to administer a drug that makes ingestion of the misused substance very unpleas-
ant. This leads to aversive learning and avoidance of the abused substance by the
client. The best-known example of this type of medication is disulfiram, which
has been available for over 60 years in treating alcohol use disorder (Krampe &
Ehrenreich, 2010). Disulfiram prevents the breakdown of a by-product of alcohol—
acetaldehyde—if the client with alcohol use disorder should consume alcohol. The
resulting buildup of acetaldehyde causes the patient to experience nausea, vomiting,
and elevated respiration and heart rate (Pedersen, Askgaard, Jorgensen, Oppedal, &
Tonnesen, 2018). Supervised treatment with disulfiram has some effect on short-term

-- 263 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	243
abstinence and assists with relapse prevention (Jorgensen, Pedersen, & Tonnesen,
2011). Compliance issues are a major concern, however (see Barlow et al., 2012). Some
of the psychosocial approaches discussed earlier, such as motivational interviewing
or behavioral couple therapy, can help clients increase their internal or external moti-
vations to remain compliant with their medication regimen.
Antagonist Treatments
Earlier we discussed how many addictive behaviors produce pleasurable effects (e.g.,
euphoria) through their effects on the brain, for example, via the dopamine reward
system. One class of medication for the treatment of some addictive disorders, called
“antagonists,” exerts its therapeutic actions by blocking or canceling out these plea-
surable effects (Barlow et al., 2012). A well-known example is the opiate antagonist
naltrexone, which has been investigated in the treatment of both alcohol use and
gambling disorders. It prevents alcohol’s positive reinforcing effects by blocking the
release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens (Stewart, Collins, Blackburn, Ellery,
& Klein, 2005). Research shows that naltrexone blocks alcohol-induced pleasurable
stimulation in human participants (Peterson, Conrod, Vassileva, Gianoulakis, &
Pihl, 2006). A double-blind, placebo-controlled study showed that naltrexone may
also be effective in treating gambling disorder (Kim, Grant, Adson, & Shin, 2001).
Overall, antagonist drugs such as naltrexone help some individuals with addictive
disorders, but they are best used as an adjunct to effective psychotherapeutic tech-
niques (Barlow et al., 2012).
Agonist Substitution
Another method for treating substance use disorders with medication is to offer the
patient a medication that has a similar chemical makeup to the misused drug but is
safer in terms of its overall negative consequences. This is known as “agonist sub-
stitution.” Two well-known examples are nicotine replacement therapy in the treat-
ment of cigarette smoking and methadone maintenance therapy in the treatment of
opiate use disorder. Agonist substitution can be considered a form of “harm reduc-
tion” treatment (Logan & Marlatt, 2010; Stancliff et al., 2012) because it involves trad-
ing a more harmful behavior for a much less harmful alternative.
With nicotine replacement therapy, the addictive drug in the tobacco smoke (nic-
otine) is provided to the client in the form of gum or a patch. This can be considered a
harm reduction treatment because, although nicotine itself can have harmful effects
(e.g., increased blood pressure), the nicotine gum and patch lack the carcinogens
contained in cigarette smoke. Doses are decreased over time to reduce nicotine with-
drawal. Both nicotine replacement therapy gum and patches have been shown to be
successful in helping people quit smoking (Hatsukami et al., 2000; Tiffany, Cox, &
Elash, 2000). However, it should be used in combination with a comprehensive psy-
chosocial treatment program because a substantial proportion of smokers relapse to
smoking after they discontinue nicotine replacement therapy. When combined with
physical exercise, nicotine replacement therapy may be beneficial in helping people
not only quit smoking but also prevent weight gain following smoking cessation
(Prappavessis et al., 2007).

-- 264 of 498 --

244 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
A more controversial form of harm reduction treatment for addiction to tobacco
smoking is the use of e-cigarettes or “vaping.” While some research suggests that
e-cigarettes can be helpful as a harm reduction strategy for supporting smoking
relapse prevention (Notley, Ward, Dawkins, & Holland, 2018), others argue that while
vaping may be less harmful than tobacco smoking, it still has substantial risks (Al-
Hamdani, 2014). These dangers include high addiction potential, raising blood pres-
sure, which can increase risk for heart attack, serious consequences for lung function
(e.g., e-cigarette- or vaping-associated lung injury), and serving as an attractive new
route into nicotine use for young people.
Methadone, an opioid receptor agonist with a relatively long half-life (Eap,
Buclin, & Baumann, 2002), is helpful in the treatment of opioid use disorder because
high doses alleviate opiate cravings and withdrawal symptoms. Moreover, when
people take methadone, cross-tolerance to other opiates develops. Therefore, cli-
ents cannot experience euphoria if they administer the misused opiate while tak-
ing methadone, since methadone already occupies the receptors (Epstein, Renner,
Ciraulo, Knapp, & Jaffe, 2005; McKim, 2006). Methadone thus provides negative
reinforcement for remaining abstinent (by alleviating aversive opioid withdrawal
symptoms) and prevents positive reinforcement (by preventing euphoria if the cli-
ent uses other opiates while taking the medication). When methadone is combined
with psychotherapy, not only do many clients reduce their use of opioids such as
heroin, but they also reduce other harmful effects. For example, methadone is asso-
ciated with decreased criminality (as patients are not engaging in as much crime
to procure drugs) and decreased risk for HIV/AIDS and hepatitis (through reduced
exposure to unsafe injection practices; Millson et al., 2007). On the negative side,
many methadone clients continue to misuse other drugs (Fulton, Barrett, Stewart, &
MacIsaac, 2012; Mahu et al., 2019), and some remain addicted to methadone for the
rest of their lives. But most professionals agree that this is a positive harm reduc-
tion outcome, since methadone has far fewer negative consequences than heroin or
fentanyl.
While methadone is a widely used medical treatment for opioid use disorder
(Krambeer, von McKnelly, Gabrielli, & Penick, 2001), recent guidelines recommend
buprenorphine–naloxone above methadone (Bruneau et al., 2018). Like methadone,
buprenorphine is an opioid agonist that helps treat withdrawal and cravings. Nal-
oxone is an opioid antagonist that is added to the buprenorphine to prevent people
from injecting their medication. Buprenorphine–naloxone is safer than methadone in
terms of overdose risk. Moreover, take-home dosing can happen more quickly with
buprenorphine–naloxone than with methadone, as the latter requires a substantial
period of daily witnessed ingestion at the clinic or pharmacy before clients are per-
mitted to take their medication home (Bruneau et al., 2018). Thus, buprenorphine–
naloxone gives the client autonomy in their treatment more quickly.
Other Medications
Another medication for the treatment of alcohol use disorder that does not readily
fall into any of the categories discussed earlier is acamprosate. It exerts its therapeu-
tic effects via impact on the GABA and glutamate neurotransmitter systems (Gor-
dis, 2000) by modulating negative reinforcement (withdrawal). A meta-analysis of

-- 265 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	245
placebo-controlled trials showed acamprosate to be superior to placebo in both alco-
hol abstinence rates and cumulative days abstinent (Dranitsaris, Selby, & Negrete,
2009).
Additionally, the recent epigenetic discoveries discussed earlier open the door
to better targeting medications for addictions to genes and biochemical pathways
and their synaptic circuit consequences that underlie relapse and craving. It might
also be possible to target medications toward lasting epigenetic mechanisms that
underlie lifelong changes in addiction vulnerability. While there are encouraging
findings in animal models (Egervani, Ciccocioppo, Jentsch, & Hurd, 2017; Massart
et al., 2015; Walker & Nestler, 2018), many problems need to be resolved before they
would be useful for treatment in humans (Nestler & Luscher, 2019).
Treatment Matching in Pharmacotherapy
While various pharmacotherapies are effective in the treatment of addictive disor-
ders, meta-analyses reveal only modest effects for these various approaches (Mann
& Hermann, 2010). For example, in the treatment of alcohol use disorder, both nal-
trexone and acamprosate are effective relative to placebo, but both have relatively
modest effects (Dranitsaris et al., 2009). This may be because these drugs are tested in
heterogeneous samples, in which the assumption that “one [treatment] size fits all” is
simply untenable (Mann & Hermann, 2010). European researchers tested the possi-
bility that naltrexone, which blocks the positively reinforcing effects of alcohol, may
work best for a subtype of alcohol use disorder patient that shows greater reactivity
to pictures of alcohol cues. In a randomized controlled trial called Project PREDICT—
comparing naltrexone to acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol use disorder (Mann
et al., 2009)—using fMRI, researchers identified clients with elevated pretreatment
cue reactivity to alcohol versus neutral control images in the ventral striatum. As
hypothesized, these highly alcohol cue-reactive clients showed superior treatment
response to naltrexone versus acamprosate in terms of time to first severe relapse
(Mann et al., 2014). This suggests that assessing individual differences in brain-based
cue reactivity responses may help clinicians in identifying clients most likely to ben-
efit from naltrexone.
CONCLUSION
To conclude this chapter, we now consider seven principles of change that emerge
from our literature review. These are intended to serve as a guide to helping clini-
cians of different orientations focus on important issues in the treatment of clients
with addictive disorders.
First, it is essential to motivate the client to desire to undertake the challenges
necessary to overcome the addictive disorder. A client who attends an assessment
session because their spouse has been nagging them to go but sees no need to change
their gambling habits will need to develop a stronger motivation for change to over-
come their gambling disorder. Motivational enhancement can be helpful for clients
undergoing pharmacotherapy for an addiction by motivating them to stick to the
prescription regimen (Miller & Rollnick, 2002).

-- 266 of 498 --

246 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Second is the importance of challenging expectancies (decreasing positive out-
come expectancies and increasing self-efficacy expectancies; Marlatt & Gordon,
1985). For example, teenage problem drinkers need to develop strong drink refusal
self-efficacy expectancies to equip them for dealing with peer pressure to use alco-
hol. Third, the successful treatment of addictive disorders involves helping clients
develop more adaptive coping skills for dealing with their own individual triggers
to engage in the addictive behavior (Monti et al., 2002). For some, this may involve
stress management training, while for others the focus may be on increasing alterna-
tive pleasant activities. Fourth, urges should be a target of intervention (Sinha, 2007),
either through the use of cue exposure in the case of alcohol (Monti et al., 2002) or
through newer acceptance-based and mindfulness techniques such as “urge surf-
ing” (Witkiewitz et al., 2005).
Fifth, there should be recognition of and planning for the high rates of relapse
that are so characteristic of the addictive disorders. Specifically, traditional and newer
mindfulness-based relapse prevention strategies (Witkiewitz et al., 2005) should be a
component of treatment planning to ensure that the inevitable lapse does not prog-
ress into a full-scale relapse. Sixth, it is crucial to consider the client’s broader social
context within the treatment (Stewart & Conrod, 2005) in terms of both providing
social support for change and reducing modeling influences. Such social-contextual
factors can be directly incorporated into the treatment by involving family members
or supportive peers in the therapy (e.g., as in family therapy, couple therapy, network
therapy, or 12-step facilitation) or via recommending that clients in individual treat-
ment garner social support in the recovery process. Social support can be helpful
even in pharmacotherapy for addictive disorders (e.g., having the spouse involved
in positively assisting with medication compliance via behavioral couple therapy;
Fals-Stewart et al., 2005).
The seventh and final principle of change in the treatment of addictive disorders
involves the importance of matching the intervention to the underlying pathway to
addiction involved. For example, an anxiety-prone individual who is misusing sub-
stances to manage anxiety has very different treatment needs than a sensation seeker
who is misusing substances for the excitement and enjoyable high. We believe that
this principle applies as much to pharmacotherapy selection as to the selection of
techniques in psychosocial treatments such as CBT. Just as appropriate matching of
client subtypes to treatments (e.g., Conrod, Stewart, et al., 2000; M. Stewart et al., 2016)
has been shown to improve efficacy of psychosocial interventions, efficacious phar-
macotherapies for those with addictive disorders are likely to be advanced substan-
tially by a more “personalized medicine” approach in which the specific pathway to
addiction is considered in medication selection for a given patient (Mann et al., 2014).
REFERENCES
Abu Shakra, M., Leyton, M., Moghnieh, H., Pruessner, J., Dagher, A., & Pihl, R. (2018). Neu-
robiological correlates and predictors of two distinct personality trait pathways to esca-
lated alcohol use. EBioMedicine, 27, 86–93.
Al-Hamdani, M. (2014). A short note on e-cigarette issues: Harm reduction, re-normalization,
and big tobacco. Journal of Public Health Policy, 35, 132–134.

-- 267 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	247
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Amodeo, M., Lundgren, L., Cohen, A., Rose, D., Chassler, D., Beltrame, C., & D’Ippoliot, M.
(2011). Barriers to implementing evidence-based practices in addiction treatment pro-
grams: Comparing staff reports on motivational interviewing, adolescent community
reinforcement approach, assertive community treatment, and cognitive behavioral ther-
apy. Evaluation and Program Planning, 34, 382–389.
Arkowitz, H., & Westra, H. A. (2004). Motivational interviewing as an adjunct to cognitive
behavioral therapy for depression and anxiety. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 18,
337–350.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Barlow, D. H., Durand, V. M., Stewart, S. H., & Lalumiere, M. (2012). Abnormal psychology: An
integrative approach (4th ed.). Toronto: Nelson.
Barrett, S., Boileau, I., Okker, J., Pihl, R. O., & Dagher, A. (2004). The hedonic response to ciga-
rette smoking is proportional to dopamine release in the human striatum as measured
by positron emission tomography and [11C]raclopride. Synapse, 54, 65–71.
Batschelet, H. M., Stein, M., Tschuemperlin, R. M., Soravia, L. M., & Moggi, F. (2020). Alcohol-
specific computerized interventions to alter cognitive biases: A systematic review of
effects on experimental tasks, drinking behavior, and neuronal activation. Frontiers in
Psychiatry, 10, 871.
Becker, J. B., & Chartoff, E. (2019). Sex differences in neural mechanisms mediating reward
and addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology, 44, 166–183.
Black, D. W., & Shaw, M. (2019). The epidemiology of gambling disorder. In A. Heinz, N.
Romanczuk-Seiferth, & M. N. Potenza (Eds.), Gambling disorder (pp. 29–48). New York:
Springer.
Boardman, J. D., Blalock, C. L., & Pampel, F. C. (2010). Trends in the genetic influences on
smoking. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 51, 108–123.
Boffo, M., Smits, R., Salmon, J. O., Cowie, M. E., de Jong, D. T. H. A., Salemink, E., . . . . Wiers,
R. W. (2018). Luck, come here!: Automatic approach tendencies toward gambling cues in
moderate- to high-risk gamblers. Addiction, 113, 289–298.
Bornovalova, M. A., Gratz, K. L., Daughters, S. B., Hunt, E. D., & Lejuez, C. W. (2012). Initial
RCT of a distress tolerance treatment for individuals with substance use disorders. Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 122, 70–76.
Bruneau, J., Ahamad, K., Goyer, M.-E., Poulin, G., Selby, P., Fischer, B., . . . Wood, E. (2018).
Management of opioid use disorders: A national practice guideline. Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 190, E247–E257.
Brunelle, C., & Pihl, R. O. (2007). Effects of conditioned reward and non-reward cues on the
heart rate response to alcohol intoxication in male social drinkers. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 31, 383–389.
Burke, B. L., Arkowitz, H., & Menchola, M. (2003). The efficacy of motivational interviewing:
A meta-analysis of controlled clinical traits. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
71, 843–861.
Bux, D. A., & Irwin, T. W. (2006). Combining motivational interviewing and cognitive behav-
ioral skills training for the treatment of crystal methamphetamine abuse/dependence.
Journal of Gay and Lesbian Psychotherapy, 10, 143–152.
Campbell, J. C., Szumlinski, K. K., & Kippin, T. E. (2009). Contribution of early environmental
stress to alcoholism vulnerability. Alcohol, 43, 547–554.
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I., . . . Poulton, R. (2002). Role of geno-
type in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297, 851–854.
Castellanos, N., & Conrod, P. J. (2006). Brief interventions targeting personality risk factors

-- 268 of 498 --

248 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
for adolescent substance misuse reduce depression, panic, and risk-taking behaviors.
Journal of Mental Health, 15, 645–658.
Chinneck, A., Thompson, K., Mahu, I. T., Davis-MacNevin, O., Dobson, K., & Stewart, S. H.
(2018). Personality and prescription drug use and misuse among first year undergradu-
ates. Addictive Behaviors, 87, 122–130.
Cinciripini, P. M., Karam-Hage, M., Kypriotakis, G., Robinson, J. D., Rabius, V., Beneventi,
D., . . . Blalock, J. A. (2019). Association of a comprehensive smoking cessation program
with smoking abstinence among patients with cancer. JAMA Network Open, 2, Article
e1912251.
Collier, R. (2008). Gambling treatment options: A roll of the dice. Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 179, 127–128.
Conklin, C. A., & Tiffany, S. T. (2002). Applying extension research and theory to cue exposure
addictive treatments. Addiction, 97, 155–167.
Connor, J. P., George, S. M., Gullo, M. J., Kelly, A. B., & Young, R. M. (2011). A prospective
study of alcohol expectancies and self-efficacy as predictors of young adolescent alcohol
misuse. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 46, 161–169.
Conrod, P., Pihl, R. O., Stewart, S., & Dongier, M. (2000). Validation of a system of classifying
female substance abusers on the basis of personality and motivational risk factors for
substance abuse. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 14, 243–256.
Conrod, P. J., Stewart, S. H., Comeau, M. N., & Maclean, M. (2006). Efficacy of cognitive behav-
ioral interventions targeting personality risk factors for youth alcohol misuse. Journal of
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 35, 550–563.
Conrod, P. J., Stewart, S. H., Pihl, R. O., Côté, S., Fontaine, V., & Dongier, M. (2000). Efficacy
of brief coping skills interventions that match different personality profiles of female
substance abusers. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 14, 231–242.
Dai, H., & Leventhal, A. M. (2019). Prevalence of e-cigarette use among adults in the United
States, 2014–2018. Journal of the American Medical Association, 322(18), 1824–1827.
Darredeau, C., Barrett, S., Jardin, B., & Pihl, R. O. (2007). Patterns and predictors of medication
compliance, diversion, and misuse in adult prescribed methylphenidate users. Human
Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental, 22, 529–536.
Dash, G. F., Slutske, W. S., Martin, N. G., Statham, D. J., Agrawal, A., & Lynskey, M. T. (2019).
Big Five personality traits and alcohol, nicotine, cannabis, and gambling disorder comor-
bidity. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 33(4), 420–429.
Di Forti, M., Quattrone, D., Freeman, T. P., Tripoli, G., Gayer-Anderson, C., Quigley, H., . . .
van der Ven, E. (2019). The contribution of cannabis use to variation in the incidence
of psychotic disorder across Europe (EU-GEI): A multicentre case– control study. Lancet
Psychiatry, 6(5), 427–436.
Donovan, D. M., Ingalsbe, M. H., Benbow, J., & Daley, D. C. (2013). 12-step interventions and
mutual support programs for substance use disorders: An overview. Social Work and Pub-
lic Health, 28, 313–332.
Donovan, D. M., Kadden, R. M., DiClemente, C. C., & Carroll, K. M. (2002). Client satisfac-
tion with three therapies in the treatment of alcohol dependence: Results from Project
MATCH. American Journal on Addiction, 11, 291–307.
Dranitsaris, G., Selby, P., & Negrete, J. C. (2009). Meta-analyses of placebo-controlled tri-
als of acamprosate for the treatment of alcohol dependence: Impact of the combined
pharmacotherapies and behavior interventions study. Journal of Addiction Medicine, 3,
74–82.
Dutra, L., Stathopoulou, G., Basden, S. C., Leyro, T. M., Powers, M. B., & Otto, M. W. (2008). A
meta-analytic review of psychosocial interventions for substance use disorders. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 179–187.
Eap, C. B., Buclin, T., & Baumann, P. (2002). Interindividual variability of clinical

-- 269 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	249
pharmacokinetics of methadone: Implications for the treatment of opioid dependence.
Clinical Pharmacokinetics, 41, 1153–1193.
Egervani, G., Ciccocioppo, R., Jentsch, J. D., & Hurd, Y. L. (2017). Shaping vulnerability to
addiction: The contributions of behavior, neural circuits, and molecular mechanisms.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 85, 117–125.
Epstein, S., Renner, J. A., Ciraulo, D. A., Knapp, C. M., & Jaffe, J. H. (2005). Opioids. In H.
R. Kranzler & D. A. Ciraulo (Eds.), Clinical manual of addiction psychopharmacology
(pp. 55–110). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Falk, D., Hsiao-Ye, Y., & Hiller-Sturmhöfel, S. (2008). An epidemiological analysis of co-
occurring alcohol and drug use and disorders: Findings from the National Epidemio-
logic Survey of Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC). Alcoholism Research and
Health, 31, 100–110.
Fals-Stewart, W., O’Farrell, T. J., Birchler, G. R., Cordova, J., & Kelley, M. L. (2005). Behavioral
couples therapy for alcoholism and drug abuse: Where we’ve been, where we are, and
where we’re going. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 229–246.
Ferguson, D., Boden, J., & Harwood, J. (2009). Tests of causal links between alcohol abuse or
dependence and major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 260–266.
Field, M., & Cox, W. M. (2008). Attentional bias in addictive behaviors: A review of its develop-
ment, causes, and consequences. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 97, 1–20.
Fulton, H. G., Barrett, S. P., Stewart, S. H., & MacIsaac, C. (2012). Prescription opioid misuse:
Characteristics of earliest and most recent memory of hydromorphone use. Journal of
Addiction Medicine, 6, 137–144.
Galanter, M. (2015). Network therapy. In M. Galanter, H. D. Kleber, & K. T. Brady (Eds.), The
American Psychiatric Publishing textbook of substance abuse treatment (5th ed., pp. 441–461).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Gladwin, T. E., Wiers, C. E., & Wiers, R. W. (2016). Cognitive neuroscience of cognitive retrain-
ing for addiction medicine: From mediating mechanisms to questions of efficacy. Prog-
ress in Brain Research, 224, 323–344.
Glahn, D., Lovallo, W., & Fox, P. (2007). Reduced amygdala activation in young adults at high
risk of alcoholism: Studies from the Oklahoma Family Health Patterns Project. Biological
Psychiatry, 61, 1306–1309.
Gonzalez, V. M., Schmitz, J. M., & DeLaune, K. A. (2006). The role of homework in cognitive-
behavioral therapy for cocaine dependence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
74, 633–637.
Gordis, E. (2000). Research refines alcohol treatment options. Alcohol Research and Health, 24,
53–61.
Grant, B. F. (2014). Source and accuracy statement: National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions-III (NESARC-III). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism.
Grant, B. F., Goldstein, R. B., Saha, T. D., Chou, S. P., Jung, J., Zhang, H., . . . Hasin, D. S. (2015).
Epidemiology of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder results from the National Epidemiologic
Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions III. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 757–766.
Griswold, M. G., Fullman, N., Hawley, C., Arian, N., Zimsen, S. R. M., Tymeson, H. D., . . .
Gakidou, E. (2018). Alcohol use and burden for 195 countries and territories, 1990–2016:
A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet, 392, 1015–1035.
Gutwinski, S., Heinz, A. J., & Heinz, A. (2018). Alcohol-related aggression and violence. In A.
R. Beech, A. J. Carter, R. E. Mann, & P. Rotshtein (Eds.), The Wiley Blackwell handbook of
forensic neuroscience (Vols. 1–2, pp. 455–480). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hasin, D. S., Sarvet, A. L., Meyers, J. L., Saha, T. D., Ruan, W. J., Stohl, M., & Grant, B. F. (2018).
Epidemiology of adult DSM-5 major depressive disorder and its specifiers in the United
States. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 336–346.

-- 270 of 498 --

250 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Hatsukami, D. K., Grillo, M., Boyle, R., Allen, S., Jensen, J., Bliss, R., & Brown, S. (2000). Treat-
ment of spit tobacco users with transdermal nicotine system and mint snuff. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 241–249.
Heitzig, M., Nigg, J., Yau, W., Zubita, J., & Zucker, R. (2008). Affective circuitry and risk for
alcoholism in late adolescence: Differences in fronto-striatal responses between vul-
nerable and resilient children of alcoholic parents. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 32, 414–426.
Helzer, J., & Pryzbeck, T. (1988). The occurrence of alcoholism with other psychiatric disorders
in the general population and its impact on treatment. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 49,
219–224.
Hendershot, C., Witkiewitz, K., George, W. H., & Marlatt, G. A. (2011). Relapse prevention for
addictive behaviors. Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 6, Article 17.
Hodgins, D. C., Currie, S. R., el-Guebaly, N., & Diskin, K. M. (2007). Does providing extended
relapse prevention bibliotherapy to problem gamblers improve outcome? Journal of Gam-
bling Studies, 23, 41–54.
Hughes, A., Sathe, N., & Spagnola, K. (2009). State estimates of substance use from the 2006–
2007 National Surveys on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH Series H-35, HHS Pub. No. SMA
09-4362). Rockville, MD: Office of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration.
Jones, C. M., Einstein, E. B., & Compton, W. M. (2018). Changes in synthetic opioid involve-
ment in drug overdose deaths in the United States, 2010–2016. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 319, 1819–1821.
Jorgensen, C., Pedersen, B., & Tonnesen, H. (2011). The efficacy of disulfiram for the treatment
of alcohol use disorders. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 35, 1749–1758.
Kalda, A., & Zharkovsky, A. (2015). Epigenetic mechanisms of psychostimulant-induced
addiction. International Review of Neurobiology, 120, 85–105.
Kaminer, Y., & Slesnick, N. (2006). Evidence-based cognitive-behavioral and family therapies
for adolescent alcohol and other substance use disorders. In M. Galanter (Ed.), Alcohol
problems in adolescents and young adults: Epidemiology, neurobiology, prevention, and treatment
(pp. 383–405). New York: Springer.
Kehayes, I.-L., Mackinnon, S. P., Sherry, S. B., Leonard, K. E., & Stewart, S. H. (2019). Drink-
ing motives and drinking behaviors in romantic couples: A longitudinal actor–partner
interdependence model. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 33, 208–220.
Kelly, J. F., Magill, M., & Stout, R. L. (2009). How do people recover from alcohol dependence?:
A systematic review of the research on mechanisms of behavior change in Alcoholics
Anonymous. Addiction Research and Theory, 17, 236–259.
Kim, S. W., Grant, J. E., Adson, D. E., & Shin, Y. C. (2001). Double blind naltrexone and placebo
comparison study in the treatment of pathological gambling. Biological Psychiatry, 49,
914–921.
Korecki, J. R., Schwebel, F. J., Votaw, V. R., & Witkiewitz, K. (2020). Mindfulness-based pro-
grams for substance use disorders: A systematic review of manualized treatments. Sub-
stance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 15, 51.
Krambeer, L. L., von McKnelly, W., Jr., Gabrielli, W. R., Jr., & Penick, E. C. (2001). Methadone
therapy for opioid dependence. American Family Physician, 15, 2404–2410.
Krampe, H., & Ehrenreich, H. (2010). Supervised disulfiram as adjunct to psychotherapy in
alcoholism treatment. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 16, 2076–2090.
Kyzar, E. J., Zhang, H., & Pandey, S. C. (2019). Adolescent alcohol exposure epigenetically sup-
presses amygdala and enhances RNA expression to confer adult anxiety susceptibility.
Biological Psychiatry, 85, 904–914.
Lee, B. K., & Awosoga, O. (2015). Congruence couple therapy for pathological gambling: A
pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Gambling Studies, 31, 1047–1068.

-- 271 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	251
Leyton, M. (2007). Conditioned and sensitized responses to stimulant drugs in humans. Prog-
ress in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 31, 1601–1613.
Li, W., Howard, M. O., Garland, E. L., McGovern, P., & Lazar, M. (2017). Mindfulness treat-
ment for substance use: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Substance
Abuse Treatment, 75, 62–96.
Lipari, R. N., Park-Lee, E., & Van Horn, S. (2016). America’s need for and receipt of substance use
treatment in 2015: The CBHSQ report. Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health Statis-
tics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Liu, M., Jiang, Y., Wedow, R., Li, Y., Brazel, D. M., Chen, F., . . . Vrieze, S. (2019). Association
studies of up to 1.2 million individuals yield new insights into the genetic etiology of
tobacco and alcohol use. Nature Genetics, 51, 237–244.
Logan, D. E., & Marlatt, G. A. (2010). Harm reduction therapy: A practice-friendly review of
research. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 66, 201–214.
MacAndrew, C., & Edgerton, R. (1969). Drunken comportment: A social explanation. Chicago:
Aldine.
Mackey, S., Allgaier, N., Chaarani, B., Spechler, P., Orr, C., Bunn, J., . . . Garavan, H. (2019).
Mega-analysis of gray matter volume in substance dependence: General and substance-
specific regional effects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 119–128.
MacLaren, V. V., Harrigan, K. A., & Dixon, M. (2012). Gambling motives and symptoms of
problem gambling in frequent slots players. Journal of Gambling Issues, 27, 1–13.
Mahu, I. T., Conrod, P. J., Barrett, S. P., Sako, A., Swansburg, J., Laurence, M., . . . Stewart,
S. H. (2019). Specificity of personality relationships to particular forms of concurrent
substance use among opiate agonist therapy clients. Addictive Behaviors, 98, Article
106056.
Mahu, I. T., Doucet, C., O’Leary-Barrett, M., & Conrod, P. J. (2015). Can cannabis use be pre-
vented by targeting personality risk in schools?: Twenty-four-month outcome of the
Adventure trial on cannabis use: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. Addiction, 110,
1625–1633.
Mann, K., & Hermann, D. (2010). Individualized treatment in alcohol dependent patients.
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 260(Suppl. 2), S116–S120.
Mann, K., Kiefer, F., Smolka, M., Gann, H., Wellek, S., Heinz, A., & the PREDICT Study
Research Team. (2009). Searching for responders to acamprosate and naltrexone in alco-
holism treatment: Rationale and design of the Predict Study. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 33, 674–683.
Mann, K., Vollstadt-Klein, S., Reinhard, I., Lemenager, T., Fauth-Bunher, M., Hermann, D., . . .
Smolka, M. N. (2014). Predicting naltrexone response in alcohol-dependent patients: The
contribution of functional magnetic resonance imaging. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experi-
mental Research, 38, 2754–2762.
Marczinski, C. A., & Fillmore, M. T. (2014). Energy drinks mixed with alcohol: What are the
risks? Nutrition Reviews, 72, 98–107.
Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (Eds.). (1985). Relapse prevention. New York: Guilford Press.
Martinotti, G., Sarchione, F., Fiori, F., Corbo, M., Poloni, N., Rarricone, I., . . . Giannatonio, M.
(2017). Gambling disorder and suicide: An overview of the associated comorbidity and
clinical characteristics. International Journal of High-Risk Behavior and Addiction, 6, Article
e30827.
Massart, R., Barnea, R., Dikshtein, Y., Suderman, M., Meir, O., Hallett, M., . . . Yadid, G. (2015).
Role of DNA methylation in the nucleus accumbens in incubation of cocaine craving.
Journal of Neuroscience, 35, 8042–8058.
McKim, W. A. (2006). Drugs and behavior: An introduction to behavioral pharmacology (6th ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice-Hall.
McKnight-Eily, L. R., Eaton, D. K., Lowry, R., Croft, J. B., Presley-Cantrell, L., & Perry, G. S.

-- 272 of 498 --

252 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(2011). Relationships between hours of sleep and health risk behaviors in US adolescent
students. Preventive Medicine, 53, 271–273.
Mellentin, A., Skot, L., Neilsen, B., Schippers, G. M., Nielsen, A. S., Stenager, E., & Juhl, C.
(2017). Cue exposure therapy for the treatment of alcohol use disorders: A meta-analytic
review. Clinical Psychology Review, 57, 195–207.
Meyers, R., Villanueva, M., & Smith, J. E. (2005). The community reinforcement approach: His-
tory and empirical justification. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 247–260.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., & Rose, G. S. (2015). Motivational interviewing and decisional balance: Contrast-
ing responses to client ambivalence. Behavioral and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 43, 129–141.
Millson, P., Challacombe, L., Villeneuve, P. J., Strike, C. J., Fischer, B., Myers, T., . . . Hopkins,
S. (2007). Reduction in the injection-related HIV risk after 6 months in a low-threshold
methadone treatment program. AIDS Education and Prevention, 19, 124–136.
Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., & Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating
alcohol dependence: A coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Morin, J. F. G., Afzali, M. H., Bourque, J., Stewart, S. H., Séguin, J. R., O’Leary-Barrett, M., &
Conrod, P. J. (2019). A population-based analysis of the relationship between substance
use and adolescent cognitive development. American Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 98–106.
Muyingo, L., Smith, M. M., Sherry, S. B., McEachern, E., Leonard, K. E., & Stewart, S. H. (2020).
Relationships on the rocks: A meta-analysis of romantic partner effects on alcohol use.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 34(6), 629–640.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2019). College drinking factsheet. Rock-
land, MD: Author.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2009). Principles of drug addiction treatment: A research-based
guide (3rd ed.). Rockland, MD: Author.
Nayak, M. B., Patterson, D., Wilsnack, S. C., Karriker-Jaffe, K. J., & Greenfield, T. K. (2019).
Alcohol’s secondhand harms in the United States: New data on prevalence and risk fac-
tors. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 80, 273–281.
Nestler, E. J., & Luscher, C. (2019). The molecular basis of drug addiction: Linking epigenetic
to synaptic and circuit mechanisms. Neuron, 102, 48–59.
Notley, C., Ward, E., Dawkins, L., & Holland, R. (2018). The unique contribution of e-cigarettes
for tobacco harm reduction in supporting smoking relapse prevention. Harm Reduction
Journal, 15, 31.
O’Connor, R. M., & Stewart, S. H. (2010). Substance use disorders. In D. McKay, J. S. Abramow-
itz, & S. Taylor (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral therapy for refractory cases: Turning failure into
success (pp. 211–229). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Pedersen, B., Askgaard, G., Jorgensen, C., Oppedal, K., & Tonnesen, H. (2018). Disulfiram for
alcohol use disorder. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 9, CD010487.
Peterson, J. B., Conrod, P. J., Vassileva, J., Gianoulakis, C., & Pihl, R. O. (2006). Differential
effects of naltrexone on cardiac, subjective, and behavioral reactions to acute ethanol
intoxication. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 31, 386–393.
Petry, N. M., & Kiluk, B. D. (2012). Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in treatment-seeking
pathological gamblers. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 190, 462–469.
Pihl, R. O. (2010). Mental disorders are brain disorders: You think? Canadian Psychologist, 51,
40–49.
Popova, S., Lange, S., Shield, K., Burd, L., & Rehm, J. (2019). Prevalence of fetal alcohol spec-
trum disorder among special subpopulations: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Addiction, 114, 1150–1172.
Prappavessis, H., Cameron, L., Baldi, J. C., Robinson, S., Borrie, K., Harper, T., & Grove, J.

-- 273 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	253
R. (2007). The effects of exercise and nicotine replacement therapy on smoking rates in
women. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 1416–1432.
Prendergast, M., Podus, D., Finney, J., Greenwell, L., & Roll, J. (2006). Contingency manage-
ment for treatment of substance use disorders: A meta-analysis. Addiction, 101, 1546–1560.
Rennert, L., Denis, C., Peer, K., Lynch, K. G., Gelernter, J., & Kranzler, H. R. (2014). DSM-5
gambling disorder: Prevalence and characteristics in a substance use disorder sample.
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 22, 50–56.
Rogojanski, J., Vettese, L. C., & Antony, M. M. (2011). Coping with cigarette cravings: Compari-
son of suppression versus mindfulness-based strategies. Mindfulness, 2, 14–26.
Ruscio, A. M., Hallion, L. S., Lim, C., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Al-Hamzawi, A., Alonso, J., . . .
Scott, K. M. (2017). Cross-sectional comparison of the epidemiology of DSM-5 general-
ized anxiety disorder across the globe. JAMA Psychiatry, 74, 465–475.
Sabourin, B. C., & Stewart, S. H. (2009). Patterns of depression–substance use disorder comor-
bidity in women seeking addictions treatment. In J. Gallivan & S. Cooper (Eds.), Path-
ways, bridges, and havens: Psychosocial determinants of women’s health (pp. 160–177). Sydney,
Nova Scotia, Canada: Cape Breton University Press.
Sawyer, W., & Wagner, P. (2019). Mass incarceration: The whole pie 2019. Retrieved from www.
prisonpolicy.org/factsheets/pie2019_allimages.pdf.
Schuler, A., Ferentzy, P., Turner, N. E., Skinner, W., McIsaac, K. E., Ziegler, C. P., & Matheson,
F. I. (2016). Gamblers Anonymous as a recovery pathway: A scoping review. Journal of
Gambling Studies, 32, 1261–1278.
Scott-Sheldon, L. A. J., Terry, D. L., Carey, K. B., Garey, L., & Carey, M. P. (2012). Efficacy of
expectancy challenge to reduce college student drinking: A meta-analytic review. Psy-
chology of Addictive Behaviors, 26, 393–405.
Sher, K. J., Jackson, K. M., & Steinley, D. A. (2011). Alcohol use trajectories and the ubiquitous
cat’s cradle: Cause for concern? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 322–335.
Sherman, B. J., Baker, N. L., Squeglia, L. M., & McRae-Clark, A. L. (2018). Approach bias modi-
fication for cannabis use disorder: A proof-of-principle study. Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment, 87, 16–22.
Sinha, R. (2007). Imaging stress- and cue-induced drug and alcohol craving: Association with
relapse and clinical implications. Drug and Alcohol Review, 26, 25–31.
Slutske, W. (2006). Natural recovery and treatment seeking in pathological gambling: Results
of two US national surveys. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 297–302.
Smith, D. P., Battersby, M. W., Pols, R. G., Harvey, P. W., Oakes, J. E., & Baigent, M. F. (2015).
Predictors of relapse in problem gambling: A prospective cohort study. Journal of Gam-
bling Studies, 31, 299–313.
Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (1993). Problem drinkers: Guided self-change. New York: Guilford
Press.
Stacy, A. W., & Wiers, R. W. (2010). Implicit cognition and addiction: A tool for explaining
paradoxical behavior. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 551–575.
Stancliff, S., Joseph, H., Furst, T., Fong, C., Comer, S. D., & Roux, P. (2012). Opioid maintenance
treatment as a harm reduction tool for opioid dependent individuals in NYC: The need
to expand access to buprenorphine in marginalized populations. Journal of Addictive Dis-
orders, 31, 278–287.
Stewart, M. A., Davis-MacNevin, P. L., Hodgins, D. C., Barrett, S. P., Swansburg, J., & Stewart,
S. H. (2016). Motivation matched approach to the treatment of problem gambling: A case
series pilot study. Journal of Gambling Issues, 33, 124–147.
Stewart, M. A., Stewart, S. H., Yi, S., & Ellery, M. (2015). Predicting gambling behavior and
problems from implicit and explicit positive gambling outcome expectancies. Interna-
tional Gambling Studies, 15, 124–140.

-- 274 of 498 --

254 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Stewart, S. H., Collins, P., Blackburn, J. R., Ellery, M., & Klein, R. N. (2005). Heart rate increase
to alcohol administration and video lottery terminal (VLT) play. Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors, 19, 94–98.
Stewart, S. H., & Conrod, P. J. (2005). State of the art in cognitive-behavioral interventions for
substance use disorders: Introduction to the special issue. Journal of Cognitive Psycho-
therapy, 19, 195–198.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2019). Key substance use and
mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug
Use and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP19-5068, NSDUH Series H-54). Rockville, MD:
Author.
Tael-Öeren, M., Naughton, F., & Sutton, S. (2019). The relationship between parental attitudes
and children’s alcohol use: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Addiction, 114, 1527–
1546.
Thompson, K. D., Davis-MacNevin, P., Teehan, M., Stewart, S. H., & the Caring Campus
Research Team. (2017). The association between second-hand harms from alcohol and
mental health outcomes among postsecondary students. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and
Drugs, 78, 70–78.
Tiffany, S. T., Cox, L. S., & Elash, C. A. (2000). Effects of transdermal nicotine patches on
abstinence-induced and cue-elicited craving in cigarette smokers. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 68, 233–240.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). The health consequences of smoking—50
years of progress: A report of the Surgeon General. Washington, DC: Author.
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J., Telang, F., Fowler, J. S., Logan, J., Childress, A.-R., . . . Wong, C.
(2006). Cocaine cues and dopamine in dorsal striatum: Mechanism of craving in cocaine
addiction. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 6583–6588.
Walker, D. M., & Nestler, E. J. (2018). Neuroepigenetics and addiction. Handbook of Clinical
Neurology, 148, 747–765.
Walters, G. D. (2000). Behavioral self-control training for problem drinkers: A meta-analysis of
randomized control studies. Behavior Therapy, 31, 135–149.
Westra, H. A., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2006). Preparing clients for cognitive behavioral therapy: A
randomized pilot study of motivational interviewing for anxiety. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 30, 481–498.
Witkiewitz, K., Marlatt, G. A., & Walker, D. (2005). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for
alcohol and substance use disorders. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 211–228.
World Health Organization. (2009). Clinical guidelines for withdrawal management and treatment
of drug dependence in closed settings. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Yakovenko, I., Quigley, L., Hemmelgarn, B. R., Hodgins, D., & Ronksley, P. (2015). The effi-
cacy of motivational interviewing for disordered gambling: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 43, 72–82.

-- 275 of 498 --

255
Successful interactions with other people are governed by a variety of psychological
mechanisms and adaptive patterns that, taken together, constitute our personali-
ties. “Personality” refers to enduring patterns of thinking, feeling, perception, and
behavior that define persons and distinguish them from other people. Included in
these patterns are preferred ways of expressing or not expressing emotion, as well
as patterns of thinking about ourselves and other people. In healthy individuals,
there is a balance between self and other functions, and difficulties may ensue when
these are not in balance. When repetitive maladaptive patterns bring the person into
repeated conflict with others, when they prevent the person from forming attach-
ments or maintaining close relationships with others, and when they interfere with
establishing and pursuing reasonable personal goals, an individual’s personality
may be considered disordered. Personality disorders (PDs) represent a wide spec-
trum of maladaptive styles of perceiving, relating to, and feeling and thinking about
the world.
Our goal in this chapter is to provide a review of general knowledge on PDs
and to highlight important considerations in the treatment of individuals with PDs.
First, we discuss common features of PDs and outline how such features may oper-
ate differently across the disorders. We then address classification issues related to
PDs, including how PDs relate to normal personality traits and what factors may
affect conceptualization and diagnosis of these disorders. We also review epidemio-
logical and general causal factors related to PDs. Finally, we conclude with a per-
spective on topics for basic and applied research that is still needed to enhance our
C H A P T E R 9
Personality Disorders
Abigail Powers Lott
Jeffrey J. Magnavita
Jacques P. Barber
Thomas F. Oltmanns

-- 276 of 498 --

256 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
understanding of and ability to treat individuals with PDs. We consider treatment
implications throughout the chapter. Because it is impossible exhaustively to cover
the diverse treatment implications for all PDs in a single chapter, we focus particu-
larly on general principles of therapeutic change that cut across all theoretical ori-
entations and can be applied differentially in the treatment of any individual with
personality pathology.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND ASSOCIATED FEATURES
The dividing line between trait disturbances, or subsyndromal presentations, that
might not meet diagnostic threshold and personality pathology is difficult to iden-
tify (O’Connor, 2002). We all have our quirks and idiosyncrasies, and there are many
different ways to manage relationships with other people. For example, it is often
helpful to be skeptical of the things other people do and say. When does a tendency
to be suspicious of other people’s motives cross the line into being a characteristic
of paranoid PD and, beyond that, when does the problem actually meet criteria for
delusional disorder? Self-confidence is another admirable quality, but it can lead to
problems if it escalates into full-blown grandiosity. The capacities necessary to main-
tain a realistic and stable sense of self include multiple domain areas, such as percep-
tion, cognition, and affective regulation (Hopwood, Wright, Ansell, & Pincus, 2013).
In many ways, the distinctions among healthy traits, eccentricity, and personality
pathology are contextual and depend on the person’s ability to adapt to the demands
of different situations. Part of that ability to adapt relies on a stable self-identity, one
that can remain relatively intact regardless of the changing demands of the environ-
ment (Westen & Heim, 2003). Variety and flexibility in interpersonal behavior are
also undoubtedly helpful (Hollenstein, Lichtwarck-Aschoff, & Potworowski, 2013).
The capacity to handle stress and regulate one’s emotions in the face of difficult
experiences is important (Aldao & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2012). These are all areas in
which people with personality dysfunction may show impairment; they repeatedly
make their own social problems worse (often unwittingly) by persistently respond-
ing in ways that do not suit the social challenges that they face.
Most forms of mental disorder, such as anxiety disorders and mood disorders,
are “ego-dystonic”; that is, people with these disorders are distressed by their symp-
toms and uncomfortable with their experiences. PDs, however, are usually “ego-
syntonic” (Hirchfeld, 1993). Often individuals with PDs have developed a familiarity
with their patterns of dysfunction, which are not associated with distress or anxiety.
Instead, they feel like familiar modes of behaving and relating, as if they are accepted
as part of the self (Carlson, Vazire, & Oltmanns, 2013). Some clinicians would argue
that these individuals do not have insight into the nature of their own problems,
that they have a difficult time understanding the perspective of others and are not
capable of “mentalization” (or the ability to understand the mental state of self or
others; Fonagy & Bateman, 2008) in more severe presentations. In many cases, those
with PDs generate distress in those with whom they have close relationships, such
as family, peers, and coworkers.
The specific symptoms that define PDs represent maladaptive variations in
several of the important domains of personality. These include motives, perceptual

-- 277 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	257
processes, affective– cognitive schemas regarding self and others, attachment pat-
terns, and temperament. We have organized our description of typical symptoms
around these issues, which run through the broad mixture of specific symptoms that
define different types of personality pathology.
Social Motivation
The concept of a “motive” refers to a person’s desires and goals (Emmons, 1997).
Motives (either conscious or unconscious) describe the way people would like things
to be, and they help to explain why people behave in a particular fashion. For exam-
ple, a man might have neglected to return a telephone call because he wanted to be
alone (rather than because he forgot that someone had called). Two useful constructs
in understanding human personality are “affiliation”—the desire for close relation-
ships and getting along with other people—and “power”—the desire to “get ahead”
and for impact, prestige, or dominance (Paulhus & Trapnell, 2008). Individual differ-
ences with regard to these social motives have an important influence on a person’s
general health and adjustment.
Many of the symptoms of personality pathology can be described in terms of
maladaptive variations with regard to needs for affiliation and power (Gurtman,
1993). One particularly important issue is the absence of motivation for affiliation.
The need for intimacy and closeness is based on our evolutionarily adapted need
to maintain attachment to our caregivers. Humans are relational at their core, and
social relationships are an important and valuable part of health and longevity (Yang
et al., 2016). However, while most people enjoy spending time with other people and
want to develop intimate relationships with friends and family members, some peo-
ple do not. Some patients with PD prefer isolation or are so anxious that they are
not able to act on their longings. Severely diminished or absent motivation for social
relationships is another pervasive theme that serves to define certain kinds of PD.
Exaggerated motivation for power (and achievement) also contributes to the pic-
ture that describes some PDs. For example, some people are preoccupied with a need
for admiration and the praise of others, called “narcissism.” They think of themselves
as privileged people and insist on special treatment. In other cases, excessive devo-
tion to work and professional accomplishment can lead some individuals to ignore
friends and family members, as well as the pursuit of leisure activities. This lack of
balance can have a seriously disruptive effect on the person’s social adjustment.
Cognitions and Perceptions of Self and Others
Our social world also depends on mental processes that determine knowledge of
ourselves and other people (Wilson, 2009). Distortions of these mechanisms are asso-
ciated with PDs (Westen & Heim, 2003). One central issue involves our image of our-
selves. When we are able to maintain a realistic and stable image of ourselves, we can
plan, negotiate, and evaluate our relationships with other people (Hopwood, Morey,
et al., 2013). Knowing (and having confidence in) our own values and opinions is
a necessary prerequisite for making independent decisions without the assistance
or reassurance of others. Self-image is also intimately connected to mood states. If
we vacillate between unrealistically positive and negative views of ourselves, our

-- 278 of 498 --

258 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
moods will swing dramatically. We may also need constant reassurance from others
and be too dependent on their opinions as a means of maintaining our own self-
esteem. We have to be able to evaluate our own importance. Of course, it is useful
to think of ourselves in positive terms (and many maintain a positive “halo”), but
extreme grandiosity can be disruptive. Perhaps even more damaging is a pattern in
which people see themselves as socially inept or inferior to other people.
Another issue involves our image of others. When we misperceive the intentions,
motives, or abilities of other people, our relationships can be severely disturbed.
Paranoid beliefs are one example. Some people believe without good reason that
others are exploiting, deceiving, or otherwise trying to harm them (Carroll, 2009).
Unreasonable fears of being abandoned, criticized, or rejected are also examples of
distorted perception of others’ intentions. Working effectively in a group of people
also requires realistic appraisal of the talents and abilities of others. In order to coop-
erate with other people, we must be able to appreciate their competence. Those with
PDs often run into problems because they misperceive other people in varied ways
(as being threatening or uncaring, or incompetent). These perceptual distortions are
often derived from internal schemas that might include beliefs encoded from ear-
lier developmental experiences, such as “The world is unsafe” or “I am bad”; these
beliefs and self–other representations are then used as pattern recognition tools for
current relationships (Summers & Barber, 2009).
Many elements of social interaction depend on being able to appraise the nature
of our relationships with other people and then to make accurate judgments about
appropriate and inappropriate behaviors. The many aspects involved include the
ability to interpret facial emotion, to hear the nuance of tone and prosody of speech,
and generally to pick up on the emotional tenor being communicated. This capacity
to manage the elements of self–other relationships and regulate the need for inti-
macy and autonomy is a critical function of an adaptive personality system (Mag-
navita, 2004). Those with PDs often have persistent problems in regulating social
distance (either becoming too intimate or maintaining too much distance from oth-
ers). Another important element of interpersonal perception is the ability to “empa-
thize” with others—to anticipate and decipher their emotional reactions and use that
knowledge to guide our own behavior (Main, Walle, Kho, & Halpern, 2017). Deficits
in the ability to understand the emotions of other people represent another of the
core features of many PDs.
Temperament and Personality Traits
If motivation helps to explain why people behave in certain ways, temperament and
personality traits describe how they behave. “Temperament” refers to a person’s
most basic, neurobiologically endowed, characteristic styles of relating to the world,
especially those styles that are evident during the first year of life (Caspi & Roberts,
1999). Experts disagree about the basic dimensions of temperament and personal-
ity. Some theories are relatively simple, using only three or four dimensions. Others
are more complicated and consider as many as 30 or 40 traits. One theory that has
come to be widely accepted is known as the five-factor model (FFM) of personal-
ity (Trull & Widiger, 2008). The basic traits (also known as “domains”) included in
this model are Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agreeableness,

-- 279 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	259
and Conscientiousness. We return to consider these domains and specific “facets”
of personality when we discuss dimensional perspectives on classification later in
this chapter. Taken as a whole, the FFM provides a comprehensive description of any
person’s behavior.
Disturbance in Interpersonal Functioning
The concept of social dysfunction plays an important role in the definition of PDs, as
well as in their assessment (Bender, Morey, & Skodol, 2011). Subjective distress and
social impairment provide a large part of the justification for defining these prob-
lems as mental disorders. If the maladaptive personality characteristics described in
the diagnostic manual interfere with a person’s ability to get along with other people
and perform social roles, they become more than just a collection of eccentric traits or
peculiar habits. They can then be viewed as a form of harmful dysfunction.
Personality pathology is characterized by impaired social and occupational
functioning, an important component to PDs that is considered more stable than the
symptoms themselves (Skodol, 2018). PDs are associated with increased interpersonal
conflict and impaired social functioning across clinical (Skodol et al., 2002; Zanarini,
Frankenburg, Hennen, Reich, & Silk, 2006) and community samples (T. Oltmanns,
Melley, & Turkheimer, 2002; Tomko, Trull, Wood, & Sher, 2014). PDs also play an
important role in many cases of marital discord (see Sbarra, Manvelian, Salinger, &
Whisman, Chapter 12, this volume). One troubling aspect of marital conflict associ-
ated with PDs is partner aggression, particularly among individuals with borderline
and antisocial PD. This tendency toward verbal or physical aggression with partners
may be a result of the presence of trait-level impulsivity or angry hostility in these
disorders (Birkley & Eckhardt, 2015; Lavner, Lamkin, & Miller, 2017).
Disturbances in Health and Physical Functioning
In addition to interpersonal and social difficulties, personality pathology is related
to problems in several other dimensions of functioning. Among such problems are
health and general medical issues for both younger and older adults. Patients with
PDs consume more mental and physical health care resources than do people with-
out PDs (Jackson & Burgess, 2002; Powers & Oltmanns, 2012). PDs are also associated
with a greater likelihood of having a number of serious medical conditions, includ-
ing cardiovascular disease, stroke, arthritis, and obesity (Dixon-Gordon, Whalen,
Layden, & Chapman, 2015; El-Gabalawy, Katz, & Sareen, 2010; Powers & Oltmanns,
2013). The presence of PD is also associated with greater risk for early mortality (Kuo
et al., 2019), although those associations may be attenuated to some extent by the
presence of comorbid mental disorders (Tyrer, Tyrer, & Yang, 2019). Increased risk for
mortality in PDs is consistent with previous suggestions that personality variables
play an important role in relation to various long-term aspects of physical health
(Graham et al., 2017).
Another serious consequence related to having a PD is suicide, one of the world’s
leading causes of death (Tyrer, Reed, & Crawford, 2015). Although evidence varies,
some studies suggest that specific personality traits, including negative affectivity,
hostility, and impulsivity, are important predictors of suicidal behavior (Nock et al.,

-- 280 of 498 --

260 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
2009). Comorbidity between PDs and other mental disorders, such as major depres-
sion or substance use disorders, also increases one’s risk for suicidal acts. In fact,
individuals with comorbid PD and substance use disorders are at particularly high
risk for suicide (Kuo et al., 2019). The presence of PD is also associated with increased
risk of suicide attempts among individuals with major depressive disorder, even
when past suicidal behavior is controlled (Bolton, Pagura, Enns, Grant, & Sareen,
2010). Borderline PD has a particularly strong relationship with suicidal behavior
and acts, and treatment protocols often focus on this explicitly in relation to border-
line pathology.
Sexual dysfunction and sleep problems, two other symptoms that commonly
cause distress for individuals with various forms of psychopathology, have received
much less attention from researchers who study PDs. Evidence of the relationship
between sexual dysfunction and PDs is almost nonexistent (see Zemishlany & Weiz-
man, 2008, for a review). As we discussed previously, however, individuals with PDs
frequently have dysfunctional interpersonal relationships, and that dysfunction is
most evident in close, intimate relationships. Furthermore, certain PDs have symp-
toms specifically tied to intimacy problems, ranging from fear of abandonment and
extreme clinginess to complete disinterest in sexual relationships. Therefore, the
extent of sexual dysfunction may vary by disorder. Some evidence has been pub-
lished regarding a link between borderline PD and sleep disturbance (J. Oltmanns,
Weinstein, & Oltmanns, 2014; Selby, 2013). More research is needed in these areas
before definitive conclusions can be drawn.
Clinical Implications of Typical Symptoms and Associated Features
Heterogeneity of symptoms across different forms of personality pathology can have
important consequences for the conceptualization and treatment of PDs. For exam-
ple, absence of motivation for social relationships is a well-known theme for patients
with schizoid or paranoid PD. Individuals with avoidant PD are different. They have
a strong internal desire for connections with other people but are frequently unable
to overcome their rejection sensitivity and seek out social relationships. It may seem
that they are less motivated to engage with other people, but the reasons for their
isolation are different from those that affect an individual with schizoid PD. Because
avoidant patients desire interpersonal connections, treatment focused on reducing
anxiety and increasing social contact is more beneficial for them than for patients
with schizoid features.
It may be easier to consider separate symptoms or features in terms of a broader
constellation of pathology when planning treatment. For example, motivation for
power is related to one’s self-image, image of others, and the way that individual
then relates in interpersonal or intimate interactions. An individual with obsessive–
compulsive PD may be conceptualized in terms of an excessive need for power; this
may be motivated by a desire for the control and order that comes from professional
accomplishments and cannot as easily be found in emotional or interpersonal expe-
riences. This focus on professional success then comes at the cost of development
in other areas, such as family relationships. Furthermore, the need for power might
negatively impact work relationships and undermine productivity or job stability.
By understanding motivating factors and interpersonal consequences, and how

-- 281 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	261
they relate to specific personality dysfunction, a practicing clinician may be better
able to determine an appropriate treatment plan. Relatedly, the strong interpersonal
dysfunction associated with personality pathology makes it especially important to
assess the nature of family relationships and social support of patients with PDs.
Therapists will likely need to help patients with PD understand how healthy rela-
tionships work and find ways to enhance positive support in their lives.
Because all PDs can be associated with specific sets of distorted beliefs called
“schemas” (Beck, Freeman, & Davies, 2004), addressing these misperceptions is
likely to be an important aspect of the therapist’s role throughout the course of treat-
ment. Reality testing is a commonly used technique patients with PDs across all
orientations and treatment approaches. Practicing clinicians must decide how con-
frontational to become when challenging misperceptions (Summers & Barber, 2009).
This style may depend partly on theoretical orientation, but individual differences
in the patient with PD and the unique personality dysfunction are also important
to consider when determining a treatment approach. We discuss this in more detail
later in the chapter.
In relation to all the symptoms and features of PDs, it is also important to keep
emotional regulation and capacity for emotional experience in mind. Certain PDs,
such as borderline PD, are specifically characterized by difficulty with emotion reg-
ulation. This can include a tendency toward dissociation, particularly under high
levels of stress. Emotional awareness and stability are important factors across the
spectrum of personality pathology, and it is beneficial to help patients learn to regu-
late their own emotions in healthy ways. Although the specific approach may vary
across orientation, a general therapeutic goal should be to help patients with PD to
identify what triggers an extreme emotional reaction in a specific situation. By track-
ing down those triggers, patients gain awareness and are more able to choose how to
approach the situation in new ways.
It is essential throughout treatment to assess specifically for suicidal ideation and
parasuicidal behavior, both before treatment begins and during its course, because
personality pathology is associated with increased risk for suicidal acts. Because
habitual use of parasuicidal behavior in borderline PD can be a form of emotion reg-
ulation, the immediate elimination of parasuicidal acts without the addition of more
adaptive emotion regulation strategies can be problematic and lead to greater risk
(Andrewes, Hulbert, Cotton, Betts, & Chanen, 2018). Therefore, in combination with
the identification of triggers for strong emotional reactions that might lead to para-
suicidal behavior in therapy, there should be a focus on increasing adaptive emotion
regulation strategies that can eventually serve as a substitute for parasuicidal behav-
iors. This is particularly helpful when patterns of reinforcement for parasuicidal and
suicidal behavior can also be identified and addressed.
Finally, physical and mental health problems often complicate the treatment of
one another, and a thorough initial assessment of physical health conditions should
be taken before treatment begins. Patients with PDs often do not adhere to medi-
cal recommendations. Helping a patient understand the importance of taking medi-
cation regularly, follow physician orders regarding a chronic medical condition, or
engage in healthy lifestyle choices may be a necessary part of treatment that a prac-
ticing clinician might not otherwise use. Similarly, addressing sleep difficulties and
providing basic education in sleep hygiene techniques may also prove beneficial to

-- 282 of 498 --

262 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
some patients with personality dysfunction (see Vincent & Davidson, Chapter 14,
this volume, for a review of treatment options for sleeplessness).
CLASSIFICATION
The past 30 years have witnessed an extensive, complex, and frequently passion-
ate debate regarding the most scientifically valid and clinically useful approach to
the classification of personality pathology. One central issue in this discussion has
centered on the utility of categorical diagnoses versus dimensional approaches. The
DSM-5 includes two different approaches to the classification of PDs. The main body
of the manual describes the traditional categorical approach (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Each of 10 specific types of PD is defined by a set of character-
istic symptoms. People who meet the general criteria for a PD and who also exhibit
enough symptoms to pass the diagnostic threshold for a specific type of disorder
would qualify for a diagnosis. Those who do not meet this somewhat arbitrary
threshold do not have a disorder, according to this perspective.
Section III of DSM-5 also includes an alternative model for PDs (AMPD; Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2013), which reflects a dramatic shift from the categori-
cal system to a description of maladaptive personality traits using a set of 25 dimen-
sional scales that fall under five broad domains. This model is included in Section III
in an effort to promote further exploration and research into the alternative model.
The recently released 11th revision of the International Classification of Diseases for
Mortality and Morbidity Statistics (ICD-11; World Health Organization [WHO], 2018)
now includes a dimensional classification system for PDs that is similar to the AMPD
but has some key differences. The acceptance of this dimensional model into ICD-
11 reflects a significant paradigm shift in how PD is conceptualized (Krueger, 2016;
Tyrer, 2014), which in the long term will likely impact the way personality pathology
is addressed in assessment and treatment. The AMPD and ICD-11 models of PDs are
discussed in more detail below.
DSM‑5 PD Categories
The DSM-5 categorical system for PDs includes 10 types that are organized into three
clusters on the basis of broadly defined characteristics. In order to qualify for a PD
diagnosis, a person must fit the general definition of PD (which applies to all 10
subtypes) and must also meet the specific criteria for a particular type of PD. The
specific criteria comprise a list of characteristic features and behaviors that define
the disorder. The general definition of PD emphasizes the duration of the pattern
and the social impairment associated with the traits in question: There must be a pat-
tern of behavior that is long-lasting, consistent across a number of contexts, and a deviation
from normative behaviors in an individual’s culture. The pattern must be evident in two
or more of the following domains: cognition (e.g., ways of thinking about the self and
other people), emotional responses, interpersonal functioning, or impulse control.
This pattern of maladaptive experience and behavior must also be inflexible and
pervasive across a broad range of personal and social situations, the source of clini-
cally significant distress or impairment, and stable and of long duration (onset often

-- 283 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	263
traced back to adolescence or early adulthood). In the following pages, we give brief
descriptions of the 10 DSM-5 PD subtypes. The first three types are paranoid, schiz-
oid, and schizotypal PDs. The behavior of people who fit these subtypes is typically
odd, eccentric, or asocial. All three types (within Cluster A) share similarity with the
symptoms of schizophrenia. One implicit assumption is that these types of PD may
represent behavioral traits or interpersonal styles on the same spectrum as schizo-
phrenia, and they are sometimes referred to as “schizophrenia spectrum disorders”
(Camisa et al., 2005).
Paranoid PD
Paranoid PD is characterized by the pervasive tendency to be inappropriately suspi-
cious of other people’s motives and behaviors. People who fit the description for this
disorder are constantly on guard and hypervigilant. They expect other people to try
to harm them, and they take extraordinary precautions to avoid being exploited or
injured. People who are paranoid are inflexible in the way that they view the motives
of other people, making it difficult for them to develop relationships or choose situ-
ations in which they can trust other people.
Paranoid PD should be distinguished from psychotic disorders such as schizo-
phrenia and delusional disorder. The pervasive suspicions of people with paranoid
PD do not always reach delusional proportions. In other words, their fears are gener-
ally reality based but represent an exaggeration, as opposed to a delusion based on
extreme distortion.
Schizoid PD
Schizoid PD is defined in terms of a pervasive pattern of indifference to other people,
coupled with a diminished range of emotional experience and expression. These
people tend to be loners; they prefer social isolation to interactions with friends or
family. Other people see them as being cold and aloof. By their own report, they do
not experience strong subjective emotions such as sadness, anger, or happiness. They
may appear “old” or “eccentric.”
Schizotypal PD
Schizotypal PD centers on peculiar patterns of behavior rather than the emotional
restriction and social withdrawal associated with schizoid PD. Many of these idio-
syncratic behaviors take the form of perceptual and cognitive disturbance. People
with this disorder may report bizarre or autistic fantasies and unusual perceptual
experiences. Their speech may be slightly difficult to follow because they use words
in an odd or eccentric way, or express themselves in a vague or disjointed manner.
Their affective expressions may be constricted in range, as in schizoid PD, or they
may be silly and inappropriate.
In spite of their odd or unusual behaviors, people with schizotypal PD are not
necessarily psychotic or out of touch with reality. Their bizarre fantasies are gener-
ally not delusional, and their unusual perceptual experiences are not sufficiently real
or compelling to be considered hallucinations.

-- 284 of 498 --

264 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
The next group (Cluster B) includes antisocial, borderline, histrionic, and nar-
cissistic PDs. These forms of personality pathology are characterized by dramatic,
emotional, or erratic behavior, and are associated with marked difficulty in sustain-
ing interpersonal relationships.
Antisocial PD
Antisocial PD is defined in terms of a persistent pattern of irresponsible and anti-
social behavior that begins during childhood or adolescence and continues into
the adult years. Features of the disorder are indicative of a widespread pattern of
repeated failure to respect the rights of others. Once the person has become an
adult, these difficulties include persistent failure to perform responsibilities associ-
ated with occupational and family roles. Conflict with others when one perceives
they have been slighted is also common. These individuals can show irritability and
aggression toward their spouses and children, as well as people outside the home.
They can be impulsive, reckless, and irresponsible, showing little regard for the con-
sequences of their actions. They can also present as charming and misleading.
Borderline PD
Borderline PD is a diffuse category whose essential feature is a pervasive pattern of
instability in mood, self-identity, and interpersonal relationships. Individuals with
borderline PD are often intolerant of being alone. They can form intense, unstable
relationships with others and are often seen as manipulative. Their “manipulative”
behavior is frequently viewed by others as a strategy to maintain an attachment to
others that they consider to be vital to their survival. Their mood may shift rapidly
and inexplicably from depression to anger to anxiety over a pattern of several hours.
Intense anger is common and may be accompanied by temper tantrums, physical
assault, or suicidal threats and parasuicidal behavior. Individuals with borderline
PD often demonstrate identity disturbance and have great difficulty maintaining an
integrated image of self that simultaneously incorporates positive and negative fea-
tures. Therefore, they alternate between thinking of themselves and others in unre-
alistically positive terms and unrealistically negative terms at different moments in
time. When they are focused on their own negative features, they have a deflated
view of themselves and may become seriously depressed. They frequently express
uncertainty about issues such as personal values, sexual preferences, and career
alternatives. Chronic feelings of emptiness and boredom may also be present.
Histrionic PD
Histrionic PD is characterized by a pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and
attention-seeking behavior. Individuals with histrionic PD thrive on being the center
of attention. They are often seen as self-centered, vain, and demanding, and they
constantly seek approval from others. When interacting with other people, their
behavior is often inappropriately sexually seductive or provocative. Their emotions
tend to be shallow and may vacillate erratically. Their reactions in situations may
frequently seem exaggerated beyond what others would expect. Unlike individuals

-- 285 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	265
with borderline PD, people with histrionic PD have an essentially intact sense of
their own identity and a better capacity for stable relationships.
Narcissistic PD
Narcissistic PD is conceptualized primarily by a pervasive pattern of grandiosity,
need for admiration, and a limited capacity to respond with empathy to others. Nar-
cissistic individuals often have a greatly exaggerated sense of their own importance.
They tend to be preoccupied with their own achievements and abilities. Because they
lack a well-developed sense of others and are overly concerned with themselves,
they often ignore the feelings of others and are seen as being arrogant or haughty.
The last group of PD types (Cluster C) includes avoidant, dependent, and
obsessive– compulsive PDs. The common element in all three disorders is presum-
ably anxiety or fearfulness. This description fits most easily with the avoidant and
dependent types. In contrast, obsessive– compulsive PD is more accurately described
in terms of perfectionism, preoccupation with rules, and lack of emotional warmth
rather than in terms of anxiety.
Avoidant PD
Avoidant PD is characterized by a pervasive pattern of social discomfort, fear of neg-
ative evaluation, and timidity. People with this disorder tend to be socially isolated
when outside their own family circle because they are afraid of criticism. Unlike
people with schizoid PD, they want to be liked by others but are extremely shy—
easily hurt by even minimal signs of disapproval from other people. This rejection
sensitivity makes them avoid social and occupational activities that require signifi-
cant contact with other people.
Avoidant PD is often indistinguishable from social anxiety disorder. In fact,
some experts have argued that they may represent two different ways of defining
the same condition or different levels of severity (Hummelen, Wilberg, Pedersen,
& Karterud, 2007; Reich, 2009). People with avoidant PD are also presumably more
socially withdrawn and have very few close relationships because they are so shy.
People with social anxiety disorder may have a lot of friends, but they are afraid of
performing in front of them. This distinction is relatively clear when social anxiety
is defined narrowly in terms of a particular kind of situation, such as public speak-
ing. It is much more difficult to make if the social phobia becomes more generalized.
Dependent PD
Dependent PD centers on a pervasive pattern of submissive and clinging behavior.
People with this disorder are afraid of separating from other people on whom they
are dependent for advice and reassurance. Often unable to make everyday decisions
on their own, they feel anxious and helpless when they are alone. Like people with
avoidant PD, they are easily hurt by criticism, extremely sensitive to disapproval,
and lacking in self-confidence. One difference between avoidant and dependent PD
involves the point in a relationship at which people experience the most difficulty.

-- 286 of 498 --

266 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
People who are avoidant have trouble initiating a relationship (because they are fear-
ful). People who are dependent have trouble being alone or separating from people
with whom they already have a close relationship.
Obsessive–Compulsive PD
Obsessive– compulsive PD is defined by a pervasive pattern of orderliness, perfec-
tionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, open-
ness, and efficiency. The central features of this disorder may involve a marked need
for control and lack of tolerance for uncertainty (Gibbs, South, & Oltmanns, 2003).
Individuals with this disorder set ambitious standards for their own performance
that frequently are so high as to be unattainable. Many would be described as “work-
aholics.” In other words, they are so devoted to work that they ignore friends, family
members, and leisure activities. They are so preoccupied with details and rules that
they lose sight of the main point of an activity or project. Intellectual endeavors are
favored over feelings and emotional experience. These individuals are excessively
conscientious, moralistic, and judgmental, and tend to be intolerant of emotional
behavior in other people.
Problems with the Categorical Definition of PDs
The categorical approach to classification treats PDs as discrete categories, and it
assumes that there are sharp boundaries between normal and abnormal personali-
ties. In reality, however, many people with serious personality problems do not fit
the official subtypes. According to the DSM-5 categorical definitions, a person must
exhibit at least a certain number of symptoms in order to meet the diagnostic criteria
for each disorder. These thresholds were established in a more or less arbitrary way;
they have not been validated empirically. Another issue that has been raised with the
categorical description of PDs is the overlap among categories. According to some
studies, at least 50% of patients who meet the diagnostic criteria for one PD also meet
the criteria for another disorder (Coid, Yang, Tyrer, Roberts, & Ullrich, 2006; Trull,
Jahng, Tomko, Wood, & Sher, 2010), It is unclear whether this is due to overlapping
categories across PDs or the fact that individuals simply have multiple PDs. It should
be noted that findings regarding the high levels of comorbidity across PDs is mixed,
and the degree of overlap is certainly lower in community samples than in clinical
samples (T. Oltmanns, Rodrigues, Weinstein, & Gleason, 2014).
In large part because of the issue of comorbidity, many experts favor a dimen-
sional classification system for PDs that would be based on a view of personality
pathology grounded in extensive research on the basic elements of personality (Clark,
2007; Widiger & Trull, 2007). Such a dimensional system would also have a stronger
theoretical basis than the arbitrary nosology for PDs that is represented in the cat-
egorical system in DSM-5 (Krueger, Eaton, Derringer, et al., 2011). A dimensional
system could provide a more complete description of each person, and it would be
more useful with patients who fall on the boundaries between different types of
PD. Considerable evidence suggests that a dimensional approach may also be easier
to use than the traditional categorical approach (Markon, Krueger, & Watson, 2005;
Waugh et al., 2017; Widiger, 2019).

-- 287 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	267
The AMPD in DSM‑5
The alternative dimensional model proposed in DSM-5 has focused on the FFM as
the basic structure for a comprehensive description of personality problems (Widi-
ger & Trull, 2007). This approach requires the clinician to consider information on
each of five pathological domains that pair with the domains of normal personality:
Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. This
makes sense, since many PDs are defined in terms of maladaptive variations on the
kinds of traits described in the FFM (Widiger & Simonsen, 2005). Problems may arise
in association with extreme variations in either direction (high or low). Dramatically
elevated levels of anger—hostility, impulsiveness, and excitement seeking—are par-
ticularly important, but so are extremely low levels of trust, compliance, and tender-
mindedness. For instance, although some forms of PD are associated with high lev-
els of anxiousness and vulnerability, people with antisocial PD frequently exhibit
unusually low levels of anxiety and concern about danger.
According to the AMPD, the diagnosis of PDs is based on a two-part process.
First, the clinician is asked to make a judgment regarding the level of impairment in
personality functioning as defined by problems with the person’s view of self and
others (identity and self-direction), as well as difficulties with maintaining interper-
sonal relationships (empathy and intimacy). Problems identified in these areas serve
as general markers for the presence of a PD; it is the key decision point in decid-
ing whether to assign a diagnosis. This judgment replaces the categorical model’s
general criteria for PDs, which are often ignored and have been criticized for being
vague and unreliable. In fact, many experts have argued that the most important
consideration regarding assessment of personality pathology is overall level of sever-
ity rather than specific types of PDs (see Tyrer et al., 2011, for a review of the rationale
of the reclassification of PDs). The dimensional system for rating level of personality
functioning is relatively straightforward, based on indications of mild, moderate, or
severe levels, and there is some evidence to indicate that it can be efficient and effec-
tive in that role (Cruitt, Boudreaux, King, Oltmanns, & Oltmanns, 2019; Dowgwillo,
Roche, & Pincus, 2018).
The second step in the AMPD specifies the nature or form of the disorder using
ratings of pathological personality traits. What kind of personality problem does
the person exhibit? The organization of these traits generally follows the FFM, but
the broad domains are labeled in a way that emphasizes the maladaptive nature of
characteristics associated with PDs (Krueger, Eaton, Clark, et al., 2011). The AMPD
includes consideration of 25 core traits. The primary domains in the DSM-5 dimen-
sional approach to defining PDs are negative affect, detachment, antagonism, disin-
hibition, and psychoticism (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
• Negative affect includes the facets of emotion lability, anxiousness, separation
insecurity, submissiveness, hostility, perseveration, depressivity, suspicious-
ness, and restricted affectivity.
• Detachment includes the facets of withdrawal, intimacy avoidance, anhedonia,
depressivity, restricted affectivity, and suspiciousness.
• Antagonism includes the facets manipulativeness, deceitfulness, grandiosity,
attention seeking, callousness, and hostility.

-- 288 of 498 --

268 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
• Disinhibition includes the facets irresponsibility, impulsivity, distractibility,
risk taking, and rigid perfectionism.
• Psychoticism includes the facets unusual beliefs and experiences, eccentricity,
and cognitive and perceptual dysregulation.
The AMPD retains six of the 10 specific types of PDs from the categorical model:
antisocial, avoidant, borderline, narcissistic, obsessive– compulsive, and schizotypal
PD. For each type of PD, the person must show moderate or greater impairment in
self or interpersonal functioning (Criterion A). Traits, then, replace symptoms for the
six retained PDs in the categorical system, and there are algorithms that help diag-
nose these PD types based on the dimensional trait ratings, using a 0- to 4-point scale.
By including some of the types, the dimensional system retains a level of continuity
with the categorical system that mental health professionals already know. The types
may provide a useful shorthand in communicating with other professionals and in
conceptualizing certain kinds of problems because they bring to mind familiar or
prototypical combinations of several maladaptive traits. But each of the six types
are now described in terms of expected trait indicators rather than the traditional
PD symptoms. For example, in order to meet criteria for borderline PD using the
AMPD, the person must be rated by the clinician as showing evidence of four out of
seven pathological personality traits. These include four facets of negative affectivity
(emotional lability, anxiousness, separation insecurity, or depressivity) two facets of
disinhibition (impulsivity or risk taking), or one facet of antagonism (hostility).
Empirical evidence thus far suggests that the trait model adequately captures
traditional PD constructs, such that when directly comparing AMPD and categori-
cal PD diagnoses, the trait model accounts for a significant amount of variance in
explaining categorical diagnoses (see review by Miller, Sleep, & Lynam, 2018). The
AMPD trait model has shown good convergent validity for five of the six PDs (with
the exception of obsessive– compulsive PD) (see Zimmerman, Kerber, Rek, Hop-
wood, & Krueger, 2019, for a review). Evidence regarding discriminant validity is
less impressive (Watters, Bagby, & Sellbom, 2019).
Other forms of PD are identified in the dimensional system using a new diag-
nosis called “personality disorder trait specified” (PDTS). In order to qualify for
this diagnosis, the person must exhibit significant impairment in self or interper-
sonal functioning, as well as one or more pathological personality traits. This sys-
tem replaces four of the categorical types with simplified trait ratings. Paranoid PD,
for example, would be described by a high rating on suspiciousness, histrionic PD
would be described by a high rating on attention seeking, and dependent PD would
be described by a high rating on submissiveness. One important benefit is that peo-
ple who exhibit a few symptoms that would be below the diagnostic threshold in the
categorical system are easily described with one set of ratings in the AMPD.
Notice that the trait descriptors actually help explain the overlap or comorbidity
that has been observed for many of the PD types. One example involves borderline
and antisocial PD. Many people qualify for a diagnosis of both disorders using the
categorical system (Freestone, Howard, Coid, & Ullrich, 2013). This is because the
borderline and antisocial types share several maladaptive traits involving antago-
nism (e.g., hostility) and disinhibition (impulsivity). However, they are most clearly
distinguished by the fact that people with borderline PD are also high on traits

-- 289 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	269
involving negative affectivity (e.g., emotional lability, anxiousness, and depressiv-
ity). The relative simplicity by which the trait-based approach identifies similarities
and differences between PDs offers an advantage over the categorical approach.
Another attractive feature is that the AMPD recognizes explicitly the continu-
ous nature of personality pathology. Rather than assume that a person either does
or does not have a PD, dimensional models place their emphasis on measuring the
extent or degree to which the person exhibits a certain personality characteristic.
This advantage is intuitively appealing, but it might also be somewhat misleading
when we consider the way such a system must be used in clinical practice. Therapists
will ultimately need to make certain important decisions that are fundamentally
categorical in nature, such as whether a person needs treatment, and whether that
treatment should be reimbursed financially. The DSM-5 Committee opted for the
new focus on the level of personality functioning as a mechanism for making deci-
sions about the presence of disorder (i.e., the 0- to 4-point scale). It remains to be seen
whether this aspect of the proposal will ultimately pass subsequent tests that focus
on its reliability and validity.
The PDs and Related Traits Model in ICD‑11
Unlike the DSM-5 model described earlier, the ICD-11 PDs and related traits model
does not include diagnostic categories. Instead, it is built on the use of a general
PD severity rating, a five-domain dimensional trait model, and a “borderline pat-
tern qualifier” (WHO, 2018). The PD severity rating is very similar to that described
earlier for DSM-5. The trait model closely aligned with the DSM-5 AMPD, as both
include negative affectivity, detachment, dissocial, and disinhibition. The main dif-
ference between the DSM-5 AMPD and ICD-11 model is that ICD-11 does not include
a domain of psychoticism and instead includes anankastic domain, which fits more
with compulsivity (J. Oltmanns & Widiger, 2018, 2019a). “Anankastic” refers to a pre-
occupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control,
and is marked by inflexibility in these behaviors, mapping onto aspects of obsessive–
compulsive PD. In ICD-11, schizotypal PD is a variant of schizophrenia and therefore
falls into the psychotic spectrum rather than in the context of personality pathology.
Additionally, unlike the DSM-5 AMPD, the ICD-11 model does not include specific
facets within the domains, although some would argue that including facet level
components is critical (J. Oltmanns & Widiger, 2019b).
The only PD that is still included in the ICD-11 PDs model is borderline PD.
More specifically, there is a borderline pattern qualifier that essentially includes the
same nine symptom criteria for borderline PD as included in DSM-5 and requires
that at least five are met for the borderline pattern qualifier to be used to describe
a patient. ICD-11 maintained borderline PD because this disorder is the most com-
monly seen in outpatient and inpatient psychiatric services, and it is the only PD that
has an empirically supported treatment specifically designed for it (e.g., dialectical
behavior therapy [DBT]: Linehan, 1993; transference-focused psychotherapy [TFP]:
Clarkin et al., 2001; mentalization-based therapy [MBT]: Bateman & Fonagy, 2004).
Another inclusion in the ICD-11 PDs and related traits model is that an indi-
vidual can be assigned “personality difficulty” if the PD diagnosis is not met but
relevant challenges still exist for the individual related to personality problems.

-- 290 of 498 --

270 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Personality difficulty can be distinguished from PD based on the level of severity in
functioning or pervasiveness, such that for individuals labeled with personality dif-
ficulty, the problems across emotions, cognitions, and behaviors are intermittent and
difficulty in functioning is substantially less impairing (WHO, 2018).
One criticism that has been raised for the dimensional models of PD is that clini-
cians may ignore personality status and assume that a mental disorder should take
precedence, especially if the PD is mild (Tyrer, Mulder, Kim, & Crawford, 2019). This
is especially true now that the diagnostic axes (previously part of DSM-IV) have been
eliminated and PDs are no longer considered on a separate Axis from other mental
disorders. Because we know that PDs can be a major factor in maintaining symptoms
of other disorders, such as depression or anxiety, and can make treatment more chal-
lenging (Berk et al., 2018; Gorwood et al., 2010), it remains critical that personality
pathology be systematically and rigorously assessed and diagnosed across clinical
settings.
Clinical Implications of Classification
The previous section on classification demonstrates even further the extent of het-
erogeneity across various forms of personality pathology, as well as the variability
that can occur within a given PD. The frequent presence of comorbid mental disor-
ders, such as depression and substance use disorders, adds to this complexity. This
diversity makes it essential that personality pathology is assessed and considered
as part of the larger case formulation. In general, if a patient presents with several
mental disorders, then this should be a sign to the clinician that the potential for
personality dysfunction is contributing to these clinical symptoms.
The constellation of clinical syndromes and relational disturbances with which
a patient comes into therapy can have serious implications for treatment, and practic-
ing clinicians should know that personality dysfunction can hinder treatment prog-
ress (Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007; Magnavita, 2004). For example, the treatment
approach a clinician selects for a depressed patient with comorbid avoidant PD is
likely to be different from the approach with a patient who has a narcissistic PD
or does not have comorbid personality pathology at all. Accurately diagnosing the
presence of personality pathology allows for more comprehensive case conceptu-
alization, which then informs treatment planning. Even within a given PD, treat-
ment may need to be tailored to fit the unique interpersonal problems of each patient
(Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007), further highlighting the potential benefits of a trait
model of personality pathology that may better capture the individual differences of
two patients that may meet criteria for the same disorder. The clinical relevance of
a trait model is also suggest by the paucity of empirical guidance on which one can
rely with respect to specific categories of PD. While Barber and Muenz (1996) showed
that interpersonal psychotherapy was more effective with depressed patients with
avoidant PD, and that cognitive therapy was more effective for depressed patients
with obsessive– compulsive PD, there is limited research on treatment matching for
individuals with PDs. In fact, as mentioned earlier, there remains limited evidence
for PD treatment more generally (with the exception of borderline PD; Bateman,
Gunderson, & Mulder, 2015). Regardless of treatment approach or orientation, clini-
cians working with patients with comorbid mental disorders may want to do some

-- 291 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	271
focused work on pathological personality patterns, in addition to the evidence-based
treatment used for disorders such as depression and anxiety. For example, experi-
enced cognitive-behavioral and psychodynamic therapists have described how dif-
ferently they implement empirically based principles of change when working with
depressed or socially anxious clients, depending on whether clients also have bor-
derline personality disorder (Castonguay, Constantino, & Beutler, 2019). Length of
treatment must also be considered, as treatment generally takes longer when comor-
bid personality pathology is present (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006).
There are many limitations to the classification system for PDs, and a PD “diag-
nosis” is unlikely to provide all the information that a clinician needs. There may
be times when a patient’s symptoms fall short of a diagnosis of PD, but a subthresh-
old presentation still has important implications for treatment. If a client engages
in impulsive, dangerous behavior and has difficulty managing emotional reactions,
these features must be kept in mind, even if the person’s personality patterns and
symptoms do not reach the diagnostic threshold for borderline PD. It is also pos-
sible that personality dysfunction may be difficult to detect in the beginning stages
of treatment. Individuals with avoidant, dependent, or obsessive– compulsive PDs,
which are characterized by constricted emotions, often seek treatment because of
depression or anxiety. Because they do not generally engage in the attention-getting
behaviors (e.g., angry outbursts), their personality dysfunction can be overlooked.
A thorough history of how patients are functioning in all aspects of their lives can
be valuable in ensuring that these kinds of issues do not go unnoticed. Ongoing
assessment and refinement of case conceptualization are necessary throughout the
course of treatment, since a patient’s level of functioning and overall relational abil-
ity may change. An individual who appears to function rather well may, as treatment
unfolds, present as being more fragile or unstable than the original presentation sug-
gested. Conversely, some patients who initially present as disturbed may quickly
restabilize with treatment.
The severity of personality dysfunction must also be kept in mind when deter-
mining the best treatment approach. Determining whether outpatient care is suf-
ficient for a client with severe personality dysfunction is critical. Does the practicing
clinician have the resources to provide treatment to this patient? Or is more intensive
inpatient care needed? One major component of this consideration is with regard to
safety, both in terms of suicidal or parasuicidal behavior and aggression. Thorough
evaluation of risky behavior, parasuicidal acts (including frequency, duration, and
methods), and active suicidal/homicidal thoughts is critical.
In line with the ICD-11 PDs model and the DSM-5 AMPD, practicing clinicians
may find it helpful to consider personality pathology in terms of presenting person-
ality trait characteristics. Dramatically elevated levels of anger–hostility and excite-
ment seeking or extremely low levels of trust, compliance, and tender-mindedness
would contribute differently to the therapeutic relationship and treatment progress.
Although some forms of PDs are associated with high levels of anxiousness and
vulnerability, people with antisocial PD frequently exhibit unusually low levels of
anxiety and concern about danger. This low level of anxiety is not necessarily cap-
tured by symptoms for antisocial PD and could be missed by a clinician unfamil-
iar with antisocial pathology (Harris & Rice, 2006). With this in mind, the use of a
structured measure to identify maladaptive variants of personality traits could be

-- 292 of 498 --

272 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
an extremely useful tool for clinicians when conceptualizing a patient with PD and
planning treatment (Waugh et al., 2017; Widiger, Lynam, Miller, & Oltmanns, 2012).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
PDs are considered to be among the most common forms of psychopathology when
considered as a general category (i.e., any of the 10 DSM-5 PDs).
Prevalence in Community Samples
In the general adult population, the overall lifetime prevalence for having at least
one PD (any type) is approximately 12% (Volkert, Gablonski, & Rabung, 2018). While
this figure tends to be relatively consistent from one study to the next, prevalence
rates for specific types of PD vary quite a bit. The highest prevalence rates, usu-
ally found to be associated with obsessive– compulsive, antisocial, and avoidant PDs,
may affect 3 or 4% of adults.
Gender Differences
The overall prevalence of PDs is approximately equal in men and women (Lenzen-
weger, Lane, Loranger, & Kessler, 2007). There are, however, consistent gender dif-
ferences with regard to at least one specific disorder: Antisocial PD is unquestion-
ably much more common among men than among women, with prevalence rates
of approximately 5% reported for men and 1% for women (Coid et al., 2006). Thus,
antisocial PD is actually an alarmingly common problem among adult males in the
United States. Epidemiological evidence regarding gender differences for the other
types of PD is much more ambiguous. In DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association,
2013), borderline and dependent PD are described as being diagnosed more fre-
quently in women than in men, but the evidence is not strong (Oldham, Skodol, &
Bender, 2009).
It is not clear whether differential prevalence rates exist (with the exception of
antisocial PD), but there is some evidence to suggest that PD symptoms may differ-
entially affect men and women across many domains of functioning. For example,
some borderline symptoms, such as affective instability, unstable relationships, and
stress-related paranoia, may be more relevant to borderline pathology in women,
whereas impulsivity or aggression may be more relevant to borderline pathology
in men (Boggs et al., 2005). However, there is evidence in clinical samples that such
gender differences in symptoms are not actually present (Mancke, Bertsch, & Her-
pertz, 2015; Silberschmidt, Lee, Zanarini, & Schulz, 2015). Other mental disorders
are represented differently in male and female patients with borderline PD. In a
national epidemiological sample, Grant and colleagues (2008) found that border-
line males showed higher rates of comorbid substance use disorders, while females
showed higher rates of comorbid depression and anxiety, in particular posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). It is important to note that these gender differences mirror
the broader gender differences found in mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders.

-- 293 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	273
Age‑Related Factors
The DSM-5 general definition specifies that a PD usually begins by adolescence or
early adulthood, and the assumption is that these characteristics are stable over time.
Based on evidence provided by several follow-up studies with young adults, we now
know that this assumption regarding stability is exaggerated (Samuel et al., 2011);
this is covered in more detail in the section below. While many patients with PD do
improve over time, longitudinal studies have not been conducted in later life. No one
has studied a community sample of middle-aged or older adults for a sufficiently
long period of time to determine whether new cases appear (T. Oltmanns & Balsis,
2011); therefore, we do not know whether some PD symptoms may emerge later in
life, with or without a foundation in related personality traits. It may be that for
some, personality dysfunction may emerge under certain conditions and in certain
contexts. For example, for some individuals, going to prison results in the emergence
of what is considered an antisocial PD, which may be the result of adaptation to
the extreme demands of prison. There are also anecdotal reports about individuals
who go from being unknown to being famous and developing narcissistic PD. When
considering these and other examples, it is often useful to think of this phenomenon
as the expression of a complex system called “personality systematics” (Magnavita,
2004).
Another related issue involves the fact that the onset of a PD is difficult to iden-
tify. It is certainly true that the onset of more florid symptoms, such as hallucinations
or washing rituals, or prominent drinking problems, might be easier to pinpoint
in time. But many forms of psychopathology have symptoms that emerge gradu-
ally, and many disorders are preceded by an extended prodromal period that is dif-
ficult to identify. In the absence of a substantial literature regarding age of onset
and PDs, we turn to the literature on personality traits. These studies show some
evidence of change, which most often is gradual (Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer,
2006). If we think of PDs as correlates of these personality traits, we have to consider
the possibility or the likelihood that the presentation of PDs may change similarly.
Furthermore, when we think in terms of latent traits or propensities to behave in a
certain way that becomes manifest (and perhaps troublesome) within a particular
social context (which can change across the life course), it seems reasonable to argue
that sudden onset is unusual or unexpected. That is different than saying, however,
that late onset is impossible.
Regarding differences in prevalence across age groups, although the evidence
is not overwhelming, several studies indicate that Cluster A and Cluster C PDs may
be more prevalent in older people than in younger people (T. Oltmanns et al., 2014;
Ullrich & Coid, 2009). In contrast, borderline and antisocial PDs are less prevalent in
older people than in younger people (Samuel et al., 2011). This pattern is interesting,
but considerable caution must be exercised in drawing conclusions about patterns
of change on the basis of this evidence, since it is all cross-sectional. Cross-sectional
studies necessarily compare people from different age groups who are living in dif-
ferent contexts. Differences in the extent of social isolation or dependence might
reflect variation in life circumstances for younger and older adults rather than true
developmental changes in the prevalence of specific personality problems (T. Olt-
manns & Balsis, 2011).

-- 294 of 498 --

274 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
It is also relevant to acknowledge that while some argue against the diagnosis
of PDs in children, others believe that choosing to ignore their existence does a dis-
service by allowing these children to suffer needlessly (Freeman & Reinecke, 2007).
If a PD diagnosis is considered in children, they should be diagnosed with a PD only
after a thorough assessment has been completed. It is probably best when consider-
ing the diagnosis of a PD in children or adolescence to use a systemic framework that
examines the child’s or adolescent’s personality within the context of family, com-
munity, and cultural systems, and to view the personality as an adaptation to these
relational and cultural forces (Magnavita, 2007).
Race and Ethnicity
There is very limited epidemiological research on ethnic or racial differences among
individuals with PDs. One large-scale study (Lenzenweger et al., 2007) reported no
significant racial differences among the PDs. In other epidemiological studies, race/
ethnicity is often simply controlled in analyses. With the few empirical studies that
have found differences, findings are mixed. As part of the Collaborative Longitudi-
nal Personality Disorders Study, Chavira and colleagues (2003) examined the rela-
tionship between ethnicity and four PDs (i.e., avoidant, schizotypal, borderline, and
obsessive– compulsive). The results showed higher rates of schizotypal PD among
Blacks and higher rates of borderline PD among Hispanics compared to Whites.
Other research supports the association between schizotypal PD and Black women
(Pulay et al., 2009). Alternatively, a more recent meta-analysis of studies of the asso-
ciation between PDs and race/ethnicity demonstrated that Blacks are significantly
less likely to be diagnosed with a PD than Whites, although whether there is actu-
ally less prevalence of personality pathology among these individuals, or whether
PDs are less likely to be diagnosed cannot be determined from available evidence
(McGilloway, Hall, Lee, & Bhui, 2010). No differences between Asian or Hispanic
groups and White groups were found. It is important to note that there is evidence of
racial diagnostic bias in schizophrenia, such that Blacks are more likely to be diag-
nosed with schizophrenia that Whites (Schwartz, Docherty, Najolia, & Cohen, 2019);
thus, racial differences in schizotypal PD could be impacted by such biases as well.
Additionally, minorities living in low-income, urban areas are at particularly high
risk for exposure to chronic interpersonal trauma across the lifespan (Gillespie et al.,
2009; Roberts, Gilman, Breslau, Breslau, & Koenen, 2011) that may enhance risk for
the development of PDs in the context of trauma. Clearly, without more research, we
cannot draw any specific conclusions about the role of ethnicity in understanding
PDs. As with any form of psychopathology, however, it is critical to keep cultural
factors in mind when conceptualizing a case, planning treatment, and implementing
an intervention.
Clinical Implications of Gender, Age, and Cultural Factors
Personality pathology is common across both clinical and community populations.
It is therefore critical to assess for PDs during the initial assessment process, while
keeping in mind potential gender, age, and race or ethnicity differences. PD symp-
toms may manifest differently in men and women, and they may also have different

-- 295 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	275
comorbid pathology (Grant et al., 2008); differences in comorbid pathology can affect
how treatment may proceed or what interventions one chooses as a clinician. With
regard to age, the clinical presentation of certain disorders may also change over
the lifespan and could further impact treatment decisions or focus. Changes in the
presentation of personality dysfunction may be subtle and difficult to detect, mak-
ing it especially important for practicing clinicians to be aware of how psychopa-
thology is likely to look in the age groups they treat. More generally, practicing cli-
nicians should always consider the sociocultural context of the patient, including
race and ethnicity, education level, and socioeconomic status, and how those factors
may affect a patient’s ability to participate fully in treatment. Black Americans, for
example, often show mistrust for the U.S. health care system based on past personal
experiences with racial discrimination in those settings or historical knowledge of
negative behaviors toward Blacks in the health care system. Mental health stigma
is also particularly strong in the Black community and if Blacks do seek treatment,
they may be ashamed of their condition or hide treatment information from family
or friends (Brown et al., 2010; Sirey et al., 2001). It may be necessary as a clinician to
address these kinds of concerns during therapy. Understanding such concerns can
help in the development of a strong therapeutic relationship and promote motivation
to continue treatment.
COURSE AND OUTCOME
Lifespan perspectives on psychopathology have played a crucial role in shaping the
classification of many forms of psychopathology. Established views of major mental
disorders, such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, are based on careful descrip-
tions that include close attention to the course of the disorders over extended peri-
ods of time. Kraepelin’s (1919) early recognition of the distinction between dementia
praecox and manic– depressive psychosis hinged largely on the different patterns
these disorders follow over time rather than on the presence of specific symptoms
during periods of acute disturbance. Therefore, it is important to consider the avail-
able evidence regarding the course of PDs from childhood to adulthood and later
life.
Childhood Antecedents
Temporal stability is one of the most important assumptions about PDs. A few lon-
gitudinal studies have made substantial contributions to our understanding of con-
tinuity of personality pathology, and they have focused largely on the period of the
lifespan ranging from childhood through adolescence and young adulthood (Paris,
2003; Skodol, 2008). For example, the Children in the Community Study study fol-
lowed a large, community-based sample of children (average age at baseline = 14)
over three decades, assessing personality pathology at five separate periods, until
participants were on average 38 years old (Cohen, 2008). Several papers from this
innovative study have demonstrated that various types of PD are associated with the
subsequent development of social impairment, as well as the onset of other forms of
psychopathology (Cohen, Crawford, Johnson, & Kasen, 2005).

-- 296 of 498 --

276 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Stability (from Adolescence to Young Adulthood)
Results from these longitudinal studies also suggest that categorical diagnoses and
particular symptoms of PDs are not as stable as previously believed and may depend
on the method of assessment (Cohen, 2008; Samuel et al., 2011; Skodol, Gunderson, et
al., 2005). In fact, recent evidence suggests that borderline PD symptoms vary as much
as depression among teens and young adults (ages 14–20), further supporting that bor-
derline PD is not necessarily “set” early on (Conway, Hipwell, & Stepp, 2017). On the
other hand, functional impairment associated with personality pathology has been
found to be extensive and relatively more stable in comparison to PD symptoms (e.g.,
Blum et al., 2008; Skodol, Pagano, et al., 2005). Viewed from a dimensional perspective,
the maladaptive traits that represent the core features of the disorders may remain rel-
atively stable between adolescence and young adulthood (Crawford, Cohen, & Brook,
2001). The relative stability of maladaptive personality traits versus diagnoses has
been supported in other studies as well (Skodol, Shea, Yen, White, & Gunderson, 2010).
Change across the Lifespan
The tentative evidence reported from longitudinal studies suggests that certain fea-
tures of personality pathology may change or “burn out” over the lifespan (Zanarini
et al., 2007). In examining patients with borderline PD over a period of 10 years fol-
lowing treatment, major improvements were most often seen in self-mutilation and
suicidal behaviors. Problems managing anger and dysphoria, and interpersonal
difficulties related to fears of abandonment and dependency were the most stable
symptoms of borderline PD. Although symptom remission was common following
treatment (93% showed 2-year symptom remission), social and vocational function-
ing remained a problem for 50% of patients; the symptoms that persist may con-
tinue to cause problems even if the level of symptoms and overall safety risk may be
reduced (Gunderson et al., 2011; Zanarini, Frankenburg, Reich, & Fitzmaurice, 2010).
Negative outcomes are still related to borderline pathology, even at subthreshold
levels (Blum et al., 2008; J. Oltmanns, Weinstein, & Oltmanns, 2014).
Across various PD types more generally, categorical diagnoses show poor sta-
bility over a 10-year course (Durbin & Klein, 2006). Patients’ symptom profiles fluc-
tuate as they rise above or pass below the exact threshold for making a diagnosis.
PD symptoms appear to be more dynamic and depend on contextual factors in the
individual’s environment. On the other hand, personality traits (both normal and
pathological) show more stability over time (Hopwood & Bleidorn, 2018; Hopwood,
Morey, et al., 2013). Thus, when considering changes in the adjustment of patients
over time, it is important to consider maladaptive personality traits in addition to
whether or not the person meets the absolute threshold for a DSM-5 diagnosis.
Clinical Implications of Course and Outcome
Case formulation of an individual and treatment planning should include a compre-
hensive assessment of the history of a client’s maladaptive traits and a determination
of how patterns of behavior may have changed or adapted across various contexts
and developmental stages. For example, a client may express a tendency toward a

-- 297 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	277
number of negative affect and antagonism facets (e.g., hostility, suspiciousness, and
manipulativeness) in the presence of an intimate partner relationship or dating but
deny such tendencies when single. Therefore, certain symptoms of borderline PD
may appear present and active at certain life stages more than others and cause more
harm in certain contexts, although the maladaptive traits may still be present. A
more nuanced understanding of the stability and change in a client’s maladaptive
traits, behaviors, and symptoms over time can enable therapist and client to work
together to identify particular contexts that represent vulnerabilities and the skills
that need to be addressed in treatment. This can also aid with ensuring that adequate
skills are present to promote relapse prevention.
Because social, vocational, and functional impairment often remains despite
reductions in PD symptoms, it is imperative to focus on these aspects of functioning
throughout treatment and build in skills that address social and vocational function-
ing to the treatment itself. Relatedly, awareness of the types of symptoms that appear
most stable over time (e.g., anger and interpersonal difficulties in borderline PD) can
allow for a directive focus on those symptoms in treatment. Therapists should be
aware that PD symptoms may shift or change over the life course and over treatment,
and that even if an individual has subthreshold PD symptoms, therapy could be war-
ranted to address the underlying maladaptive traits that may cause future difficulties
or maintain functional impairment across social, vocational, and other domains.
ETIOLOGY
Evidence regarding causal factors involved in the development and maintenance of
PDs points to a complicated set of interactions involving genetic factors and envi-
ronmental events (Kendler et al., 2008). Most studies of these issues have focused on
specific types of PDs rather than the entire spectrum of personality pathology.
Genetic Factors
The most extensive research on genetic factors in PDs has been on schizotypal PD
because of its associations with schizophrenia and psychotic spectrum disorders;
schizotypal PD symptoms have similarities with prodromal schizophrenic symp-
toms (Ettinger, Meyhöfer, Steffens, Wagner, & Koutsouleris, 2014; Parnas, Licht, &
Bovet, 2005). Twin studies have examined genetic contributions to schizotypal PD
from a dimensional perspective in which schizotypal personality traits are measured
with questionnaires. Evidence points to a significant genetic contribution (Linney et
al., 2003). Family studies point to the same conclusion; the first-degree relatives of
schizophrenic patients are considerably more likely than people in the general popu-
lation to exhibit features of schizotypal PD (Kendler et al., 1993).
Genetic research has also been conducted on borderline and antisocial PD.
Twin studies have suggested that both are moderately heritable (Distel et al., 2008;
Reichborn-Kjennerud et al., 2015). Empirical evidence further indicates that fun-
damental personality traits that define borderline PD, such as neuroticism and
impulsivity, are clearly influenced by genetic factors (Niv, Tuvblad, Raine, Wang, &
Baker, 2012; Zheng, Plomin, & von Stumm, 2016). Research on antisocial behaviors

-- 298 of 498 --

278 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
has demonstrated that their development is determined by an interaction between
genetic factors and adverse environmental circumstances (Rhee & Waldman, 2002).
As pointed out by Wright, Pahlen, and Krueger (2017), this is true across all the PDs,
since personality pathology is considered in terms of maladaptive personality traits.
Environmental Adversity
Many researchers are interested in the role of environmental adversity in the devel-
opment of PDs. What kinds of events might be involved in this process? Obvious
candidates include childhood abuse and neglect (Cicchetti, 2016). Longitudinal data
on adolescents have shown that children exposed to abuse or neglect are four times
more likely that those who have not been mistreated to develop symptoms of PDs
as young adults (Johnson, Cohen, Brown, Smailes, & Bernstein, 1999; Johnson et al.,
2001). Other research in community and clinical samples have also shown a link
between childhood maltreatment and risk for personality pathology, particularly
Cluster A and Cluster B PDs (Afifi et al., 2011; Powers, Thomas, Ressler, & Bradley,
2011). Importantly, childhood trauma exposure differentially impacts low socioeco-
nomic status and minority individuals, potentially increasing risk for certain PDs,
such as paranoid PD (Iacovino, Jackson, & Oltmanns, 2014).
The type of abuse or neglect experienced may impact what type of PD develops.
For example, in a research study, Lobbestael, Arntz, and Bernstein (2010), using a
sample of 409 outpatient, inpatient, and forensic patients, found that sexual abuse is
associated with paranoid, schizoid, borderline, and avoidant PD symptoms, physical
abuse is associated with antisocial PD symptoms, emotional abuse is associated with
paranoid, schizotypal, borderline, avoidant, dependent, and obsessive– compulsive
PD symptoms, and emotional neglect is associated with histrionic and borderline
PD symptoms. A study by Cohen and colleagues (2014) with adults recruited from
inpatient and outpatient settings examined only borderline PD, antisocial PD, and
Clusters A and C as outcome variables, and found that physical abuse is associated
with antisocial PD, emotional abuse is associated with Cluster C PD symptoms, and
emotional neglect is associated with Cluster A PD symptoms. Unfortunately, there
has not been enough research to identify clear risk pathways; therefore, it is critical to
more broadly understand the risks associated with childhood maltreatment and not
make assumptions about what type of maltreatment might lead to what diagnosis
based only on the few studies available.
The link between childhood abuse and neglect and borderline PD has been par-
ticularly well studied (Chanen & Kaess, 2012). Studies of patients with borderline PD
do point toward the influence of widespread problematic relationships with their
parents and an invalidating home environment. Adolescent girls with borderline PD
report pervasive lack of supervision; frequent witnessing of domestic violence; and
being subjected to inappropriate behavior by their parents and other adults, includ-
ing verbal, physical, and sexual abuse (Helgeland & Torgersen, 2004; Pally, 2002). The
extent and severity of abuse vary widely across individuals. Many patients describe
multiple forms of abuse by more than one person. These data (both retrospective
and longitudinal) support the argument that maladaptive patterns of parenting and
family relationships increase the probability that a person will develop certain types
of PD.

-- 299 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	279
Clinical Implications of Genetic and Environmental Causes
While there is relatively little research on etiological factors related to PDs, the treat-
ment considerations that emerge may be particularly critical to understand regard-
less of the treatment method being used. We discuss a few here.
Because of the strong link between childhood trauma and PDs, thorough evalua-
tion of lifetime trauma exposure, with a particular focus on childhood maltreatment,
is encouraged when treating patients with PDs. The type of childhood maltreatment
experienced is very relevant clinically and may inform case conceptualization and
treatment planning. Especially if the patient has experienced trauma, there may be
comorbid symptoms of PTSD that need attention during the course of treatment.
Because the trauma may also have been invalidated by others in the past or patients
may have never previously shared the trauma with others, it may be necessary to help
them face the severity of the trauma experienced in a safe and supportive therapeutic
environment. Psychoeducation regarding common symptoms related to trauma expo-
sure can be very helpful in patients’ understanding of their difficulties in functioning
and presenting symptoms. Family history of psychiatric conditions should also be
assessed, especially considering genetic factors for antisocial and schizotypal PDs.
For practicing clinicians who work with children, it is also critical to be aware
of the developmental precursors to personality dysfunction. Behavioral and conduct
disorder, when not transient, often lead to the development of PD in adolescence and
adulthood (Cohen et al., 2005). Children with chronic developmental problems need
to have increased attention, with preventive treatment aimed toward helping them
avoid chronic personality dysfunction.
Understanding the nature of developmental relationships in patients with PD
may also be particularly informative because those relationships likely contributed
to current dysfunctional images of self and others (Magnavita, 2000). This can be
valuable regardless of theoretical orientation and does not have to take away from
a general emphasis on “the present,” which is characteristic of some of the current
PD treatments, such as DBT. Descriptions of current relationships with family and
friends also provide clinicians with an idea of what social support is present for the
patient and what environmental factors may impede treatment progress. There is no
clear etiological pathway to developing PD, but it is beneficial to keep in mind the
general contribution of family and traumatic experiences.
TREATMENT
Treatment of PDs is invariably difficult. It has been particularly challenging for
investigators to provide clear, evidence-based principles grounded in solid empiri-
cal evidence because PDs are heterogeneous. Treatment procedures for people with
PDs are especially difficult to design and evaluate for three principal reasons. First,
as previously mentioned, people with these disorders frequently do not have insight
into the nature of their problems. Thus, they are unlikely to seek treatment, and if
they do, they frequently terminate treatment prematurely. Second, pure forms of PDs
are relatively rare. Most people with PDs who are in treatment also exhibit comorbid
forms of other mental disorders, such as depression or drug addiction. Third, people

-- 300 of 498 --

280 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
with PDs have difficulty establishing and maintaining meaningful, stable interper-
sonal relationships of the sort required for psychotherapy.
Despite the previously mentioned challenges of treating individuals with PDs,
the field of PD treatment is advancing, and a number of evidence-based approaches
have been developed for PDs (Bateman et al., 2015; Cristea et al., 2017; Magnavita,
2010). As mentioned previously, three therapeutic approaches have been specifically
developed for the treatment of borderline PD: DBT (Linehan, 1993); MBT (Bateman
& Fonagy, 2004); and TFP (Clarkin et al., 2001). A recent meta-analysis suggests that
all three approaches are effective at reducing borderline PD symptoms and improv-
ing outcomes (Cristea et al., 2017). DBT has more recently been shown to be effec-
tive transdiagnostically, and since it is beneficial in improving emotion regulation, it
could be incorporated in the treatment of other PDs as well (Neacsiu, Eberle, Kramer,
Wiesmann, & Linehan, 2014). Both cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and short-
term dynamic psychotherapy (Bateman et al., 2015; Messer & Abbass, 2010; Town,
Abbass, & Hardy, 2011) have been shown to be effective, especially for certain anx-
ious and dramatic forms of PD. CBT approaches may also be useful in the treatment
of the maladaptive trait antagonism (Maples-Keller, Yasinski, Coghlan, & Powers,
2019). Psychodynamic group therapy delivered in a partial hospital setting is an
underutilized yet cost-effective treatment option for PDs as well (Piper, 2008). Each
of these approaches may offer useful strategies and techniques for working with a
spectrum of individuals with PDs.
Treatment also may involve the use of antipsychotic or antidepressant medica-
tion, most often for patients with schizotypal or borderline PD. A few controlled
studies indicate that pharmacological treatment can be beneficial (Ingenhoven,
Lafay, Rinne, Passchier, & Duivenvoorden, 2010). More research is needed to deter-
mine the differential benefits of these treatment methods and what factors clinicians
should consider when planning treatment.
Beyond specific treatment options, many general therapeutic principles of
change are essential to effective intervention regardless of the therapist’s theoretical
orientation (Castonguay & Beutler, 2006). Two groups of researchers have reviewed
the research literature and identified a number of common principles that may be
particularly important to keep in mind in the treatment of individuals with PDs.
Some of the principles include a strong therapeutic relationship; honest communica-
tion about the limits of therapy and difficulty of change; emphasis on goal-oriented,
structured therapy sessions; and a general focus on increasing adaptive ways of
thinking and behaving, and decreasing maladaptive thinking–behavior patterns
(Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006; Linehan, Davison, Lynch, & Sanderson, 2005).
Clinical Implications
Development of a Collaborative Relationship
Probably the most vexing part of working with individuals with personality pathol-
ogy is that they typically experience widespread difficulties in social and inter-
personal relationships. The standard way that clinicians develop a collaborative
relationship is not likely to be effective. Nevertheless, the importance of a strong
therapeutic alliance is clear. The therapeutic relationship can be used as a model for
how healthy relationships might work.

-- 301 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	281
The clinician will likely need to attend to the therapeutic alliance regularly, with
particular attention to therapeutic ruptures, an inevitable part of the treatment pro-
cess that affects the therapeutic relationship over time (Muran & Safran, 2002). Some
research suggests that an explicit focus on the nature of the therapeutic relationship
in therapy can have a positive effect on outcome (Clarkin et al., 2001), although there
is still limited evidence on what client-specific factors must be kept in mind when
using such an approach. The focus of the therapeutic relationship may differ by type
of PD (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006) or nature of the presenting problems (Sum-
mers & Barber, 2009). For example, a strong, positive alliance may greatly benefit
individuals with PDs, who often alienate others and have difficulty with developing
close relationships, such as a person with paranoid PD. Alternatively, individuals
with borderline PD may easily develop a strong attachment to their therapist but
have difficulty managing the relationship. In these cases, attention might best be
focused on establishing relational boundaries, demonstrating appropriate distance
in the relationship, and modeling the integration of positive and negative aspects of
an interpersonal relationship.
Critchfield and Benjamin (2006) describe a number of principles that can help the
development and maintenance of a positive therapeutic relationship with patients
with PD, including expression of empathy, positive regard, and patience in sessions,
as well as adoption of a flexible stance toward treatment (while maintaining appro-
priate boundaries). Therapeutic flexibility may be particularly important when treat-
ing patients with PD because PDs involve such a heterogeneous group of conditions
and are related to so many kinds of relationship difficulties. No single style or thera-
peutic approach fits every patient with a PD, but these principles reach across all
theoretical orientations. It is imperative for clinicians to assess the needs and capaci-
ties of each individual and modify the treatment as needed, while using therapeutic
interventions that are both grounded in case conceptualization and based on empiri-
cally supported treatments and the clinician’s own expertise and training.
One crucial component to treatment of PD is disclosure of diagnosis and psy-
choeducation regarding diagnosis. Although there has been stigma in providing
individuals with a diagnosis, particularly in the context of borderline PD, there is
ample evidence to suggest that disclosure early on is a valuable component of suc-
cessful treatment (Lequesne & Hersh, 2004; Zanarini & Frankenburg, 2008). It is also
important to limit unacceptable behavior in therapy and model appropriate expres-
sion of thoughts or emotions (Seibel & Dowd, 2001). Practicing clinicians may find
that patients with borderline pathology push the limits of therapy more than people
with any other PD, so this point is particularly relevant in the treatment of these indi-
viduals. Finally, explicitly addressing patients’ expectations for success, discussing
the limits of therapy, and conveying understanding about the difficulty of change
helps to ensure that patients do not hold unrealistic expectations that the therapist
can never meet. In brief, there is a need in some cases to provide ongoing education
about therapy (e.g., Linehan, 1993).
Emphasis on Working toward Explicit Mutually Agreed‑Upon Goals
Psychotherapists should consider an active stance in helping patients organize their
complaints and distress into clear and understandable goals, which become bench-
marks toward which to work. Many individuals with personality dysfunction are

-- 302 of 498 --

282 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
unaware of the nature and the impact of their dysfunctional patterns and therefore
do not generally seek treatment for these problems. They may enter treatment with
relational disturbances or a clinical syndrome such as depression, or they may be in
treatment because the courts or family members referred them. The therapist must
accept patients as they are and formulate goals consistent with their wishes. As treat-
ment unfolds, the psychotherapist can begin to shift by expanding or narrowing the
focus of treatment when the patient appears to be ready for such change. Regardless
of therapeutic orientation, detailed analyses of the precipitating factors and conse-
quences of problematic behaviors are an important first step in gaining a thorough
picture of the patient’s difficulty and what will need to be addressed in the context
of therapy (Linehan, 1993). Related to this, education about the patterns discovered
and how treatment can help is necessary. For example, a patient with dependent PD
should understand how the dependent patterns interfere with goal attainment and
ultimate satisfaction, and how facing unpleasant affective states allows growth to
proceed.
While determining treatment goals may seem to be relatively straightforward,
the implementation of PD treatment is often thrown off course. Remember that indi-
viduals with PDs are characteristically rigid and inflexible in their patterns of think-
ing and behaving, and they often feel comfortable with these patterns. It is common,
and often needed, for therapists to spend a great deal of therapy time discussing a
patient’s desire for change, reviewing treatment goals and the reason those goals
were determined, and assessing level of distress or dysfunction with current behav-
ior. This process can look very different, depending on the PD patient. Therapists
may have a particularly difficult time with therapy impasses or unfocused treatment
when working with patients with borderline PD (Fonagy & Bateman, 2008; Kernberg,
Yeomans, Clarkin, & Levy, 2008; Linehan, 1993). Structure and consistency are essen-
tial in the treatment of patients with borderline PD, however, because their lives are
almost always filled with chaos outside of therapy. Avoidant patients, on the other
hand, may remain distant during sessions or even avoid therapy as a way to avoid
facing their fears; if a clear pattern emerges, this behavior could then be addressed in
an empathetic way by the therapist.
To ensure progress toward treatment goals, it is critical that clinicians take an
active therapeutic stance (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006; Linehan, 1993). Because
of their tendency perceptually to misperceive or distort the intentions of others,
patients with PD generally do not do well with an overly detached, passive thera-
peutic stance. A balance must be sought between controlling the process and letting
it stagnate, which will result in premature termination. Furthermore, active monitor-
ing of a patient’s response to treatment is essential. If the patient is not responding,
psychotherapist and patient should collaborate about changing treatment goals.
Focus on Increasing Adaptive Thinking/Behaving and Decreasing
Maladaptive Thinking/Behavior
One of the criteria for a diagnosis of PD is the presence of maladaptive patterns of
thinking or behaving in cognition, emotional responses, interpersonal functioning,
and/or impulse control. Whether or not these tie explicitly to treatment goals, part
of the therapist’s role is to facilitate more adaptive ways of thinking about the self

-- 303 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	283
and others, manage emotional reactions, and tolerate distress. At the same time, it
is essential to avoid reinforcing negative behaviors. Some of this can be done in the
context of the therapeutic relationship, but it is also important for the therapist to
relate newly learned behaviors to the patient’s everyday life (Linehan, 1993; Swales
& Dunkley, 2020). While most treatments for psychopathology share the focus of
altering affect, cognition, and behavior in one way or another, affect may be a par-
ticularly critical focus in PD treatment (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006; Summers &
Barber, 2009).
CONCLUSION
PDs are among the most common and debilitating of conditions presented in clinical
practice and medical offices. Their negative impact is far-reaching, affecting many
aspects of individuals’ lives, with a particularly detrimental impact on interpersonal
relationships. Pathological personality traits often begin in childhood or adoles-
cence, and those early traits are associated with an increased risk for the subsequent
development of PD and other mental disorders (Cohen, Chen, Crawford, Brook, &
Gordon, 2007). PDs are commonly comorbid with other psychopathology, such as
major depression or substance use disorders. They can also have a negative impact
on the course of such disorders and make treatment adherence difficult (Fournier et
al., 2008).
While the devastating impact of PDs on general functioning and well-being is
clear, there are a number of limitations in the current basic research. First, much of
the work described earlier focuses on a single PD (i.e., borderline PD) or a group of
PDs, and does not provide data on the full range of personality pathology. Combining
what we know about general personality traits and PDs, and exploring interactions
among personality traits (e.g., high Neuroticism, low Conscientiousness, and low
Agreeableness) may be one way to advance our basic knowledge of PDs. The way PDs
are measured also varies across studies, making it difficult to make specific conclu-
sions about etiological or sociocultural factors in relation to PDs, or to determine the
particular impact of a given PD feature. Furthermore, many of the longitudinal stud-
ies up to now have been restricted to small clinical samples with only younger adults,
and there is evidence that the presentation of personality pathology may change as
individuals age (Gleason, Weinstein, Balsis, & Oltmanns, 2014; Oltmanns et al., 2014).
There is also growing evidence of risk for negative physical health outcomes associ-
ated with PDs, particularly among older adults (e.g., Powers & Oltmanns, 2012, 2013).
This is an unusual time for PD researchers and clinicians, as clearly demon-
strated by the fact that DSM-5 includes two alternative systems for classifying PDs.
Furthermore, while the categorical system for PDs remains the primary focus in
DSM-5, ICD-11 has now adopted a dimensional trait model for determining PD.
Dimensional classification systems have the advantage of being better able to account
for similarities and differences in people with various combinations of personality
traits and do not require the assumption of arbitrary boundaries between normal
and abnormal personality. Although this is different from the categorical method
currently used by clinicians, it may be equally or even more useful when trying to
conceptualize patients and determine treatment.

-- 304 of 498 --

284 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
PDs are heterogenous, challenging conditions to diagnose and treat. There is
still a great deal we need to learn about the etiology, course, and consequences of
PDs. There is also a long way to go in validating empirically supported treatments
for patients with PDs. However, the importance of understanding and treating per-
sonality pathology in clinical practice cannot be overemphasized. PDs are extremely
costly to our health care system, and evidence shows that when PDs are treated,
there are significant reductions in health care utilization for up to 3 years follow-
ing completion of treatment (Davies & Campling, 2003). The variability among indi-
viduals with PDs makes it much too difficult to expect that one theoretical model
or therapeutic technique can satisfy that diversity. By using general principles of
change and common themes that run across orientations as our guide, we can better
understand what makes treatment effective for each unique individual. As we think
about next steps for the field, it will be imperative to move beyond the barriers of
a single theoretical orientation and investigate the therapeutic elements associated
with treatment efficacy and how effectiveness varies with different patients.
REFERENCES
Afifi, T. O., Mather, A., Boman, J., Fleisher, W., Enns, M. W., MacMillan, H., & Sareen, J. (2011).
Childhood adversity and personality disorders: Results from a nationally representative
population-based study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45(6), 814–822.
Aldao, A., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2012). The influence of context on the implementation of
adaptive emotion regulation strategies. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(7–8), 493–501.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Andrewes, H. E., Hulbert, C., Cotton, S. M., Betts, J., & Chanen, A. M. (2018). Patterns of non-
suicidal self-injury and their relationship with suicide attempts in youth with borderline
personality disorder. Archives of Suicide Research, 22(3), 465–478.
Barber, J. P., & Muenz, L. R. (1996). The role of avoidance and obsessiveness in matching
patients to cognitive and interpersonal psychotherapy: Empirical findings from the
Treatment for Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Consulting and Clin-
ical Psychology, 64, 951–958.
Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2004). Mentalization-based treatment of BPD. Journal of Personal-
ity Disorders, 18(1), 36–51.
Bateman, A. W., Gunderson, J., & Mulder, R. (2015). Treatment of personality disorder. Lancet,
385, 735–743.
Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., & Davies, D. D. (2004). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Bender, D. S., Morey, L. C., & Skodol, A. E. (2011). Toward a model for assessing level of person-
ality functioning in DSM-5: Part I. A review of theory and methods. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 93, 332–346.
Berk, M., Boyce, P., Hamilton, A., Morris, G., Outhred, T., Das, P., . . . Parker, G. (2018). Person-
ality: Distraction or driver in the diagnosis of depression. Personality and Mental Health,
12(2), 126–130.
Birkley, E. L., & Eckhardt, C. I. (2015). Anger, hostility, internalizing negative emotions, and
intimate partner violence perpetration: A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 37, 40–56.
Blum, N., John, D., Pfohl, B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B., Allen, J., . . . Black, D. W. (2008). Systems
training for emotional predictability and problem solving (STEPPS) for outpatients with

-- 305 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	285
borderline personality disorder: A randomized controlled trial and 1-year follow-up.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 468–478.
Boggs, C., Morey, L., Skodol, A., Shea, M., Sanislow, C., Grilo, C., . . . Gunderson, J. G. (2005).
Differential impairment as an indicator of sex bias in the DSM-IV criteria for four per-
sonality disorders. Psychological Assessment, 17, 492–496.
Bolton, J., Pagura, J., Enns, M., Grant, B., & Sareen, J. (2010). A population-based longitudinal
study of risk factors for suicide attempts in major depressive disorder. Journal of Psychia-
try Research, 44(13), 817–826.
Brown, C., Conner, K. O., Copeland, V. C., Grote, N., Beach, S., Battista, D., & Reynolds, C. F.,
III. (2010). Depression stigma, race, and treatment seeking behavior and attitudes. Journal
of Community Psychology, 38(3), 350–368.
Camisa, K. M., Bockbrader, M. A., Lysaker, P., Rae, L. L., Brenner, C. A., & O’Donnell, B. F.
(2005). Personality traits in schizophrenia and related personality disorders. Psychiatry
Research, 133(1), 23–33.
Carlson, E. N., Vazire, S., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2013). Self-other knowledge asymmetries in per-
sonality pathology. Journal of Personality, 81(2), 155–170.
Carroll, A. (2009). Are you looking at me?: Understanding and managing paranoid personal-
ity disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 15(1), 40–48.
Caspi, A., & Roberts, B. (1999). Personality change and continuity across the life course. In L.
A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 300–326).
New York: Guilford Press.
Castonguay, L., & Beutler, L. (2006). Principles of therapeutic change that work. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Castonguay, L. G., Constantino, M. J., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2019). Principles of change: How
psychotherapists implement research in practice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chanen, A. M., & Kaess, M. (2012). Developmental pathways to borderline personality disor-
der. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14(1), 45–53.
Chavira, D., Grilo, C., Shea, M. T., Yen, S., Gunderson, J., & Morey, L., . . . McGlashan, T. H.
(2003). Ethnicity and four personality disorders. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 44, 483–491.
Cicchetti, D. (2016). Socioemotional, personality, and biological development: Illustrations
from a multilevel developmental psychopathology perspective on child maltreatment.
Annual Review of Psychology, 67, 187–211.
Clark, L. A. (2007). Assessment and diagnosis of personality disorder: Perennial issues and an
emerging reconceptualization. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 227–257.
Clarkin, J. F., Foelsch, P. A., Levy, K. N., Hill, J. W., Delaney, J. C., & Kernberg, O. F. (2001).
The development of psychodynamic treatment for patients with borderline personality
disorder: A preliminary study of behavior change. Journal of Personality Disorders, 15,
487–495.
Cohen, L. J., Tanis, T., Bhattacharjee, R., Nesci, C., Halmi, W., & Galynker, I. (2014). Are there
differential relationships between different types of childhood maltreatment and differ-
ent types of adult personality pathology? Psychiatry Research, 215(1), 192–201.
Cohen, P. (2008). Child development and personality disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 31(3), 477–493.
Cohen, P., Chen, H., Crawford, T. N., Brook, J. S., & Gordon, K. (2007). Personality disorders
in early adolescence and the development of later substance use disorders in the general
population. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 88, S71–S84.
Cohen, P., Crawford, T. N., Johnson, J. G., & Kasen, S. (2005). The Children in the Community
Study of developmental course of personality disorder. Journal of Personality, 19, 466–486.
Coid, J., Yang, M., Tyrer, P., Roberts, A., & Ullrich, S. (2006). Prevalence and correlates of per-
sonality disorder among adults aged 16 to 74 in Great Britain. British Journal of Psychiatry,
188, 423–431.

-- 306 of 498 --

286 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Conway, C. C., Hipwell, A. E., & Stepp, S. D. (2017). Seven-year course of borderline personal-
ity disorder features: Borderline pathology is as unstable as depression during adoles-
cence. Clinical Psychological Science, 5(4), 742–749.
Crawford, T., Cohen, P., & Brook, J. (2001). Dramatic– erratic personality disorder symptoms:
Continuity from early adolescence into adulthood. Journal of Personality Disorders, 15,
319–335.
Cristea, I. A., Gentili, C., Cotet, C. D., Palomba, D., Barbui, C., & Cuijpers, P. (2017). Efficacy
of psychotherapies for borderline personality disorder: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 74(4), 319–328.
Critchfield, K. L., & Benjamin, L. S. (2006). Principles for psychosocial treatment of person-
ality disorder: An integration of participant, relationship, and treatment domains. In
L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 253–271).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Crits-Christoph, P., & Barber, J. P. (2007). Psychological treatments for personality disorders.
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that works (3rd ed., pp. 641–
658). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cruitt, P. J., Boudreaux, M. J., King, H. R., Oltmanns, J. R., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2019). Examining
criterion A: DSM-5 level of personality functioning as assessed through life story inter-
views. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 10(3), 224–234.
Davies, S., & Campling, P. (2003). Therapeutic community treatment of personality disorder:
Service use and mortality over 3 years’ follow-up. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, s24–s27.
Distel, M. A., Trull, T. J., Derom, C. A., Thiery, E. W., Grimmer, M. A., Martin, N. G., . . .
Boomsma, D. I. (2008). Heritability of borderline personality disorder features is similar
across three countries. Psychological Medicine, 38(9), 1219–1229.
Dixon-Gordon, K. L., Whalen, D. J., Layden, B. K., & Chapman, A. L. (2015). A systematic
review of personality disorders and health outcomes. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie
Canadienne, 56(2), 168–190.
Dowgwillo, E. A., Roche, M. J., & Pincus, A. L. (2018). Examining the interpersonal nature
of criterion a of the DSM-5 section III alternative model for personality disorders using
bootstrapped confidence intervals for the interpersonal circumplex. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 100(6), 581–592.
Durbin, C. E., & Klein, D. N. (2006). Ten-year stability of personality disorders among outpa-
tients with mood disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115(1), 75–84.
El-Gabalawy, R., Katz, L., & Sareen, J. (2010). Comorbidity and associated severity of border-
line personality disorder and physical health conditions in a nationally representative
sample. Psychosomatic Medicine, 72, 641–647.
Emmons, R. (1997). Motives and goals. In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & R. Stephan (Eds.), Handbook
of personality psychology (pp. 485–512). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ettinger, U., Meyhöfer, I., Steffens, M., Wagner, M., & Koutsouleris, N. (2014). Genetics, cogni-
tion, and neurobiology of schizotypal personality: A review of the overlap with schizo-
phrenia. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 5, 18.
Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A. (2008). The development of borderline personality disorder—a men-
talizing model. Journal of Personality Disorders, 22, 4–21.
Fournier, J. C., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Gallop, R., Amsterdam, J. D., & Hollon, S. D.
(2008). Antidepressant medications v. cognitive therapy in people with depression with
or without personality disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 124–129.
Freeman, A., & Reinecke, M. A. (Eds.). (2007). Personality disorders in children and adolescents.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Freestone, M., Howard, R., Coid, J. W., & Ullrich, S. (2013). Adult antisocial syndrome co-
morbid with borderline personality disorder is associated with severe conduct disorder,
substance dependence and violent antisociality. Personality and Mental Health, 7(1), 11–21.

-- 307 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	287
Gibbs, N., South, S., & Oltmanns, T. (2003). Attentional coping style in obsessive– compulsive
personality disorder: A test of the intolerance of uncertainty hypothesis. Personality and
Individual Differences, 34, 41–57.
Gillespie, C. F., Bradley, B., Mercer, K., Smith, A. K., Conneely, K., Gapen, M., . . . Ressler, K. J.
(2009). Trauma exposure and stress-related disorders in inner city primary care patients.
General Hospital Psychiatry, 31(6), 505–514.
Gleason, M. E., Weinstein, Y., Balsis, S., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). The enduring impact of mal-
adaptive personality traits on relationship quality and health in later life. Journal of Per-
sonality, 82(6), 493–501.
Gorwood, P., Rouillon, F., Even, C., Falissard, B., Corruble, E., & Moran, P. (2010). Treatment
response in major depression: Effects of personality dysfunction and prior depression.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 196(2), 139–142.
Graham, E. K., Rutsohn, J. P., Turiano, N. A., Bendayan, R., Batterham, P. J., Gerstorf, D., . . .
Bastarache, E. D. (2017). Personality predicts mortality risk: An integrative data analysis
of 15 international longitudinal studies. Journal of Research in Personality, 70, 174–186.
Grant, B., Chou, S., Goldstein, R., Huang, B., Stinson, F., Saha, T., . . . Ruan, W. J. (2008). Preva-
lence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV borderline personality disorder:
Results from the Wave 2 National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related Con-
ditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 533–545.
Gunderson, J. G., Stout, R. L., McGlashan, T. H., Shea, M. T., Morey, L. C., Grio, C. M., . . .
Skodol, A. E. (2011). Ten-year course of borderline personality disorder: Psychopathology
and function from the Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 68(8), 827–837.
Gurtman, M. B. (1993). Constructing personality tests to meet a structural criterion: Applica-
tion of the interpersonal circumplex. Journal of Personality, 61, 237–263.
Harris, G. T., & Rice, M. E. (2006). Treatment of psychopathy: A review of empirical findings.
In C. J. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 555–572). New York: Guilford Press.
Helgeland, M., & Torgersen, S. (2004). Developmental antecedents of borderline personality
disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 45, 138–147.
Hirchfeld, R. M. (1993). Personality disorders: Definition and diagnosis. Journal of Personality
Disorder, Suppl. 1, 9–17.
Hollenstein, T., Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A., & Potworowski, G. (2013). A model of socioemotional
flexibility at three time scales. Emotion Review, 5(4), 397–405.
Hopwood, C. J., & Bleidorn, W. (2018). Stability and change in personality and personality
disorders. Current Opinion in Psychology, 21, 6–10.
Hopwood, C. J., Morey, L. C., Donnellan, M. B., Samuel, D. B., Grilo, C. M., McGlashan, T. H.,
. . . Skodol, A. E. (2013). Ten-year rank-order stability of personality traits and disorders
in a clinical sample. Journal of Personality, 81(3), 335–344.
Hopwood, C. J., Wright, A. G., Ansell, E. B., & Pincus, A. L. (2013). The interpersonal core of
personality pathology. Journal of Personality Disorders, 27(3), 270–295.
Hummelen, B., Wilberg, T., Pedersen, G., & Karterud, S. (2007). The relationship between
avoidant personality disorder and social phobia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 48, 348–356.
Iacovino, J. M., Jackson, J. J., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). The relative impact of socioeconomic sta-
tus and childhood trauma on Black–White differences in paranoid personality disorder
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123(1), 225–230.
Ingenhoven, T., Lafay, P., Rinne, T., Passchier, J., & Duivenvoorden, H. (2010). Effectiveness of
pharmacotherapy for severe personality disorders: Meta-analyses of randomized con-
trolled trials. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 14–25.
Jackson, H. J., & Burgess, P. M. (2002). Personality disorder in the community: Results from
the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing: Part II. Relationships
between personality disorder, Axis I mental disorders and physical conditions with

-- 308 of 498 --

288 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
disability and health consultations. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 37(6),
251–260.
Johnson, J., Cohen, P., Brown, J., Smailes, E., & Bernstein, D. (1999). Childhood maltreatment
increases risk for personality disorders during early adulthood. Archives of General Psy-
chiatry, 56, 600–606.
Johnson, J., Cohen, P., Smailes, E., Skodol, A., Brown, J., & Oldham, J. (2001). Childhood verbal
abuse and risk for personality disorders in adolescence and early adulthood. Comprehen-
sive Psychiatry, 42, 16–23.
Kendler, K., Aggen, S., Czajkowski, N., Roysamb, E., Tambs, K., . . . Reichborn-Kjennerud, T.
(2008). The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors for DSM-IV personality
disorders: A multivariate twin study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65, 1438–1446.
Kendler, K., McGuire, M., Gruenberg, A., O’Hare, A., Spellman, M., & Walsh, D. (1993). The
Roscommon Family Study, III: Schizophrenia-related personality disorders in relatives.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50(10), 781–788.
Kernberg, O., Yeomans, F., Clarkin, J., & Levy, K. (2008). Transference focused psychotherapy:
Overview and update. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 89, 601–620.
Kraepelin, E. (1919). Dementia praecox and paraphrenia. London: Livingstone.
Krueger, R. F. (2016). The future is now: Personality disorder and the ICD-11. Personality and
Mental Health, 10, 118–119.
Krueger, R., Eaton, N., Clark, L., Watson, D., Markon, K., Derringer, J., . . . Livesley, J. (2011).
Deriving an empirical structure of personality pathology for DSM-5. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 25, 170–191.
Krueger, R. F., Eaton, N. R., Derringer, J., Markon, K. E., Watson, D., & Skodol, A. E. (2011).
Personality in DSM-5: Helping delineate personality disorder content and framing the
metastructure. Journal of Personality Assessment, 93, 325–331.
Kuo, C. J., Chen, W. Y., Tsai, S. Y., Chen, P. H., Ko, K. T., & Chen, C. C. (2019). Excessive mortal-
ity and causes of death among patients with personality disorder with comorbid psychi-
atric disorders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 54(1), 121–130.
Lavner, J. A., Lamkin, J., & Miller, J. D. (2017). Trait impulsivity and newlyweds’ marital tra-
jectories. Journal of Personality Disorders, 31(1), 133–144.
Lenzenweger, M. F., Lane, M. C., Loranger, A. W., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). DSM-IV personality
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 62, 553–564.
Lequesne, E. R., & Hersh, R. G. (2004). Disclosure of a diagnosis of borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 10(3), 170–176.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York:
Guilford Press.
Linehan, M. M., Davison, G., Lynch, T., & Sanderson, C. (2005). Technique factors in treating
personality disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beulter (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change
that work (pp. 239–252). New York: Oxford University Press.
Linney, Y. M., Murray, R. M., Peters, E. R., MacDonald, A. M., Rijsdijk, F., & Sham, P. C. (2003).
A quantitative genetic analysis of schizotypal personality traits. Psychological Medicine,
33, 803–816.
Lobbestael, J., Arntz, A., & Bernstein, D. P. (2010). Disentangling the relationship between dif-
ferent types of childhood maltreatment and personality disorders. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 24(3), 285–295.
Magnavita, J. J. (2000). Relational therapy for personality disorders. New York: Wiley.
Magnavita, J. J. (Ed.). (2004). Handbook of personality disorders: Theory and practice. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Magnavita, J. J. (2007). A systemic family perspective on child and adolescent personality
disorders. In A. Freeman & M. A. Reinecke (Eds.), Personality disorders in childhood and
adolescence (pp. 131–181). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

-- 309 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	289
Magnavita, J. J. (Ed.). (2010). Evidence-based treatment of personality dysfunction. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Main, A., Walle, E. A., Kho, C., & Halpern, J. (2017). The interpersonal functions of empathy:
A relational perspective. Emotion Review, 9(4), 358–366.
Mancke, F., Bertsch, K., & Herpertz, S. C. (2015). Gender differences in aggression of border-
line personality disorder. Borderline Personality Disorder and Emotion Dysregulation, 2(1),
Article 7.
Maples-Keller, J., Yasinski, C., Coghlan, C., & Powers, A. (2019). Treatment of antagonism:
Cognitive behavioral therapy. In J. Miller & D. R. Lynam (Eds.), The handbook of antago-
nism: Conceptualizations, assessment, consequences, and treatment of the low end of agreeable-
ness (pp. 351–364). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Markon, K., Krueger, R., & Watson, D. (2005). Delineating the structure of normal and abnor-
mal personality disorder: An integrative hierarchical approach. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 88, 139–157.
McGilloway, A., Hall, R., Lee, T., & Bhui, K. (2010). A systematic review of personality dis-
order, race and ethnicity: Prevalence, aetiology and treatment. BMC Psychiatry, 10, 33.
Messer, S. B., & Abbass, A. A. (2010). Evidence-based psychodynamic therapy with personal-
ity disorders. In J. J. Magnavita (Ed.), Evidence-based treatment of personality dysfunction:
Principles, methods, and processes (pp. 79–111). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Miller, J. D., Sleep, C., & Lynam, D. R. (2018). DSM-5 alternative model of personality disorder:
Testing the trait perspective captured in Criterion B. Current Opinion in Psychology, 21,
50–54.
Muran, J. C., & Safran, J. D. (2002). A relational approach to psychotherapy: Resolving rup-
tures in the therapeutic alliance. In F. W. Kaslow (Ed.), Comprehensive handbook of psycho-
therapy (pp. 253–281). New York: Wiley.
Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. W., Kramer, R., Wiesmann, T., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). Dialectical
behavior therapy skills for transdiagnostic emotion dysregulation: A pilot randomized
controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 59, 40–51.
Niv, S., Tuvblad, C., Raine, A., Wang, P., & Baker, L. A. (2012). Heritability and longitudinal
stability of impulsivity in adolescence. Behavior Genetics, 42(3), 378–392.
Nock, M., Hwang, I., Sampson, N., Kessler, R., Angermeyer, M., Beautrais, A., . . . Williams,
D. R. (2009). Cross-national analysis of the associations among mental disorders and sui-
cidal behavior: Findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLOS Medicine,
6(8), e1000123.
O’Connor, B. P. (2002). The search for dimensional structure differences between normality
and abnormality: A statistical review of published data on personality and psychopa-
thology. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(4), 962–982.
Oldham, J. M., Skodol, A. E., & Bender, D. S. (2009). Future directions: Toward DSM-V. In J.
M. Oldham, A. E. Skodol, & D. S. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders (pp. 381–
392). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Oltmanns, J. R., Weinstein, Y., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). Borderline personality pathology and
insomnia symptoms in community-dwelling older adults. Personality and Mental Health,
8(3), 178–187.
Oltmanns, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2018). A self-report measure for the ICD-11 dimensional
trait model proposal: The Personality Inventory for ICD-11. Psychological Assessment, 30,
154–169.
Oltmanns, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2019a). Evaluating the assessment of the ICD-11 personality
disorder diagnostic system. Psychological Assessment, 31(5), 674–684.
Oltmanns, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2019b). The Five-Factor Personality Inventory for ICD-11: A
facet-level assessment of the ICD-11 trait model. Psychological Assessment, 31(5), 674–684.

-- 310 of 498 --

290 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Oltmanns, T. F., & Balsis, S. (2011). Personality pathology in later life: Questions about the
measurement, course, and impact of disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7,
321–349.
Oltmanns, T. F., Melley, A., & Turkheimer, E. (2002). Impaired social function and symptoms
of personality disorders assessed by peer and self-report in a nonclinical sample. Journal
of Personality Disorders, 16, 437–452.
Oltmanns, T. F., Rodrigues, M. M., Weinstein, Y., & Gleason, M. E. (2014). Prevalence of per-
sonality disorders at midlife in a community sample: Disorders and symptoms reflected
in interview, self, and informant reports. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assess-
ment, 36(2), 177–188.
Pally, R. (2002). The neurobiology of borderline personality disorder: The synergy of “nature
and nurture.” Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 8(3), 133–142.
Paris, J. (2003). Personality disorders over time: Precursors, course and outcome. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 17, 479–488.
Parnas, J., Licht, D., & Bovet, P. (2005). Cluster A personality disorders: A review. In M. Maj,
H. S. Akiskal, J. E. Mezzich, & A. Okasha (Eds.), Personality disorders (Vol. 8, pp. 1–124).
Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Paulhus, D. L., & Trapnell, P. D. (2008). Self-presentation of personality: An agency– communion
framework. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality:
Theory and research (3rd ed., pp. 492–517). New York: Guilford Press.
Piper, W. E. (2008). Underutilization of short-term group therapy: Enigmatic or understand-
able? Psychotherapy Research, 18, 127–138.
Powers, A., & Oltmanns, T. (2012). Personality disorders and physical health: A longitudinal
assessment of physical functioning, healthcare utilization, and health-related behaviors
in adults. Journal of Personality Disorders, 26, 524–538.
Powers, A., & Oltmanns, T. (2013). Borderline personality pathology and chronic health prob-
lems in later adulthood: The mediating role of obesity. Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 4(2), 152–159.
Powers, A., Thomas, K. M., Ressler, K. J., & Bradley, B. (2011). The differential effects of child
abuse and posttraumatic stress disorder on schizotypal personality disorder. Compre-
hensive Psychiatry, 52(4), 438–445.
Pulay, A., Stinson, F., Dawson, D., Goldstein, R., Chou, P., Huang, B., . . . Grant, B. F. (2009).
Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV schizotypal personal-
ity disorder: Results from the Wave 2 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 11(2), 53–67.
Reich, J. (2009). Avoidant personality disorder and its relationship to social phobia. Current
Psychiatry Reports, 11, 89–93.
Reichborn-Kjennerud, T., Czajkowski, N., Ystrøm, E., Ørstavik, R., Aggen, S. H., Tambs, K., . . .
Knudsen, G. P. (2015). A longitudinal twin study of borderline and antisocial personal-
ity disorder traits in early to middle adulthood. Psychological Medicine, 45(14), 3121–3131.
Rhee, S., & Waldman, I. (2002). Genetic and environmental influences on antisocial behavior:
A meta-analysis of twin and adoption studies. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 490–529.
Roberts, A. L., Gilman, S. E., Breslau, J., Breslau, N., & Koenen, K. C. (2011). Race/ethnic dif-
ferences in exposure to traumatic events, development of post-traumatic stress disorder,
and treatment-seeking for post-traumatic stress disorder in the United States. Psychologi-
cal Medicine, 41, 71–83.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level change in per-
sonality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 132(1), 1–25.
Samuel, D., Hopwood, C., Ansell, E., Morey, L., Sanislow, C., Markowitz, J. C., . . . Grilo, C. M.

-- 311 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	291
(2011). Comparing the temporal stability of self-report and interview assessed personal-
ity disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 670–680.
Schwartz, E. K., Docherty, N. M., Najolia, G. M., & Cohen, A. S. (2019). Exploring the racial
diagnostic bias of schizophrenia using behavioral and clinical-based measures. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 128(3), 263–271.
Seibel, C. A., & Dowd, E. T. (2001). Personality characteristics associated with psychological
reactance. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(7), 963–969.
Selby, E. A. (2013). Chronic sleep disturbances and borderline personality disorder symptoms.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81(5), 941–947.
Silberschmidt, A., Lee, S., Zanarini, M., & Schulz, S. C. (2015). Gender differences in borderline
personality disorder: Results from a multinational, clinical trial sample. Journal of Person-
ality Disorders, 29(6), 828–838.
Sirey, J., Bruce, M., Alexopoulos, G., Perlick, D. A., Friedman, S., & Meyers, B. (2001). Stigma as
a barrier to recovery: Perceived stigma and patient-rated severity of illness as predictors
of antidepressant drug adherence. Psychiatric Services, 52, 1615–1620.
Skodol, A. E. (2008). Longitudinal course and outcome of personality disorders. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 31, 495–503.
Skodol, A. E. (2018). Impact of personality pathology on psychosocial functioning. Current
Opinion in Psychology, 21, 33–38.
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., McGlashan, T. H., Dyck, I. R., Stout, R. L., Bender, D. S., . . .
Oldham, J. M. (2002). Functional impairment in patients with schizotypal, borderline,
avoidant, or obsessive– compulsive personality disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
159, 276–283.
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., Shea, M. T., McGlashan, T. H., Morey, L. C., Sanislow, C. A., . . .
Stout, R. L. (2005). The Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study (CLPS):
Overview and implications. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19(5), 487–504.
Skodol, A. E., Pagano, M. E., Bender, D. S., Shea, M., Gunderson, J. G., Yen, S., . . . McGlashan,
T. H. (2005). Stability of functional impairment in patients with schizotypal, borderline,
avoidant, or obsessive– compulsive personality disorder over two years. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 443–451.
Skodol, A. E., Shea, M. T., Yen, S., White, C. N., & Gunderson, J. G. (2010). Personality disorders
and mood disorders: perspectives on diagnosis and classification from studies of lon-
gitudinal course and familial associations. Journal of Personality Disorders, 24(1), 83–108.
Summers, R. J., & Barber, J. P. (2009). Dynamic psychotherapy: A guide to evidence-based practice.
New York: Guilford Press.
Swales, M., & Dunkley, C. (2020). Principles of skills assessment in dialectical behavior ther-
apy. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 27(1), 18–29.
Tomko, R. L., Trull, T. J., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J. (2014). Characteristics of borderline person-
ality disorder in a community sample: Comorbidity, treatment utilization, and general
functioning. Journal of Personality Disorders, 28(5), 734–750.
Town, J. M., Abbass, A., & Hardy, G. (2011). Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy for per-
sonality disorders: A critical review of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 25(6), 723–740.
Trull, T. J., Jahng, S., Tomko, R. L., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J. (2010). Revised NESARC person-
ality disorder diagnoses: Gender, prevalence, and comorbidity with substance depen-
dence disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 24, 412–426.
Trull, T. J., & Widiger, T. A. (2008). Geology 102: More thoughts on a shift to a dimensional
model of personality disorders. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(2), 949–967.
Tyrer, P. (2014). Time to choose—DSM-5, ICD-11, or both? Archives of Psychiatry and Psycho-
therapy, 16, 5–8.

-- 312 of 498 --

292 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Tyrer, P., Crawford, M., Mulder, R., Blashfield, R., Farnam, A., Fossati, A., . . . Swales, M. (2011).
A classification based on evidence is the first step to clinical utility. Personality and Mental
Health, 5(4), 304–307.
Tyrer, P., Mulder, R., Kim, Y. R., & Crawford, M. J. (2019). The development of the ICD-11 clas-
sification of personality disorders: An amalgam of science, pragmatism, and politics.
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 481–502.
Tyrer, P., Reed, G. M., & Crawford, M. J. (2015). Classification, assessment, prevalence, and
effect of personality disorder. Lancet, 385, 717–726.
Tyrer, P., Tyrer, H., & Yang, M. (2019). Premature mortality of people with personality disor-
der in the Nottingham Study of Neurotic Disorder. Personality and Mental Health. [Epub
ahead of print]
Ullrich, S., & Coid, J. (2009). The age distribution of self-reported personality disorder traits in
a household population. Journal of Personality Disorders, 23(2), 187–200.
Volkert, J., Gablonski, T. C., & Rabung, S. (2018). Prevalence of personality disorders in the
general adult population in Western countries: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 213(6), 709–715.
Watters, C. A., Bagby, R. M., & Sellbom, M. (2019). Meta-analysis to derive an empirically
based set of personality facet criteria for the alternative DSM-5 model for personality
disorders. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 10(2), 97–104.
Waugh, M. H., Hopwood, C. J., Krueger, R. F., Morey, L. C., Pincus, A. L., & Wright, A. G. (2017).
Psychological assessment with the DSM-5 Alternative Model for Personality Disorders:
Tradition and innovation. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 48(2), 79–89.
Westen, D., & Heim, A. K. (2003). Disturbances of self and identity in personality disorders. In
M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 643–664). New York:
Guilford Press.
Widiger, T. A. (2019). Considering the research: Commentary on “The trait–type dialectic:
Construct validity, clinical utility, and the diagnostic process.” Personality Disorders: The-
ory, Research, and Treatment, 10(3), 215–219.
Widiger, T. A., Lynam, D. R., Miller, J. D., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2012). Measures to assess mal-
adaptive variants of the five-factor model. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94(5), 450–455.
Widiger, T. A., & Simonsen, E. (2005). Alternative dimensional models of personality disorder:
Finding a common ground. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19, 110–130.
Widiger, T. A., & Trull, T. J. (2007). Plate tectonics in the classification of personality disorder:
Shifting to a dimensional model. American Psychologist, 62, 71–83.
Wilson, T. (2009). Know thyself. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 384–389.
World Health Organization. (2018). International classification of diseases for mortality and morbid-
ity statistics (11th rev.). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Wright, Z. E., Pahlen, S., & Krueger, R. F. (2017). Genetic and environmental influences on
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) maladaptive personality
traits and their connections with normative personality traits. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 126(4), 416–428.
Yang, Y. C., Boen, C., Gerken, K., Li, T., Schorpp, K., & Harris, K. M. (2016). Social relationships
and physiological determinants of longevity across the human life span. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 113(3), 578–583.
Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R. (2008). A preliminary, randomized trial of psychoedu-
cation for women with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders,
22(3), 284–290.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Hennen, J., Reich, D. B., & Silk, K. R. (2006). Prediction of
the 10-year course of borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163,
827–832.

-- 313 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	293
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., & Fitzmaurice, G. (2010). Time to attainment
of recovery from borderline personality disorder and stability of recovery: A 10-year
prospective follow-up study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(6), 663–667.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F., Reich, D., Silk, K., Hudson, J., & McSweeney, L. (2007). The
subsyndromal phenomenology of borderline personality disorder: A 10-year follow-up
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 929–935.
Zemishlany, Z., & Weizman, A. (2008). The impact of mental illness on sexual dysfunction.
Advances in Psychosomatic Medicine, 29, 89–106.
Zheng, Y., Plomin, R., & von Stumm, S. (2016). Heritability of intraindividual mean and vari-
ability of positive and negative affect: Genetic analysis of daily affect ratings over a
month. Psychological Science, 27(12), 1611–1619.
Zimmermann, J., Kerber, A., Rek, K., Hopwood, C. J., & Krueger, R. F. (2019). A brief but com-
prehensive review of research on the alternative DSM-5 model for personality disorders.
Current Psychiatry Reports, 21(9), 1–19.

-- 314 of 498 --

294
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severely disabling and recurrent condition. While its
genetic etiology has been recognized, it has also been shown to be responsive to psy-
chosocial treatment. In this chapter, we review the phenomenology and etiology, as
well as empirically supported pharmacological and psychological treatments of BD.
PHENOMENOLOGY
BD is complex on many fronts: Symptoms vary from the extreme highs of mania
to the lows of depression, and comorbid conditions are the norm rather than the
exception. Here we provide brief definitions of the different forms of the disorder
and describe the associated clinical features, epidemiology, and common comorbid
conditions.
Typical Symptoms and Course
BDs are defined on the basis of manic symptoms of varying severity and duration.
Manic episodes are defined by a set of mood and arousal-related symptoms that are
serious enough to lead to functional impairment; hypomanic episodes are defined by
parallel symptom criteria without the marked impairment of a full manic episode.
Motor activity is tightly tethered to symptoms, increasing with manic symptoms and
decreasing with depressive symptoms (Merikangas et al., 2019).
C H A P T E R 1 0
Bipolar Disorder
Sheri L. Johnson
Michael W. Otto
Alexandra K. Gold
Matthew V. Elliott

-- 315 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	295
Three major forms of BD are recognized in DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013). Bipolar I disorder (BD-I) is defined by at least one episode of mania.
Bipolar II disorder (BD-II) is defined by at least one hypomanic, but not full manic, epi-
sode and one or more depressive episodes. Cyclothymic disorder is defined by chronic
fluctuations between high and low moods that are not severe enough to qualify as
hypomanic or depressive episodes yet persist for 2 years (1 year in children and
adolescents). Although much of the extant research focuses on BD-I, milder forms
of disorder merit attention, in that BD-II also is characterized by high rates of recur-
rence and comorbidity (Del’Osso et al., 2017), and subthreshold manic symptoms
robustly predict the onset of diagnosable BD among offspring of those diagnosed
with bipolar disorder (hazard ratio = 7.57) (Axelson et al., 2015).
Across the BD spectrum, DSM-5 provides specifiers for rapid-cycling and mixed
episodes. Rapid cycling is defined by at least four distinct episodes within a 1-year
period. Mixed episodes are defined by at least three symptoms of the opposing polar-
ity (e.g., depressive symptoms during a manic episode, or manic symptoms during a
depressive episode). The presence of either specifier predicts a more severe course of
BD (Valentí et al., 2015; Vieta & Valentí, 2013).
There is considerable heterogeneity in the severity of depression within BD.
About one-fourth of people with BD do not experience depressive episodes during
their lifetime (Johnson, Cuellar, & Peckham, 2014), although depression rates are
higher among those who seek treatment. In a 13-year prospective study, subsyn-
dromal symptoms of depression were present during half of the weeks of follow-up
(Judd et al., 2002).
Associated Clinical Features
One of the most intriguing aspects of BD is the extreme variability in outcomes. BD
is overrepresented among those in creative professions (Kyaga et al., 2013), those who
have achieved eminence for creativity (Jamison, 1993), and those with exceptional
scholastic accomplishment (Vreeker et al., 2016). Nonetheless, functional outcomes
are poor for many people with the disorder. BD is the 12th leading medical cause of
global disability (World Health Organization [WHO], 2011). Even when asymptom-
atic, persons with BD often report low quality of life (Brissos, Dias, & Kapczinski,
2008). In studies of functioning, gains are noted across the full year after hospitaliza-
tion, but less than half of patients diagnosed with BD-I or BD-II are employed (Sup-
pes et al., 2001). Although social outcomes are highly variable, on average, people
with BD report less support than those without psychological disorders, particularly
as they experience recurrent episodes (Romans & McPherson, 1992). The disorder is
associated with high rates of family conflict (Simoneau, Miklowitz, & Saleem, 1998),
marital dissatisfaction, separation, and divorce (Coryell et al., 1993).
Cognitive function may be an important predictor of functional outcome.
Although subjective reports of cognition may be biased downward by depression,
objective cognitive tests consistently indicate that executive functioning is lower, on
average, among those with remitted BD and among their family members as com-
pared to healthy controls (Arts, Jabben, Krabbendam, & van Os, 2008; Bora, Yucel, &
Pantelis, 2009). Executive function, though, is highly variable, and lower levels are

-- 316 of 498 --

296 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
tied to earlier onset (Bortolato, Miskowiak, Köhler, Vieta, & Carvalho, 2015), lower
educational attainment (Bora et al., 2016), poor emotion regulation, and lower occu-
pational function (Lima, Peckham, & Johnson, 2018).
Suicide is all too common in BD. In one national cohort study, 8% of men and
5% of women diagnosed with BD died from suicide (Nordentoft, Mortensen, & Ped-
ersen, 2011). In the representative sample of the WHO study of 61,392 adults in 11
countries, one in four persons diagnosed with BD-I reported a suicide attempt, one
in five persons diagnosed with BD-II reported a suicide attempt, and more than half
of those with BD-I or BD-II reported suicidal ideation within the past 12 months
(Merikangas et al., 2011). Suicide attempts are more likely among those with a family
history of suicide, in the presence of depressive episodes, and when comorbid anxi-
ety or alcohol/substance use problems are present (Schaffer et al., 2015).
Epidemiology
In the cross-national WHO study, lifetime prevalence was estimated to be 0.6% for
BD-I, 0.4% for BD-II, and 1.4% of persons reported at least one symptom of mania.
Rates were approximately doubled in the United States (Merikangas et al., 2011), and
the disorder appears to have an earlier onset, a longer delay until treatment receipt,
and a more severe course among those in the United States compared to other coun-
tries (Post et al., 2017). The mean age of onset of BD-I is between 18 and 20 (Meri-
kangas et al., 2011), and earlier age of onset predicts a worse course of illness and
greater risk of suicidality (Perlis et al., 2004). Men are slightly more likely to receive a
diagnosis of BD-I, and women are slightly more likely to receive a diagnosis of BD-II
(Merikangas et al., 2011).
Although the prevalence of BD is unrelated to race or ethnicity in the United
States when careful diagnostic measures are used (Merikangas et al., 2007), several
studies suggest troubling gaps in the care received by minorities with BD. African
Americans with BD are at risk for overdiagnosis with schizophrenia (Haeri et al.,
2011). Among those diagnosed with BD, African Americans are less likely to receive
psychiatric medication, outpatient follow-up, or appropriate mood stabilizer medica-
tions, and more likely to receive antipsychotic medications (Gonzalez et al., 2007; K.
Johnson & Johnson, 2014; Kilbourne et al., 2005; Kupfer, Frank, Grochocinski, Houck,
& Brown, 2005).
Comorbidity
Psychiatric comorbidity is elevated in BD, including childhood externalizing dis-
orders (including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder), anxiety disorders, and
substance abuse (Kessler, Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005). In the WHO international
study, 34% of participants with BD met diagnostic criteria for alcohol or substance
disorder, and 63% met diagnostic criteria for anxiety disorders during their lifetime
(Merikangas et al., 2011). Many studies overestimate the occurrence of comorbid per-
sonality disorders by assessing personality symptoms during mood episodes (Post
et al., 2018). Nonetheless, among those in remission from episodes of BD-I, more than
one-fourth meet diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder (George, Miklowitz,
Richards, Simoneau, & Taylor, 2003; Post et al., 2018).

-- 317 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	297
BD also has been related to high rates of medical illnesses such as cardiovascu-
lar disease and type 2 diabetes (Fiedorowicz et al., 2009; Vancampfort et al., 2016),
even among youth with BD (Goldstein et al., 2015). Some of these illnesses, in turn,
predict a more severe course of BD (Calkin et al., 2015) and contribute to premature
mortality in BD (Hayes, Miles, Walters, King, & Osborn, 2015; Laursen, Munk-Olsen,
Nordentoft, & Mortensen, 2007).
Clinical Implications
A number of clinical implications follow from the phenomenology of BD. In addi-
tion to assessing symptoms, clinicians should systematically evaluate occupational,
social, and medical functioning. Not only could this allow therapists to provide care
aimed at improving life quality, but it might also reduce risk for relapse or recurrence
of symptoms. Because risk for relapse is very high, clinicians should educate clients
about such risk, teach them to self-monitor for incipient symptoms, and arrange for
maintenance treatment. It is also crucial for the clinician working with BD to evalu-
ate risk for suicide, with particular concern about risk among clients with early onset
of BD (McGrady, Lynch, & Rapport, 2017).
Given that a poorer course of BD has been found for those with comorbid con-
ditions (Dunayevich et al., 2000; Masi et al., 2004; Otto et al., 2006; Tohen, Water-
naux, & Tsuang, 1990), such conditions should be addressed. Sadly, reviews of 13
pharmacotherapy studies and eight psychosocial treatment trials of comorbid BD
and substance use disorders found that no treatment consistently yielded significant
improvements in both mood and substance use symptoms (Gold et al., 2018; Salloum
& Brown, 2017). In early findings focused on treatment of comorbid BD, valproic acid
was found to help address comorbid alcohol use disorder (Salloum et al., 2005), and
integrated group therapy (IGT) and citicoline were shown to reduce comorbid sub-
stance use disorder (Brown et al., 2015; Weiss et al., 2007).
ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
There is strong evidence for the heritability of BD, including evidence from one
adoption study (Wender et al., 1986). In a representative community-based twin
study, heritability was estimated at 85% (McGuffin et al., 2003). In that study, 71% of
the genetic liability to mania was distinct from that of depression (McGuffin et al.,
2003), suggesting that people with a lifetime history of mania may vary considerably
in their genetic propensity toward depression. One genome-wide association study
of over 20,000 individuals diagnosed with BD-I and BD-II identified 30 genetic loci
related to BD, eight of which overlapped with schizophrenia (Stahl et al., 2019). The
identified genes related to neuronal plasticity, ion channels, neurotransmitter trans-
porters, and synaptic function, and accounted for about 8% of the variance in BD.
Many people with BD worry whether their children might develop the disorder.
Even though children of parents diagnosed with BD have a fourfold increase in risk
of developing a mood disorder, most (91%) will not develop manic or hypomanic epi-
sodes by late adolescence (Axelson et al., 2015; LaPalme, Hodgins, & LaRoche, 1997).

-- 318 of 498 --

298 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Psychosocial Risk Factors
Psychosocial factors often differentially influence bipolar depression versus mania.
We first consider variables that appear to contribute to manic and depressive relapse,
then psychosocial predictors of bipolar depression, and last those related to manic
symptoms.
Triggers for Manic and Depressive Symptoms
Several variables appear to be tied to both manic and depressive symptoms, includ-
ing affective dysregulation, impulsive responses to emotion states, and high levels
of trauma. These risk variables may overlap, in that trauma exposure may contribute
to emotion dysregulation and emotion-triggered impulsivity.
Increased affective intensity and variability are present among those with remit-
ted BD (Barnett et al., 2011; Gruber, 2011) and their offspring (Tseng et al., 2015), and
have been shown to predict the onset of BD (Youngstrom, Findling, Youngstrom, &
Calabrese, 2005). Youth with a family history of BD show altered amygdala activa-
tion and functional connectivity when viewing emotional faces compared to con-
trols (Acuff et al., 2018; Manelis et al., 2015), and emotional stimuli appear to capture
attention more for those with BD (Miskowiak et al., 2019). Most with BD endorse
using a wide range of emotion regulation strategies (Dodd, Lockwood, Mansell, &
Palmer-Clauss, 2019) and are able to regulate emotions when instructed to do so in
laboratory settings, yet they still report less confidence in their emotion regulation
efforts (Gruber, Harvey, Gross, 2012).
Those with BD, even during remission, endorse problems with impulsivity in
the face of heightened emotions (Muhtadie, Johnson, Carver, Gotlib, & Ketter, 2014),
even though measures of non-emotion-related impulsivity show only modest eleva-
tions after remission (Strakowski et al., 2010; Swann, Pazzaglia, Nicholls, Dougherty,
& Moeller, 2003). For those with BD, the degree of emotion-related impulsivity pre-
dicts more functional impairment, lower quality of life, greater severity of suicidal
ideation and action, and more difficulties with aggression (S.L. Johnson & Carver,
2016; Muhtadie et al., 2014; Victor, Johnson, & Gotlib, 2011).
At least half of those with BD report exposure to serious childhood adversity
(Garno, Goldberg, Ramirez, & Ritzler, 2005). Childhood adversity, in turn, predicts
earlier onset; more severe and frequent manic and depressive symptoms; greater
risk of comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and substance use
diagnoses; and increased suicidality (Agnew-Blais & Danese, 2016).
Psychosocial Predictors of Bipolar Depression
Many of the variables that predict unipolar depression also predict bipolar depres-
sion, including neuroticism, negative cognitive styles, negative life events, and lower
social support (S. L. Johnson, Cuellar, & Peckham, 2015). “Expressed emotion” (EE),
defined by family criticism, hostility, or overinvolvement toward the patient with
BD, has been found to predict bipolar depressive symptoms (Yan, Hammen, Cohen,
Daley, & Henry, 2004). In summary, psychosocial models of unipolar depression are
applicable to understanding bipolar depression.

-- 319 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	299
Psychosocial Predictors of Manic Symptoms
Many of the variables that predict bipolar depression do not predict the course of
manic symptoms. For example, in prospective studies, negative life events (S. John-
son, 2005; for a review, see Hosang, Uher, Maughan, McGuffin, & Farmer, 2012) and
low social support (S. Johnson, Winett, Meyer, Greenhouse, & Miller, 1999) do not
directly predict mania. Although negative cognitive styles are often documented in
BD, they are most likely to be found during depressed rather than well periods (S.
Johnson et al., 2015), more consistently predict depression than mania (S. Johnson &
Fingerhut, 2004; but see Alloy, Reilly-Harrington, Fresco, Whitehouse, & Zechmeis-
ter, 1999), and can be explained by the presence of depressive history rather than
manic history (Alloy et al., 1999). In contrast to general models of psychosocial dis-
ruption, current models highlight two types of predictors of mania: goal dysregula-
tion and sleep deprivation/schedule disruption.
GOAL DYSREGULATION
The goal dysregulation model suggests that mania may be triggered by excessive
goal engagement secondary to increased sensitivity of the dopaminergic reward
pathways (see S. Johnson, Edge, Holmes, & Carver, 2012, for review). Multiple stud-
ies indicate that people with BD describe themselves as more sensitive to rewards;
that is, they endorse feeling more energized and excited by opportunities to pursue
goals, even during remission. This sensitivity to reward predicts the onset of BD
and a more severe course of mania (S. Johnson et al., 2012). Ability to use coping
strategies to modulate responses to rewarding and frustrating events can influence
symptom profiles in response to reward-related life events (Chan & Tse, 2018). Exces-
sive reward sensitivity and goal focus may heighten reactivity to success. In keeping
with this idea, life events involving goal attainment predict increases in manic, but
not depressive, symptoms (S. Johnson et al., 2012).
Functional magnetic resonance imaging research suggests that those with BD
show atypical activation patterns in reward-related neural regions in response to
anticipation of reward, including the ventral striatum, anterior cingulate, and
orbitofrontal cortex (Nusslock, Young, & Damme, 2014). Reward-related activation
patterns, as with behavioral indices of reward, are blunted by even minor depres-
sive symptoms (Redlich et al., 2015). Overall, these findings, along with findings of
diminished ventral striatal volume in BD (Lancaster, 2018), experimental pharma-
cological manipulations, and positron emission tomographic (PET) findings of ele-
vated striatal dopamine (D2/3) receptor availability, suggest dopamine dysregulation
as a potential neurobiological marker of BD that might help explain the behavioral
goal dysregulation profile (Ashok et al., 2017; Whitton, Treadway, & Pizzagalli, 2016).
SCHEDULE DISRUPTION
Researchers have focused on sleep deprivation, as well as more general schedule
disruption, as a trigger of manic symptoms (Murray & Harvey, 2010). Drawing on
the clinical observation that manic episodes are often preceded by life events that
involved sleep disruption, such as transmeridian flights or childbearing, Wehr,

-- 320 of 498 --

300 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Sack, and Rosenthal (1987) suggested that sleep disruption might be one mechanism
through which life events influence symptom generation. Congruently, experimen-
tal studies of sleep deprivation suggest that a single night of sleep deprivation can
trigger manic symptoms for more than 10% of people with BD depression (Barbini et
al., 1998). Across studies, melatonin and cortisol diurnal rhythms of those with BD
are phase delayed compared to control participants (Melo, Abreu, Linhares Neto, de
Bruin, & de Bruin, 2017).
Ehlers, Frank, and Kupfer (1988) suggested that those with BD, consequent to
biological underpinnings of the disorder, might be vulnerable when social zeitgebers
(timekeepers) are disrupted (e.g., a job with shifting work hours). Although find-
ings using the social rhythm metric (SRM), a measure of the constancy of the daily
schedule (Monk, Frank, Potts, & Kupfer, 2002), have been mixed, it does appear that
BD is tied to lower activity levels (Ashman et al., 1999; Jones, Tai, Evershed, Knowles,
& Bentall, 2006). Patients with BD report more life events involving social rhythm
disruption (events that affect sleep or wake times, or daily routines) before the onset
of mania than before depression (Malkoff-Schwartz et al., 2000). Together with the
previous findings, it appears that sleep deprivation and schedule disruption may
trigger increases in manic symptoms.
In summary, the variables hypothesized to influence the onset of mania include
goal dysregulation and sleep/schedule disruption. As discussed below, some of these
risk factors are amenable to modification through psychosocial intervention.
TREATMENT
Pharmacological Treatments
Mood-stabilizing medications—such as lithium, anticonvulsants, and atypical
antipsychotics—are used to resolve acute episodes and to prevent mood episode
recurrence. Anticonvulsants include divalproex and lamotrigine, and atypical
antipsychotic medications include olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, and lurasi-
done, also provide mood stabilization. For acute episodes, U.K. and U.S. treatment
guidelines suggest use of lithium, valproate, or antipsychotic medication (American
Psychiatric Association, 2002; Goodwin et al., 2016). For longer-term maintenance
treatment, U.S. guidelines recommend lithium or valproate, but U.K. guidelines rec-
ommend lithium, valproate, lamotrigine, or antipsychotics (dopamine antagonists) as
first-line approaches (American Psychiatric Association, 2002; Goodwin et al., 2016).
More specific approaches designed to target cognitive features of the disorder remain
in preliminary phases of testing (Miskowiak, Carvalho, Vieta, & Kessing, 2016).
In practice, mood-stabilizing medications are often combined with antidepres-
sants or anxiolytic agents (benzodiazepines). Despite the popularity of antidepres-
sant medications for bipolar depression, meta-analytic findings indicate that when
added to a mood stabilizer regimen, antidepressants are no more effective than pla-
cebo (McGirr, Vöhringer, Ghaemi, Lam, & Yatham, 2016). In addition, antidepres-
sants can trigger manic episodes in patients with BD when taken without a mood
stabilizer (Ghaemi, Lenox, & Baldessarini, 2001). There is also no evidence support-
ing the efficacy of benzodiazepines for BD (Bobo et al., 2014).

-- 321 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	301
Psychosocial Treatment
Despite advances in pharmacotherapy, recurrences of mood episodes and chronic
subsyndromal depressive symptoms are normative aspects of BD, even among
patients receiving ongoing treatment (e.g., Tondo, Vasquez, & Baldessarini, 2017).
Even with documented medication adherence, rates of relapse within BD are high—
as many as one-half of patients with BD relapse within the first year after an epi-
sode (Keller et al., 1986), and three-fourths of patients relapse within 4–5 years (Git-
lin, Swendsen, Heller, & Hammen, 1995). Medication nonadherence, which greatly
increases risk of relapse and suicide (Tondo & Baldessarini, 2000), is common among
those with BD (Bauer et al., 2019), so it is another important target for psychosocial
treatments. Psychosocial treatments for BD have gained strong research support,
reflected in part by inclusion in pharmaco-centric treatment guidelines (e.g., Good-
win et al., 2016).
Despite different theoretical orientations, there is a surprising degree of similar-
ity among current empirically supported psychosocial treatments. Most treatments
include psychoeducation about BD and the importance of medication adherence,
and rehearsal of methods for the early detection of symptoms. In addition to these
basic elements, treatment approaches may include problem solving, stress manage-
ment, cognitive interventions, activity and sleep management, amelioration of nega-
tive interpersonal/family interactions, and goal regulation interventions.
For each of these empirically supported psychological treatments, we briefly
describe the intervention and the evidence of its effectiveness for depression and
mania outcomes. Where evidence is available, we also note findings regarding mech-
anisms of change. We conclude our review of treatment studies by identifying prin-
ciples of change that can guide tailored interventions based on the specific treatment
goal and risk factors for a particular patient. Beyond the psychological interventions
noted here, system-level interventions, such as providing rapid access to well-trained
nurse practitioners, coupled with psychoeducation, have shown benefits (see Simon
et al., 2005).
Psychoeducation and Relapse Prevention Programs
In addition to providing basic education about BD, many psychoeducation programs
incorporate a range of strategies designed to prevent relapse. Psychoeducation may
be delivered in an individual or group format. In one trial, 120 BD-I and BD-II outpa-
tients in remission were randomized to receive structured, group-based psychoedu-
cation or nondirective group therapy as adjuncts to standard medication treatment
(Colom et al., 2009). Psychoeducation included six sessions focused on BD and its
course, two sessions focused on symptom detection, six sessions focused on educa-
tion about different medication classes, and five sessions focused on avoiding trig-
gers (e.g., substance abuse, sleep disruption) and coping with early symptoms. Psy-
choeducation significantly reduced the number of episodes and hospitalizations per
patient, and delayed depressive, as well as manic–hypomanic–mixed, recurrences.
The psychoeducation intervention continued to be associated with diminished rates
of recurrence and hospitalization in a 5-year follow-up. Multiple effects could con-
tribute to the positive outcomes. For example, psychoeducation improves medication

-- 322 of 498 --

302 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
adherence and quality of life compared to medication alone (Demissie et al., 2018;
Javadpour, Hedayati, Dehbozorgi, & Azizi, 2013; Michalak, Yatham, Wan, & Lam,
2005)
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
A meta-analytic review demonstrates the value of adding cognitive-behavioral treat-
ment (CBT) to treatment as usual, with moderate effect sizes for reduced relapse and
mania severity, higher quality of life, and overall positive but varied effect sizes for
depression (Chiang et al., 2017). Several CBT manuals have been developed (cf. Lam,
Jones, & Hayward, 2010; Otto et al., 2009). The relative emphases in these manuals
differ, but all of the CBT manuals include psychoeducation about BD. They tend
to focus on identifying maladaptive negative thoughts about the self and teaching
skills to challenge these overly negative thoughts. Many also include interventions to
improve treatment engagement, and to target the overly positive thoughts that might
be present during mania. The manual by Lam and colleagues (1999) provides more
strategies to support self-calming and to diminish excessive goal engagement, and
the Otto and colleagues (2009) manual provides treatment modules (e.g., anger man-
agement, anxiety management, assertiveness training) that can be added as needed.
Self-help books are available to facilitate application of these approaches (Jones, Hay-
ward, & Lam, 2009; Otto et al., 2011; Roberts, Sylvia, & Reilly-Harrington, 2014).
Support for these approaches includes a randomized trial by Lam and colleagues
(2003) comparing brief individual CBT (12–18 sessions within the first 6 months, and
two booster sessions in the second 6 months of care) relative to standard pharma-
cological care. Patients who received CBT had significantly fewer bipolar episodes,
higher social functioning, and less depression during the first year of follow-up than
did patients in the control group. In a 2-year follow-up study, significant advantages
were seen for CBT efficacy in reducing depressive, but not manic, symptoms (Lam,
Hayward, Watkins, Wright, & Sham, 2005). In another study, Miklowitz and associ-
ates (2007) showed that CBT as well as family-focused therapy and interpersonal
psychotherapy with a social rhythm component (see below) lowered depression rela-
tive to a minimal treatment control. More recently, studies have explored CBT for
BD with added treatment elements. Jones and colleagues (2015) evaluated a targeted
“recovery-focused” CBT adjunctive that supplemented standard CBT with treat-
ment components such as recognizing the association between mood symptoms
and attainment of recovery goals, creation of a recovery plan, and evaluation of the
relationship between general functioning and recovery. Recovery-focused CBT plus
standard medication treatment was associated with an increased time to relapse up
to 15-month follow-up and improved personal ratings of recovery up to 12-month
follow-up relative to standard medication alone.
Family Therapy
Drawing on the links between EE and the course of the disorder, researchers have
considered whether family or marital approaches can help reduce bipolar symptoms.
The best-studied approach, family-focused therapy (FFT), provides psychoeducation
for patients and their family members, and draws on family interventions that have

-- 323 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	303
effectively improved family communication and delayed relapse in schizophrenia
(e.g., Hogarty et al., 1991; Miklowitz & Chung, 2016). The family components include
communication enhancement training, in which patients rehearse expressing posi-
tive and negative feelings, listening, and requesting changes in others’ behaviors,
and problem-solving skills training, in which patients learn to identify, define, and
solve specific family problems (Miklowitz & Goldstein, 1997).
Miklowitz, George, Richards, Simoneau, and Suddath (2003) randomly assigned
patients with BD and their family members to receive FFT (21 sessions) or a less
intensive clinical management approach as adjuncts to standard pharmacotherapy.
Compared to clinical management, FFT was associated with lower levels of symp-
toms and longer time before relapse. Significant interactions between time and treat-
ment were observed for depression but not for mania scores.
Similar support for FFT was obtained in a randomized clinical trial of FFT ver-
sus individual treatment among patients with a recent manic episode who were on
mood-stabilizing medication. Patients who received FFT experienced fewer relapses
and hospitalizations than did those who received individual treatment (Rea et al.,
2003). It is not clear whether improvements were specific to depression, though,
because analyses collapsed across mania and depression.
In one prevention trial, researchers considered whether FFT would be helpful
for youth with mood symptoms and a first- or second-degree relative with BD (Mik-
lowitz et al., 2020). Compared to psychoeducation, youth who received FFT showed
longer intervals without depressive episodes, but did not differ on time to manic or
hypomanic episodes.
Some forms of family therapy other than FFT have not been shown to produce
changes in manic or depressive symptoms (Miller, Solomon, Ryan, & Keitner, 2004;
van Gent & Zwart, 1991). FFT is distinguished from these other approaches by its
longer duration, as well as more structured exercises concerning family communica-
tion, more education about BD, and more specific strategies for responding to symp-
toms.
Some research has been conducted on the mechanisms of change for family
therapy. For example, family therapy has been found to significantly reduce EE from
spouses of patients with BD in one study (Honig, Hofman, Hilwiq, Noorthoorn, &
Ponds, 1995), and improve positive communications among family members with-
out reducing negative interactions in another study (Simoneau, Miklowitz, Richards,
Saleem, & George, 1999). Improvements in positive nonverbal communication were
correlated with improvements in mood. Findings are consistent with the idea that
one mechanism involved in family treatment is improvement in family communica-
tion and functioning. Congruent with the inclusion of psychoeducation in FFT, per-
sons who receive FFT also demonstrate better medication adherence than do those
who receive clinical management (Miklowitz et al., 2003).
Interventions to Improve Sleep
Wehr and associates (1998) theorized that a light–dark cycle that mirrors the natu-
ral rhythm of the sun might help protect sleep and thereby reduce symptoms in
BD. Accordingly, they asked a person with BD to rest in bed in a dark room for 14
hours per night. Over a 19-month period, the dark period was gradually reduced

-- 324 of 498 --

304 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
to 10 hours. Symptoms were tracked daily for several years before the intervention
and throughout the 19 months of the intervention. This intensive treatment success-
fully improved sleep, activity, and mood symptoms. More recently, reductions in BD
symptoms and relapse rates were observed in a randomized controlled trial of CBT
to reduce insomnia as compared to psychoeducation (Harvey et al., 2015).
Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy
Similar to traditional interpersonal therapy, interpersonal and social rhythm therapy
(IPSRT) focuses on four types of interpersonal problems: grief (extended to cover
grief over the “lost healthy self” with the diagnosis of BD), interpersonal conflicts,
role transitions (i.e., changes in employment situation), and interpersonal deficits (i.e.,
social isolation), but supplements this focus with techniques to improve medication
adherence and to address social rhythm disturbances (Frank, 2005). Hence, IPSRT is
designed to address many of the triggers of bipolar symptoms, including medication
adherence, schedule disruption, negative life events, and low social support.
In one study, Frank and colleagues (2005) randomly assigned 175 acutely ill par-
ticipants to receive either IPSRT or clinical management. IPSRT was administered as
acute therapy (weekly sessions for several months) or maintenance therapy (monthly
for 2 years), leading to four combinations of acute/maintenance treatment. Find-
ings from the study were mixed, in that acute IPSRT treatment led to longer periods
before recurrence, but maintenance IPSRT did not yield improvements in symptoms
compared to clinical management. In a randomized controlled trial of 100 persons,
IPSRT and supportive care attained comparable results (Inder et al., 2017). In the
large-scale Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-
BD) trial, IPSRT achieved better outcomes than did clinical management (Miklowitz
et al., 2007).
Some research has examined the mechanisms through which IPSRT produces
change. Patients who received IPSRT achieved greater stability of daily routines than
did those who received clinical management (Frank et al., 2005), and those improve-
ments predicted less likelihood of relapse (Frank et al., 2005; but for negative results,
see Frank et al., 1997; Shen et al., 2008).
Mindfulness‑Based Training
There has been hope that mindfulness training could help reduce the stress and anx-
iety that are often present for those with BD (Murray et al., 2017). There is emerging
data indicating that mindfulness has reliable benefit for bipolar depression, although
effects appear to be lost over longer follow-up periods (Xuan et al., 2020; cf. Chu et
al., 2018).
Predictors and Moderators of Psychosocial Treatment Outcomes in BD
Studies have evaluated various factors that may predict psychosocial treatment out-
come or moderate response to different psychosocial treatments in BD, though this
remains a relatively unexplored and nonreplicated area of research. Collectively,
data across studies to date suggest that an elevated body mass index, more comorbid

-- 325 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	305
medical conditions, and more tendency to engage in extreme attributions (all-or-
nothing explanations for various life events) can interfere with achieving full benefit
from psychosocial treatment for BD (e.g., Peters et al., 2015; Frank et al., 2005; Stange
et al., 2013).
Principles of Change
Given the range of available treatment options and the relatively comparable evi-
dence for many of these treatments, clinicians may want to tailor their choice of
treatment to the patient by considering principles of change; that is, the best treat-
ment options likely depend on whether the goal is reducing manic or depressive
relapse, and the particular social and psychological risk factors for a given patient.
In Table 10.1, we consider principles of change and specific interventions that
might address each domain. Psychoeducation has the strongest long-term support
and might be considered a first line of psychological intervention for those patients
who have not yet received solid information about their disorder and treatment
options. Several options have been found to reduce depressive symptoms, so the
clinician might choose treatments to address depression based on whether a patient
demonstrates interpersonal difficulties, social rhythm disturbances, family conflict,
or negative cognitive styles. Early detection and intervention strategies have been
applied successfully to preventing the occurrence and severity of manic relapse.
CONCLUSION
People diagnosed with BD are at high risk for recurrent episodes and medical comor-
bidity, and they incur substantial losses to their social and occupational worlds.
Their risk for suicide is higher than rates observed across most psychiatric disorders.
Clearly, there is a need for treatment development and innovation.
Every major treatment guideline recommends medication as the best way to
reduce acute symptoms and to protect against recurrence over time. Medication non-
adherence can trigger increases in depressive and manic symptoms. Even with such
medications, however, rates of relapse remain disappointingly high.
Although genetic heritability is clearly the major force involved in whether
a person develops the disorder, genetic models are less helpful in predicting the
course of disorder. Psychological variables have been found to predict the course
of disorder. Emotional lability, trauma, and emotion-related impulsivity may pre-
dict more serious manic and depressive symptoms over time. Negative life events,
negative cognitive styles, and family criticism are related to more severe depressive
symptoms over time. Schedule and sleep disruption, as well as various facets of goal
dysregulation, predict increases in mania over time. Each of these variables can be
considered a potential treatment target.
A growing body of evidence supports the efficacy of specific psychosocial
treatments for BD. Psychoeducation, training in medication adherence, and symp-
tom monitoring appear to have significant relapse prevention effects. CBT has been
found to reduce depression significantly, and there is evidence for the prevention
of mania during the first year after treatment, but not the second, with one of the

-- 326 of 498 --

306 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
TABLE 10.1. Principles of Change in Psychological Treatment Approaches for Bipolar Disorder
Principles of change 	Examples of specific guidelines
Improve awareness of symptoms. 	Teach the patient to routinely review symptoms, in
order to be alert to the signs and symptoms of an
incipient mood episode.
Increase motivation for medication
adherence.
Teach the patient about course of disorder and role
of mood stabilizers as a relapse prevention treatment
(i.e., to be taken even in the absence of symptoms).
Increase treatment engagement. 	Educate the patient, care providers, and support
network about efficacy of specific psychosocial
treatment. Establish strong rapport, provide forum
for discussing the meaning and hardships associated
with illness. Provide education and support to
improve motivation for treatment. Teach strategies
to enhance regular medication regimens, including
techniques to prevent forgetfulness and to manage
side effect of medications.
Reduce risk factors for episodes. 	Teach the patient about the dangers of substance
use for symptom management; consider behavioral
strategies to help reduce substance abuse. Teach skills
to manage stress and/or anxiety comorbidity.
Improve family functioning. 	Teach communication skills to the patient and their
family (e.g., constructive expression of both positive
and negative feelings, listening, assertiveness
training).
Develop plans to foster appropriate
support from close others and treatment
providers if mood episodes emerge.
Consider use of treatment contracts that specify
actions of providers and others (e.g., preferred
hospital should severe mood episodes be
encountered).
Promote regular sleep–wake cycles and
activity cycles.
Teach the patient sleep hygiene skills, help them
extend resting period in bed, and enhance stability of
daily routines.
Diminish excessive engagement in
overly ambitious goal pursuit and
practice self-calming skills after goal-
attainment life events.
Help the patient learn to avoid periods of overly
confident risk taking and frenetic goal engagement.
Help the patient learn to avoid acting on surges of
confidence present after small successes.
Address interpersonal stress and social
isolation.
Help the patient identify core interpersonal goals
for change and use behavioral strategies to promote
change.
Address maladaptive thoughts. 	Identify and challenge overly negative self-relevant
thoughts with use of cognitive strategies similar to
those employed for unipolar depression.

-- 327 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	307
available CBT manuals. Family treatment has been shown to enhance a range of out-
comes but to influence depression most directly. Intervention to address insomnia
has been shown to help reduce symptoms. IPSRT integrates interventions to address
both schedule disruption and interpersonal stressors, and has been found to provide
symptom relief when offered as an acute treatment but not as a maintenance treat-
ment. The large-scale STEP-BD study suggests that CBT, FFT, and IPSRT performed
comparably in reducing depressive symptoms.
Beyond the encouraging findings relative to symptoms, several studies suggest
that psychotherapies can bolster social and occupational functioning; that is, brief
psychoeducation (van Gent & Zwart, 1991), FFT (Miklowitz et al., 2003), IPT (Frank
et al., 2008), and CBT (Lam et al., 2003; Miklowitz et al., 2007) have been found to
improve social functioning. More work is needed for these targets, though, given the
extreme occupational and social distress associated with this disorder.
In summary, the findings from the host of treatment outcome studies are encour-
aging, in that a range of mechanisms has been targeted, with beneficial effects on a
broad range of outcomes. Notwithstanding the significance of these gains, there is
a need for more precise studies of the mechanisms involved in symptom genera-
tion and for treatments that more directly target these mechanisms. For example, it
remains unclear whether sleep or schedule disruption are better predictors of out-
come, and knowing this would certainly shape treatment targets. Such analyses of
which variables are most predictive could help refine treatment targets.
Overall, treatment outcome research on BD has achieved a great deal. The
early findings suggest that a host of treatments can be helpful. Psychoeducation can
enhance medication adherence and diminish symptoms. More specific interventions
are designed to address other mechanisms involved in the course of the disorder.
These basic findings on treatment outcome in BD set the stage for more careful inte-
gration of specific mechanisms with intervention studies, and extension of research
to a broader range of outcomes and populations.
REFERENCES
Acuff, H. E., Versace, A., Bertocci, M. A., Ladouceur, C. D., Hanford, L. C., Manelis, A., . . .
Phillips, M. L. (2018). Association of neuroimaging measures of emotion processing and
regulation neural circuitries with symptoms of bipolar disorder in offspring at risk for
bipolar disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 75(12), 1225–1233.
Agnew-Blais, J., & Danese, A. (2016). Childhood maltreatment and unfavourable clinical out-
comes in bipolar disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 3(4),
342–349.
Alloy, L. B., Reilly-Harrington, N., Fresco, D. M., Whitehouse, W. G., & Zechmeister, J. S. (1999).
Cognitive styles and life events in subsyndromal unipolar and bipolar disorders: Stabil-
ity and prospective prediction of depressive and hypomanic mood swings. Journal of
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 13, 21–40.
American Psychiatric Association. (2002). Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with bipo-
lar disorder (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.

-- 328 of 498 --

308 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Arts, B., Jabben, N., Krabbendam, L., & van Os, J. (2008). Meta-analyses of cognitive function-
ing in euthymic bipolar patients and their first-degree relatives. Psychological Medicine,
38(6), 771–785.
Ashman, S. B., Monk, T. H., Kupfer, D. J., Clark, C. H., Myers, F. S., Frank, E., & Leibenluft, E.
(1999). Relationship between social rhythms and mood in patients with rapid cycling
bipolar disorder. Psychiatry Research, 86, 1–8.
Ashok, A. H., Marques, T. R., Jauhar, S., Nour, M. M., Goodwin, G. M., Young, A. H., & Howes,
O. D. (2017). The dopamine hypothesis of bipolar affective disorder: The state of the art
and implications for treatment. Molecular Psychiatry, 22(5), 666–679.
Axelson, D., Goldstein, B., Goldstein, T., Monk, K., Yu, H., Hickey, M. B., . . . Birmaher, B. (2015).
Diagnostic precursors to bipolar disorder in offspring of parents with bipolar disorder:
A longitudinal study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172(7), 638–646.
Barbini, B., Colombo, C., Benedetti, F., Campori, E., Bellodi, L., & Smeraldi, E. (1998). The
unipolar–bipolar dichotomy and the response to sleep deprivation. Psychiatry Research,
79, 43–50.
Barnett, J., Huang, J., Perlis, R., Young, M., Rosenbaum, J., Nierenberg, A., . . . Smoller, J. (2011).
Personality and bipolar disorder: Dissecting state and trait associations between mood
and personality. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1593–1604.
Bauer, M., Glenn, T., Alda, M., Bauer, R., Grof, P., Marsh, W., . . . Whybrow, P. C. (2019). Tra-
jectories of adherence to mood stabilizers in patients with bipolar disorder. International
Journal of Bipolar Disorders, 7, 19.
Bobo, W. V., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Ketter, T. A., Brody, B. D., Kinrys, G., Kemp, D. E., . . .
Kamali, M. (2014). Effect of adjunctive benzodiazepines on clinical outcomes in lithium-
or quetiapine-treated outpatients with bipolar I or II disorder: Results from the Bipolar
CHOICE trial. Journal of Affective Disorders, 161, 30–35.
Bora, E., Hıdıroğlu, C., Özerdem, A., Kaçar, Ö. F., Sarısoy, G., Civil Arslan, F., . . . Tümkaya,
S. (2016). Executive dysfunction and cognitive subgroups in a large sample of euthymic
patients with bipolar disorder. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 26(8), 1338–1347.
Bora, E., Yucel, M., & Pantelis, C. (2009). Cognitive endophenotypes of bipolar disorder: A
meta-analysis of neuropsychological deficits in euthymic patients and their first-degree
relatives. Journal of Affective Disorders, 113(1–2), 1–20.
Bortolato, B., Miskowiak, K. W., Köhler, C. A., Vieta, E., & Carvalho, A. F. (2015). Cognitive dys-
function in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia: A systematic review of meta-analyses.
Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 11, 3111–3125.
Brissos, S., Dias, V., & Kapczinski, F. (2008). Cognitive performance and quality of life in bipo-
lar disorder. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 52, 517–524.
Brown, E. S., Todd, J. P., Hu, L. T., Schmitz, J. M., Carmody, T. J., Nakamura, A., . . . Lo, A. (2015).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of citicoline for cocaine depen-
dence in bipolar I disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 1014–1021.
Calkin, C. V., Ruzickova, M., Uher, R., Hajek, T., Slaney, C. M., Garnham, J. S., . . . Alda, M.
(2015). Insulin resistance and outcome in bipolar disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry,
206(1), 52–57.
Chan, S. H. W., & Tse, S. (2018). Coping with amplified emotionality among people with bipo-
lar disorder: A longitudinal study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 239, 303–312.
Chiang, K. J., Tsai, J. C., Liu, D., Lin, C. H., Chiu, H. L., & Chou, K. R. (2017). Efficacy of
cognitive-behavioral therapy in patients with bipolar disorder: A meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. PLOS ONE, 12, e0176849.
Chu, C. S., Stubbs, B., Chen, T. Y., Tang, C. H., Li, D. J., Yang, W. C., . . . Lin, P. Y. (2018). The
effectiveness of adjunct mindfulness-based intervention in treatment of bipolar disor-
der: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Affective Disorders, 225, 234–245.
Colom, F., Vieta, E., Sanchez-Moreno, J., Palomino- Otiniano, R., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M.,

-- 329 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	309
. . . Martinez-Aran, A. (2009). Group psychoeducation for stabilised bipolar disorders:
5-year outcome of a randomised clinical trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194, 260–265.
Coryell, W., Scheftner, W., Keller, M., Endicott, J., Maser, J., & Klerman, G. L. (1993). The endur-
ing psychosocial consequences of mania and depression. American Journal of Psychiatry,
150, 720–727.
Dell’Osso, B., Shah, S., Do, D., Yuen, L. D., Hooshmand, F., Wang, P. W., . . . Ketter, T. A. (2017).
American tertiary clinic-referred bipolar II disorder versus bipolar I disorder associated
with hastened depressive recurrence. International Journal of Bipolar Disorders, 5, 2.
Demissie, M., Hanlon, C., Birhane, R., Ng, L., Medhin, G., & Fekadu, A. (2018). Psychologi-
cal interventions for bipolar disorder in low- and middle-income countries: Systematic
review. BJPsych Open, 4(5), 375–384.
Dodd, A., Lockwood, E., Mansell, W., & Palmier-Claus, J. (2019). Emotion regulation strategies
in bipolar disorder: A systematic and critical review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 246,
262–284.
Dunayevich, E., Sax, K. W., Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., Sorter, M. T., McConville, B. J., & Stra-
kowski, S. M. (2000). Twelve-month outcome in bipolar patients with and without per-
sonality disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61, 134–139.
Ehlers, C. L., Frank, E., & Kupfer, D. J. (1988). Social zeitgebers and biological rhythms: A uni-
fied approach to understanding the etiology of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry,
45, 948–952.
Fiedorowicz, J. G., Solomon, D. A., Endicott, J., Leon, A. C., Li, C., Rice, J. P., & Coryell, W. H.
(2009). Manic/hypomanic symptom burden and cardiovascular mortality in bipolar dis-
order. Psychosomatic Medicine, 71, 598–606.
Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s guide to interpersonal and social rhythm
therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Frank, E., Hlastala, S., Ritenour, A., Houck, P., Tu, X. M., Monk, T. H., . . . Kupfer, D. J. (1997).
Inducing lifestyle regularity in recovering bipolar disorder patients. Biological Psychiatry,
41, 1165–1173.
Frank, E., Kupfer, D., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., . . . Monk,
T. (2005). Two-year outcomes for interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in individuals
with bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 996–1004.
Frank, E., Soreca, I., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., Mallinger, A. G., Thase, M. E., . . . Kupfer,
D. J. (2008). The role of interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in improving occupa-
tional functioning in patients with bipolar I disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165,
1559–1565.
Garno, J. L., Goldberg, J. F., Ramirez, P. M., & Ritzler, B. A. (2005). Impact of childhood abuse
on the clinical course of bipolar disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186(2), 121–125.
George, E. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Taylor, D. O. (2003). The
comorbidity of bipolar disorder and axis II personality disorders: Prevalence and clinical
correlates. Bipolar Disorders, 5, 115–122.
Ghaemi, S. N., Lenox, M. S., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2001). Effectiveness and safety of long-term
antidepressant treatment in bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 565–569.
Gitlin, M. J., Swendsen, J., Heller, T. L., & Hammen, C. (1995). Relapse and impairment in bipo-
lar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1635–1640.
Gold, A. K., Otto, M. W., Deckersbach, T., Sylvia, L. G., Nierenberg, A. A., & Kinrys, G. (2018).
Substance use comorbidity in bipolar disorder: A qualitative review of treatment strate-
gies and outcomes. American Journal of Addictions, 27, 188–201.
Goldstein, B. I., Carnethon, M. R., Matthews, K. A., McIntyre, R. S., Miller, G. E., Raghuveer,
G., . . . McCrindle, B. W. (2015). Major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder predis-
pose youth to accelerated atherosclerosis and early cardiovascular disease: A scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 132(10), 965–986.

-- 330 of 498 --

310 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Gonzalez, J. M., Thompson, P., Escamilla, M., Araga, M., Singh, V., Farrelly, N., . . . Bowden,
C. L. (2007). Treatment characteristics and illness burden among European Americans,
African Americans, and Latinos in the first 2,000 patients of the systematic treatment
enhancement program for bipolar disorder. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 40, 31–46.
Goodwin, G. M., Haddad, P. M., Ferrier, I. N., Aronson, J. K., Barnes, T. R. H., Cipriani, A., . . .
Young, A. H. (2016). Evidence-based guidelines for treating bipolar disorder: Revised
third edition recommendations from the British Association for Psychopharmacology.
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30, 495–553.
Gruber, J. (2011). Can feeling too good be bad?: Positive emotion persistence (PEP) in bipolar
disorder. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 217–221.
Gruber, J., Harvey, A., & Gross, J. (2012). When trying is not enough: Emotion regulation and
the effort-success gap in bipolar disorder. Emotion, 12, 997–1003.
Haeri, S., Williams, J., Kopeykina, I., Johnson, J., Newmark, A., Cohen, L., & Galynker, I. (2011).
Disparities in diagnosis of bipolar disorder in individuals of African and European
descent: A review. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 17, 394–403.
Harvey, A. G., Soehner, A. M., Kaplan, K. A., Hein, K., Lee, J., Kanady, J., . . . Buysse, D. J.
(2015). Treating insomnia improves mood state, sleep, and functioning in bipolar disor-
der: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83,
564–577.
Hayes, J. F., Miles, J., Walters, K., King, M., & Osborn, D. P. J. (2015). A systematic review
and meta-analysis of premature mortality in bipolar affective disorder. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 131(6), 417–425.
Hogarty, G. E., Anderson, C. M., Reiss, D. J., Kornblith, S. J., Greenwald, D. P., & Ulrich, R. F.
(1991). Family psychoeducation, social skills training, and maintenance chemotherapy in
the aftercare of schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 340–347.
Honig, A., Hofman, A., Hilwiq, M., Noorthoorn, E., & Ponds, R. (1995). Psychoeducation and
expressed emotion in bipolar disorder: Preliminary findings. Psychiatry Research, 28,
299–301.
Hosang, G. M., Uher, R., Maughan, B., McGuffin, P., & Farmer, A. E. (2012). The role of loss
and danger events in symptom exacerbation in bipolar disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 46(12), 1584–1589.
Inder, M. L., Crowe, M. T., Moor, S., Carter, J. D., Luty, S. E., Frampton, C. M., & Joyce, P. R.
(2017). Three-year follow-up after psychotherapy for young people with bipolar disorder.
Bipolar Disorders, 20, 441–447.
Jamison, K. (1993). Touched with fire: Manic depressive illness and the artistic temperament. New
York: Free Press.
Javadpour, A., Hedayati, A., Dehbozorgi, G. R., & Azizi, A. (2013). The impact of a simple
individual psychoeducation program on quality of life, rate of relapse, and medication
adherence in bipolar disorder patients. Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 6, 208–213.
Johnson, K. R., & Johnson, S. L. (2014). Inadequate treatment of black Americans with bipolar
disorder. Psychiatric Services, 65, 255–258.
Johnson, S. L. (2005). Life events in bipolar disorder: Towards more specific models. Clinical
Psychology Review, 25, 1008–1027.
Johnson, S. L., & Carver, C. S. (2016). Emotion-relevant impulsivity predicts sustained anger
and aggression after remission in bipolar I disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 189,
169–175.
Johnson, S. L., Cuellar, A., & Peckham, A. H. (2015). Risk factors for bipolar disorder. In I. H.
Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (3rd ed., pp. 315–333). New York:
Guilford Press.
Johnson, S. L., Edge, M. D., Holmes, M. K., & Carver, C. S. (2012). The behavioral activation
system and mania. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 243–267.

-- 331 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	311
Johnson, S. L., & Fingerhut, R. (2004). Negative cognitions predict the course of bipolar depres-
sion, not mania. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 18, 149–162.
Johnson, S. L., Winett, C. A., Meyer, B., Greenhouse, W. J., & Miller, I. (1999). Social support
and the course of bipolar disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 558–566.
Jones, S., Hayward, P., & Lam, D. (2009). Coping with bipolar disorder: A CBT-informed guide to
living with manic depression. Oxford, UK: One World.
Jones, S. H., Smith, G., Mulligan, L. D., Lobban, F., Law, H., Dunn, G., . . . Morrison, A. P. (2015).
Recovery-focused cognitive-behavioural therapy for recent-onset bipolar disorder: Ran-
domised controlled pilot trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 58–66.
Jones, S. H., Tai, S., Evershed, K., Knowles, R., & Bentall, R. (2006). Early detection of bipolar
disorder: A pilot familial high-risk study of parents with bipolar disorder and their ado-
lescent children. Bipolar Disorders, 8, 362–372.
Judd, L. L., Akiskal, H. S., Schetteler, P. J., Endicott, J., Maser, J., Solomon, D. A., . . . Keller, M.
B. (2002). The long-term natural history of the weekly symptomatic status of bipolar I
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 530–537.
Keller, M., Lavori, P., Coryell, W., Andreasen, N., Endicott, J., Clayton, P., . . . Hirschfeld, R. M.
(1986). Differential outcome of pure manic, mixed/cycling, and pure depressive episodes
in patients with bipolar illness. Journal of the American Medical Association, 255, 3138–3142.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comor-
bidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.
Kilbourne, A. M., Bauer, M. S., Han, X., Haas, G. L., Elder, P., Good, C. B., . . . Pincus, H. (2005).
Racial differences in the treatment of veterans with bipolar disorder. Psychiatric Services,
56, 1549–1555.
Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., Grochocinski, V. J., Houck, P. R., & Brown, C. (2005). African-American
participants in a bipolar disorder registry: Clinical and treatment characteristics. Bipolar
Disorders, 7, 82–88.
Kyaga, S., Landén, M., Boman, M., Hultman, C. M., Långström, N., & Lichtenstein, P. (2013).
Mental illness, suicide and creativity: 40-year prospective total population study. Journal
of Psychiatric Research, 47(1), 83–90.
Lam, D. H., Jones, S. H., & Hayward, P. (2010). Cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: A therapist’s
guide to concepts, methods, and practice (2nd ed.). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham, P. (2005). Relapse prevention in
patients with bipolar disorder: Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 162(2), 324–329.
Lam, D. H., Watkins, E. R., Hayward, P., Bright, J., Wright, K., & Kerr, N. (2003). A randomized
controlled study of cognitive therapy of relapse prevention for bipolar affective disorder:
Outcome of the first year. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 145–152.
Lancaster, T. M. (2018). Evidence for association between familial bipolar risk and ventral
striatal volume. Journal of Affective Disorders, 232, 69–72.
LaPalme, M., Hodgins, S., & LaRoche, C. (1997). Children of parents with bipolar disorder:
A meta-analysis of risk for mental disorders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 42, 623–631.
Laursen, T. M., Munk-Olsen, T., Nordentoft, M., & Mortensen, P. B. (2007). Increased mortality
among patients admitted with major psychiatric disorders: A register-based study com-
paring mortality in unipolar depressive disorder, bipolar affective disorder, schizoaffec-
tive disorder, and schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 68, 899–907.
Lima, I. M. M., Peckham, A. D., & Johnson, S. L. (2018). Cognitive deficits in bipolar disorders:
Implications for emotion. Clinical Psychology Review, 59, 126–136.
Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B. P., Hlastala, S. A., Luther, J. F., & Sherrill, J. T.
(2000). Social rhythm disruption and stressful life events in the onset of bipolar and uni-
polar episodes. Psychological Medicine, 30, 1005–1016.

-- 332 of 498 --

312 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Manelis, A., Ladouceur, C. D., Graur, S., Monk, K., Bonar, L. K., Hickey, M. B., . . . Phillips, M.
L. (2015). Altered amygdala-prefrontal response to facial emotion in offspring of parents
with bipolar disorder. Brain, 138(9), 2777–2790.
Masi, G., Perugi, G., Toni, C., Millepiedi, S., Mucci, M., Bertini, N., & Akiskal, H. S. (2004).
Predictors of treatment nonresponse in bipolar children and adolescents with manic or
mixed episodes. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 14, 395–404.
McGirr, A., Vöhringer, P. A., Ghaemi, S. N., Lam, R. W., & Yatham, L. N. (2016). Safety and
efficacy of adjunctive second-generation antidepressant therapy with a mood stabiliser
or an atypical antipsychotic in acute bipolar depression: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised placebo-controlled trials. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 1138–1146.
McGrady, A., Lynch, D., & Rapport, D. (2017). Psychosocial factors and comorbidity associ-
ated with suicide attempts: Findings in patients with bipolar disorder. Psychopathology,
50, 171–174.
McGuffin, P., Rijsdijk, F., Andrew, M., Sham, P., Katz, R., & Cardno, A. (2003). The heritability
of bipolar affective disorder and the genetic relationship to unipolar depression. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 60, 497–502.
Melo, M. C. A., Abreu, R. L. C., Linhares Neto, V. B., de Bruin, P. F. C., & de Bruin, V. M. S.
(2017). Chronotype and circadian rhythm in bipolar disorder: A systematic review. Sleep
Medicine Reviews, 34, 46–58.
Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E., Hirschfeld, R. M., Petukhova, M.,
& Kessler, R. C. (2007). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 543–552.
Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J.-P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., Sampson, N. A., . . . Zarkov, Z. (2011).
Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the World Mental Health Sur-
vey Initiative. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(3), 241–251.
Merikangas, K. R., Swendsen, J., Hickie, I. B., Cui, L., Shou, H., Merikangas, A. K., . . . Zipun-
nikov, V. (2019). Real-time mobile monitoring of the dynamic associations among motor
activity, energy, mood, and sleep in adults with bipolar disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(2),
190–198.
Michalak, E. E., Yatham, L. N., Wan, D. D., & Lam, R. W. (2005). Perceived quality of life in
patients with bipolar disorder: Does group psychoeducation have an impact? Canadian
Journal of Psychiatry, 50, 95–100.
Miklowitz, D. J., & Chung, B. (2016). Family-focused therapy for bipolar disorder: Reflections
on 30 years of research. Family Processes, 55, 483–499.
Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Suddath, R. L. (2003). A ran-
domized study of family-focused psychoeducation and pharmacotherapy in the outpa-
tient management of bipolar disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 904–912.
Miklowitz, D. J., & Goldstein, M. J. (1997). Bipolar disorder: A family-focused treatment approach.
New York: Guilford Press.
Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J.
N., . . . Sachs, G. S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression: A one-year ran-
domized trial from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64, 419–427.
Miklowitz, D. J., Schneck, C. D., Walshaw, P. D., Singh, M. K., Sullivan, A. E., Suddath, R. L.,
. . . Chang, K. D. (2020). Effects of family-focused therapy vs enhanced usual care for
symptomatic youths at high risk for bipolar disorder: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry, 77(5), 455–463.
Miller, I., Solomon, D. A., Ryan, C. E., & Keitner, G. I. (2004). Does adjunctive family therapy
enhance recovery from bipolar I mood episodes? Journal of Affective Disorders, 82, 431–
436.
Miskowiak, K. W., Carvalho, A. F., Vieta, E., & Kessing, L. V. (2016). Cognitive enhancement

-- 333 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	313
treatments for bipolar disorder: A systematic review and methodological recommenda-
tions. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 1541–1561.
Miskowiak, K. W., Seeberg, I., Kjaerstad, H. L., Burdick, K. E., Martinez-Aran, A., Del Mar
Bonnin, C., . . . Vieta, E. (2019). Affective cognition in bipolar disorder: A systematic
review by the ISBD targeting cognition task force. Bipolar Disorders, 21(8), 686–719.
Monk, T. H., Frank, E., Potts, J. M., & Kupfer, D. J. (2002). A simple way to measure daily life-
style regularity. Journal of Sleep Research, 11, 183–190.
Muhtadie, L., Johnson, S. L., Carver, C. S., Gotlib, I. H., & Ketter, T. A. (2014). A profile approach
to impulsivity in bipolar disorder: the key role of strong emotions. Acta Psychiatrica Scan-
dinavica, 129(2), 100–108.
Murray, G., & Harvey, A. (2010). Circadian rhythms and sleep in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Dis-
orders, 12(5), 459–472.
Murray, G., Leitan, N. D., Thomas, N., Michalak, E. E., Johnson, S. L., Jones, S., . . . Berk, M.
(2017). Towards recovery-oriented psychosocial interventions for bipolar disorder: Qual-
ity of life outcomes, stage-sensitive treatments, and mindfulness mechanisms. Clinical
Psychology Review, 52, 148–163.
Nordentoft, M., Mortensen, P. B., & Pedersen, C. B. (2011). Absolute risk of suicide after first
hospital contact in mental disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(10), 1058–1064.
Nusslock, R., Young, C. B., & Damme, K. S. F. (2014). Elevated reward-related neural activation
as a unique biological marker of bipolar disorder: Assessment and treatment implica-
tions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 62, 74–87.
Otto, M. W., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Knauz, R. O., Henin, A., Kogan, J. N., & Sachs, G. S.
(2011). Living with bipolar disorder (expanded ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Otto, M. W., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Kogan, J. N., Henin, A., Knauz, R. O., & Sachs, G. S.
(2009). Managing bipolar disorder: A cognitive-behavioral approach (Therapist guide). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Otto, M. W., Simon, N. M., Wisniewski, S. R., Miklowitz, D. J., Kogan, J. N., Reilly-Harrington,
N. A., & STEP-BD Investigators. (2006). Prospective 12-month course of bipolar disorder
in out-patients with and without comorbid anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry,
189, 20–25.
Perlis, R. H., Miyahara, S., Marangell, L. B., Wisniewski, S. R., Ostacher, M., Delbello, M. P., . . .
STEP-BD Investigators. (2004). Long-term implications of early onset in bipolar disorder:
Data from the first 1000 participants in the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program
for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Biological Psychiatry, 55, 875–881.
Peters, A. T., Shesler, L. W., Sylvia, L. G., da Silva Magalhaes, P. V., Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M.
W., . . . Deckersbach, T. (2015). Medical burden, body mass index and the outcome of
psychosocial interventions for bipolar depression. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 50, 667–677.
Post, R. M., Altshuler, L. L., Kupka, R., McElroy, S. L., Frye, M. A., Rowe, M., . . . Nolen, W.
A. (2017). More childhood onset bipolar disorder in the United States than Canada
or Europe: Implications for treatment and prevention. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 74, 204–213.
Post, R. M., Leverich, G. S., McElroy, S., Kupka, R., Suppes, T., Altshuler, L., . . . Hellemann, G.
(2018). Prevalence of axis II comorbidities in bipolar disorder: Relationship to mood state.
Bipolar Disorders, 20(4), 303–312.
Rea, M. M., Tompson, M., Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Hwang, S., & Mintz, J. (2003). Fam-
ily focused treatment vs. individual treatment for bipolar disorder: Results of a random-
ized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 482–492.
Redlich, R., Dohm, K., Grotegerd, D., Opel, N., Zwitserlood, P., Heindel, W., . . . Dannlowski, U.
(2015). Reward processing in unipolar and bipolar depression: A functional MRI study.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 40(11), 2623–2631.

-- 334 of 498 --

314 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Roberts, S. M., Sylvia, L. G., & Reilly-Harrington, N. A. (2014). The bipolar II disorder workbook:
Managing recurring depression, hypomania, and anxiety. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Romans, S. E., & McPherson, H. M. (1992). The social networks of bipolar affective disorder
patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 25, 221–228.
Salloum, I. M., & Brown, E. S. (2017). Management of comorbid bipolar disorder and substance
use disorders. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 43, 366–376.
Salloum, I. M., Cornelius, J. R., Daley, D. C., Kirisci, L., Himmelhoch, J. M., & Thase, M. E.
(2005). Efficacy of valproate maintenance in patients with bipolar disorder and alcohol-
ism: A double-blind placebo controlled study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 37–45.
Schaffer, A., Isometsä, E. T., Tondo, L., Moreno, D. H., Turecki, G., Reis, C., . . . Yatham, L. N.
(2015). International Society for Bipolar Disorders Task Force on Suicide: Meta-analyses
and meta-regression of correlates of suicide attempts and suicide deaths in bipolar dis-
order. Bipolar Disorders, 17(1), 1–16.
Shen, G., Sylvia, L., Alloy, L., Barrett, F., Kohner, M., Iacoviello, B., & Mills, A. (2008). Lifestyle
regularity and cyclothymic symptomatology. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 64, 482–500.
Simon, G. E., Ludman, E. J., Unützer, J., Bauer, M. S., Operskalski, B., & Rutter, C. (2005). Ran-
domized trial of a population-based care program for people with bipolar disorder. Psy-
chological Medicine, 35, 13–24.
Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Saleem, R., & George, E. L. (1999). Bipolar
disorder and family communication: Effects of a psychoeducational treatment program.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 588–597.
Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., & Saleem, R. (1998). Expressed emotion and interactional
patterns in the families of bipolar patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 497–507.
Stahl, E. A., Breen, G., Forstner, A. J., McQuillin, A., Ripke, S., Trubetskoy, V., . . . Sklar, P.
(2019). Genome-wide association study identifies 30 loci associated with bipolar disor-
der. Nature Genetics, 51(5), 793–803.
Stange, J. P., Sylvia, L. G., da Silva Magalhaes, P. V., Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E.,
. . . Deckersbach, T. (2013). Extreme attributions predict the course of bipolar depression:
Results from the STEP-BD randomized controlled trial of psychosocial treatment. Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 74, 249–255.
Strakowski, S. M., Fleck, D. E., DelBello, M. P., Adler, C. M., Shear, P. K., Kotwal, R., & Arndt, S.
(2010). Impulsivity across the course of bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 12(3), 285–297.
Suppes, T., Leverich, G. S., Keck, P. E., Nolen, W. A., Denicoff, K. D., Altshuler, L. L., . . . Post,
R. M. (2001). The Stanley Foundation Bipolar Treatment Outcome Network: II. Demo-
graphics and illness characteristics of the first 261 patients. Journal of Affective Disorders,
67, 45–59.
Swann, A. C., Pazzaglia, P., Nicholls, A., Dougherty, D. M., & Moeller, F. G. (2003). Impulsivity
and phase of illness in bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 73, 105–111.
Tohen, M., Waternaux, C. M., & Tsuang, M. T. (1990). Outcome in mania: A 4-year prospec-
tive follow-up of 75 patients utilizing survival analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 47,
1106–1111.
Tondo, L., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2000). Reducing suicide risk during lithium maintenance
treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61, 97–104.
Tondo, L., Vazquez, G. H., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2017). Depression and mania in bipolar disor-
der. Current Neuropharmacology, 15, 353–358.
Tseng, W.-L., Guyer, A. E., Briggs-Gowan, M. J., Axelson, D., Birmaher, B., Egger, H. L., . . .
Brotman, M. A. (2015). Behavior and emotion modulation deficits in preschoolers at risk
for bipolar disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 32, 325–334.
Valentí, M., Pacchiarotti, I., Undurraga, J., Bonnín, C. M., Popovic, D., Goikolea, J. M., . . . Vieta,
E. (2015). Risk factors for rapid cycling in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 17, 549–559.

-- 335 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	315
van Gent, E. M., & Zwart, R. M. (1991). Psychoeducation of partners of bipolar manic patients.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 21, 15–18.
Vancampfort, D., Correll, C. U., Galling, B., Probst, M., De Hert, M., Ward, P. B., . . . Stubbs,
B. (2016). Diabetes mellitus in people with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major
depressive disorder: A systematic review and large scale meta-analysis. World Psychiatry,
15(2), 166–174.
Victor, S. E., Johnson, S. L., & Gotlib, I. H. (2011). Quality of life and impulsivity in bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 13(3), 303–309.
Vieta, E., & Valentí, M. (2013). Mixed states in DSM-5: Implications for clinical care, education,
and research. Journal of Affective Disorders, 148(1), 28–36.
Vreeker, A., Boks, M. P. M., Abramovic, L., Verkooijen, S., Van Bergen, A. H., Hillegers, M. H. J.,
. . . Ophoff, R. A. (2016). High educational performance is a distinctive feature of bipolar
disorder: A study on cognition in bipolar disorder, schizophrenia patients, relatives and
controls. Psychological Medicine, 46, 807–818.
Wehr, T. A., Sack, D. A., & Rosenthal, N. E. (1987). Sleep reduction as a final common pathway
in the genesis of mania. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 210–214.
Wehr, T. A., Turner, E., Shimada, J., Lowe, C., Barker, C., & Leibenluft, E. (1998). Treatment of a
rapidly cycling bipolar patient by using extended bed rest and darkness to stabilize the
timing and duration of sleep. Biological Psychiatry, 43, 822–828.
Weiss, R. D., Griffin, M. L., Kolodziej, M. E., Greenfield, S. F., Najavits, L. M., Daley, D. C., &
Hennen, J. A. (2007). A randomized trial of integrated group therapy versus group drug
counseling for patients with bipolar disorder and substance dependence. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 164, 100–107.
Wender, P. H., Kety, S. S., Rosenthal, D., Schulsinger, F., Ortmann, J., & Lunde, I. (1986). Psy-
chiatric disorders in the biological and adoptive families of adopted individuals with
affective disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 923–929.
Whitton, A. E., Treadway, M. T., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2016). Reward processing dysfunction in
major depression, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 28,
7–12.
World Health Organization. (2011). The World Health report: Mental health. Geneva, Switzerland:
Author.
Xuan, R., Li, X., Qiao, Y., Guo, Q., Liu, X., Deng, W., . . . Zhang, L. (2020). Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychia-
try Research, 290, 113116.
Yan, L. J., Hammen, C., Cohen, A. N., Daley, S. E., & Henry, R. M. (2004). Expressed emotion
versus relationship quality variables in the prediction of recurrence in bipolar patients.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 83, 199–206.
Youngstrom, E. A., Findling, R. L., Youngstrom, J. K., & Calabrese, J. R. (2005). Toward an
evidence-based assessment of pediatric bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Child and Ado-
lescent Psychology, 34, 433–448.

-- 336 of 498 --

316
Contemporary basic and translational schizophrenia research challenges historical
therapeutic pessimism. The stronger the research, the clearer it is that people with
schizophrenia are not fated to this condition by strong genetic determinism, nor are
they rendered unaware or unfeeling in their experience of schizophrenia’s symp-
tomatology. An appreciation for this contemporary evidence makes it less surprising
when pharmacotherapy for schizophrenia disappoints, and in some cases, medica-
tion may not even be the most appropriate approach to treatment (Murray et al.,
2016). Along with these emerging basic and translational research implications, there
are also encouraging data on schizophrenia treatment itself. Research in this cat-
egory includes (1) traditional psychosocial treatments, well established for the care of
people with other conditions, being applied to treating schizophrenia; (2) advances
in newer psychosocial treatments that have come also to be appreciated as relevant
for the care of people diagnosed with schizophrenia; and (3) translational research
efforts aimed at individual symptoms and at basic psychological processes thought
to be crucial for schizophrenia. In this chapter, we sample from a range of basic,
translational, and intervention studies to support a more encouraging perspective on
schizophrenia treatment, not only for the benefit of those who study and treat people
with schizophrenia but also in the hope of catching the attention of other readers of
this volume who may not be aware of these developments.
We begin by describing the current schizophrenia diagnostic criteria and their
origins. We then review recent data on the epidemiology of schizophrenia, including
the number and types of people affected (i.e., their gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic
status), and on schizophrenia’s typical course, comorbidities, and prognosis. The
bulk of this chapter is then devoted to descriptions of schizophrenia’s main symp-
toms and the ways in which theory, methods, and measures from affective science,
cognitive neuroscience, and behavioral neuroscience have enabled us more precisely
C H A P T E R 1 1
Schizophrenia
Ann M. Kring
David A. Smith

-- 337 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	317
than ever before to pinpoint the nature of these main symptoms. This increased
explanatory precision has informed the next generation of assessment measures
and psychosocial treatments, which we also describe. In addition to covering these
assessment tools and interventions, where possible throughout this chapter, we
derive clinical implications from basic and translational psychopathology research.
Finally, we delineate general principles of change emerging from newer and promis-
ing treatments.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND CLASSIFICATION
Contemporary approaches to psychiatric diagnosis are sometimes regarded as neo-
Kraepelinian in recognition of the pioneering contributions of the 19th-century
German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin’s original symptom-based distinctions among
mental disorders (Jablensky, 2010). In contrast with this early work, the 20th century
witnessed decades of alternative approaches that were etiologically based, subjective
and inferential, unreliable, and frankly ignored, before more operationally defined
and objectively denotable symptom sets such as Kraepelin’s were reintroduced as
part of the third edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s (1980) Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III) and the 10th edition of the World
Health Organization’s (1992) International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10).
Apart from his general contributions to contemporary, worldwide diagnostic
standards, Kraepelin is also credited specifically with initiating the scientific study
of schizophrenia. He referred to what we today consider schizophrenia as dementia
praecox, which denotes what Kraepelin thought to be the disease’s characteristic early
onset and chronic deteriorating course. It was Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1911)
who later coined the term “schizophrenia,” which he chose to evoke a splitting of
the mind, in recognition of his more psychodynamic ideas about the nature of the
disorder.
One widely used manual that specifies diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia is
DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), which includes several symptoms
(e.g., hallucinations, blunted affect) and specifies duration criteria for the symptoms.
DSM-5 dispensed with schizophrenia subtypes that were part of prior versions of
DSM and remain part of ICD because of their limited reliability, validity, and utility.
Although our focus in this chapter is on schizophrenia, there are other disorders on
the psychotic disorder spectrum, including schizoaffective disorder, schizophreni-
form disorder, brief psychotic disorder, delusional disorder, and two of the personal-
ity disorders (schizotypal, schizoid).
DSM represents a consensus-driven approach to characterizing the symptoms
of schizophrenia. Among the more popular alternatives to the consensus-driven
approach are empirical ones based on factor analysis of symptom ratings. Fortunately,
there is some convergence between the two approaches, especially with respect to
DSM-5. Although the findings are not entirely consistent, the bulk of factor-analytic
studies also converge, like DSM-5, on some variant of a positive, negative, and dis-
organized speech/behavior structure (Kotov et al., 2020; Peralta & Cuesta, 2001).
As with the convergence between consensus and empirical approaches, a satisfy-
ing additional line of convergence comes, once again, from a historical perspective.

-- 338 of 498 --

318 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Kendler (2016) culled key schizophrenia symptoms from textbooks and review
articles published between 1899 and 1956. Thought disorder, emotional blunting,
and delusions were reported by every author reviewed. Notably, this consistency
emerged during the pre–neuroleptic era, further bolstering confidence in both the
contemporary consensus (DSM and ICD) and empirical evidence (factor analysis) for
these being among the most important of schizophrenia’s symptoms.
Although the characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia seem well established,
it must be noted that symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia does not ensure that
schizophrenia is characteristic of these symptoms. Indeed, these very same symp-
toms may present across other disorders and may even be more characteristic of
disorders other than schizophrenia. In particular, positive symptoms might charac-
terize personality disorders (e.g., paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal) and negative
symptoms might characterize mood disorders (e.g., major depression). While this
lack of symptom specificity creates nosological difficulties, for clinical purposes, it
creates opportunities for breakthroughs in the treatment of symptoms in the context
of other disorders to potentially inform the treatment of those same symptoms in the
context of schizophrenia.
Our adoption of a symptom level of analysis for this chapter, as opposed to
considering schizophrenia a unitary diagnostic entity, is a common and not alto-
gether new approach to managing the disorder’s heterogeneity (Neale, Oltmanns, &
Harvey, 1985; Persons, 1986). Among the various symptom configurations, one that
distinguishes positive, negative, and disorganized symptoms has proved useful in
terms of etiology and treatment, especially for positive and negative symptoms. It is
important to emphasize, however, that the positive versus negative locution is nei-
ther evaluative nor valanced. Positive symptoms are positive in the sense that they
are “additions”—excess experiences, phenomena, or functions not typical of people
who are not diagnosed with schizophrenia. Positive symptoms include delusions
and hallucinations. Negative symptoms, on the other hand, are “subtractions”—defi-
ciencies or absences of experience and function. Negative symptoms include asocial-
ity, avolition, anhedonia, blunted affect, and alogia. Disorganized symptoms include
disorganized speech and behavior. With this broad range of symptoms, it is clear
that schizophrenia can touch on everything that makes us human: the way we think,
what our senses perceive, what we feel, our motivation, and the way we behave.
Not surprisingly, schizophrenia is also associated with difficulties in social relation-
ships, goal-directed behavior, and communication. This breadth of impact, coupled
with schizophrenia’s relatively early onset and long-term outcomes, make clear that
by any standard, schizophrenia is among the most severe of the formally recognized
psychological disorders (Charlson et al., 2018).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is nearly 1%, and it affects men slightly more
often than women (Kirkbride et al., 2006; Walker, Kestler, Bollini, & Hochman, 2004).
Schizophrenia is more prevalent in developed than in developing nations (Saha,
Chant, Welham, & McGrath, 2005), but the incidence (i.e., number of new cases over
a particular time period) does not vary according to the economic status of the coun-
try (Saha, Welham, Chant, & McGrath, 2006). Taken together, these epidemiological

-- 339 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	319
findings suggest that the clinical course of schizophrenia is better in developing
nations than in developed ones. However, a close analysis of outcomes across sev-
eral nations indicates a great deal of variability that does not cleave to the devel-
oped versus developing nation perspective (Cohen, Patel, Thara, & Gureje, 2008). In
the United States, schizophrenia is diagnosed more frequently among some racial
groups, such as African Americans, than among others, though it appears that this
may reflect diagnostic bias among clinicians rather than an actual difference among
groups (Schwartz, Docherty, Najolia, & Cohen, 2019; Schwartz & Blankenship, 2014).
COURSE, ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES, AND COMORBIDITY
The typical schizophrenia onset is between ages 18 and 25, usually somewhat earlier
in men than in women. Some evidence suggests that an earlier age of onset is associ-
ated with more negative symptoms and a poorer prognosis (Tandon, Nasrallah, &
Keshavan, 2009). Perhaps owing to their later age of onset, women with schizophre-
nia tend to have an overall better prognosis than men, including better functioning
prior to the onset of the first episode, fewer hospitalizations, fewer negative symp-
toms, better response to treatment, and better social and occupational functioning
(Salem & Kring, 1998). People with schizophrenia typically have a number of more
severe acute episodes with less severe but still debilitating symptoms, including neg-
ative symptoms, between these episodes. Some estimates suggest that about 1 in 5
people with schizophrenia have an optimal course of illness, which means that they
are able to live independently, hold a job, and have meaningful relationships. Most
people with this disorder, however, have multiple episodes and continuing difficul-
ties in social and occupational functioning (Cancro, 1989).
Comorbid substance use disorders are common in schizophrenia, complicating
treatment efforts (Hartz et al., 2014). Anxiety disorders, including panic disorder,
obsessive– compulsive disorder, and social anxiety, are also commonly comorbid
with schizophrenia (Braga, Petrides, & Fifueira, 2004). Posttraumatic stress disor-
der (PTSD), in general, and childhood or adult trauma, in particular, are risk factors
for schizophrenia (Achim et al., 2011; Gibson, Alloy, & Ellman, 2016; Powers, Fani,
Cross, Ressler, & Bradley, 2016), especially so for positive symptoms (Bailey et al.,
2018). Childhood neglect, on the other hand, appears to be a risk factor for negative
symptoms (Bailey et al., 2018). Trauma, unfortunately, is all too common and a fairly
nonspecific risk factor for several psychological disorders, including schizophrenia
(de Vries et al., 2019); that is, experiencing trauma does not chart a direct course to
the onset of schizophrenia. Depression, too, is typical of people with schizophrenia,
though it can be difficult to distinguish between clinical depression and side effects
of medications commonly used to treat schizophrenia (Tandon et al., 2009). Perhaps
related to the high comorbidity with depression, people with schizophrenia are more
likely than people in the general population to die from suicide (Palmer, Pankratz, &
Bostwick, 2005), Sadly, for reasons that are not fully understood, people with schizo-
phrenia are also more likely to die from any cause (Laursen, Nordentoft, & Morten-
son, 2014). Results from a meta-analysis of over 300 people with schizophrenia found
that sleep difficulties, including sleep inefficiency, decreased total sleep time, and
increased sleep latency, are also common, even among people not being treated with
antipsychotic medications (Chouinard, Poulin, Stip, & Godbout, 2004).

-- 340 of 498 --

320 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Clinical Implications
Given the key gender differences in schizophrenia, consideration of gender is impor-
tant for both assessment and treatment. In addition, it is important to do a thorough
diagnostic assessment to identify any comorbid conditions that also require clinical
intervention, including anxiety disorders, PTSD, and both childhood trauma and
neglect. Of particular importance is consideration of depression and suicide risk
among people with schizophrenia. Substance use also warrants additional scrutiny,
not only for possible intervention but also because substance use can complicate
diagnosis by seeming to explain otherwise important indicators of underlying psy-
chosis. Finally, assessment and treatment of sleep difficulties may be beneficial (see
Vincent & Davidson, Chapter 14, this volume), especially because sleep difficulties
are problems in their own right, and because sleep therapies and sleep hygiene train-
ing entail minimal cost and risk, especially in relation to the costs associated with
psychosis and its treatment.
The fact that prognosis is unrelated to socioeconomic differences between coun-
tries raises the possibility that culture plays a strong role. Perhaps it is the culture
of symptom nonacceptance and a reciprocal relationship between symptoms and
control attempts (e.g., Barrowclough & Hooley, 2003; Vasconcelos e Sa, Wearden, &
Barrowclough, 2013) that drives both the aggressiveness of treatment and the poorer
outcomes in Western cultures. While from a Western perspective it is difficult to
imagine accepting schizophrenia to any degree, perhaps the message in these data
is that attempts to ameliorate symptoms can be undertaken from a clinical posture
that is more accepting of idiosyncrasies and eccentricities evidenced by the people
experiencing them. The essentialist impulse to deem anything unusual about peo-
ple to be related to their schizophrenia is nearly irresistible. It is sharply rejecting
and potentially alliance rupturing, however, to mount professional efforts to change
something that is neither part of the disorder nor troublesome to the person. Such
change efforts may be perceived as crossing the line from help into control, so it may
be that alliance building with people diagnosed with schizophrenia is encouraged
not only by negotiating what to change but also by negotiating what not to change.
This, in turn, might provide impetus for a broader societal conversation about accep-
tance of harmless, even if markedly unusual, human diversity.
Diagnostically, there are some important clinical considerations as well. DSM
requires the presence of at least two symptoms from its set of five domains. Because
only one of the DSM domains includes negative symptoms, a person evidencing
negative symptoms without positive symptoms would not qualify for a diagnosis
of schizophrenia. Conversely, a person with positive symptoms (say, delusions and
hallucinations) without negative symptoms, could be diagnosable with schizophre-
nia. Because delusions and hallucinations are highly correlated with each other,
DSM can be viewed as relatively biased in favor of a positive symptom presenta-
tion. Also, establishing the 6-month illness duration criterion can be a challenge
clinically, especially with people who may lack insight into their difficulties and
may thereby be poor historians of symptom onset. The negative symptoms them-
selves, because they are evidenced by the absence of ordinary functions, such as
emotional expressivity, can pose unique diagnostic challenges, making refined
assessment instruments and thorough training in this area very important. People

-- 341 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	321
with schizophrenia also may not appear to be experiencing distress, so the DSM
psychosocial impairment diagnostic criterion requires especially careful evaluation,
including an openness to understanding nontraditional indicators of distress and
ongoing reevaluation of distress as the therapeutic relationship becomes more estab-
lished and trusting.
Finally, racial bias requires constant vigilance, especially in the face of data sug-
gesting that apparent racial differences in schizophrenia may be driven more by cli-
nician diagnostic bias than by actual morbidity. Knowing where bias manifests (e.g.,
Eack, Bahorik, Newhill, Neighbors, & Davis, 2012; Iacovino, Jackson, & Oltmanns,
2014; Schwartz & Blankenship, 2014), whether implicitly or explicitly, is the first step
in eradicating it, so consciousness raising around pathologized racial and ethnic
differences through research, training, and personal reflection is probably neces-
sary to unconfound the schizophrenia diagnosis from its sociopolitical and histori-
cal contexts. There is no shame in feeling insufficiently prepared to navigate racial
and ethnic dimensions of schizophrenia diagnosis, but if diversity considerations in
schizophrenia differential diagnosis fall sufficiently outside one’s competence, it is
worth pursuing the necessary training, experience, consultation, and supervision,
or even making appropriate referrals, to ensure that clinical practice occurs within
the bounds of one’s competence (American Psychological Association, 2017). Doing
nothing is not professionally acceptable, as it perpetuates the continuation of such
biases and misdiagnosis. One of the troubling findings reported by Eack and col-
leagues (2012) is that the greater the mistrust of mental health professionals by Afri-
can Americans with schizophrenia, the greater the likelihood that these individuals
would be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Although speculative, one interpreta-
tion of this finding is that mental health professionals who sensed such mistrust may
have been inclined to attribute it to paranoia or suspiciousness rather than to their
own biases. We can and must do better.
CLINICAL DESCRIPTIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE OF SYMPTOMS
Our symptom-based description of schizophrenia is intended to manage the het-
erogeneity of the disorder for expository purposes and to better represent empirical
findings. Importantly, it is not intended as an approach to categorizing people diag-
nosed with schizophrenia. Symptom-based dimensional models represent the scien-
tific state of the art (e.g., Kotov et al., 2020), and creating new categories from differ-
ent configurations of symptoms no longer seems fruitful (Guloksuz & van Os, 2018).
Consistent with the purpose of the present volume, we see symptoms as occupying
a scientifically rigorous and clinically useful middle ground between aggregated
symptom dimensions and polythetic diagnostic categories.
Positive Symptoms
Positive symptoms tend to be the most familiar schizophrenic symptoms. Unlike neg-
ative symptoms, which manifest as absences, hallucinations and delusions are read-
ily apparent and salient experiences. They are also the most common schizophrenic
symptoms, with a prevalence approaching 90% in some samples (e.g., Demjaha et

-- 342 of 498 --

322 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
al., 2009). Nevertheless, it is worth noting that some evidence suggests that positive
symptoms may be less specific to schizophrenia than are negative symptoms, and
may be secondarily associated with a wide variety of other medical and psychiatric
conditions (e.g., hypo-/hyperglycemia, medication interactions/withdrawal, electro-
lyte/metabolic abnormalities, acute toxicities; Griswold, Del Regno, & Berger, 2015).
Hallucinations
“Hallucinations” are sensory perceptions in the absence of external sensory stimu-
lation. Common examples of hallucinations include hearing voices; seeing shapes,
colors, or people; smelling or tasting rancid food; and feeling insects, burning, or
numbness on parts of the body. The lifetime prevalence of auditory hallucinations
among people diagnosed with schizophrenia approaches 80%, while visual, tactile,
and olfactory hallucination prevalences are nearer to 30%, 20%, and 10%, respec-
tively (McCarthy-Jones et al., 2017). It is especially important to consider religious
and cultural factors in diagnosing hallucinations, as certain visions and other sen-
sory experiences may not be out of the ordinary within particular social groups.
Delusions
“Delusions” are fixed false beliefs that are not normative within one’s religious or
cultural community. Delusions are the most commonly occurring schizophrenia
symptom, evidenced in some 70% of cases across different cultures (Maher, 2001).
DSM distinguishes “bizarre” delusions, which are not possible even in principle—
such as being a deceased historical figure—from “non-bizarre” delusions, which are
possible in principle but are plainly false, such as the belief that one is being system-
atically thwarted by conspiring international authorities or that one’s thoughts are
being inserted, broadcast, or removed. Among the more common delusional themes
is delusions of persecution, which are the most common (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013); paranoia, which is also quite common; grandiosity; and ideas of
reference, according to which otherwise unrelated events are thought to be arranged
for or targeted specifically at the person experiencing the delusions.
Disorganization Symptoms
Disorganized symptoms include disorganized speech and disorganized behavior.
Disorganized speech refers to problems in organizing ideas and in speaking, so that
a listener can understand. Speech may be disorganized by what are called “loose
associations” or “derailment.” With this, a person may be more successful in com-
municating with a listener but has difficulty sticking to one topic. A nice example of
loose associations can be found in excerpts from the book The Soloist by Los Angeles
Times reporter Steve Lopez (2008). Lopez asks about Beethoven and gets the follow-
ing response:
“Cleveland doesn’t have the Beethoven statue. That’s a military-oriented city, occu-
pied, preoccupied, with all the military figures of American history, the great sol-
diers and generals, but you don’t see the musicians on parade, although you do

-- 343 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	323
have Severance Hall, Cleveland Music School Settlement, Ohio University Bobcats,
Buckeyes of Ohio State. All the great soldiers are there from the United States Mili-
tary, World War Two, Korean War, whereas in Los Angeles you have the LAPD, Los
Angeles County Jail, Los Angeles Times, Mr. Steve Lopez. That’s an army, right?”
(pp. 23–24)
In contrast to disorganized speech, disorganized behavior might include bouts
of agitation, dressing in unusual clothes, acting in a silly manner, wandering with
no particular destination, or collecting garbage. A person with this symptom seems
to lose the ability to organize their behavior and make it conform to community
standards. They might also have difficulty performing the tasks of everyday living.
In DSM-5, one manifestation of disorganized behavior is called “catatonia.” This
used to be a subtype of schizophrenia in prior DSM versions, but as noted earlier,
their limited validity rendered subtypes obsolete in DSM-5. People with catatonia
may gesture repeatedly, using peculiar and sometimes complex sequences of finger,
hand, and arm movements, which often seem to be purposeful. Some people mani-
fest an unusual increase in their overall level of activity, including much excitement,
flailing of the limbs, and great expenditure of energy similar to that seen in mania.
At the other end of the spectrum is immobility: People adopt unusual postures and
maintain them for very long periods of time. Catatonia is seldom seen today in peo-
ple with schizophrenia, perhaps because treatments work effectively on these dis-
turbed movements or postures.
Negative Symptoms
A 2006 National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) consensus statement on nega-
tive symptoms concluded that the evidence base supports five negative symptoms:
asociality, avolition, anhedonia, blunted affect, and alogia (Kirkpatrick, Fenton, Car-
penter, & Marder, 2006).
Asociality
“Asociality” involves decreased interest in forming close relationships with others
and/or reduced social activity. People with this symptom may not desire close rela-
tionships with family, friends, or romantic partners. Instead, they may wish to spend
much of their time alone. When around others, people with this symptom may inter-
act only superficially and briefly, and appear aloof or indifferent to these social inter-
actions. People with asociality may report frequently being alone, yet they do not
report feeling lonely. Asociality is distinct from social skills deficits or conditions
that limit the opportunity to interact with other people (e.g., living far away from
friends or family members).
Avolition
“Avolition” refers to diminished motivation and difficulty in initiating and persist-
ing in what are usually routine activities, such as work or school, hobbies, or social
activities. For example, a person with avolition may not be motivated to seek out

-- 344 of 498 --

324 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
work or to keep up with household chores or hobbies, and may instead spend much
of the time at home doing nothing. Like asociality, avolition involves both an expe-
rience component (i.e., motivation) and a behavioral component (i.e., goal-directed
behavior). Therefore, failure to be working is not an indicator of avolition in a non-
working person who is otherwise motivated to work.
Anhedonia
“Anhedonia” involves a reduction in the experience of pleasure. People with anhe-
donia may report diminished pleasure in different domains, such as social activities,
physical activities (e.g., food, sex, exercise), work or school, hobbies, and so forth.
As we discuss in more detail in a later section, research suggests that it is impor-
tant to distinguish consummatory or “in-the-moment” pleasure from anticipatory
pleasure (Kring & Elis, 2013). People with schizophrenia appear to have more dif-
ficulties with anticipatory than with consummatory pleasure; that is, when people
with schizophrenia are asked about expected future situations or activities that are
pleasurable to most people (e.g., good food, recreational activities), they report that
they anticipate less pleasure from these sorts of activities than do people without
schizophrenia (Gard, Kring, Germans Gard, Horan, & Green, 2007). However, when
presented with actual pleasant activities, such as amusing films or tasty beverages,
people with schizophrenia report experiencing as much pleasure as do people with-
out schizophrenia (Kring & Elis, 2013).
Blunted Affect
“Blunted affect” (also called “flat” or “restricted affect”) refers to a lack of outward
expression of emotion. A person with this symptom may stare vacantly, the muscles
of the face motionless, the eyes lifeless. When spoken to, the person may answer in
a flat and toneless voice and not look at their conversational partner. Importantly,
this symptom refers only to the outward expression of emotion and not to reported
experience of emotion, which is not impoverished at all (Kring & Elis, 2013).
Alogia
“Alogia” refers to a significant reduction in the amount of speech. Simply put, people
with this symptom do not talk much. People with alogia answer questions with one
or two words and elaborate on their answers with only the minimum of additional
detail.
Structure of Schizophrenia Symptoms
As described earlier, positive and negative symptoms emerge as distinct factors in
factor-analytic studies of schizophrenia symptoms (e.g., Smith, Mar, & Turoff, 1998).
The psychosis super spectrum of the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology
(Kotov et al., 2017) comprises similar thought disorder and detachment spectra
(Kotov et al., 2020). Despite latent factors underlying the specific symptoms, there are
reasons to preserve symptom-level distinctions. In the case of positive symptoms,

-- 345 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	325
DSM-5 retains the distinction between hallucinations and delusions because some
psychotic disorders involve only one or the other, and because the various treatment
approaches focus on them in somewhat different ways (Barch et al., 2013). Insofar as
negative symptoms are concerned, factor analyses suggest an even more complex
latent situation, with two distinct negative symptom factors emerging (Blanchard
& Cohen, 2006; Blanchard et al., 2017; Kring, Gur, Blanchard, Horan, & Reise, 2013;
Messinger et al., 2011; but see Strauss et al., 2018, for a more complex factor solution).
The first factor is diminished expressivity, and it includes blunted affect and alogia; the
second factor is diminished motivation and pleasure, and it includes avolition, asociality,
and anhedonia.
Clinical Implications
Different types of symptoms are related to a number of clinically significant factors.
The positive and disorganization symptoms tend to be associated with a less chronic
course, including more remissions and relapses than the more chronic course associ-
ated with negative symptoms (Owen, Sawa, & Mortensen, 2016). Positive and disor-
ganization symptoms also respond better to most antipsychotic medications, includ-
ing those that are otherwise associated with the treatment of negative symptoms
(e.g., clozapine; Huhn et al., 2019). Researchers examining the impact of positive and
disorganizations symptoms find that these symptoms are associated with greater
levels of caregiver burden (Barrowclough et al., 2003; Perlick et al., 2006; Wolthaus et
al., 2002). Positive symptoms also seem to decline with age, perhaps owing to reduc-
tions in dopamine that are also associated with aging (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013).
The negative symptoms tend to endure beyond acute episodes and have pro-
found effects on the lives of people with schizophrenia, as well as their family
members. Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies have shown that the presence
of many negative symptoms is a strong predictor of a poor clinical outcome (Fenton
& McGlashan, 1991; Ho, Nopoulos, Flaum, Arndt, & Andreasen, 1998; Milev, Ho,
Arndt, & Andreasen, 2005) and poor quality of life (Blanchard et al., 2017; Eack &
Newhill, 2007; Savill et al., 2016). Negative symptoms are also prognostic of func-
tional outcomes, including poor occupational attainment, financial dependence, and
impaired social adjustment (Siegel et al., 2006). Negative symptoms can also have a
major impact on family members. They are a significant source of caregiver burden
(Dyck, Short, & Vitaliano, 1999; Perlick et al., 2006; Provencher & Mueser, 1997) and
may also contribute to family conflict, which in its own right is related to poor prog-
nostic outcomes for people with schizophrenia (e.g., Hooley, 2007; Weisman, Nuech-
terlein, Goldstein, & Snyder, 2000). In a landmark study of people with schizophrenia
and their spouses, Hooley, Richters, Weintraub, and Neale (1987) found that spouses
believed that negative symptoms were more under the volitional control of the ill
spouse. By contrast, positive symptoms were believed to be part of the illness and
therefore under less individual control, even as spouses with more positive symp-
toms had lower overall functioning compared to spouses with negative symptoms.
Negative symptoms are also attributed to African American psychiatric inpatients
much more often than they are attributed to non-African American psychiatric inpa-
tients (Trierweiler et al., 2000).

-- 346 of 498 --

326 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
ASSESSING SYMPTOMS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
There are many methods for assessing symptoms in schizophrenia. In this section,
we briefly review two methods: clinical interviews and self-report measures. In the
following section we discuss laboratory methods for assessing negative symptoms
later, as a way to illustrate the benefits of translational research.
Clinical Interviews
Perhaps the most typical way to assess schizophrenia symptoms is the clinical inter-
view and rating scale. Clinical interviews are designed to aid diagnosis by assess-
ing the severity of specific symptoms. They typically focus on symptoms over a
particular time interval (e.g., last week, last month, last year), and symptom severity
is indicated on a rating scale that corresponds to the interview. One example of a
commonly used structured interview that coincides with the DSM is the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders (SCID-5; First, Williams, Karg, & Spitzer,
2015). The SCID includes modules covering all diagnoses in the DSM, includ-
ing a module for psychotic and associated symptoms. Most symptoms are rated
on a 3-point scale of severity, with instructions for algorithmically translating the
resulting configuration of symptom ratings into categorical diagnoses. DSM-5 also
includes a Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity assessment,
which uses a 0–4 rating scale to capture psychosis symptom severity (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2013). This measure assesses not only the severity of hallucina-
tions, delusions, disorganization, and negative symptoms but also domains that are
not symptoms of schizophrenia per se, specifically, impaired cognition, depression,
and mania.
Other clinical interview and rating scales, such as the Brief Psychiatric Rat-
ing Scale (BPRS; Lukoff, Nuechterlein, & Ventura, 1986; Overall & Gorham, 1962),
assess general psychiatric symptoms, including those observed in schizophrenia,
anxiety, and mood disorders. One of the mostly widely used clinical rating scales
for schizophrenia is the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS; Kay, Fisz-
bein, & Opler, 1987). Despite its widespread use, the PANSS has several problems.
First, it includes only a single item for hallucinations and a single item for delusions.
Single-item assessments are problematic from a measurement perspective, and they
also fail to cover the complexity of hallucinations (Visual? Auditory?) and delusions
(Reference? Paranoid?). Second, some of the items covering negative symptoms are
no longer considered negative symptoms (e.g., inattention). The Psychotic Symptom
Rating Scales (PSYRATS; Haddock, McCarron, Tarrier, & Faragher, 1999) provide
more comprehensive coverage of positive symptoms by also assessing conviction,
preoccupation, and distress that a person experiences with particular symptoms.
The Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms (CAINS; Kring et al.,
2013) includes several items for each of the five negative symptoms, and the inter-
viewer is instructed to consider multiple perspectives (e.g., experience, behavior) and
to resolve inconsistencies by using follow-up questions.
One challenge is that clinical rating scales can privilege interviewer observa-
tions over first-person reports. This appears to be particularly relevant for schizo-
phrenia, perhaps reflecting the dogma that people with schizophrenia have limited
.

-- 347 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	327
insight or awareness of their illness and cannot reliably report on their own experi-
ences (e.g., Amador et al., 1994; Selten, Gernaat, Nolen, Wiersma, & van den Bosch,
1998). Reconciling two discrepant reports is never an easy task, but such discrepan-
cies may reflect something other than lack of insight or limited self-awareness on the
part of the person with schizophrenia. For example, asking people with schizophre-
nia whether they generally experience pleasure (or even to describe what kinds of
things they find pleasurable) might elicit a different response than asking whether
they derive pleasure from consuming a favorite meal; that is, the context in which
questions about emotional experiences are asked can lead to different responses.
Moreover, and in some ways more importantly, the tendency to interpret mismatches
between first-person and other reports as error by the person with schizophrenia
conveys the message that first-person reports are not meaningful. Nothing could be
further from the truth.
Self‑Report Measures
Another way to assess symptoms is with self-report. Somewhat surprisingly, self-
report measures have not often been used in the assessment of schizophrenia. This
may be due to a general misperception that people with schizophrenia cannot reli-
ably and accurately complete such measures. However, research employing a vari-
ety of paradigms documents the ability of people with schizophrenia to provide
reliable and valid reports of domains such as anhedonia, emotion expression, and
motivation—all constructs related to negative symptoms (e.g., Barch, Yodkovik,
Sypher-Locke, & Hanewinkel, 2008; Horan, Green, Kring, & Nuechterlein, 2006;
Horan, Kring, & Blanchard, 2006).
That people with schizophrenia produce valid self-reports of emotion is less
remarkable when we understand that they do not approach such measures with
different underlying conceptualizations or knowledge structures of the constructs.
For example, a study using multidimensional scaling techniques demonstrated that
people with schizophrenia use the same two-dimensional structure (valence and
arousal) as people without schizophrenia when completing emotion ratings (Kring,
Barrett, & Gard, 2003). Self-report measures are also related to other measures, such
as physiology and behavior (Kring & Elis, 2013). In short, there is considerable evi-
dence that people with schizophrenia self-report their emotion and other internal
states and motivations related to their symptoms in reliable and valid fashion.
One widely used measure to assess positive symptoms is the Community
Assessment of Psychic Experiences (CAPE; Konings, Back, Hanssen van Os, &
Krabbendam, 2006), which covers positive and negative symptoms (also depression
symptoms) and is an expansion of the work of Peters and colleagues who developed
the Peters et al. Delusions Inventory (PDI; Peters, Joseph, & Garety, 1999). This mea-
sure can assess recent and lifetime experiences of symptoms and is also used as a
measure of risk for psychosis.
There are a few specific self-report measure of negative symptoms (Lincoln,
Dollfus, & Lyne, 2017), including a self-report measure based on the CAINS that
assesses the motivation and pleasure domain, and is known as the MAP-SR (Park et
al., 2012). This has been used in several studies, and people with schizophrenia can
complete this without problems (Lincoln et al., 2017).

-- 348 of 498 --

328 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Perhaps the most widely used negative symptom self-report measures are of
anhedonia. In particular, two measures developed in the 1970s by Loren and Jean
Chapman at the University of Wisconsin, the Physical Anhedonia Scale (Chapman &
Chapman, 1978) and the Social Anhedonia Scale (Eckblad, Chapman, Chapman, &
Mishlove, 1982), have been used in many studies. These studies indicate that people
with schizophrenia score higher than (1) people who do not have a psychological
disorder and (2) people with bipolar disorder, but (3) do not differ from people with
depression. However, whereas scores on these scales wax and wane with depres-
sion episodes, they remain elevated among people with schizophrenia, suggesting a
more trait-like anhedonic disturbance. Indeed, scores on these scales show stability
across not only time but also whether a person is taking medication (Horan, Kring,
et al., 2006). While the Chapman scales are useful self-report measures of anhedonia
that have been widely used in schizophrenia research, their content is somewhat
outdated, and more recent research suggests that it is important also to consider
distinct components of anhedonia that are not necessarily reflected on these scales
(Lincoln et al., 2017).
A more contemporary anhedonia measure, which takes into consideration the
time course of emotion in its conceptualization of anhedonia in schizophrenia, is
the Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale (TEPS; Gard, Germans Gard, Kring, &
John, 2006). This trait measure assesses consummatory physical pleasure (i.e., extent
to which a person gets pleasure from physical activities; e.g., food and the outdoors)
and anticipatory physical pleasure (i.e., extent to which a person experiences plea-
sure in anticipation of future physical activities). Meta-analyses of studies using the
TEPS have found that people with schizophrenia can reliably and validly complete
this measure, and that they score lower than people without schizophrenia on the
Anticipatory but not the Consummatory subscale (Frost & Strauss, 2016; Visser,
Chapman, Ruiz, Raugh, & Strauss, 2020).
Clinical Implications
The myriad ways in which schizophrenia symptoms may be assessed suggest a few
key treatment implications. First, the clinical interview itself may be viewed as a
form of “therapeutic assessment” (Finn, 2007); that is, simply by engaging a person
with schizophrenia in a careful and detailed discussion of experiences, emotions,
social relationships, and motivations, the clinician may be helping to identify treat-
ment targets or, in cognitive-behavioral therapy parlance, to develop the problem/
treatment goals list (Beck, Rector, Stolar, & Grant, 2009). Second, because there are
strengths and weaknesses to any assessment approach, routine use of both interview
and self-report measures (as well as laboratory measures, discussed in the next sec-
tion) may be the only way to ensure comprehensive coverage of domains that treat-
ment needs to target. Third, no matter what assessments are used, it will be impor-
tant to consider whether a specific person exhibits particular symptoms, as opposed
to reliance on a global rating or total score that sums across all symptoms or even
symptom domains (i.e., positive, disorganized, or negative). Although the incremen-
tal contribution of finer-grained assessments to the delivery of more effective treat-
ment remains an empirical matter, it would seem that consideration of particular
symptoms guides treatment decisions more effectively and efficiently than lumping
all the symptoms together.

-- 349 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	329
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH: THE EXAMPLE OF NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS
Although clinical interviews and rating scales effectively assess schizophrenia
symptoms and assist with diagnosis, they can be limited when it comes to develop-
ing targeted treatments. First, the behavioral sample on which these interviews are
based may not be representative because the ratings are typically made at a single
time point, such as during hospitalization, that may not fully capture the individual’s
general level of functioning. Second, the format of these interviews, which demand
a certain degree of clinical skill, may systematically fail to elicit the full context of
when symptoms appear and are distressing. Finally, most uses of the rating scales
require tabulation of a total score rather than specific subscale or symptom scores.
Knowing the total score is informative with respect to overall symptomatology, but
it does not provide any specific information about particular symptoms. Less sus-
ceptible to these limitations, laboratory measures that are the focus of translational
research can be a useful means for augmenting clinical interviews when assessing
schizophrenia symptoms.
The aim of translational research is to convert laboratory findings into clinically
useful knowledge, moving them from “bench to bedside.” Our clinical understand-
ing of the negative symptoms of schizophrenia is a good example of translational
research because it has been enhanced by researchers who adopt the methods and
theories developed in affective science, social psychology, personality psychology,
and neuroscience to study emotion and motivation, as well as social interactions
and relationships in schizophrenia (Barch, Gold, & Kring, 2017). With respect to
emotion, these methods include laboratory studies in which emotionally evocative
stimuli are presented to people with and without schizophrenia, while measures of
facial expression, reported experience, physiology, and brain activation are obtained.
With respect to motivation, these methods include laboratory presentation of cues
signaling reward, along with assessments of motivated or goal-directed behavior to
obtain those rewards (or avoid losses). In the social domain, laboratory-based inter-
personal interactions and social perception tasks create opportunities for assessing
social behavior and cognition.
Here, we briefly review examples of such translational research as it pertains to
blunted affect, anhedonia, and avolition. Apart from the direct applications of find-
ings in this literature, it is worth pointing out that many laboratory measures that
are part and parcel of translational research can also be used effectively in clinical
assessments, as well as in gauging the effectiveness of interventions targeting nega-
tive symptoms.
A remarkably consistent pattern of findings has emerged from translational
research studies over the past 30 years (see Kring & Elis, 2013, for review): In the
presence of emotionally evocative stimuli—whether they be films, pictures, foods,
odors, or sounds—people with schizophrenia are less outwardly expressive of posi-
tive and negative emotion than are people without schizophrenia. However, people
with schizophrenia report feeling emotions as strongly as, if not more strongly than,
people without schizophrenia.
Contradicting a clinical rating of anhedonia, people with schizophrenia report
experiencing as much positive emotion in the presence of emotionally pleasant
things, such as films, pictures, tastes, or just day-to-day life, as do people without
schizophrenia (Kring & Elis, 2013). Translational research has helped to resolve this

-- 350 of 498 --

330 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
contradiction. Specifically, neurobehavioral models that distinguish between com-
ponents of hedonic experience (Kring & Barch, 2014) point to an important distinc-
tion between pleasure experienced when directly engaged in an enjoyable activity
(i.e., “consummatory pleasure”) and pleasure experienced in anticipation of future
activities (i.e., “anticipatory pleasure”). Anticipatory pleasure can be further parsed
into two components: (1) predicting the future experience of pleasure and (2) the con-
current experience of pleasure in knowing that a future activity is going to occur—
that is, the pleasure experienced in anticipation of things to come. Behavioral and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) evidence support the contention that
compared to people without schizophrenia, people with schizophrenia have difficul-
ties with both components of anticipatory pleasure. The clinical implication of this
finding is important: If people with schizophrenia are less likely to anticipate that
future events will be pleasurable and to experience pleasure in anticipation of things
to come, they may be less likely to seek out experiences they might find equally plea-
surable (e.g., Frost & Strauss, 2016).
More recent translational research has turned to avolition. There is a growing
body of evidence at both the behavioral and neural levels that people with schizo-
phrenia have difficulty translating reward information (picking up on cues of reward,
maintaining information about forthcoming reward, parsing out costs and benefits
to action) into goal-directed or motivated reward-seeking behavior (for reviews, see
Fulford, Campellone, & Gard, 2018; Kring & Barch, 2014). Heerey and Gold (2007)
showed emotionally evocative pictures to people with and without schizophrenia
in two conditions, asking them to press a button quickly either to see it again (for
positive images) or not to see it again (for negative images). In the first, called the
“representational responding condition,” button pressing took place after the image
was removed from view for 3 seconds. In the second, called the “evoked responding
condition,” button pressing commenced during picture viewing. Interesting group
differences emerged in the representational condition, in which participants pre-
sumably needed to maintain a representation of the pictures to guide their button
pressing. Healthy individuals exhibited a pattern of button pressing that was dis-
tinguishable by valence (i.e., they pressed the button more frequently for emotional
compared to neutral pictures); participants with schizophrenia did not show such
differentiation, suggesting a deficit in motivated behavior that required maintaining
representation of the forthcoming reward (in this case, to see a picture again).
Clinical Implications
What are the treatment implications of the illustrated translational research find-
ings? When treating a person with schizophrenia who is not very outwardly expres-
sive, whether facially, vocally, or gesturally, it is important to recognize that the per-
son likely feels strong emotions. Inasmuch as levels of subjective distress contribute
to impairment of judgments that are necessary for psychiatric diagnosis, mistaking
lack of expression for a lack of distress needs to be avoided, perhaps through spe-
cial efforts to understand emotional experience, when making diagnostic decisions.
Second, people with schizophrenia can express emotion facially if instructed to do
so (e.g., Kohler et al., 2008; Putnam & Kring, 2007). Thus, interventions built around
training expressive behavior may be effective. Third, blunted affect might account for
myriad family and interpersonal difficulties, inasmuch as the social consequences of

-- 351 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	331
unexpressive behavior are likely great, disrupting interactions with both familiar
and unfamiliar people (e.g., Hooley et al., 1987; Krause, Steimer-Krause, & Hufnagel,
1992). Family interventions provide an excellent vehicle for transmitting these trans-
lational findings not only to family members but also to people with schizophrenia
themselves. This way, family members can come to appreciate and empathize even
with the more obscure negative symptoms, while people with schizophrenia can
acquire a vocabulary for expressing and understanding themselves. Thus, family
interventions might benefit from including discussions of these translational find-
ings to more fully help family members understand the nature of negative symp-
toms.
Fourth, assuming, based on a clinical interview or self-report measures of anhe-
donia, that people with schizophrenia experience no pleasure would be a mistake.
Clinical interviews and self-report measures in themselves would have to cause
consummatory pleasure to expose genuine variability in hedonic capacity. Fifth,
it is important to assess both anticipatory and consummatory pleasure, perhaps
borrowing directly from laboratory-dependent measures to do so. Finally, exist-
ing cognitive-behavioral interventions for depression, such as pleasure predicting
(Burns, 1980), may be useful for people with schizophrenia who have a deficit in
anticipatory pleasure.
TREATMENT
Treating any symptom of schizophrenia is notoriously difficult. The current treat-
ment recommendation for schizophrenia from the American Psychiatric Association
and the Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) is for medication plus psychosocial
intervention (American Psychiatric Association, 2020; Kreyenbuhl, Buchanan, Dick-
erson, & Dixon, 2010). Unfortunately, it is often difficult for people with schizophrenia
to receive psychosocial interventions. Without access to psychosocial interventions,
pharmacological treatment becomes the default approach, frequently operating in
isolation from other helpful approaches, so much so that it becomes a challenge for
people diagnosed with schizophrenia to avoid taking medications.
Indeed, the most commonly used treatment is medication, but it is more effec-
tive for (some) positive symptoms and disorganization symptoms than for negative
symptoms. Indeed, the evidence in support of medication treatments for negative
symptoms is underwhelming, with studies showing only minor benefit from phar-
macological treatment (e.g., Leucht et al., 2017; Murphy, Chung, Park, & McGorry,
2006). In what follows, we consider how currently available treatments do (or, in most
cases do not) effectively treat schizophrenia symptoms.
Medication Treatment
In the 1950s, the serendipitous discovery of the class of antipsychotic drugs known
as phenothiazines, especially the drug chlorpromazine (e.g., Thorazine), revolution-
ized the way schizophrenia was treated. Indeed, in less than 20 years, these drugs
became the primary form of treatment for schizophrenia. Other early antipsychot-
ics include the thioxanthenes (e.g., thiothixene/Navane) and the butyrophenones
(e.g., haloperidol/Haldol). Collectively, these drugs are referred to as first-generation

-- 352 of 498 --

332 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
antipsychotics because they came out of the first “wave” of significant, empirically
supported medication treatments for schizophrenia. These first-generation antipsy-
chotic drugs are most effective with the positive and disorganization symptoms,
but as many as 30% of people with schizophrenia do not respond favorably to the
first-generation antipsychotics. As well, about half the people who take any antipsy-
chotic drug quit after 1 year, and up to three-fourths quit before 2 years, because
of unpleasant side effects such as sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, restlessness,
and sexual dysfunction (e.g., Lieberman, et al., 2005). Other more serious side effects
include “extrapyramidal side effects” (e.g., tremors of the fingers, a shuffling gait,
and drooling), “dystonia” (rigid muscles), “akathisia” (inability to remain still), and
“tardive dyskinesia” (involuntary and unstoppable movements of the mouth area).
Because of these side effects, current clinical practice guidelines from the Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association (2020) call for treating people with the smallest possible
doses of drugs. Ideally, the smallest possible dosage would be no drugs at all when
side effects are not tolerable or when symptoms are not affected; in practice, however,
low dosages are nevertheless routinely prescribed. Notably, and unfortunately, the
first-generation antipsychotic drugs are not very effective in treating negative symp-
toms (e.g., Leucht et al., 2009).
In order to remedy the deficiencies of first-generation antipsychotics, a second
wave of research produced a group of drugs referred to as the second-generation
antipsychotics. Heralded at the time as drugs that would have fewer side effects and
be more effective than first-generation drugs, particularly for negative symptoms
(e.g., Kane, Honigfeld, Singer, Meltzer, & the Clozapine Study Group, 1988), these
medications have their own troubling profile of side effects, such as weight gain
(Huhn et al., 2019; Rummel-Kluge et al., 2010), which has been linked to the develop-
ment of type 2 diabetes (Leslie & Rosenheck, 2004). Unfortunately, between 12 and
20% of people do not respond to these medications, particularly clozapine (Siskind,
Siskind, & Kisely, 2017). Furthermore, there is no strong evidence that these drugs
are any more effective than the first-generation drugs. A meta-analysis of over 400
studies with over 50,000 people compared the efficacy and side-effect profiles of 32
different first- and second-generation medications (Huhn et al., 2019). Two key find-
ings emerged. First, all but six of the drugs did a better job of reducing symptoms
compared to placebo, and there was little difference between the drugs in terms of
how effective they were at reducing symptoms. Second, the greatest effect was on
positive and disorganization symptoms. As noted earlier, medications are not very
effective for negative symptoms, whether first- or second-generation (Fusar-Poli et
al., 2015). In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration, the body that
approves new medication treatments for all illnesses, has yet to approve any medica-
tion with an indication for negative symptoms.
Another challenge with second-generation medications is that nearly three-
fourths of people stop taking them due to side effects (Jones et al., 2006; Lieberman
et al., 2005).
Psychosocial Treatments
Several psychosocial interventions, including cognitive-behavioral therapy, family-
based treatments, and skills training, have a solid evidence base to support their
use as an adjunctive treatment to medications (Dixon et al., 2010; National Institute

-- 353 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	333
for Health and Care Excellence, 2014; Turner, van der Gaag, Karyotaki, & Cuijpers,
2014).
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
A growing body of evidence demonstrates that the maladaptive beliefs of some peo-
ple with schizophrenia can benefit from cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT; Garety,
Fowler, & Kuipers, 2000; Wykes, Steel, Everitt, & Tarrier, 2008). The use of CBT in
schizophrenia is often referred to as CBTp, where the p stands for “psychosis” to
make clear that the CBT has been adapted for people with psychosis, such as those
with schizophrenia.
People with schizophrenia can be encouraged to test out their delusional beliefs
in much the same way as can people without schizophrenia. Through collaborative
discussions (and in the context of other modes of treatment, including antipsychotic
drugs), some people with schizophrenia have been helped to attach a nonpsychotic
meaning to paranoid symptoms and thereby reduce their intensity and aversive
nature, similar to what is done for depression and panic disorder (Beck & Rector,
2005; Beck et al., 2009; Turkington, Kingdon, & Weiden, 2006).
But does CBTp help with the negative symptoms? CBTp formulations targeting
negative symptoms may include challenging belief structures tied to low expecta-
tions for success (avolition) and low expectations for pleasure (anticipatory pleasure
deficit in anhedonia) (Rector, Beck, & Stolar, 2005; Wykes et al., 2008). One study has
shown that CBTp can help with avolition, by challenging belief structures tied to
low expectations for success (Grant, Huh, Perivoliotis, Stolar, & Beck, 2012). A meta-
analysis of 34 studies of close to 2,000 people with schizophrenia, across eight dif-
ferent countries, found small to moderate effect sizes for CBTp in treating positive
symptoms, negative symptoms, mood, and general life functioning (Wykes et al.,
2008). A qualitative review of 21 studies found that CBTp was effective in reducing
negative symptoms either compared to an active treatment or treatment as usual
(Elis, Caponigro, & Kring, 2013).
CBT exists within an extremely active and creative research community that
not only values empirical research but also aggressively pursues innovative means
of effecting change. Recently, CBT has embraced mindfulness-based approaches
(Kabat-Zinn, 1990; Khoury, Lecomte, Gaudiano, & Paquin, 2013), acceptance and
commitment therapy (Bach & Hayes, 2002; Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999; Louise,
Fitzpatrick, Strauss, Rossell, & Thomas, 2018), emotion theory, and metacognitive
concepts (Flavell, 1979; Sauvé, Lavigne, Pochiet, Brodeur, & Lepage, 2020), among oth-
ers. Collectively, these are sometimes referred to as third-wave approaches because
they follow behavioral, then cognitive-behavioral approaches. CBT is also studied
in the context of nearly every other form of psychopathology, creating ample oppor-
tunity for cross-fertilization of theories and methods in order to address the myriad
problems experienced by people with schizophrenia (Freeman, Taylor, Molodynski,
& Waite, 2019), including specific symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions
(Freeman, 2016; van der Gaag, Valmaggia, & Smit, 2014).
A variant of CBT, cognitive-behavioral social skills training (CBSST), focuses on
reducing symptoms and improving functioning (Granholm, McQuaid, & Holden,
2016). Randomized controlled clinical trials have shown it to be effective (Gran-
holm et al., 2005; Granholm, Holden, Link, & McQuaid, 2014), and it has also shown

-- 354 of 498 --

334 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
promise among people early in the course of the disorder (Herman, Shireen, Brom-
ley, Yiu, & Granholm, 2018). This treatment was effective in reducing positive symp-
toms and avolition (other negative or disorganization symptoms were not assessed).
Another treatment that has shown promise for people early in the course of
schizophrenia is called NAVIGATE (Mueser et al., 2015). This is a broad-based
approach that includes medication, family psychoeducation, and individual therapy.
In a large randomized controlled clinical trial called the Recovery after an Initial
Schizophrenia Episode Early Treatment Program (RAISE-ETP), NAVIGATE was
more effective than standard community care in terms of improving quality of life
and reducing symptoms. Unfortunately, the investigators did not parse positive, dis-
organized, and negative symptoms for separate analyses; they just reported a symp-
tom total score (Kane et al., 2016).
Family Psychoeducation
Family psychoeducation approaches to schizophrenia treatment are based on data
pertaining to the role of families in relapse of psychopathology (Hooley, 2007;
Pharoah, Mari, Rathbone, & Wong, 2010). Although a wide variety of family psycho-
education programs have been developed, they are more similar than they are differ-
ent. In particular, they all entail work with both the family and the identified patient,
in a collaboration dedicated to improving family functioning and reducing stress.
Efforts at helping that are well intended but not helpful (e.g., criticism, emotional
overinvolvement) are replaced with ones that are more helpful. Importantly, family
members are not blamed for symptom exacerbations; rather, there is an emphasis on
the nature of schizophrenia, the sometimes nonintuitive needs of symptomatic fam-
ily members, how to access support and care systems, negotiated problem solving or
crisis management work, and collaborative monitoring of systems in order to permit
prompt interventions during acute problem periods, in order to avoid relapses and
more invasive interventions. A recent review of 20 studies with a total of 2,337 partic-
ipants suggested that brief psychoeducation can lower relapse rates, improve symp-
toms, increase medication compliance, and reduce anxiety and depression (Zhao,
Sampson, Xia, & Jayaram, 2015).
Social Skills Training
Social skills training is designed to teach people with schizophrenia how to man-
age successfully a wide variety of interpersonal situations, such as discussing their
medications with the psychiatrist, interviewing for jobs, and reading bus schedules
(Heinssen, Liberman, & Kopelowicz, 2000; Liberman, Eckman, Kopelowicz, & Sto-
lar, 2000). Social skills training typically involves role playing and other group exer-
cises to practice skills, both in a therapy group and in actual social situations. As
might be expected, social skills training has its largest impact on social skills, but
it also has significant impact on negative symptoms. In a meta-analysis, Kurtz and
Mueser (2008) report moderate effects (effect size [ES] = 0.40) across six studies (N =
363) of social skills training on negative symptoms. Interestingly, these effect sizes
exceed those for other psychiatric symptoms (ES = 0.15), though they are substan-
tially smaller than those found for actual social skills (ES = 1.20).

-- 355 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	335
Adapted Meditation
It is easy enough to advocate basing new and innovative treatments on the best
contemporary translational science. It is somewhat harder actually to do so. Nev-
ertheless, this work has already begun. A recent meta-analysis of meditation-based
treatments for negative symptoms found a small but reliable effect size for these
treatments helping to reduce negative symptoms compared to treatment-as-usual or
another control treatment (Sabe, Sentissi, & Kaiser, 2019).
To illustrate this type of treatment approach, an emotion-focused meditation
treatment targeting anticipatory pleasure and motivation difficulties in schizo-
phrenia (Johnson et al., 2009, 2011) was developed as an extension and adaptation
to schizophrenia of loving-kindness meditation (LKM). Similar to other meditation
practices, LKM involves quiet contemplation and attention to the here and now. Par-
ticipants follow a guided meditation that asks them to direct their attention to their
heart region and contemplate a person for whom they already feel warm, tender,
and compassionate feelings, or a situation in which they felt warm feelings. They
are then asked to extend these warm feelings to themselves, using such internally
spoken phrases as “May I be safe” or “May I be at peace,” to help generate these feel-
ings. As the practice continues, participants are asked to radiate these warm, tender,
and compassionate feelings to others: first to a few people they know well, then to all
their friends and family, and finally to all people with whom they have a connection.
In the emotion-focused meditation, two groups of nine participants with schizo-
phrenia attended 1-hour weekly sessions for 6 weeks, as well as a review session 6
weeks after the final session. The weekly group sessions incorporated three major
components: discussion, skills teaching, and practice. At the beginning of each ses-
sion, the participants were encouraged to discuss something they learned from
doing the meditation or a perceived benefit of the meditation. Problems, challenges,
or questions about the practice were then addressed by the group, with advice given
by the therapist to meet participants’ needs and reinforce positive aspects of the
practice. Next, a mindfulness activity such as mindful eating, walking, listening,
or body movement, was taught and practiced. Then, the group facilitator led par-
ticipants in 5- to 10-minute meditation practice during the session, gently remind-
ing participants to redirect their attention nonjudgmentally to the feeling of loving-
kindness and positive emotions when their attention wandered. Participants were
encouraged to practice at home and were given a CD with guided meditations.
Although this was a completely uncontrolled study and the findings are
extremely preliminary, the attendance of people with schizophrenia was over 90%,
and feedback suggested that participants enjoyed and benefited from the treatment.
The treatment was associated with a decrease in anhedonia and asociality, and an
increase in positive emotions at posttreatment and at 3-month follow-up assessments
(Johnson et al., 2011).
Principles of Change
Although we have discussed clinical implications at various points throughout this
chapter, it is also worth attempting to delineate some more general principles of
change. Foremost among these is the proposition that psychosocial and biological
interventions complement rather than contradict each other. Just as medications have

-- 356 of 498 --

336 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
psychosocial effects, so, too, do psychosocial interventions have biological effects. A
completely deterministic biological accounting for the etiology of schizophrenia will
not change this any more than a biological account of learning would eliminate the
need for formal education. Similarly, fundamentally psychosocial phenomena may
be affected by biological interventions. Unlike other disorders, such as depression,
the symptoms of schizophrenia—especially the negative symptoms—are far enough
from ordinary experience that it is tempting to assume there must be something
wrong neurobiologically with patients and that a biological intervention is therefore
necessary. Both assumptions are based on faulty logic that researchers and clinicians
must avoid.
It may also be the case that the effective treatments are aimed not at schizo-
phrenia per se but at circumscribed problems associated with schizophrenia. For
instance, social skills training has its greatest effects on social skills, anhedonia and
asociality appear to be affected by emotion-focused meditation, and anticipatory
pleasure seems to be improved by interventions specifically targeting this phenom-
enon. Changes may be most likely when basic symptom and translational research
processes are targeted for intervention.
Interest in psychosocial interventions has also been invigorated by a focus on
specific symptoms rather than on the overall schizophrenia diagnostic category.
Research into CBT for delusions, for example, has reversed the traditional wisdom
that engaging with the content of positive symptoms is not useful. On the contrary,
doing so brings a wide array of well-specified procedures, including worry control
and exposure therapies, into the armamentarium of psychosis treatment.
Finally, though not a therapy unto itself, the therapeutic alliance in schizophre-
nia treatment has been the subject of increasing empirical attention. In a recent nar-
rative review of this literature, Browne, Nagendra, Kurtz, Berry, and Penn (2019)
found stronger therapeutic alliances to be associated with better insight, medication
adherence, and improved functioning, among other findings. Their appeal for more
training and supervision in developing a positive alliance with people experiencing
psychosis seems especially apt given the social and interpersonal difficulties often
associated with schizophrenia, particularly its negative symptoms (Shattock, Berry,
Degnan, & Edge, 2018).
CONCLUSION
Decades of empirical research have led to a growing understanding of the phenom-
enology (symptoms, prevalence, course, associated clinical features, comborbidity)
and etiology of schizophrenia. From these findings, clinical implications have been
derived with the goal of improving treatments. This is indicated, as the limitations of
contemporary treatments are as heartbreaking as they are well known. Fortunately,
promising evidence has emerged from the implementation of traditional and newer
forms of psychosocial therapies, as well as from innovative interventions based on
translational research. Clearly, the search for effective treatments must continue. To
the extent that the search for next-generation schizophrenia treatments leverages
evolving basic, applied, and translational research, there is cause for optimism that
this tragic disorder will one day be tractable.

-- 357 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	337
REFERENCES
Achim, A. M., Maziade, M., Raymond, E., Olivier, D., Merette, C., & Roy, M.-A. (2011). How
prevalent are anxiety disorders in schizophrenia?: A meta-analysis and critical review
on a significant association. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(4), 811–821.
Amador, X. F., Flaum, M., Andreasen, N. C., Strauss, D. H., Yale, S. A., Clark, S. C., & Gorman,
J. M. (1994). Awareness of illness in schizophrenia and schizoaffective and mood disor-
ders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 826–836.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2020). The American Psychiatric Association practice
guideline for the treatment of patients with schizophrenia. Retrieved from www.psychia-
try.org/psychiatrists/practice/clinical-practice-guidelines.
American Psychological Association. (2017). APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and
Code of Conduct. American Psychologist, 57(12), 1–20.
Bach, P., & Hayes, S. C. (2002). The use of acceptance and commitment therapy to prevent the
rehospitalization of psychotic patients: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consult-
ing and Clinical Psychology, 70, 1129–1139.
Bailey, T., Alvarez-Jimenez, M., Garcia-Sanchez, A. M., Hulbert, C., Barlow, E., & Bendall, S.
(2018). Childhood trauma is associated with severity of hallucinations and delusions in
psychotic disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 44(5),
1111–1122.
Barch, D. M., Bustillo, J., Gaebel, W., Gur, R., Heckers, S., Malaspina, D., . . . Carpenter, W.
(2013). Logic and justification for dimensional assessment of symptoms and related clini-
cal phenomena in psychosis: Relevance to DSM-5. Schizophrenia Research, 150(1), 15–20.
Barch, D. M., Gold, J. M., & Kring, A. M. (2017). Paradigms for assessing hedonic processing
and motivation in humans: Relevance to understanding negative symptoms in psycho-
pathology. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 43, 701–705.
Barch, D. M., Yodkovik, N., Sypher-Locke, H., & Hanewinkel, M. (2008). Intrinsic motivation
in schizophrenia: Relationships to cognition, depression, anxiety, and personality. Jour-
nal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 776–787.
Barrowclough, C., & Hooley, J. M. (2003). Attributions and expressed emotion: A review. Clini-
cal Psychology Review, 23(6), 849–880.
Barrowclough, C., Tarrier, N., Humphreys, L., Ward, J., Gregg, L., & Andrews, B. (2003). Self-
esteem in schizophrenia: Relationships between self-evaluation, family attitudes, and
symptomatology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 92–99.
Beck, A. T., & Rector, N. A. (2005). Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: Theory and ther-
apy. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 577–606.
Beck, A. T., Rector, N. A., Stolar, N., & Grant, P. (2009). Schizophrenia: Cognitive theory, research,
and therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Blanchard, J. J., Bradshaw, K. R., Garcia, C. P., Nasrallah, H. A., Harvey, P. D., Casey, D., . . .
O’Gorman, C. (2017). Examining the reliability and validity of the Clinical Assessment
Interview for Negative Symptoms within the Management of Schizophrenia in Clinical
Practice (MOSAIC) multisite national study. Schizophrenia Research, 185, 137–143.
Blanchard, J. J., & Cohen, A. (2006). The structure of negative symptoms within schizophre-
nia: Implications for assessment. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 238–245.
Bleuler, E. (1911). Dementia Praecox oder Gruppe der Schizophrenien. Leipzig, Germany: Deuticke.
Braga, R. J., Petrides, G., & Fifueira, I. (2004). Anxiety disorders in schizophrenia. Comprehen-
sive Psychiatry, 45, 460–468.

-- 358 of 498 --

338 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Browne, J., Nagendra, A., Kurtz, M., Berry, K., & Penn, D. L. (2019). The relationship between
the therapeutic alliance and client variables in individual treatment for schizophrenia
spectrum disorders and early psychosis: Narrative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 71,
51–62.
Burns, D. D. (1980). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New York: Morrow.
Cancro, R. (1989). Schizophrenia. In T. B. Karasu (Ed.), Treatments of psychiatric disorders: A task
force report of the American Psychiatric Association. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association.
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1978). The Revised Physical Anhedonia Scale. Unpublished test,
University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI.
Charlson, F. J., Ferrari, A. J., Santomauro, D. F., Diminic, S., Stockings, E., Scott, J. G., . . . Whit-
eford, H. A. (2018). Global epidemiology and burden of schizophrenia: Findings from the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 44, 1195–1203.
Chouinard, S., Poulin, J., Stip, E., & Godbout, R. (2004). Sleep in untreated patients with schizo-
phrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30, 957–967.
Cohen, A., Patel, V., Thara, R., & Gureje, O. (2008). Questioning an axiom: Better prognosis for
schizophrenia in the developing world? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(2), 229–244.
de Vries, B., van Busschbach, J. T., van der Stouwe, E. C. D., Aleman, A., van Dijk, J. J. M., Lysa-
ker, P. H., . . . Pijnenborg, G. H. M. (2019). Prevalence rate and risk factors of victimiza-
tion in adult patients with a psychotic disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 45, 114–126.
Demjaha, A., Morgan, K., Morgan, C., Landau, S., Dean, K., Reichenberg, A., . . . Dazzan, P.
(2009). Combining dimensional and categorical representation of psychosis: The way
forward for DSM-V and ICD-11? Psychological Medicine, 39(12), 1943–1955.
Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., Goldberg, R. W., . . .
Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT). (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia
PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 36, 48–70.
Dyck, D. G., Short, R., & Vitaliano, P. P. (1999). Predictors of burden and infectious illness in
schizophrenia caregivers. Psychosomatic Medicine, 61, 411–419.
Eack, S. M., Bahorik, A. L., Newhill, A. L., Neighbors, H. W., & Davis, L. E. (2012). Interviewer-
perceived honesty as a mediator of racial disparities in the diagnosis of Schizophrenia.
Psychiatric Services, 63, 875–880.
Eack, S. M., & Newhill, C. E. (2007). Psychiatric symptoms and quality of life in schizophrenia:
A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 1225–1237.
Eckblad, M. L., Chapman, L. J., Chapman, J. P., & Mishlove, M. (1982). The Revised Social Anhe-
donia Scale. Unpublished test, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI.
Elis, O., Caponigro, J. M., & Kring, A. M. (2013). Psychosocial treatments for negative symp-
toms in schizophrenia: Current practices and future directions. Clinical Psychology
Review, 33(8), 914–928.
Fenton, W. S., & McGlashan, T. H. (1991). Natural history of schizophrenia subtypes: II. Positive
and negative symptoms and long-term course. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 978–986.
Finn, S. E. (2007). In our clients’ shoes: Theory and techniques of therapeutic assessment. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-5 Disorders, Clinician Version (SCID-5-CV). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive-
developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34(10), 906–911.
Freeman, D. (2016). Persecutory delusions: A cognitive perspective on understanding and
treatment. Lancet Psychiatry, 3(7), 685–692.

-- 359 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	339
Freeman, D., Taylor, K. M., Molodynski, A., & Waite, F. (2019). Treatable clinical intervention
targets for patients with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 211, 44–50.
Frost, K. H., & Strauss, G. P. (2016). A review of anticipatory pleasure in schizophrenia. Current
Behavioral Neuroscience Reports, 3, 232–247.
Fulford, D., Campellone, T., & Gard, D. E. (2018). Social motivation in schizophrenia: How
research on basic reward processes informs and limits our understanding. Clinical Psy-
chology Review, 63, 12–24.
Fusar-Poli, P., Papanastasiou, E., Stahl, D., Rocchetti, M., Carpenter, W., Shergill, S., & McGuire,
P. (2015). Treatments of negative symptoms in schizophrenia: Meta-analysis of 168 ran-
domized placebo-controlled trials. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 41(4), 892–899.
Gard, D. E., Germans Gard, M., Kring, A. M., & John, O. P. (2006). Anticipatory and consum-
matory components of the experience of pleasure: A scale development study. Journal of
Research in Personality, 40, 1086–1102.
Gard, D. E., Kring, A. M., Germans Gard, M., Horan, W. P., & Green, M. F. (2007). Anhedo-
nia in schizophrenia: Distinctions between anticipatory and consummatory pleasure.
Schizophrenia Research, 93, 253–260.
Garety, P. A., Fowler, D., & Kuipers, E. (2000). Cognitive behavioral therapy for medication-
resistant symptoms. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 73–86.
Gibson, L. E., Alloy, L. B., & Ellman, L. M. (2016). Trauma and the psychosis spectrum: A
review of symptom specificity and explanatory mechanisms. Clinical Psychology Review,
49, 92–105.
Granholm, E., Holden, J. L., Link, P., & McQuaid, J. R. (2014). Randomized clinical trial of
cognitive behavioral social skills training for schizophrenia: Improvement in function-
ing and experiential negative symptoms. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 82,
1173–1185.
Granholm, E. L., McQuaid, J. R., & Holden, J. L. (2016). Cognitive-behavioral social skills training
for schizophrenia: A practical treatment guide. New York: Guilford Press.
Granholm, E., McQuaid, J. R., McClure, F. S., Auslander, L. A., Perivoliotis, D., Paola Pedrelli,
M. S., . . . Jeste, D. V. (2005). A randomized, controlled trial for cognitive behavioral social
skills training for middle-aged and older outpatients with chronic schizophrenia. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 520–529.
Grant, P. M., Huh, G., Perivoliotis, D., Stolar, N., & Beck, A. T. (2012). Randomized trial to
evaluate the efficacy of cognitive therapy for low-functioning patients with schizophre-
nia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 121–127.
Griswold, K. S., Del Regno, P. A., & Berger, R. C. (2015). Recognition and differential diagnosis
of psychosis in primary care. American Family Physician, 91(12), 856–863.
Guloksuz, S., & van Os, J. (2018). The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia and the pain-
ful birth of the psychosis spectrum. Psychological Medicine, 48(2), 229–244.
Haddock, G., McCarron, J., Tarrier, N., & Faragher, E. (1999). Scales to measure dimensions of
hallucinations and delusions: The Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales (PSYRATS). Psycho-
logical Medicine, 29, 879–889.
Hartz, S. M., Pato, C. N., Medeiros, H., Cavazos-Rehg, P., Sobell, J. L., Knowles, J. A., . . .
Genomic Psychiatry Cohort Consortium. (2014). Comorbidity of severe psychotic disor-
ders with measures of substance use. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(3), 248–254.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An
experiential approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.
Heerey, E. A., & Gold, J. M. (2007). Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate dissociation
between affective experience and motivated behavior. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
116, 268–278.
Heinssen, R. K., Liberman, R. P., & Kopelowicz, A. (2000). Psychosocial skills training for
schizophrenia: Lessons from the laboratory. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 21–46.

-- 360 of 498 --

340 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Herman, Y., Shireen, H., Bromley, S., Yiu, N., & Granholm, E. (2018). Cognitive-behavioural
social skills training for first-episode psychosis: A feasibility study. Early Intervention in
Psychiatry, 12(5), 863–868.
Ho, B. C., Nopoulos, P., Flaum, M., Arndt, S., & Andreasen, N. C. (1998). Two-year outcome in
first-episode schizophrenia: Predictive value of symptoms for quality of life. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 1196–1201.
Hooley, J. M. (2007). Expressed emotion and relapse of psychopathology. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 3, 329–352.
Hooley, J. M., Richters, J. E., Weintraub, S., & Neale, J. M. (1987). Psychopathology and mari-
tal distress: The positive side of positive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96,
27–33.
Horan, W. P., Green, M. F., Kring, A. M., & Nuechterlein, K. H. (2006). Does anhedonia in
schizophrenia reflect faulty memory for subjectively experienced emotions? Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 115, 496–508.
Horan, W. P., Kring, A. M., & Blanchard, J. J. (2006). Anhedonia in schizophrenia: A review of
assessment strategies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 259–273.
Huhn, M., Nikolakopoulou, A., Schneider-Thoma, J., Krause, M., Samara, M., Peter, N., . . .
Leucht, S. (2019). Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 32 oral antipsychotics for the
acute treatment of adults with multi-episode schizophrenia: A systematic review and
network meta-analysis. Lancet, 394, 939–951.
Iacovino, J. M., Jackson, J. J., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). The relative impact of socioeconomic sta-
tus and childhood trauma on Black–White differences in paranoid personality disorder
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123(1), 225–230.
Jablensky, A. (2010). The diagnostic concept of schizophrenia: Its history, evolution, and future
prospects. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 12(3), 271–287.
Johnson, D. J., Penn, D. L., Fredrickson, B. L., Kring, A. M., Meyer, P. S., Catalino, L. I., & Brant-
ley, M. (2011). A pilot study of loving-kindness meditation for the negative symptoms of
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 129, 137–140.
Johnson, D. J., Penn, D. L., Fredrickson, B. L., Meyer, P. S., Kring, A. M., & Brantley, M. (2009).
Loving-kindness meditation to enhance recovery from negative symptoms of schizo-
phrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65, 499–509.
Jones, P. B., Barnes, T. R. E., Davies, L., Dunn, G., Lloyd, H., Hayhurst, K. P., . . . Lewis, S. W.
(2006). Randomized controlled trial of the effect on quality of life of second- vs first-
generation antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: Cost Utility of the Latest Antipsychotic
Drugs in Schizophrenia Study (CUtLASS 1). Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 1079–1087.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress,
pain and illness. New York: Delacorte.
Kane, J., Honigfeld, G., Singer, J., Meltzer, H., & the Clozapine Collaborative Study Group.
(1988). Clozapine for treatment resistant schizophrenics. Archives of General Psychiatry,
45, 789–796.
Kane, J. M., Robinson, D. G., Schooler, N. R., Mueser, K. T., Penn, D. L., Rosenheck, R. A., . . .
Heinssen, R. K. (2016). Comprehensive versus usual community care for first-episode
psychosis: 2-year outcomes from the NIMH RAISE early treatment program. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 362–372.
Kay, S., Fiszbein, A., & Opler, L. (1987). The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 261–276.
Kendler, K. S. (2016). Phenomenology of schizophrenia and the representativeness of modern
diagnostic criteria. JAMA Psychiatry, 73(10), 1082–1092.
Khoury, B., Lecomte, T., Gaudiano, B. A., & Paquin, K. (2013). Mindfulness interventions for
psychosis: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 150(1), 176–184.
Kirkbride, J. B., Fearon, P., Morgan, C., Dazzon, P., Morgan, K., Dazzan, P., . . . Jones, P. B. (2006).

-- 361 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	341
Heterogeneity in the incidence of schizophrenia and other psychotic illnesses: Results
from the 3-center Aesop study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 250–258.
Kirkpatrick, B., Fenton, W. S., Carpenter, W. T., & Marder, S. R. (2006). The NIMH-MATRICS
Consensus Statement on Negative Symptoms. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32(2), 214–219.
Kohler, C. G., Martin, E. A., Milonova, M., Wang, P., Verma, R., Brensinger, C. M., . . . Gur, R.
C. (2008). Dynamic evoked facial expressions of emotions in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Research, 105, 30–39.
Konings, M., Bak, M., Hanssen, M., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. (2006). Validity and reliabil-
ity of the CAPE: A self-report instrument for the measurement of psychotic experiences
in the general population. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 114(1), 55–61.
Kotov, R., Jonas, K. G., Carpenter, W. T., Dretsch, M. N., Eaton, N. R., Forbes, M. K., . . . Watson,
D. (2020). Validity and utility of Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP): I.
Psychosis superspectrum. World Psychiatry, 19(2), 151–172.
Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., Althoff, R. R., Bagby, R. M., . . . Zimmer-
man, M. (2017). The Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP): A dimensional
alternative to traditional nosologies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126(4), 454–477.
Krause, R., Steimer-Krause, E., & Hufnagel, H. (1992). Expression and experience of affects in
paranoid schizophrenia. European Review of Applied Psychology, 42, 131–138.
Kreyenbuhl, J., Buchanan, R. W., Dickerson, F. B., & Dixon, L. B. (2010). The Schizophrenia
Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT): Updated treatment recommendations 2009.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 94–103.
Kring, A. M., & Barch, D. M. (2014). The motivation and pleasure dimension of negative symp-
toms: Neural substrates and behavioral outputs. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 24,
725–736.
Kring, A. M., Barrett, L. F., & Gard, D. E. (2003). On the broad applicability of the affective
circumplex: Representations of affective knowledge in schizophrenia. Psychological Sci-
ence, 14, 207–214.
Kring, A. M., & Elis, O. (2013). Emotion deficits in people with schizophrenia. Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology, 9, 409–433.
Kring, A. M., Gur, R. E., Blanchard, J. J., Horan, W. P., & Reise, S. P. (2013). The Clinical Assess-
ment Interview for Negative Symptoms (CAINS): Final development and validation.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 165–172.
Kurtz, M. M., & Mueser, K. T. (2008). A meta-analysis of controlled research on social skills
training for schizophrenia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 491–504.
Laursen, T. M., Nordentoft, M., & Mortensen, P. B. (2014). Excess early mortality in schizophre-
nia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 10, 425–448.
Leslie, D. L., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2004). Incidence of newly diagnosed diabetes attributable to
atypical antipsychotic medications. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 1709–1711.
Leucht, S., Corves, C., Arbter, D., Engel, R. R., Li, C., & Davis, J. M. (2009). Second-generation
versus first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Lancet,
373, 31–41.
Leucht, S., Leucht, C., Huhn, M., Chaimani, A., Mavridis, D., Helfer, B., . . . Davis, J. M. (2017).
Sixty years of placebo-controlled antipsychotic drug trials in acute schizophrenia: Sys-
tematic review, Bayesian meta-analysis, and meta-regression of efficacy predictors.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 174(10), 927–942.
Liberman, R. P., Eckman, T. A., Kopelowicz, A., & Stolar, D. (2000). Friendship and intimacy
module. Available from Psychiatric Rehabilitation Consultants, PO Box 2867, Camarillo,
CA 93011.
Lieberman, J. A., Scott Stroup, T., McEvoy, J. P., Swartz, M. S., Rosenheck, R. A., Perkins, D.
O., . . . Hsiao, J. K. (2005). Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic
schizophrenia. New England Journal of Medicine, 353(12), 1209–1223.

-- 362 of 498 --

342 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Lincoln, T. M., Dollfus, S., & Lyne, J. (2017). Current developments and challenges in the
assessment of negative symptoms. Schizophrenia Research, 186, 8–18.
Lopez, S. (2008). The soloist: A lost dream, an unlikely friendship, and the redemptive power of music.
New York: Putnam.
Louise, S., Fitzpatrick, M., Strauss, C., Rossell, S. L., & Thomas, N. (2018). Mindfulness- and
acceptance-based interventions for psychosis: Our current understanding and a meta-
analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 192, 57–63.
Lukoff, D., Nuechterlein, K. H., & Ventura, J. (1986). Manual for the Expanded Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12, 594–602.
Maher, B. A. (2001). Delusions. In P. B. Sutker & H. E. Adams (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of
psychopathology (3rd ed., pp. 309–339). Hingham, MA: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
McCarthy-Jones, S., Smailes, D., Corvin, A., Gill, M., Morris, D. W., Dinan, T. G., . . . Dudley,
R. (2017). Occurrence and co-occurrence of hallucinations by modality in schizophrenia-
spectrum disorders. Psychiatry Research, 252, 154–160.
Messinger, J. W., Tremeau, F., Antonius, D., Mendelsohn, E., Prudent, V., Stanfore, A. D., &
Malaspina, C. (2011). Avolition and expressive deficits capture negative symptom phe-
nomoenology: Implications for DSM-5 and schizophrenia research. Clinical Psychology
Review, 31, 161–168.
Milev, P., Ho, B. C., Arndt, S., & Andreasen, N. C. (2005). Predictive values of neurocognition
and negative symptoms on functional outcome in schizophrenia: A longitudinal first-
episode study with 7-year follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 495–506.
Mueser, K. T., Penn, D. L., Addington, J., Brunette, M. F., Gingerich, S., Glynn, S. M., . . . Kane, J.
M. (2015). The NAVIGATE program for first-episode psychosis: Rationale, overview, and
description of psychosocial components. Psychiatric Services, 66, 680–690.
Murphy, B. P., Chung, Y.-C., Park, T.-W., & McGorry, P. D. (2006). Pharmacological treatment
of primary negative symptoms in schizophrenia: A systematic review. Schizophrenia
Research, 88, 5–25.
Murray, R. M., Quattrone, D., Natesan, S., van Os, J., Nordentoft, M., Howes, O., . . . Taylor,
D. (2016). Should psychiatrists be more cautious about the long-term prophylactic use of
antipsychotics? British Journal of Psychiatry, 209(5), 361–365.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2014). Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults:
Treatment and management (NICE Clinical Guideline 178). London: Author.
Neale, J. M., Oltmanns, T. F., & Harvey, P. D. (1985). The need to relate cognitive deficits to
specific behavioral referents of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 11(2), 286–291.
Overall, J. E., & Gorham, D. R. (1962). The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. Psychological Reports,
10, 799–812.
Owen, M. J., Sawa, A., & Mortensen, P. B. (2016). Schizophrenia. Lancet, 388, 86–97.
Palmer, B. A., Pankratz, V. S., & Bostwick, J. M. (2005). The lifetime risk of suicide in schizo-
phrenia: A reexamination. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 247–253.
Park, S. G., Llerena, K., McCarthy, J. M., Couture, S. M., Bennett, M. E., & Blanchard, J. J. (2012).
Screening for negative symptoms: Preliminary results from the self-report version of the
Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms. Schizophrenia Research, 135(1–3),
139–143.
Peralta, V., & Cuesta, M. J. (2001). How many and which are the psychopathological dimen-
sions in schizophrenia?: Issues influencing their ascertainment. Schizophrenia Research,
49, 269–285.
Perlick, D. A., Rosenheck, R. A., Kaczynski, R., Swartz, M. S., Canive, J. M., & Lieberman,
J. A. (2006). Components and correlates of family burden in schizophrenia. Psychiatric
Services, 57, 1117–1125.
Persons, J. B. (1986). The advantages of studying psychological phenomena rather than psy-
chiatric diagnoses. American Psychologist, 41, 1252–1260.

-- 363 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	343
Peters, E. R., Joseph, S. A., & Garety, P. A. (1999). Measurement of delusional ideation in the
normal population: Introducing the PDI (Peters et al. Delusions Inventory). Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 25(3), 553–576.
Pharoah, F., Mari, J., Rathbone, J., & Wong, W. (2010). Family intervention for schizophrenia.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 12, CD000088.
Powers, A., Fani, N., Cross, D., Ressler, K. J., & Bradley, B. (2016). Childhood trauma, PTSD,
and psychosis: Findings from a highly traumatized, minority sample. Child Abuse and
Neglect, 58, 111–118.
Provencher, H. L., & Mueser, K. T. (1997). Positive and negative symptom behaviors and care-
giver burden in the relatives of persons with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 26,
71–80.
Putnam, K. M., & Kring, A. M. (2007). Accuracy and intensity of posed emotional expressions
in unmedicated schizophrenia patients: Vocal and facial channels. Psychiatry Research,
151, 67–76.
Rector, N. A., Beck, A. T., & Stolar, N. (2005). The negative symptoms of schizophrenia: A cog-
nitive perspetive. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 50, 247–257.
Rummel-Kluge, C., Komossa, K., Schwarz, S., Hunger, H., Schmid, F., Lobos, C. A., . . . Leucht,
S. (2010). Head-to-head comparisons of metabolic side effects of second generation anti-
psychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Schizophrenia Research, 123, 225–233.
Sabe, M., Sentissi, O., & Kaiser, S. (2019). Meditation-based mind–body therapies for nega-
tive symptoms of schizophrenia: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials and
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 212, 15–25.
Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., & McGrath, J. (2005). The systematic review of the prevalence
of schizophrenia. PLOS Medicine, 2, 413–433.
Saha, S., Welham, J., Chant, D., & McGrath, J. (2006). Incidence of schizophrenia does not vary
with economic status of the country: Evidence from a systematic review. Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 41, 338–340.
Salem, J. E., & Kring, A. M. (1998). The role of gender differences in the reduction of etiologic
heterogeneity in schizophrenia. Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 795–819.
Sauvé, G., Lavigne, K. M., Pochiet, G., Brodeur, M. B., & Lepage, M. (2020). Efficacy of psycho-
logical interventions targeting cognitive biases in schizophrenia: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 78, Article 101854.
Savill, M., Orfanos, S., Reininghaus, U., Wykes, T., Bentall, R., & Priebe, S. (2016). The relation-
ship between experiential deficits of negative symptoms and subjective quality of life in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 176(2), 387–391.
Schwartz, E. K., Docherty, N. M., Najolia, G. M., & Cohen, A. S. (2019). Exploring the racial
diagnostic bias of schizophrenia using behavioral and clinical-based measures. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 128, 263–271.
Schwartz, R. C., & Blankenship, D. M. (2014). Racial disparities in psychotic disorder diagno-
sis: A review of empirical literature. World Journal of Psychiatry, 4(4), 133–140.
Selten, J. P., Gernaat, H. B., Nolen, W. A., Wiersma, D., & van den Bosch, R. J. (1998). Experience
of negative symptoms: Comparison of schizophrenic patients to patients with a depres-
sive disorder and to normal subjects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 350–354.
Shattock, L., Berry, K., Degnan, A., & Edge, D. (2018). Therapeutic alliance in psychological
therapy for people with schizophrenia and related psychoses: A systematic review. Clini-
cal Psychology and Psychotherapy, 25(1), e60–e85.
Siegel, S. J., Irani, F., Brensinger, C. M., Kohler, C. G., Bilker, W. B., Ragland, J. D., . . . Gur, R. E.
(2006). Prognostic variables at intake and long-term level of function in schizophrenia.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 433–441.
Siskind, D., Siskind, V., & Kisely, S. (2017). Clozapine response rates among people with

-- 364 of 498 --

344 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
treatment-resistant schizophrenia: Data from a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 62(11), 772–777.
Smith, D. A., Mar, C. M., & Turoff, B. K. (1998). The structure of schizophrenic symptoms: A
meta-analytic confirmatory factor analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 31, 57–70.
Strauss, G. P., Nuñez, A., Ahmed, A. O., Barchard, K. A., Granholm, E., Kirkpatrick, B., . . .
Allen, D. N. (2018). The latent structure of negative symptoms in schizophrenia. JAMA
Psychiatry, 75(12), 1271–1279.
Tandon, R., Nasrallah, H. A., & Keshavan, M. A. (2009). Schizophrenia, just the facts: 4. Clini-
cal features and conceptualization. Schizophrenia Research, 110, 1–23.
Trierweiler, S. J., Neighbors, H. W., Thompson, E. E., Munday, C., Binion, V. J., & Gomez, J. P.
(2000). Clinician attributions associated with the diagnosis of schizophrenia in African
American and non-African American patients. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 68(1), 171–175.
Turkington, D., Kingdon, D., & Weiden, P. J. (2006). Cognitive behavior therapy for schizo-
phrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 365–373.
Turner, D. T., van der Gaag, M., Karyotaki, E., & Cuijpers, P. (2014). Psychological interven-
tions for psychosis: A meta-analysis of comparative outcome studies. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 171, 523–538.
van der Gaag, M., Valmaggia, L. R., & Smit, F. (2014). The effects of individually tailored
formulation-based cognitive behavioural therapy in auditory hallucinations and delu-
sions: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 156(1), 30–37.
Vasconcelos e Sa, D., Wearden, A., & Barrowclough, C. (2013). Expressed emotion, types of
behavioural control and controllability attributions in relatives of people with recent-
onset psychosis. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 48(9), 1377–1388.
Visser, K. F., Chapman, H. C., Ruiz, I., Raugh, I. M., & Strauss, G. P. (2020). A meta-analysis of
self-reported anticipatory and consummatory pleasure in the schizophrenia-spectrum.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 121, 68–81.
Walker, E., Kestler, L., Bollini, A., & Hochman, K. (2004). Schizophrenia: Etiology and course.
Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 401–430.
Weisman, A. G., Nuechterlein, K. H., Goldstein, M. J., & Snyder, K. S. (2000). Controllability
perceptions and reactions to symptoms of schizophrenia: A within-family comparison
of relatives with high and low expressed emotion. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
167–171.
Wolthaus, J., Dingemans, P., Schene, A., Linszen, D., Wiersma, D., van den Bosch, R., . . . Hij-
man, R. (2002). Caregiver burden in recent-onset schizophrenia and spectrum disorders:
The influence of symptoms and personality traits. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
190, 241–247.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders:
Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Wykes, T., Steel, C., Everitt, T., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy for schizo-
phrenia: Effect sizes, clinical models, and methodological rigor. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
34, 523–537.
Zhao, S., Sampson, S., Xia, J., & Jayaram, M. B. (2015). Psychoeducation (brief) for people with
serious mental illness. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD010823.

-- 365 of 498 --

345
Problems in interpersonal relationships are core or associated features of most forms
of psychopathology. Psychopathology occurs in a social context, and this observa-
tion dates back well over a century. Relational discord plays a role in the etiology,
maintenance, and relapse of a range of mental health problems (Foran, Whisman,
& Beach, 2015; Whisman & Baucom, 2012) and physical health outcomes (Robles,
Slatcher, Trombello, & McGinn, 2014) in adulthood; family relationships also provide
the context for most forms of psychopathology that begin in childhood and adoles-
cence (Wamboldt & Wamboldt, 2000). Furthermore, couple-based treatments have
been shown to be effective for some psychiatric disorders and physical health prob-
lems (Baucom, Whisman, & Paprocki, 2012; Snyder, Castellani, & Whisman, 2006).
In this chapter, we review what is known about the presentation, classification,
prevalence, course, comorbidities, and available treatment options for marital and
relational discord (MRD). We limit the scope of our review on MRD to adult marital
or long-term committed partnerships, which we call “marriage-like relationships,”
given that the most immediate and relevant interpersonal context for adults is mar-
riage or a marriage-like partnership. From our perspective, the inclusion of a chapter
on MRD in a volume on psychopathology–psychotherapy integration is a positive
sign of the times; it is inarguable that MRD is associated with considerable suffer-
ing, both in its own right and in its association with mental and physical health and
well-being.
Although MRD can be understood in many of the same ways we typically think
about individual psychopathology, MRD also contains at least two major elements
that make it distinct from the other disorders considered in this volume. First, MRD
C H A P T E R 1 2
Marital and Relational Discord
David A. Sbarra
Atina Manvelian
Julia M. Salinger
Mark A. Whisman

-- 366 of 498 --

346 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
is inherently dyadic (First et al., 2002); people cannot have marital or relational dis-
cord unless they are in a relationship. It is therefore important to think about MRD as
a systemic problem when considering assessment, etiology, and treatment. Second,
the relationships that define the context for MRD are—in most of the Western indus-
trialized world—based on choice. Most love relationships hinge on free will and the
choice two people make to live together. A corollary of this point, then, is that people
can choose to greatly mitigate the psychological toll of MRD by ending the relation-
ship. It is clear that the same cannot be said for major depression or panic disorder,
for example; we cannot disavow the part of ourselves that causes us to feel sad and
guilty in the same way we can attempt to solve MRD by ending a dysfunctional rela-
tionship. We return to this point at the end of the chapter when we review literature
on the available treatments for MRD.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS
MRD is a heterogeneous and broad construct. In DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013), MRD is included under “other conditions that may be a focus of clini-
cal attention.” Specifically, “relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner”
(V61.1) is to be used when the major focus of treatment is intimate relationship qual-
ity or when intimate relationship quality is impacting the course, prognosis, or treat-
ment of a mental or other medical disorder. As defined in DSM-5, MRD is typically
associated with impaired functioning in the domains of behavior (e.g., withdrawal,
overinvolvement, or difficulty with conflict resolution), cognition (e.g., chronic nega-
tive attributions of a partner’s actions or intentions, dismissal of a partner’s posi-
tive behaviors), and affect (e.g., chronic sadness, apathy, and/or anger). DSM-5 also
includes codes for problems involving adult maltreatment and neglect in the section
on other conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention. These include physical
or sexual spousal or partner violence and psychological spousal or partner abuse.
MRD is significantly associated with intimate partner violence (Stith, Green, Smith,
& Ward, 2008). However, because intimate partner violence has its own set of risk
factors (Stith, Smith, Penn, Ward, & Tritt, 2004) and its own treatment considerations,
we omit a thorough discussion of this topic and point the interested reader to more
in-depth coverage elsewhere (e.g., Eckhardt et al., 2013).
Clinical Implications
Although a detailed description of assessing MRD and couple functioning is beyond
the scope of this chapter, we encourage clinicians to assess partners’ global evalua-
tion of their relationship (i.e., relationship satisfaction), as well as specific domains
of functioning that reflect relationship quality (as outlined by Snyder, Heyman,
& Haynes, 2005). First, couple-based assessment evaluates relationship behaviors,
including partners’ ability to communicate and successfully solve problems and
resolve conflict. Second, couple-based assessment examines relationship cognitions,
such as causal and responsibility attributions for partner behavior, and relationship
assumptions, standards, and expectancies. Third, couple-based assessment evalu-
ates relationship affect, including partners’ intensity, duration, and reciprocity of
negative feelings about each other and their relationship. These domains are broadly

-- 367 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	347
consistent with those outlined by Lawrence and colleagues (2011) and included in
the Relationship Quality Interview, which is a semistructured interview of relational
behaviors that evaluates the following domains: (1) quality of emotional intimacy,
(2) quality of the couple’s sexual satisfaction, (3) quality of support transactions, (4)
quality of the couple’s ability to share power in the relationship, and (5) quality of
problem solving in the relationship. A thorough couple-based assessment should
also incorporate an evaluation of individual differences that may impact relationship
quality, such as psychopathology, health problems, personality characteristics, and
attachment; within-couple differences, such as cultural norms and family histories;
and external factors (e.g., environmental stress, discrimination, neighborhood vio-
lence) that may impact relationship quality. Assessment should be done regularly
during the course of treatment, not just at the onset of treatment. Repeated assess-
ment allows clinicians to evaluate whether partners continue to exhibit individual
distress, even after the relationship has improved, which may suggest the need for
extending treatment or supplementing couple-based treatments with individual-
based treatments.
ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES
One of the most common clinical features of MRD is high rates of psychopathol-
ogy, and we consider this topic later in the section on comorbidity. In this section,
we address issues of quality of life, physical health, and sexual functioning, all of
which are important associated clinical features of MRD. First, MRD is associated
with lower quality of life as operationalized in terms of lower subjective well-being.
For example, in a large-scale, nationally representative sample of middle-aged adults
in the United States, marital satisfaction demonstrated the strongest association with
overall life satisfaction, surpassing the associations obtained for finances, children,
health, work, sexuality, and contributions to others (Fleeson, 2004). Similarly, results
from a meta-analysis of the associations between different domains of satisfaction
indicated life satisfaction was more strongly associated with MRD than job or social
satisfaction (Heller, Watson, & Illies, 2004). Longitudinal studies have attempted
to elucidate the directional relationship between MRD and life satisfaction. In a
population-based sample of middle-aged and older couples, lower levels of MRD
at baseline were associated with higher levels of life satisfaction 2 years later and
vice versa, for both husbands and wives (BE, Whisman, & Uebelacker, 2013). Among
women, baseline MRD was a stronger predictor of subsequent life satisfaction than
baseline life satisfaction was of subsequent MRD. More recently, Roberson and col-
leagues (2018) examined cross-lagged associations between quality of life and two
aspects of relational quality (MRD vs. satisfaction) across three data collection time
points spanning 25 years, in a national sample of U.S. adults. Results indicated that
(1) life satisfaction predicts later MRD and (2) life satisfaction and relationship satis-
faction have a bidirectional relationship.
Second, marital quality is associated with health-relevant indicators in adults.
Robles and colleagues (2014) conducted a meta-analysis of 126 studies that had
examined associations between MRD and physical health, operationalized either as
objective and subjective health outcomes (i.e., “clinical endpoints”) or as biological
markers of immune, neuroendocrine, or cardiovascular functioning implicated in

-- 368 of 498 --

348 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
downstream health outcomes (i.e., “surrogate endpoints”). MRD was found to have
a significant association with health, with small effect sizes that were comparable in
magnitude to associations between health and factors such as diet and exercise. A
particularly clear link was supported between MRD and cardiovascular reactivity
during conflict discussions. MRD was also significantly and positively associated
with mortality across several studies of individuals diagnosed with chronic health
conditions (e.g., renal or cardiovascular disease); this finding has since been repli-
cated in a probability sample of married adults not recruited for preexisting health
conditions (Whisman, Gilmour, & Salinger, 2018). Recent reviews have elaborated on
interactive psychological, behavioral, and biological pathways through which MRD
may influence health. Kiecolt-Glaser and Wilson (2017), for example, posit a model
in which the elevated risk for depressive symptoms associated with MRD plays a
key role in couples’ health trajectories. Within this model, stress and depressive
symptoms associated with MRD are thought to up-regulate the acute and sustained
production of proinflammatory cytokines, thereby contributing to downstream risk
for conditions such as cancer, diabetes, obesity, and cardiovascular disease; these
effects may be especially pernicious for women relative to men and for older relative
to younger couples. The association between MRD and inflammatory processes is
thought to be mediated by complex bidirectional feedback loops between biological
processes (i.e., immune, neuroendocrine, metabolic, and cardiovascular function-
ing) and health behaviors (i.e., sleep, appetitive behavior). Other recent reviews have
elaborated on the role of the microbiome (Kiecolt-Glaser, Wilson, & Madison, 2019)
and affective processes (Sbarra & Coan, 2018) as potential key links in mediational
paths between MRD and health, including in relation to inflammatory processes.
Third, MRD is also associated with aspects of couples’ sexual relationships. For
example, in a probability sample of people in the United States, MRD was associ-
ated with elevated risk of arousal problems, orgasmic dysfunction, and inhibited
enjoyment in women (Dunn, Croft, & Hackett, 1999). Although Dunn and colleagues
did not find an association between MRD and sexual problems for men, subsequent
research has indicated there may be an association between MRD and aspects of
male sexual functioning, including sexual desire and erectile dysfunction (Boddi et
al., 2015). Sexual problems are far from the only sex-related factor relevant to MRD;
sexual satisfaction, for example, is a reliable correlate of MRD (Christopher & Spre-
cher, 2000). Longitudinal studies investigating the direction of this association have
yielded mixed results; one study of newlyweds found a significant and negative
bidirectional association between MRD and sexual satisfaction (McNulty, Wenner,
& Fisher, 2016), whereas studies of longer-term married or cohabiting couples have
found that sexual satisfaction is predictive of MRD but MRD is not predictive of
sexual satisfaction (Fallis, Rehman, Woody, & Purdon, 2016), or vice versa (Vowels
& Mark, 2020). MRD and sexual satisfaction have also been conceptualized as recip-
rocal developmental processes that change together over time, with high baseline
sexual satisfaction buffering subsequent increases in MRD (Quinn-Nilas, 2019).
Clinical Implications
A primary implication that emerges from considering the clinical features associ-
ated with MRD is the need to assess a wider range of functioning than MRD alone.

-- 369 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	349
Quality of life, physical health, and sexual functioning, for example, impact and are
impacted by MRD, and clinicians should consider all of these issues when assess-
ing the broader context of MRD. A useful tool for assessing these domains is the
Treatment Outcome Package (TOP; Kraus, Seligman, & Jordan, 2005), which provides
clinical cutoff scores in a variety of different domains of functioning. When assess-
ing these domains, a critical issue for clinicians to consider is whether the associated
features exacerbate or are exacerbated by MRD. In most cases, it is likely that the
causal arrow of effect is reciprocal and operates in both directions.
CLASSIFICATION
Categorizing individuals or couples as “discordant” implies that there is a mean-
ingful qualitative distinction between discordant and nondiscordant individuals or
couples, and that currently available measures can correctly assign individuals or
couples to the appropriate category. For example, individuals or couples are com-
monly defined as discordant if they score ≤97 on the Dyadic Adjustment Scale (DAS;
Spanier, 1976), which was selected because it is the score that is halfway between
married and divorced populations (Jacobson et al., 1984). Using data from a large
Internet sample, Funk and Rogge (2007) provided cutoff scores for several self-report
measures of relationship adjustment that correspond to this DAS cutoff score. Other
research indicates that marital discord is “taxonic”—MRD exists as a distinct cat-
egory that differs in kind from an underlying distribution of relational distress—and
this work has been replicated in large samples (Beach, Fincham, Amir, & Leonard,
2005; Whisman, Beach, & Snyder, 2008). People who score in the MRD taxon are pre-
sumed to comprise a discrete latent class of individuals who differ qualitatively, not
just quantitatively, from people who are not members of the taxon.
Clinical Implications
If MRD is taxonic, then methods are needed for identifying individuals or couples
that are members of the taxon and therefore may need treatment. Whisman, Snyder,
and Beach (2009) developed a reliable and easy to use 10-item screen for the taxon
that represents a nonarbitrary way of classifying relationships as discordant, thereby
identifying couples who may be in need of treatment. A self-report version of this
screening measure (the Marital Satisfaction Inventory – Brief Form [MSI-B]) is avail-
able from Western Psychological Services (www.wpspublish.com), and an interview
version can be found in Whisman and colleagues (2009). Both versions can be admin-
istered by people with minimal expertise in family psychology, and the measures
are scored by counting the number of coded responses, with couples scoring >4 clas-
sified as discordant and therefore potentially in need of treatment.
The availability of a clinical cutoff on the MSI-B has obvious implications for not
only couple therapists focused on MRD but also for therapists who primarily work
with individuals. As we discuss later in this chapter, couple-based interventions are
effective in treating several different forms of psychopathology. Therefore, because
the administration and scoring of the MSI-B is straightforward, it makes it easy for
clinicians to determine whether someone is a member of the relationship discord

-- 370 of 498 --

350 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
taxon and may therefore be in need of referral for more extensive relationship assess-
ment or treatment.
EPIDEMIOLOGY, COURSE, AND OUTCOMES
Understanding the epidemiology of MRD hinges on understanding the general epi-
demiology of marriage and romantic relationships. Although there are roughly 2.2
million new marriages each year in the United States (6.9 new marriages per 1,000
adults in the United States in 2017; National Vital Statistics System, 2017), when it
comes to the family structure, perhaps one of the greatest demographic changes in
the United States is that marriage rates are declining, the age at first marriage is
increasing, and cohabitation is quite common (Lavner & Bradbury, 2019a, 2019b).
Divorce rates have also decreased over the last 35 years, from 5.0/1,000 marriages in
1970 to 2.9/1,000 in 2017 (Tejada-Vera & Sutton, 2009). Using data from the National
Survey of Family Growth, which involved face-to-face interviews with 10,847 women
ages 15–44 years, Bramlett and Mosher (2002) estimated the divorce rate for first mar-
riages in the United States to be 43%. Among adults who do divorce, 15% remarry
within 1 year, 39% within 3 years, and 75% with 10 years; close to 40% of second mar-
riages break up within 5 years (Bramlett & Mosher, 2002). Despite a general decline
in the average divorce rate across the last two decades, the divorce rate among peo-
ple over 50—referred to as the so-called “gray divorce”—doubled over the past two
decades and now accounts for 25% of all divorces in the United States, with a total
of 600,000 people over the age of 50 becoming divorced in 2010 (Brown & Lin, 2012).
This increase has occurred despite recent stability in the overall divorce rate, sug-
gesting that younger adults are divorcing less frequently, whereas older adults are
divorcing at an increased rate.
Among intact relationships, approximately three out of every 10 couples are
likely to experience MRD (Beach et al., 2005; Whisman et al., 2008), and as such, are
likely to differ in kind, as well as degree, from couples in nondiscordant relationships.
Insofar as it is estimated that over 90% of Americans will marry in their lifetime (Kre-
ider & Fields, 2001), and that most people who do not marry will form other types of
committed, intimate partnerships (e.g., cohabiting relationships), a large percentage
of the population is likely to be exposed to clinically significant MRD at some point
in a lifetime. Although future research needs to determine the rate and predictors
of movement into (or out of) the MRD taxon, it is informative to consider norma-
tive changes in continuous measures of martial satisfaction over time. Whereas a
fair amount of evidence indicates that, normatively, marital satisfaction declines over
time, especially in the early years of marriage, more recent work suggests this view
might be overly pessimistic (Lavner & Bradbury, 2010). For example, in a study span-
ning 20 years, Amato and James (2018) reported that marriages that remained intact
showed little evidence of deterioration over time. Across the entirety of study period,
spouses who did not divorce showed relatively stable levels of marital happiness and
shared activities, with discord steadily decreasing over time; the opposite was true
for spouses who ultimately divorced, and these adults reported relatively precipi-
tous declines in happiness, with fast increases in discord as well. A synthesis of the
empirical work on trajectories of relationship satisfaction over time concluded that

-- 371 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	351
many of the negative attributions and interactions, as well as limited positivity in the
relationship, were evident at the earliest phases of the relationship and did not often
develop among otherwise happy couples (Lavner & Bradbury, 2019b).
Rates of distress are not evenly distributed across gender, race, and socioeco-
nomic circumstances. In an analysis of marital satisfaction data from the 1973–2006
General Social Survey, Corra, Carter, Carter, and Knox (2009) found independent
effects for both race and gender, with Whites and husbands reporting greater marital
satisfaction than Blacks and wives. Furthermore, they found that when comparing
four subgroups (White husbands, White wives, Black husbands, and Black wives)
over time, although White husbands consistently report the highest level of mari-
tal satisfaction, the difference between groups has been steadily declining. Lower
income couples are at substantially increased risk for divorce relative to higher
income couples (Bramlett & Mosher, 2002). Risk for marital distress is significantly
greater for low-income couples, and the major explanation for this risk focuses on the
context in which these relationships develop; specifically, external negative stress-
ors limit partners’ capacities to attend to and respond constructively to one another
(Neff & Karney, 2017). This account, however, does not appear to translate directly
into decreases in average satisfaction over time. Across the first 4 years of marriage,
lower income couples do not have less satisfying marriages or steeper decreases in
satisfaction, but they do appear to have greater fluctuations in their MRD over time
and more variability between husbands and wives (Jackson, Krull, Bradbury, & Kar-
ney, 2017), which may translate into more turbulent relationships.
Clinical Implications
Taxometric data suggest that marital discord is widespread, affecting approximately
30% of all couples, and 20–25% of newly married couples (Beach et al., 2005; Whis-
man et al., 2008). This suggests clinicians should anticipate that a sizable proportion
of partnered individuals are likely to be unhappy with their relationship; therefore,
clinicians should routinely assess level of relationship quality. The chronic nature
of relationship discord in couples seeking treatment underscores the importance of
obtaining a history of relationship quality, including information about the onset of
relationship problems. Such information may be useful in helping clinicians deter-
mine whether MRD preceded or followed the onset of psychopathology. In situa-
tions in which MRD is believed to be an important contributing factor in the etiology
or maintenance of psychopathology, couple therapy may be indicated, either by itself
or in combination with individual-focused treatments such medication or individual
therapy.
COMORBIDITY
MRD co-occurs with a variety of manifestations of psychopathology. Results from
meta-analyses have found that MRD correlates with depression (Whisman, 2001),
posttraumatic stress disorder (Taft, Watkins, Stafford, Street, & Monson, 2011), and
overall well-being (Proulx, Helms, & Buehler, 2007). Epidemiological studies sug-
gest that many people with an active (i.e., 12-month) psychiatric disorder are not in

-- 372 of 498 --

352 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
treatment (Wang et al., 2005). To make sure that the association between relation-
ship functioning and psychopathology is not limited only to people in treatment—a
minority of all people with psychopathology—researchers have studied the associa-
tion between MRD and psychopathology in probability samples.
MRD has been found to covary with psychiatric disorders in several probability
samples. For example, in a probability sample from Ontario, Canada, 24.5% of people
with a current psychiatric disorder were likely to report troubled relationships with
their spouse, compared to only 8.9% of people without a current psychiatric disor-
der (Whisman, Sheldon, & Goering, 2000). Similarly, in two probability samples of
people across the 48 coterminous United States, MRD was associated with DSM-
III (Whisman, 1999) and DSM-IV (Whisman, 2007) diagnosed mood, anxiety, and
substance use disorders, defined in terms of broad-band classifications of groups of
disorders, and narrow-band classification of specific disorders. Results from other
probability samples have similarly found greater MRD among people with specific
psychiatric disorders, and that the strength of the association between MRD and
psychiatric disorders is consistent across race and ethnicity in the United States
(McShall & Johnson, 2015).
MRD is also associated with personality pathology. For example, in a probabil-
ity sample, borderline personality disorder (BPD) symptom severity was positively
associated with MRD, perpetration of minor and severe marital aggression, and
marital disruption; these associations remained significant when adjusting for other
past-year psychiatric disorders (Whisman & Schonbrun, 2009). Similarly, personal-
ity disorder symptoms, particularly symptoms of BPD and dependent personality
disorder, were associated with MRD and verbal aggression, and perpetration of
physical violence in a community sample of couples; in addition, spouses’ reports
of personality disorder symptoms added incrementally to self-report in predicting
marital functioning (South, Turkheimer, & Oltmanns, 2008). Another study revealed
that both partners’ personality disorder symptoms were associated with MRD in a
community sample of couples (Stroud, Durbin, Saigal, & Knobloch-Fedders, 2010).
Longitudinal studies evaluating MRD and psychopathology have found that
MRD predicts increased risk for psychiatric symptoms and onset of psychiatric dis-
orders. For example, a meta-analysis of prospective studies evaluating the longitudi-
nal association between MRD and subsequent well-being obtained a weighted mean
effect size (r) of .25 (Proulx et al., 2007). Furthermore, the longitudinal association
between MRD and depressive symptoms is comparable in magnitude to the longitu-
dinal association between depressive symptoms and MRD (Davila, Karney, Hall, &
Bradbury, 2003; Whisman & Uebelacker, 2009). With respect to onset of psychiatric
disorders, a 12-month prospective study involving a probability sample of adults
who did not meet criteria for the corresponding disorder at baseline revealed that
MRD at baseline predicted incidence of a major depressive episode (Whisman &
Bruce, 1999) and alcohol abuse or dependence (Whisman, Uebelacker, & Bruce, 2006)
at 12-month follow-up; these associations remained significant when adjusting for
sociodemographic variables and prior history of the respective disorder. Similarly, in
a Dutch probability sample, MRD predicted 2-year incidence of the broad-band diag-
nosis of mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders, and the narrow-band diagnosis
of major depressive disorder, dysthymia, social phobia, and alcohol abuse (Overbeek
et al., 2006).

-- 373 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	353
Clinical Implications
Evidence that MRD co-occurs with psychopathology, predicts increases in psychiat-
ric symptoms, and is associated with the onset of psychiatric disorders has important
clinical implications. First, it is reasonable to assume that people who are unhappy
with their relationship may be less likely to respond to individually oriented treat-
ments for psychopathology because these treatments do not focus on improving rela-
tionship functioning. Indeed, MRD predicts poorer outcomes for individual-based
treatments for a variety of disorders. For example, a higher level of MRD at pre-
treatment was associated with poorer outcome for (1) depressed individuals receiv-
ing medication, cognitive therapy, or interpersonal psychotherapy (Whisman, 2001);
(2) chronically depressed individuals receiving medication, Cognitive Behavioral
Analysis System of Psychotherapy, or their combination (Denton et al., 2010); and (3)
individuals with recurrent depression receiving cognitive therapy (Trombello et al.,
2019). Similarly, MRD predicted poorer treatment outcome (i.e., greater likelihood of
relapse, fewer days abstinent, and shorter time to relapse) for men with substance
use disorder (Fals-Stewart, O’Farrell, & Hooley, 2001), and greater marital tension
predicted poorer treatment outcome for people with generalized anxiety disorder
(Durham, Allan, & Hackett, 1997). Second, as reviewed in greater detail later in this
chapter, couple-based interventions may be effective in treating psychopathology
(Baucom et al., 2012; Snyder et al., 2006).
ETIOLOGY
Most marriages begin happily and are characterized by optimism. Baker and Emery
(1993) conducted a study to reveal just how optimistic people are about their mar-
riage. One hundred thirty-seven adults who had recently filed for a first marriage
license were surveyed about their knowledge of the general divorce rate and their
estimate of the likelihood that their own marriage would end in divorce. In terms of
the general divorce rate, participants accurately reported that 50% of marriages (in
the early 1990s) would end in divorce, but the median response was 0% when assess-
ing the likelihood that they personally would divorce (Baker & Emery, 1993). Similarly,
when a sample of newlyweds was asked to predict changes in their marital satisfac-
tion over the subsequent 4 years, almost all participants reported that satisfaction
would remain at the present level or increase; nevertheless, there was an average
decline in marital satisfaction at follow-up (Lavner, Karney, & Bradbury, 2013). The
transition from an optimistic beginning to teetering on the brink of divorce appears
to be a developmental process that unfolds over time (Bradbury & Karney, 1993)
and displays significant heterogeneity, impacting a subset of couples (Lavner &
Bradbury, 2019b). Gottman (1994) referred to this process as the “cascade model of
marital dissolution.” Here we detail several major approaches to understanding the
cascade into MRD. It is important to recognize that decline in relationship quality
and emergence of MRD occurs at multiple levels, including interactions between
partners, psychological processes within individuals, and contextual stressors that
impact both between- and within-person dynamics. Following our review of etio-
logical models of MRD, we describe the treatments that stem from these frameworks.

-- 374 of 498 --

354 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
The Cognitive‑Behavioral Model of Relationship Functioning
The cognitive-behavioral model of relationship functioning emphasizes partner
behaviors, as well as people’s interpretations and evaluations of their own and their
partners’ behavior. This approach emphasizes the frequency and range of recipro-
cal positive reinforcers exchanged between partners: Relationship satisfaction is
high when rates of relationship rewards (or reinforcers) exceed rates of relationship
costs, and when the differences between the rates of rewards and costs received
exceed one’s standard of what one thinks one deserves (Kelley & Thibaut, 1978).
This approach also emphasizes partners’ ability to communicate, successfully nego-
tiate behavior change, and resolve problems and conflict in their relationship. For
example, compared to people who are satisfied with their relationship, dissatisfied
partners are more likely to engage in negative verbal and nonverbal communication,
including negative reciprocity (i.e., the tendency for negative behavior by one person
to be followed by negative behavior by the partner; for a review, see Salazar, 2015);
and demand–withdraw communication, in which one person pressures the part-
ner with demands, complaints, or criticisms and the partner withdraws with defen-
siveness and inaction (Christensen & Heavey, 1990; for a meta-analysis, see Burrell,
Kartch, Allen, & Hill, 2014).
The cognitive-behavioral approach emphasizes not only behaviors exchanged
between partners but also partners’ interpretations of these behaviors. For example,
compared to partners who are satisfied with their relationship, dissatisfied partners
are more likely to attribute each other’s negative behavior to broad and stable traits,
and to view negative partner behavior as selfishly motivated and worthy of blame
(Bradbury & Fincham, 1990). Dissatisfied partners are also more likely to hold dys-
functional or extreme assumptions (i.e., beliefs about how things are), standards (i.e.,
beliefs about how things should be), and expectations (i.e., beliefs about how things
will be) with respect to themselves, their partners, and their relationship (Baucom,
Epstein, Sayers, & Sher, 1989). Additionally, people who desire to form or maintain
close bonds with a partner tend to engage in motivated cognition, which is defined as
thinking in ways that produce conclusions consistent with one’s desires (Lemay &
Clark, 2015). In other words, motivation to bond with a partner can positively bias
people’s perceptions of their relationships and their relationship partners. For exam-
ple, people may utilize a variety of cognitive processes—such as selectively attend-
ing to information that is consistent with their desires, remembering information
in a biased manner, or making biased interpretations of situations—that help them
draw the conclusion that they are valued, cared for, and understood by their partner
(Lemay & Clark, 2015).
Attachment Theory and MRD
A great deal is written about the role of attachment theory and relationship dis-
tress. Basic research has demonstrated that individual differences in attachment
are associated with MRD. Attachment insecurity can be characterized along two
dimensions—anxiety and avoidance—with people high in anxiety hyperactivat-
ing their attachment needs and people high in avoidance deactivating their attach-
ment needs (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). A large body of evidence indicates that

-- 375 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	355
attachment insecurity is associated with difficulties with self-disclosure, trust, and
intimacy, as well as lower levels of commitment and satisfaction in romantic rela-
tionships, higher levels of marital conflict, poor conflict management skills, and
problems seeking or receiving support from one’s partner (Banse, 2004). Adults with
high-anxiety or high-avoidance dimensions are at-risk for MRD, with effect sizes (r)
of –.29 and –.42 between relationship satisfaction and anxious attachment and avoid-
ant attachment, respectively (Hadden, Smith, & Webster, 2014). In addition, the larger
the attachment discrepancy between partners, the greater the risk for MRD (Banse,
2004; Milad, Ottenberger, & Artigas, 2014).
In one of the first studies to examine mechanisms of the association between
attachment and marital satisfaction, Davila, Bradbury, and Fincham (1998) found that
“negative affectivity,” which they defined as the stable tendency to experience and
express negative emotion, mediated the association between husbands’ and wives’
attachment anxiety and marital satisfaction. The results of this study also revealed
an interesting partner effect, in which husbands’ satisfaction was negatively associ-
ated with wives’ anxiety (with no effect from husbands’ satisfaction to wives), sug-
gesting that it is important to consider gender-specific effects when studying the link
between attachment and marital satisfaction or discord (Davila et al., 1998). Other
research suggests that marital partners who are both securely attached report the
highest levels of marital adjustment (Siegel, Levin, & Solomon, 2019). High levels of
attachment security associated with high levels of marital satisfaction may promote
positive perceptions of one’s partner, which, in turn, are associated with greater
social support behavior (Cobb, Davila, & Bradbury, 2001). Attachment orientations
demonstrate how mental representations of interpersonal dynamics—that is, the
degree to which we believe we are worthy of love and the extent we believe we can
trust intimate partners—can profoundly impact rates of MRD.
Contextual Variables and MRD
The last two decades have witnessed a surge of research dedicated to understanding
how life circumstances and stressors are associated with relational quality (Karney
& Bradbury, 2005; Randall & Bodenmann, 2009, 2017; Story & Bradbury, 2004). It is
well established that financial hardship and daily stress increase risk for divorce
(Lavee, McCubbin, & Olson, 1987), and a major focus of the research in this area is
to understand how external forces are associated with increases in MRD. Important
distinctions in this area include intensity of stress (major vs. minor stress), duration
of stress exposure (acute vs. chronic stress), and source or locus of stress (outside
or inside the relationship), and whether individuals and couples can cope with and
adjust to the experience of stress (Randall & Bodenmann, 2009). The experience of
stress in domains of life outside the relationship (e.g., work) may spill over into one’s
relationship, causing stress within the relationship (Neff & Karney, 2017; Randall
& Bodenmann, 2017). For instance, Neff and Karney (2004) assessed 82 newlywed
couples every 6 months for the first 4 years of marriage and found that wives who
experienced the highest levels of stress spillover demonstrated the greatest declines
in marital satisfaction over the study, and that increased negative perceptions of rela-
tionship problems mediated the association between stress and relationship quality.
Building on this research, Neff and Karney (2007) also found evidence for a dyadic

-- 376 of 498 --

356 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
crossover effect, whereby husbands reported lower satisfaction when their wives
experienced higher stress.
Clinical Implications
The brief overview of etiological models of MRD offers several directions for treat-
ment that may help in preventing or treating MRD, which we discuss in detail below.
For example, the cognitive-behavioral model suggests that increasing the rates of
positive relationship behaviors, improving communication and problem-solving
skills, and recognizing and modifying unrealistic or distorted cognitions should
improve relationship quality. Attachment theory suggests that helping couples
change their emotional engagement, responsiveness, and soothing behaviors may
improve the quality of their relationship by helping partners attend to one another.
Finally, helping couples cope during times of stress, including during the transition
to parenthood, may improve MRD.
TREATMENTS AND TREATMENT OUTCOME
Preventing MRD
Given that most couples begin marriage with minimal discord and a high degree of
optimism, preventive interventions have been developed to capitalize on relation-
ship strengths and reduce risk for downstream MRD. Many of the existing evidence-
based preventive interventions for MRD draw from the cognitive-behavioral frame-
work focus on increasing healthy communication and relationship behaviors, while
decreasing unhealthy behaviors (Jakubowski, Milne, Brunner, & Miller, 2004).
Although differing terms have been used to refer to interventions intended to pre-
vent MRD, one of the most common terms is “relationship education” (RE), which
can be defined as “efforts or programs that provide education, skills, and principles
that help individuals . . . and couples . . . increase their chances of having healthy and
stable relationships” (Markman & Rhoades, 2012, p. 169).
Several meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of relationship education
programs have supported their efficacy, with small and statistically significant pos-
tintervention differences between RE and control groups; however, findings regard-
ing maintenance of intervention effects are mixed (see Cowan & Cowan, 2014, for a
review of meta-analyses). The pattern of moderation findings across meta-analyses
indicates that effect sizes may range from small to medium, depending on the length
of follow-up, type of measure, intervention dose (or more than or less than 8 hours),
and lay or professional delivery. Jakubowski and colleagues (2004) designated four
RE programs as empirically supported, on the basis of significant findings in at least
two randomized clinical trials conducted by different researchers; three were con-
sidered possibly efficacious, and six were empirically untested.
A criticism of RE research has been that clinical trials largely consist of middle-
class, nonminority couples, and may not be efficacious for couples experiencing
contextual stressors (Johnson, 2012). A recent meta-analysis provided support for
the efficacy of RE interventions for low-income couples; pooled positive relationship
outcomes were significantly higher postintervention for couples randomized to RE

-- 377 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	357
programs relative to control groups, though with a smaller effect size than estimates
obtained in prior meta-analyses (Arnold & Beelman, 2019). There is also evidence
that increases in MRD during the transition to parenthood are reducible through
the use of RE programs (Schulz, Cowan, & Cowan, 2006), and this may be the case
for women in particular (Daley-McCoy, Rogers, & Slade, 2015). These findings are
promising and demonstrate that preventive interventions may forestall the onset of
MRD for couples experiencing stressors such as low income or the transition to par-
enthood.
Outcome Research on the Prevention and Relationship Enhancement Program
Of the established RE programs, the Prevention and Relationship Enhancement Pro-
gram (PREP) in particular has received substantial research attention (Markman &
Rhoades, 2012). PREP was developed with the primary goal of enhancing couples’
communication and problem-solving skills to enable them to proactively and produc-
tively navigate conflict, thereby reducing risk for MRD (Renick, Blumberg, & Mark-
man, 1992). Early research on PREP generally found significant associations between
PREP receipt and lower levels of MRD (for a summary, see Stanley, 2001). However,
as Stanley noted, not all studies of PREP have supported its efficacy for reducing
risk for MRD; moreover, methodological problems, including selection effects and
higher attrition rates in control groups, can complicate interpretation of follow-up
findings of PREP studies. A review of studies that have utilized data from one of the
largest randomized controlled trials of a PREP variant to date, implemented among
Army couples, drew mixed conclusions about the efficacy of PREP (Allen, Stanley,
Rhoades, & Markman, 2015). At one of the two study sites, couples who participated
in PREP were significantly less likely to have divorced at 1- and 2-year follow-ups.
However, there was not a significant difference in MRD between PREP and control
groups across sites 2 years postintervention. The effect of group (i.e., PREP vs. con-
trol) on MRD differed, based on history of infidelity and premarital cohabitation.
PREP appears to be more effective for couples who are experiencing MRD risk
factors, including contextual stressors. For example, PREP participation has been
associated with decreased risk for MRD, particularly for minority couples and for
couples who cohabited prior to committing to their relationship (Allen et al., 2015).
Participation in PREP has also been associated with a significant reduction in divorce
rate, especially for couples wherein one or both individuals are members of a racial
minority, with a trend toward couples experiencing higher levels of financial strain
also benefiting more from PREP (Allen et al., 2015). Another study documented sig-
nificant decreases in MRD post-PREP, with a large effect size, in a sample of racial/
ethnic minority low-income couples (Owen, Quirk, Bergen, Inch, & France, 2012).
Reducing MRD
Several approaches to couple therapy have been developed for reducing MRD once
it is present. In the following sections, we review approaches to couple therapy that
have been evaluated in multiple trials (for a review of approaches evaluated in single
trials, see Snyder et al., 2006). The interested reader is referred to Gurman, Lebow,
and Snyder (2015) for a more detailed description of these approaches to treatment.

-- 378 of 498 --

358 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Cognitive‑Behavioral Couple Therapy
In line with the cognitive-behavioral models of MRD, behavioral and cognitive-
behavioral approaches to therapy focus on behavior exchange (i.e., increasing posi-
tive behaviors), communication, and problem-solving skills training, and, in the case
of cognitive-behavioral approaches, cognitive restructuring. In a meta-analysis of
20 couple therapy outcome studies targeting couple distress, Byrne, Carr, and Clark
(2004) reported the mean effect size for couple distress at the end of treatment was
0.95, indicating that couples who received treatment fared better at the end of treat-
ment than 83% of untreated couples. The mean percentage of couples falling into
the nondistressed range of functioning 6 months to 4 years after treatment was 54%
(Byrne et al., 2004). These effect sizes are comparable to (if not stronger than) the
effects frequently observed for individual-based treatments of other disorders.
Integrative Behavioral Couple Therapy
Building on the foundation of what has come be labeled “traditional behavioral cou-
ple therapy” (TBCT), integrative behavioral couple therapy (IBCT) was developed in
the 1990s, and it combines traditional behavioral techniques for promoting change
(e.g., behavior exchange, communication, and problem-solving skills training) with
techniques for promoting emotional acceptance. IBCT focuses on MRD being the
result of the (1) dynamic series of interactions that occur between partners, (2) con-
textual factors that exacerbate relational problems, and (3) differences between part-
ners that influence these interactions (Christensen & Doss, 2017). IBCT theory of
change is that issues in the relationship are the result of triggering behaviors and
sensitive responses to those behaviors. Unlike TBCT, which focuses on altering trig-
gering actions, IBCT therefore aims to change both the triggering event (i.e., trig-
gering action or inaction from Partner A) and the sensitive response (i.e., the way
Partner B responds when triggered). An IBCT therapist will align with both partners;
gather information about their history, context, and individual differences; promote
emotional acceptance of triggers in the relationship; and cultivate more helpful reac-
tions to these triggers.
A review of the research on the efficacy of couple therapy interventions estab-
lishes IBCT as an evidence-based treatment comparable to TBCT (Christensen &
Doss, 2017). For example, in a 5-year longitudinal study, 134 chronically distressed
couples were randomly assigned to IBCT or TBCT. Both IBCT and TBCT produced
significant improvements in relationship satisfaction at the end of treatment.
Importantly, more than half the participants in both groups (69% of IBCT couples
and 60% of TBCT couples) showed clinically significant improvements 2 years post-
treatment (Christensen, Atkins, Yi, Baucom, & George, 2006). This durability find-
ing is especially significant because couples in the BCT–IBCT trial were selected
for being chronically distressed and dissatisfied with their relationship (see Chris-
tensen, Atkins, Yi, Baucom, & George, 2006). Two smaller studies (N = 17) and (N =
21) also demonstrated that IBCT was superior to a wait-list control group and TCBT,
respectively. More recently, IBCT has been adapted and formulated into an impres-
sive online program called OurRelationship. This 8-hour program helps partners
observe and understand the variety of external factors and underlying emotions that

-- 379 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	359
may be driving their partner’s behavior, then provides them with opportunities to
have key conversations to respond, sharing strategies about how they might develop
better communication skills and help one another discuss core issues. Results from
a randomized controlled trial with 300 couples indicate that the OurRelationship
program demonstrated improvements in relationship satisfaction (d = 0.69), with
effects that were smaller than IBCT’s original efficacy trials (Doss, Benson, Georgia,
& Christensen, 2013).
Baucom, Atkins, Simpson, and Christensen (2009) investigated the predictors
of 2-year outcomes in the TBCT–IBCT trial, with the goal of identifying those who
might benefit most from treatment. Moderation analyses revealed that none of the
intrapersonal distress (e.g., overall mental health, high neuroticism) or interper-
sonal variables (e.g., commitment, sexual satisfaction, power bases) predicted long-
term treatment outcome, nor did any self-reported communication variables (e.g.,
demand–withdraw patterns, constructive communication); instead, several of the
behavioral communication variables interacted with type of treatment to predict
long-term treatment response. For example, the use of “soft influence” tactics (i.e.,
couple-level patterns of language that reflect a collaborative style free of manipu-
lation and pressure for change) predicted improved response in IBCT, with high-
influence tactics predicting an increased likelihood of a couple being classified as
having deteriorated functioning at follow-up. Influence patterns were not associated
with treatment response within TBCT.
Researchers have also examined change mechanisms in TBCT and IBCT. Doss
and colleagues (2004) found both therapies were effective in increasing emotional
acceptance and improving communication behaviors across the course of therapy;
however, these changes differed by treatment in a manner consistent with their
hypothesized change mechanisms. Specifically, acceptance increased significantly
more for couples in IBCT than for couples in TBCT, whereas couples in TBCT showed
larger gains in positive communication. In addition, examination of change sepa-
rately in the first and second halves of therapy indicated that change in targeted
behaviors predicted changes in relationships satisfaction early in therapy, whereas
in the second half of therapy, emotional acceptance was more strongly related to
changes in satisfaction.
Emotion‑Focused Couple Therapy
Emotion-focused couple therapy (EFCT; Wiebe & Johnson, 2016) is an experien-
tial couple therapy intervention rooted in attachment theory that draws from sys-
temic and humanistic traditions. This model suggests that couple distress is main-
tained by maladaptive interaction patterns that promote emotional disconnection
and insecure attachment. EFCT focuses on alleviating couple distress by creating a
greater sense of secure attachment between partners. Specifically, EFCT therapists
aim to help couples understand one another’s primary emotions and attune to one
another’s attachment needs, helping them become more accessible, responsive, and
engaged (Johnson, 2019). EFCT is divided into the following three stages: (1) deesca-
lation of the negative cycle—the identification of negative interaction cycles as the
issue in the relationship and simultaneous uncovering of hidden primary emotions/
core beliefs that maintain couple distress; (2) restructuring interactions—the shaping

-- 380 of 498 --

360 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
of more helpful emotional experiences and interactions by encouraging partners to
explore and share their attachment needs with one another; and (3) consolidation—
reinforcing new interaction patterns and promoting couples’ abilities to solve prob-
lems (Johnson, 2019). An EFCT therapist focuses on creating a safe alliance with
partners, identifying their individual attachment histories/core beliefs around rela-
tionships, helping them articulate their emotions, and choreographing emotional
interactions to cultivate secure attachment patterns.
A variety of clinical trials suggest that EFCT is an evidence-based couple therapy
intervention (Wiebe & Johnson, 2016). In the previously referenced meta-analysis of
20 couple therapy outcome studies specifically targeting couple distress, Byrne and
colleagues (2004) reported large effect sizes for EFCT. The mean effect size for post-
treatment couple distress was 1.27 for EFCT, indicating that couples in EFCT fared
better at the end of treatment than 89% of untreated couples. Among couples treated
with EFCT, 53% of couples fell into the nondistressed range of functioning 2 months
to 2 years after treatment (Byrne et al., 2004).
In line with attachment theory, process-level research demonstrates that changes
in emotional engagement, responsiveness, and soothing are associated with positive
outcomes in EFCT. For example, a study using a task analysis methodology reported
on three EFCT studies, demonstrating that couples were significantly more support-
ive, affirming, and understanding with each other at the end of treatment than at the
beginning; that greater affiliation and depth of experiencing were highly associated
with couple-rated “peak” session events, as were self-focused disclosing and expres-
sions of emotion; and that therapist-facilitated, intimate self-disclosures increased
affiliative behaviors within a couple (Greenberg, Ford, Alden, & Johnson, 1993).
Together, these findings suggest that EFCT exerts its effects in a manner consistent
with attachment theory. Although more comprehensive studies on mechanisms of
change are needed, it appears that teaching partners to use each other as a secure
base and to engage in behaviors that soften and deepen the emotional connection
within the relationship are among the key elements for the successful treatment of
MRD using EFCT.
Clinical Implications
There are several empirically supported approaches to working with couples present-
ing with MRD. When looking across the multiple efficacious treatments for couples,
what factors can be derived that would be considered general principles, or unify-
ing themes, of change? Although entire volumes are dedicated to different perspec-
tives on this issue (Gurman et al., 2015), efforts have been made to integrate diverse
themes in the treatment of MRD. Sprenkle and Blow (2004), for example, highlight
three nonspecific (general) treatment variables that are common to marriage and
family therapies: behavioral regulation (i.e., changing interactional patterns among
and between people), cognitive mastery (i.e., clients gaining new perspectives about
themselves and their partners, as well as new insights into interaction processes), and
emotional experiencing (i.e., clients changing the way they experience and respond
to emotional events). These therapeutic processes are common to many individual
interventions as well, and Sprenkle and Blow further suggest three common factors
unique to couple and family treatments: relational conceptualizations (i.e., a view

-- 381 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	361
of family problems as relational in nature and embedded in the relationship con-
text), expanded direct treatment system (i.e., a push in most couple treatments to
treat the couple over the individual), and the expanded therapeutic alliance (i.e., the
therapist must form a strong alliance with both members of the couple). As another
example, Snyder, Schneider, and Castellani (2003) proposed an organizational model
for sequencing and pacing couple interventions using a pluralistic approach that
draws on diverse theoretical perspectives and interventions. In short, these authors
proposed six levels of intervention that progress across three broad domains. This
model begins with the use of interventions that establish a collaborative alliance,
contain crises (e.g., physical aggression, infidelity), and strengthen the couple’s rela-
tionship. This is followed by behavioral techniques (e.g., communication skills train-
ing) that promote relevant relationship skills. Finally, the model encourages the use
of cognitive and insight-oriented approaches to address intrapersonal factors (e.g.,
unrealistic standards, previous relationship injuries) linked to relationship function-
ing.
Beyond these common factors, one way to think about unifying principles for
treating MRD is to consider what changes need to occur for most couples who experi-
ence clinically significant MRD. Of course, there exists no mean or modal couple, and
functional-analytic assessment of idiographic, controlling variables plays as impor-
tant a role in couple treatment as in individual treatment. The dangers of generali-
ties notwithstanding, the most common reasons that couples give for seeking couple
therapy are problematic communication and lack of emotional affection (Doss, Simp-
son, & Christensen, 2004). Similarly, couple therapists report that the most common
problems in couples presenting for therapy are communication, power struggles,
and unrealistic expectations in the relationship or one’s partner (Whisman, Dixon,
& Johnson, 1997).
Treating MRD and Co‑Occurring Psychopathology
Because MRD predicts the onset and course of some forms of psychopathology, it is
reasonable to assume that involving partners of people with psychopathology may
improve both partners’ mental health and well-being. Indeed, there is good evidence
that couple-based intervention can be effective in terms of improving not only rela-
tionship quality but also mental health outcomes. In a mega-analysis of 20 meta-
analyses of different couple therapies, Shadish and Baldwin (2003) reported that the
average person receiving treatment for couple therapy was better off at the end of
treatment than 80% of members of the no-treatment control group. A more focused
meta-analysis of 30 studies comparing BCT to a no-treatment control found a smaller
effect size (d = 0.59) but clearly demonstrated that BCT is effective over a range of
representative clinical conditions (Shadish & Baldwin, 2003).
There are several specific forms of psychopathology for which couple therapy is
effective. First, couple therapy is an effective treatment for major depression. Results
from a meta-analysis of eight controlled trials indicated no differences between cou-
ple therapy and individual psychotherapy in the treatment of depression (measured
in terms of either depressive symptoms or persistence of depression) and that couple
therapy was more effective than individual psychotherapy in improving MRD, par-
ticularly among couples in distressed relationships at the beginning of treatment

-- 382 of 498 --

362 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(Barbato & D’Avanzo, 2008). Second, TBCT has been shown to be an effective treat-
ment for substance use disorders. A meta-analysis of 12 controlled trials reported
that couple therapy was more effective than individual-based treatments in improv-
ing relationship satisfaction at posttreatment, and more effective than individual-
based treatments in impacting frequency of use, consequences of use, and relation-
ship satisfaction at follow-up (Powers et al., 2008). Other reviews have concluded
that compared to individual-based treatments for substance abuse, TBCT results in
significantly higher reductions in partner violence, greater improvements in psycho-
social functioning of children, and better cost–benefit results and cost-effectiveness
(Fals-Stewart, O’Farrell, Birchler, Cordova, & Kelley, 2005). Finally, there is emerging
evidence that couple therapies based on behavioral principles may be effective in the
treatment of PTSD (Monson et al., 2012) and anorexia nervosa (Baucom et al., 2017),
and a couple-assisted CBT program may be helpful in the treatment of obsessive-
compulsive disorder (Abramowitz et al., 2013).
CONCLUSION
Humans are naturally motivated to form and maintain interpersonal bonds, and
most people spend much of their adult life married or in a marriage-like relation-
ship. Consequently, many people experience MRD, and the associated emotional and
behavioral sequelae, at least some time in their life. In this chapter, we have provided
an overview of the presentation, classification, prevalence and course, comorbidities,
and available treatment options of MRD. An important limitation of the literature on
MRD is that the majority of studies have recruited and focused on Western or white
samples, with more diverse couples only recently being prioritized and studied. To
promote a better understanding of how MRD functions in diverse groups of couples,
researchers might choose to focus more specifically on MRD across diverse contexts
(e.g., within different cultures and sexual orientations). It is our hope that contin-
ued research on the onset, prevention, and treatment of MRD will help not only to
improve intimate relationships but also enhance partnered individuals’ quality of
life and improve their physical and mental health.
REFERENCES
Abramowitz, J. S., Baucom, D. H., Boeding, S., Wheaton, M. G., Pukay-Martin, N. D., Fabricant,
L. E., . . . Fischer, M. S. (2013). Treating obsessive– compulsive disorder in intimate rela-
tionships: A pilot study of couple-based cognitive-behavior therapy. Behavior Therapy,
44, 395–407.
Allen, E., Stanley, S., Rhoades, G., & Markman, H. (2015). PREP for strong bonds: A review
of outcomes from a randomized clinical trial. Contemporary Family Therapy, 37, 232–246.
Amato, P. R., & James, S. L. (2018). Changes in spousal relationships over the marital life course.
In D. Alwin, D. Felmlee, & D. Kreager (Eds.), Frontiers in sociology and social research: Vol 2.
Social networks and the life course (pp. 139–158). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Arnold, L. S., & Beelmann, A. (2019). The effects of relationship education in low-income

-- 383 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	363
couples: A meta-analysis of randomized-controlled evaluation studies. Family Relations,
68, 22–38.
Baker, L. A., & Emery, R. E. (1993). When every relationship is above average. Law and Human
Behavior, 17, 439–450.
Banse, R. (2004). Adult attachment and marital satisfaction: Evidence for dyadic configuration
effects. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 21, 273–282.
Barbato, A., & D’Avanzo, B. (2008). Efficacy of couple therapy as a treatment for depression: A
meta-analysis. Psychiatric Quarterly, 79, 121–132.
Baucom, B. R., Atkins, D. C., Simpson, L. E., & Christensen, A. (2009). Prediction of response
to treatment in a randomized clinical trial of couple therapy: A 2-year follow-up. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 160–173.
Baucom, D. H., Epstein, N., Sayers, S., & Sher, T. G. (1989). The role of cognitions in marital
relationships: Definitional, methodological, and conceptual issues. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 57, 31–38.
Baucom, D. H., Kirby, J. S., Fischer, M. S., Baucom, B. R., Hamer, R., & Bulik, C. M. (2017). Find-
ings from a couple-based open trial for adult anorexia nervosa. Journal of Family Psychol-
ogy, 31, 584–591.
Baucom, D. H., Whisman, M. A., & Paprocki, C. (2012). Couple-based interventions for psy-
chopathology. Journal of Family Therapy, 34, 250–270.
BE, D., Whisman, M. A., & Uebelacker, L. A. (2013). Prospective associations between marital
adjustment and life satisfaction. Personal Relationships, 20, 728–739.
Beach, S. R. H., Fincham, F. D., Amir, N., & Leonard, K. E. (2005). The taxometrics of marriage:
Is marital discord categorical? Journal of Family Psychology, 19, 276–285.
Boddi, V., Fanni, E., Castellini, G., Fisher, A. D., Corona, G., & Maggi, M. (2015). Conflicts
within the family and within the couple as contextual factors in the determinism of male
sexual dysfunction. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 12, 2425–2435.
Bradbury, T. N., & Fincham, F. D. (1990). Attributions in marriage: Review and critique. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 107, 3–33.
Bradbury, T. N., & Karney, B. R. (1993). Longitudinal study of marital interaction and dysfunc-
tion: Review and analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 13, 15–27.
Bramlett, M. D., & Mosher, W. D. (2002). Cohabitation, marriage, divorce, and remarriage in the
United States. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Brown, S. L., & Lin, I.-F. (2012). The gray divorce revolution: Rising divorce among middle-
aged and older adults, 1990–2010. Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 67, 731–741.
Burrell, N. A., Kartch, F. F., Allen, M., & Hill, C. B. (2014). A meta-analysis of demand/with-
draw interaction patterns. In N. A. Burrell, M. Allen, B. M. Gayle, & R. W. Preiss (Eds.),
Managing interpersonal conflict: Advances through meta-analysis (pp. 297–314). New York:
Routledge.
Byrne, M., Carr, A., & Clark, M. (2004). The efficacy of behavioral couples therapy and emo-
tionally focused therapy for couples distress. Contemporary Family Therapy, 26, 361–387.
Christensen, A., Atkins, D. C., Yi, J., Baucom, D. H., & George, W. H. (2006). Couple and indi-
vidual adjustment for 2 years following a randomized clinical trial comparing tradi-
tional versus integrative behavioral couple therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 74, 1180–1191.
Christensen, A., & Doss, B. D. (2017). Integrative behavioral couple therapy. Current Opinion
in Psychology, 13, 111–114.
Christensen, A., & Heavey, C. L. (1990). Gender and social structure in the demand/withdraw
pattern of marital conflict. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 73–81.
Christopher, F. S., & Sprecher, S. (2000). Sexuality in marriage, dating, and other relationships:
A decade review. Journal of Marriage and Family, 62, 999–1017.
Cobb, R. J., Davila, J., & Bradbury, T. N. (2001). Attachment security and marital satisfaction:

-- 384 of 498 --

364 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
The role of positive perceptions and social support. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 27, 1131–1143.
Corra, M., Carter, S. K., Carter, J. S., & Knox, D. (2009). Trends in marital happiness by gender
and race, 1973 to 2006. Journal of Family Issues, 30, 1379–1404.
Cowan, P. A., & Cowan, C. P. (2014). Controversies in couple relationship education (CRE):
Overlooked evidence and implications for research and policy. Psychology, Public Policy,
and Law, 20, 361–383.
Daley-McCoy, C., Rogers, M., & Slade, P. (2015). Enhancing relationship functioning during
the transition to parenthood: A cluster-randomised controlled trial. Archives of Women’s
Mental Health, 18, 681–692.
Davila, J., Bradbury, T. N., & Fincham, F. (1998). Negative affectivity as a mediator of the
association between adult attachment and marital satisfaction. Personal Relationships, 5,
467–484.
Davila, J., Karney, B. R., Hall, T. W., & Bradbury, T. N. (2003). Depressive symptoms and mari-
tal satisfaction: Within-subject associations and the moderating effects of gender and
neuroticism. Journal of Family Psychology, 17, 557–570.
Denton, W. H., Carmody, T. J., Rush, A. J., Thase, M. E., Trivedi, M. H., Arnow, B. A., . . . Keller,
M. B. (2010). Dyadic discord at baseline is associated with lack of remission in the acute
treatment of chronic depression. Psychological Medicine, 40, 415–424.
Doss, B. D., Benson, L. A., Georgia, E. J., & Christensen, A. (2013). Translation of Integrative
Behavioral Couple Therapy to a web-based intervention. Family Process, 52, 139–153.
Doss, B. D., Simpson, L. E., & Christensen, A. (2004). Why do couples seek marital therapy?
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 35, 608–614.
Dunn, K. M., Croft, P. R., & Hackett, G. I. (1999). Association of sexual problems with social,
psychological, and physical problems in men and women: A cross sectional population
survey. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 53, 144–148.
Durham, R. C., Allan, T., & Hackett, C. A. (1997). On predicting improvement and relapse in
generalized anxiety disorder following psychotherapy. British Journal of Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 36, 101–119.
Eckhardt, C. I., Murphy, C. M., Whitaker, D. J., Sprunger, J., Dykstra, R., & Woodard, K. (2013).
The effectiveness of intervention programs for perpetrators and victims of intimate part-
ner violence. Partner Abuse, 4, 196–231.
Fallis, E. E., Rehman, U. S., Woody, E. Z., & Purdon, C. (2016). The longitudinal association
of relationship satisfaction and sexual satisfaction in long-term relationships. Journal of
Family Psychology, 30, 822–831.
Fals-Stewart, W., O’Farrell, T. J., Birchler, G. R., Cordova, J., & Kelley, M. L. (2005). Behavioral
couples therapy for alcoholism and drug abuse: Where we’ve been, where we are, and
where we’re going. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 30, 1479–1495.
Fals-Stewart, W., O’Farrell, T. J., & Hooley, J. M. (2001). Relapse among married or cohab-
iting substance-abusing patients: The role of perceived criticism. Behavior Therapy, 32,
787–801.
First, M. B., Bell, C. C., Cuthbert, B., Malison, R., Reiss, D., Widiger, T., . . . Wisner, K. L. (2002).
Personality disorders and relational disorders: A research agenda for addressing crucial
gaps in DSM. In T. Widiger & K. L. Wisner (Eds.), A research agenda for DSM-V (pp. 123–
199). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Fleeson, W. (2004). The quality of the American life at the end of the century. In O. G. Brim, C.
D. Ryff, & R. C. Kessler (Eds.), How healthy are we?: A national study of well-being at midlife
(pp. 252–272). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foran, H. M., Whisman, M. A., & Beach, S. R. H. (2015). Intimate partner relationship distress
in the DSM-5. Family Process, 54, 48–63.
Funk, J. L., & Rogge, R. D. (2007). Testing the ruler with item response theory: Increasing

-- 385 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	365
precision of measurement for relationship satisfaction with the Couples Satisfaction
Index. Journal of Family Psychology, 21, 572–583.
Gottman, J. M. (1994). What predicts divorce?: The relationship between marital processes and marital
outcomes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greenberg, L. S., Ford, C. L., Alden, L. S., & Johnson, S. M. (1993). In-session change in emo-
tionally focused therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 78–84.
Gurman, A. S., Lebow, J. L., & Snyder, D. K. (Eds.). (2015). Clinical handbook of couple therapy (5th
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Hadden, B. W., Smith, C. V., & Webster, G. D. (2014). Relationship duration moderates associa-
tions between attachment and relationship quality: Meta-analytic support for the tempo-
ral adult romantic attachment model. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 18, 42–58.
Heller, D., Watson, D., & Ilies, R. (2004). The role of person versus situation in life satisfaction:
A critical examination. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 574–600.
Jackson, G. L., Krull, J. L., Bradbury, T. N., & Karney, B. R. (2017). Household income and
trajectories of marital satisfaction in early marriage. Journal of Marriage and Family, 79,
690–704.
Jacobson, N. S., Follette, W. C., Revenstorf, D., Baucom, D. H., Hahlweg, K., & Margolin, G.
(1984). Variability in outcome and clinical significance of behavioral marital therapy: A
reanalysis of outcome data. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 497–504.
Jakubowski, S. F., Milne, E. P., Brunner, H., & Miller, R. B. (2004). A review of empirically sup-
ported marital enrichment programs. Family Relations, 53, 528–536.
Johnson, M. D. (2012). Healthy marriage initiatives: On the need for empiricism in policy
implementation. American Psychologist, 67, 296–308.
Johnson, S. M. (2019). Attachment theory in practice: Emotionally focused therapy (EFT) with indi-
viduals, couples, and families. New York: Guilford Press.
Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2005). Contextual influences on marriage: Implications for
policy and intervention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 171–174.
Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J. W. (1978). Interpersonal relations: A theory of interdependence. New
York: Wiley.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Wilson, S. J. (2017). Lovesick: How couples’ relationships influence
health. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 13, 421–443.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Wilson, S. J., & Madison, A. (2019). Marriage and gut (microbiome) feel-
ings: Tracing novel dyadic pathways to accelerated aging. Psychosomatic Medicine, 81,
704–710.
Kraus, D. R., Seligman, D. A., & Jordan, J. R. (2005). Validation of a behavioral health treatment
outcome and assessment tool designed for naturalistic settings: The Treatment Outcome
Package. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61, 285–314.
Kreider, R. M., & Fields, J. M. (2001). Number, timing, and duration of marriages and divorces: Fall
1996 (Current Population Reports, P70-80). Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Lavee, Y., McCubbin, H. I., & Olson, D. H. (1987). The effect of stressful life events and transi-
tions on family functioning and well-being. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 49, 857–873.
Lavner, J. A., & Bradbury, T. N. (2010). Patterns of change in marital satisfaction over the new-
lywed years. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 1171–1187.
Lavner, J. A., & Bradbury, T. N. (2019a). Marriage and committed partnerships. In B. H. Fiese
(Ed.-in-Chief), M. Celano, K. Deater-Deckard, E. N. Jouriles, & M. A. Whisman (Assoc.
Eds.), APA handbook of contemporary family psychology: Vol. 1. Foundations, methods, and con-
temporary issues across the lifespan (pp. 445–461). Washington, DC: American Psychologi-
cal Association.
Lavner, J. A., & Bradbury, T. N. (2019b). Trajectories and maintenance in marriage and long-
term committed relationships. In D. Schoebi & B. Campos (Eds.), New directions in the
psychology of close relationships (pp. 28–44). New York: Routledge.

-- 386 of 498 --

366 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Lavner, J. A., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2013). Newlyweds’ optimistic forecasts of their
marriage: For better or for worse? Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 531–540.
Lawrence, E., Barry, R. A., Brock, R. L., Bunde, M., Langer, A., Ro, E., . . . Madsen, L. (2011). The
Relationship Quality Interview: Evidence of reliability, convergent and divergent valid-
ity, and incremental utility. Psychological Assessment, 23(1), 44–63.
Lemay, E. P., & Clark, M. S. (2015). Motivated cognition in relationships. Current Opinion in
Psychology, 1, 72–75.
Markman, H. J., & Rhoades, G. K. (2012). Relationship education research: Current status and
future directions. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38, 169–200.
McNulty, J. K., Wenner, C. A., & Fisher, T. D. (2016). Longitudinal associations among relation-
ship satisfaction, sexual satisfaction, and frequency of sex in early marriage. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 45, 85–97.
McShall, J. R., & Johnson, M. D. (2015). The association between relationship distress and
psychopathology is consistent across racial and ethnic groups. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 124, 226–231.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2007). Attachment in adulthood: Structure, dynamics, and change.
New York: Guilford Press.
Milad, E. H., Ottenberger, D. R., & Artigas, D. H. (2014). Associations among attachment, sex-
uality, and marital satisfaction in adult Chilean couples: A linear hierarchical models
analysis. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, 40, 259–274.
Monson, C. M., Fredman, S. J., Macdonald, A., Pukay-Martin, N. D., Resick, P. A., & Schnurr,
P. P. (2012). Effect of cognitive-behavioral couple therapy for PTSD: A randomized con-
trolled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 308, 700–709.
National Vital Statistics System. (2017). National marriage and divorce rate trends for 2000–
2018. Retrieved from www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/marriage-divorce.htm.
Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2004). How does context affect intimate relationships?: Linking
external stress and cognitive processes within marriage. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 30, 134–148.
Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2007). Stress crossover in newlywed marriage: A longitudinal and
dyadic perspective. Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 594–607.
Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2017). Acknowledging the elephant in the room: How stressful
environmental contexts shape relationship dynamics. Current Opinion in Psychology, 13,
107–110.
Overbeek, G., Vollebergh, W., de Graaf, R., Scholte, R., de Kemp, R., & Engels, R. (2006). Lon-
gitudinal associations of marital quality and marital dissolution with the incidence of
DSM-III-R disorders. Journal of Family Psychology, 20, 284–291.
Owen, J., Quirk, K., Bergen, C., Inch, L. J., & France, T. (2012). The effectiveness of PREP with
lower-income racial/ethnic minority couples. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38,
296–307.
Proulx, C. M., Helms, H. M., & Buehler, C. (2007). Marital quality and personal well-being: A
meta-analysis. Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 576–593.
Quinn-Nilas, C. (2019). Relationship and sexual satisfaction: A developmental perspective on
bidirectionality. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 37, 624–646.
Randall, A. K., & Bodenmann, G. (2009). The role of stress on close relationships and marital
satisfaction. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 105–115.
Randall, A. K., & Bodenmann, G. (2017). Stress and its associations with relationship satisfac-
tion. Current Opinion in Psychology, 13, 96–106.
Renick, M. J., Blumberg, S. L., & Markman, H. J. (1992). The Prevention and Relationship
Enhancement Program (PREP): An empirically based preventive intervention program
for couples. Family Relations, 41, 141–147.
Roberson, P. N., Lenger, K. A., Norona, J. C., & Olmstead, S. B. (2018). A longitudinal

-- 387 of 498 --

Marital and Relational Discord 	367
examination of the directional effects between relationship quality and well-being for a
national sample of US men and women. Sex Roles, 78, 67–80.
Robles, T. F., Slatcher, R. B., Trombello, J. M., & McGinn, M. M. (2014). Marital quality and
health: A meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 140, 140–187.
Salazar, L. R. (2015). The negative reciprocity process in marital relationships: A literature
review. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 24, 113–119.
Sbarra, D. A., & Coan, J. A. (2018). Relationships and health: The critical role of affective sci-
ence. Emotion Review, 10, 40–54.
Schulz, M. S., Cowan, C. P., & Cowan, P. A. (2006). Promoting healthy beginnings: A random-
ized controlled trial of a preventive intervention to preserve marital quality during the
transition to parenthood. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 20–31.
Shadish, W. R., & Baldwin, S. A. (2003). Meta-analysis of MFT interventions. Journal of Marital
and Family Therapy, 29, 547–570.
Siegel, A., Levin, Y., & Solomon, Z. (2019). The role of attachment of each partner on marital
adjustment. Journal of Family Issues, 40, 415–434.
Snyder, D. K., Castellani, A. M., & Whisman, M. A. (2006). Current status and future direc-
tions in couple therapy. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 317–344.
Snyder, D. K., Heyman, R. E., & Haynes, S. N. (2005). Evidence-based approaches to assessing
couple distress. Psychological Assessment, 17, 288–307.
Snyder, D. K., Schneider, W. J., & Castellani, A. M. (2003). Tailoring couple therapy to individ-
ual differences: A conceptual approach. In D. K. Snyder & M. A. Whisman (Eds.), Treating
difficult couples: Helping clients with coexisting mental and relationship disorders (pp. 27–51).
New York: Guilford Press.
South, S. C., Turkheimer, E., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2008). Personality disorder symptoms and
marital functioning. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 769–780.
Spanier, G. B. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment: New scales for assessing the quality of
marriage and similar dyads. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 35, 15–28.
Sprenkle, D., & Blow, A. (2004). Common factors and our sacred models. Journal of Marital and
Family Therapy, 30, 113–129.
Stanley, S. M. (2001). Making a case for premarital education. Family Relations, 50, 272–280.
Stith, S. M., Green, N. M., Smith, D. B., & Ward, D. B. (2008). Marital satisfaction and marital
discord as risk markers for intimate partner violence: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
Family Violence, 23, 149–160.
Stith, S. M., Smith, D. B., Penn, C. E., Ward, D. B., & Tritt, D. (2004). Intimate partner physical
abuse perpetration and victimization risk factors: A meta-analytic review. Aggression and
Violent Behavior, 10, 65–98.
Story, L. B., & Bradbury, T. N. (2004). Understanding marriage and stress: Essential questions
and challenges. Clinical Psychology Review, 23, 1139–1162.
Stroud, C. B., Durbin, C. E., Saigal, S. D., & Knobloch-Fedders, L. M. (2010). Normal and abnor-
mal personality traits are associated with marital satisfaction for both men and women:
An actor–partner interdependence model analysis. Journal of Research in Personality, 44,
466–477.
Taft, C. T., Watkins, L. E., Stafford, J., Street, A. E., & Monson, C. M. (2011). Posttraumatic stress
disorder and intimate relationship problems: A meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 79, 22–33.
Tejada-Vera, B., & Sutton, P. (2009). Births, marriages, divorces, and deaths: Provisional data for July
2008 (National Vital Statistics Reports, Vol. 57, No. 13). Hyattsville, MD: National Center
for Health Statistics.
Trombello, J. M., Vittengl, J. R., Denton, W. H., Minhajuddin, A., Thase, M. E., & Jarrett, R. B.
(2019). The role of dyadic discord in outcomes in acute phase cognitive therapy for adults
with recurrent major depressive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 50, 778–790.

-- 388 of 498 --

368 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Vowels, L. M., & Mark, K. P. (2020). Relationship and sexual satisfaction: A longitudinal actor–
partner interdependence model approach. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 35, 46–59.
Wamboldt, M. Z., & Wamboldt, F. S. (2000). Role of the family in the onset and outcome of
childhood disorders: Selected research findings. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 1212–1219.
Wang, P. S., Lane, M., Olfson, M., Pincus, H. A., Wells, K. B., & Kessler, R. C. (2005). Twelve-
month use of mental health services in the United States: Results from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 629–640.
Whisman, M. A. (1999). Marital dissatisfaction and psychiatric disorders: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 701–706.
Whisman, M. A. (2001). Marital adjustment and outcome following treatments for depression.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 125–129.
Whisman, M. A. (2007). Marital distress and DSM-IV psychiatric disorders in a population-
based national survey. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116, 638–643.
Whisman, M. A., & Baucom, D. H. (2012). Intimate relationships and psychopathology. Clinical
Child and Family Psychology Review, 15, 4–13.
Whisman, M. A., Beach, S. R. H., & Snyder, D. K. (2008). Is marital discord taxonic and can
taxonic status be assessed reliably?: Results from a national, representative sample of
married couples. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 745–755.
Whisman, M. A., & Bruce, M. L. (1999). Marital distress and incidence of major depressive
episode in a community sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 674–678.
Whisman, M. A., Dixon, A. E., & Johnson, B. (1997). Therapists’ perspectives of couple prob-
lems and treatment issues in couple therapy. Journal of Family Psychology, 11, 361–366.
Whisman, M. A., Gilmour, A. L., & Salinger, J. M. (2018). Marital satisfaction and mortality in
the United States adult population. Health Psychology, 37, 1041–1044.
Whisman, M. A., & Schonbrun, Y. C. (2009). Social consequences of borderline personality
disorder features in a population-based survey: Marital distress, marital violence, and
marital disruption. Journal of Personality Disorders, 23, 410–415.
Whisman, M. A., Sheldon, C. T., & Goering, P. (2000). Psychiatric disorders and dissatisfaction
with social relationships: Does type of relationship matter? Journal of Abnormal Psychol-
ogy, 109, 803–808.
Whisman, M. A., Snyder, D. K., & Beach, S. R. H. (2009). Screening for marital and relationship
discord. Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 247–254.
Whisman, M. A., & Uebelacker, L. A. (2009). Prospective associations between marital discord
and depressive symptoms in middle-aged and older adults. Psychology and Aging, 24,
184–189.
Whisman, M. A., Uebelacker, L. A., & Bruce, M. L. (2006). Longitudinal association between
marital dissatisfaction and alcohol use disorders in a community sample. Journal of Fam-
ily Psychology, 20, 164–167.
Wiebe, S. A., & Johnson, S. M. (2016). A review of the research in emotionally focused therapy
for couples. Family Process, 55, 390–407.

-- 389 of 498 --

369
Over 50% of individuals from general population samples report being dissatisfied
with the sexual aspects of their relationship (Laumann & Gagnon, 1995). Among
these, 43% of women and 31% of men report a sexual issue, such as low desire, prob-
lems with vaginal lubrication, and erectile difficulties (Laumann, Paik, & Rosen,
1999). Based on these data, sexual issues overall appear to be common. We focus in
this chapter on sexual dysfunctions—sexual issues that are associated with clini-
cally significant distress and are experienced for more than 6 months—as defined
by the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5;
American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Specifically, we highlight the symptoms,
prevalence, etiologies, course, and treatment outcome of the sexual dysfunctions,
and discuss clinical implications.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Sexual dysfunctions are characterized by disturbances in a person’s ability to respond
sexually or to experience sexual pleasure. Sexual dysfunctions consist of clinically
significant issues with desire, interest, arousal (e.g., erection), orgasm (e.g., ejacula-
tion), and genito-pelvic pain and penetration. It should be noted, however, that if the
presence of sexual dysfunctions can be explained by comorbid nonsexual mental
disorders (e.g., a mood disorder), only the nonsexual disorder diagnosis should be
made (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). In addition, the diagnosis of a sexual
dysfunction requires that issues better explained by the effects of a medical condi-
tion or by severe relationship distress, partner violence, or other stressors are ruled
out (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). However, sexual dysfunctions may be
diagnosed as being due to the use of medications and/or substances.
C H A P T E R 1 3
Sexual Dysfunctions
Caroline F. Pukall
Sophie Bergeron

-- 390 of 498 --

370 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
DSM-5 sexual dysfunctions are organized into four main categories of sexual
response: (1) desire/interest dysfunctions, which describe issues with sexual fanta-
sies and the wish to engage in sexual activity; (2) arousal dysfunctions, which are
characterized by concerns related to the subjective feelings of sexual pleasure and
associated physiological changes (e.g., erection); (3) orgasm dysfunctions, which are
problems with the timing of the release of sexual tension; and (4) genito-pelvic pain/
penetration disorder (GPPD), which describes issues that prevent vaginal penetra-
tion (e.g., pain, severe anxiety about penetration). It is important to note that these
dysfunctions are highly comorbid, especially for women (McCabe et al., 2016). For
example, genito-pelvic pain can potentially interfere with any or all aspects of sexual
response, and a client presenting with orgasm difficulties may also experience prob-
lems with desire/interest. The overall prevalence of sexual dysfunction in women
has been reported to be 40–50% regardless of age; however, an overall prevalence
rate of sexual dysfunction in men is difficult to ascertain given the large number of
studies focusing on erectile disorder and premature (early) ejaculation to the near
exclusion of the other male sexual dysfunctions (McCabe et al., 2016). Nevertheless,
a Swiss longitudinal study of men and women ages 20–50 reported higher lifetime
risks for any sexual problem in women (67.0%) as compared to men (46.0%), and func-
tional, emotional, and sexual desire issues more frequently overlapped in women
(16.9 vs. 5.0% for men) (Angst, Hengartner, Rossler, Ajdacic-Gross, & Leeners, 2015).
As displayed in Table 13.1, DSM-5 lists seven sexual dysfunctions and three
“other” designations (i.e., substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction, other
specified sexual dysfunction, and unspecified sexual dysfunction) that can be diag-
nosed when the sexual problem is associated with significant distress and has been
present for a minimum of 6 months (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Ques-
tions asked during the clinical interview should determine the specifications (i.e.,
onset, context, and distress severity) of each sexual dysfunction (for more informa-
tion regarding the clinical assessment of sexual dysfunctions, see Pukall, Eccles, &
Gauvin, 2019). Onset is “lifelong” when a sexual dysfunction appears to have always
been present; if the sexual dysfunction developed after a period of nonproblematic
experiences, the onset would be specified as “acquired.” Context is specified as “situ-
ational” when the sexual dysfunction is restricted to certain types of stimulation, sit-
uations, or partners, whereas a “generalized” dysfunction indicates that the dysfunc-
tion occurs in all experienced circumstances. “Distress severity” can be designated
as mild, moderate, or severe, and should be documented for all sexual dysfunctions,
except for premature (early) ejaculation (PE). In the latter case, the severity designa-
tion corresponds to the client’s estimate of ejaculatory latency during penetrative
sexual activity; mild would be specified if the ejaculatory latency is between 30 and
60 seconds; moderate, between 15 and 30 seconds; and severe, within 15 seconds or
prior to or at the start of sexual activity) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Clinically, such accurate distinctions are rarely made; rather, general time estimates
(e.g., “just before penetration,” “as soon as I penetrate,” “within a few seconds,”
“within a minute or two”) are used to inform the severity of PE.
Sexual desire disorders affect 15–25% of women and men under the age of
60 and around 40–50% of those over the age of 60 (McCabe et al., 2016). The sex-
ual desire and arousal disorders include male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
(HSDD), female sexual interest/arousal disorder (SIAD), and erectile disorder (ED).

-- 391 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	371
The diagnosis of male HSDD is made when a client describes persistent or recur-
rent deficient (or absent) sexual/erotic thoughts or fantasies and desire for sexual
activity (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Although DSM-5 considers desire
dysfunctions as distinct from arousal dysfunctions for men (i.e., there are separate
diagnoses for HSDD and ED; see Table 13.1), this distinction is not made for women.
Based on research indicating that women report a higher degree of overlap in per-
ceptions of sexual desire and arousal than men (Graham, Sanders, Milhausen, &
McBride, 2004) and that the parallel criteria for HSDD in men and women do not
accurately represent women’s experiences of sexual desire—thereby leading to over-
diagnosis of HSDD in women (Brotto, 2010)—DSM-5 includes the diagnosis of SIAD,
which replaces the former and distinct diagnoses of female hypoactive sexual desire
disorder and female sexual arousal disorder. The experiences of women with SIAD
are likely to be similar to those of women with these previous diagnoses; however,
recent evidence suggests that they exhibit more severe symptoms (O’Loughlin, Bas-
son, & Brotto, 2018), thereby potentially avoiding overdiagnosis of normative and
adaptive changes in desire.
SIAD is characterized by at least three of the following: absent/reduced (1) inter-
est in sexual activity; (2) sexual/erotic thoughts or fantasies; (3) sexual excitement/
pleasure during sexual activity in almost all or all (75–100%) sexual encounters;
(4) sexual interest/arousal in response to any internal or external sexual/erotic cues;
TABLE 13.1. DSM‑5 Sexual Dysfunctions
Category of
sexual dysfunction 	Males 	Females
Desire/interest 	Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
(HSDD)
Sexual interest/arousal disorder
(SIAD)
Excitement/arousal 	Erectile disorder (ED)
Orgasm 	Delayed ejaculation (DE)
Premature (early) ejaculation (PE)
Orgasmic disorder (OD)
Vaginal penetration 	Genito-pelvic pain/penetration
disorder (GPPPD)
Affecting any phase
or multiple phases
Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction (i.e., when the symptoms
of a sexual dysfunction developed during or soon after substance
intoxication, substance withdrawal, or after exposure to a medication as
based on history, physical examination, or laboratory findings, and the
substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms)
Other specified sexual dysfunction (i.e., when another sexual dysfunction
not listed in the DSM-5 is specified and diagnosed; for example, sexual
aversion, persistent genital arousal disorder, hypersexual disordera)
Unspecified sexual dysfunction (i.e., when another sexual dysfunction not
listed in the DSM-5 is diagnosed but not specified)
aHypersexual disorder (commonly referred to as “sex addiction”) can be coded as an “other specified disrup-
tive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder” given that some believe that it is not a sexual dysfunction (see
Kafka, 2014).

-- 392 of 498 --

372 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
and (5) genital/nongenital sensations during sexual activity (75–100% of encounters);
as well as (6) no/reduced initiation of sexual activity and typically unreceptive to a
partner’s attempts to initiate sexual activity (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
A diagnosis of ED is made when at least one of the following three symptoms
is experienced on all or almost all (75–100%) sexual encounters: marked difficulty in
obtaining or maintaining an erection, or a marked decrease in erectile rigidity (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). A pattern of increasing ED with increasing age has
been well documented: The prevalence of erectile disorder is 1–10% under the age
of 40; 2–15% at ages 40–49; around 10–25% at ages 50–59; 20–40% at ages 60–69; and
50–100% in those aged 70 and older (McCabe et al., 2016).
Orgasmic disorders consist of orgasmic disorder (OD) in women, and delayed
ejaculation (DE) and PE in men. OD is characterized by the presence of at least one
of the following symptoms experienced in 75–100% of sexual encounters: marked
delay in, marked infrequency of, or absence of orgasm and markedly reduced inten-
sity of orgasmic sensations (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). OD affects
approximately 16–25% of women, with some studies reporting higher rates in
women over the age of 50 years (McCabe et al., 2016). The diagnostic criteria for DE
include at least one of the following symptoms experienced in 75–100% of sexual
encounters, without desiring the delay: marked delay in ejaculation and marked
infrequency or absence of ejaculation (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). One
article suggests that a median latency of 20 minutes following vaginal penetration
may be clinically useful for future definitions of DE given that this latency dis-
criminates between those with and without DE (Morgentaler et al., 2017). PE, which
affects 11–16% of men (McCabe et al., 2016), is diagnosed when a client describes a
persistent or recurrent pattern of ejaculation within approximately 1 minute follow-
ing vaginal penetration, and before the individual wishes it, that is experienced in
75–100% of partnered sexual encounters. Note that these criteria can also be applied
to nonvaginal penetration activities (e.g., anal penetration) (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013).
GPPPD is a sexual dysfunction that is currently restricted to females; there is no
parallel diagnosis for males, despite the fact that research has established the exis-
tence of genito-pelvic pain in men (Bergeron, Rosen, Pukall, & Corsini-Munt, 2020).
The diagnosis of GPPPD involves persistent or recurrent difficulties with at least one
of the following: (1) vaginal penetration during intercourse; (2) marked vulvovagi-
nal/pelvic pain during vaginal intercourse or penetration attempts; (3) marked fear/
anxiety about vulvovaginal/pelvic pain in anticipation of, during, or as a result of
vaginal penetration; and (4) marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor mus-
cles during attempted vaginal penetration (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
GPPPD has a prevalence of 10–28% (Pukall et al., 2016a), but specific rates depend on
the type of condition (e.g., chronic pelvic pain, vulvodynia).
Associated Clinical Features
Sexual functioning is a complex biopsychosocial process, and these factors play
important roles in the predisposition to, and initiation and maintenance of, all sexual
dysfunctions. Biological factors include general physical health and specific health
conditions, medications and other treatments, one’s diet and exercise routine, sleep

-- 393 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	373
habits, and alcohol and drug intake. Psychological influences include anxiety and
depressive symptoms, stress, and coping skills. Social aspects include individuals’
experiences in their family of origin (e.g., communication/education about sexual-
ity and relationships, quality of the caregiver relationship), with peers (e.g., qual-
ity, norms, expectations), with sexual and other partners (e.g., quality, interpersonal
violence, degree of support), and the larger sociocultural context in which they were
raised (e.g., traditional or liberal gender/sex roles). Historical factors can influence
current sexual function and, as discussed in “Clinical Implications” below, care
should be taken to assess both past and current experiences in order to create a
framework that can capture the client’s predisposing, initiating, and maintaining
factors, so that treatment can be targeted and individualized for optimal outcome.
Clinical Implications
Sexual dysfunction is highly prevalent, and sexual issues or concerns should rou-
tinely be part of a comprehensive assessment of one’s overall function, even if the
clinical setting is not specifically geared toward sexual health, independent of the
reason for referral. However, health care providers’ discomfort with raising issues
related to sexuality has been well documented in the literature; these conversations
tend to be limited and highly variable (Reese et al., 2017). Key issues include a lack
of time, perceiving the topic to be too personal, lack of knowledge and training in
sexual issues, and a lack of resources (reviewed in O’Connor et al., 2019). Although
many clinicians prefer to avoid embarrassing or offending clients and some prefer
to wait until the client raises the issue themselves, evidence indicates that clients are
typically comfortable with, and expect, health care providers to ask about sexual
concerns (reviewed in O’Connor et al., 2019). Unfortunately, many clients are dissat-
isfied with the depth of content and level of support given to them by their providers
even when the topic is discussed (Zhou et al., 2016).
In nonsexual health clinical settings, the clinician’s initial question should be
framed generally (e.g., “Do you have any sexual issues that you would like to discuss
with me today?”) and can be preceded by permission to ask about the patient’s sex-
ual health, depending on the context and client. If the response is “yes,” then the cli-
nician should ask general questions about the nature of the issue (see below for more
specific information), and conduct an overall assessment of sexual response (i.e.,
sexual desire/interest, sexual arousal, orgasmic frequency and pleasure, the pres-
ence of any pain). In cases in which several aspects of sexual response and pleasure
are affected, then the clinician should initiate a discussion with respect to where to
start in order to set the focus when moving forward with further assessment and
treatment of the issue or when making a referral to someone with expertise in sexual
health.
In addition, given that sexual issues often arise within a relationship context,
basic questions surrounding the partner’s sexual function and pleasure should be
posed, and the possibility of including the partner in the assessment and treatment
process should be discussed. Research has consistently demonstrated the inter-
dependence of sexual function between partners (Brotto et al., 2016). Clinically, it
is extremely useful to hear the partner’s perspective, and it is often more produc-
tive to involve partners, as they witness the sexual difficulty and may partake in

-- 394 of 498 --

374 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
its maintenance, experience its potential inconvenience, and as such, present sexual
distress and dysfunction themselves. Nevertheless, there is no rule of thumb for
when to involve the partner, and this decision must be based on a careful assessment
of the contributors to the individuals’ sexual dysfunction, as well as their therapy-
related goals and needs. Sometimes, patients consult a therapist on their own rather
than with the partner because they may be ashamed of their difficulty and not yet
ready to discuss it openly with their partner, or because they have sexual secrets
(e.g., infidelity, private sexual interests/preferences/orientation) that they have never
disclosed to their partner and prefer to explore these in a safe space of their own.
Last, if the client is in a relationship with a partner who is willing to be part of the
assessment and treatment process and the health care provider is not competent in
this area, it may be necessary to refer the client to a sexual health therapist who also
has expertise in relationship therapy; if their partner is not willing, then therapy can
continue with the individual but focus only on the individual and their perceptions
of partner responses and behaviors.
In settings with a focus on sexual health, the clinical interview is the main tech-
nique to assess and diagnose sexual dysfunctions. The interview typically starts
with the individual describing the nature of the problem and the reason for seeking
treatment. Following an open-ended description of the problem, the clinician may
ask more specific questions about when the problem started (onset), the conditions
under which it occurs (context), and the extent of the problem and amount of dis-
tress experienced because of the issue (severity). Questions are then asked about the
various biological, psychological, and social issues that might be implicated (Meana,
Binik, & Thaler, 2008). In terms of general biological factors, the clinician should
assess and take into account age, general health status (e.g., body mass index), life-
style factors (e.g., diet, cigarette smoking), hormone levels, chronic pain syndromes
(e.g., chronic prostatitis syndrome, vulvodynia), hormone levels, and medical ill-
nesses that affect vascular, sensory, central, and nervous system functions. In addi-
tion, questions regarding past surgeries and injuries, especially those in the genital
or pelvic region, and past and current medications should be posed (Meana et al.,
2008). It is commonly understood that many medications, such as antidepressants,
antipsychotics, and antihypertensives, can detrimentally affect sexual functioning.
With respect to individual psychological factors, depression and anxiety are
often comorbid with sexual dysfunction. If symptoms of mood issues are present
and treatment does not target them, then treatment will likely not be successful. Sub-
stance abuse disorders may also have a major impact on sexual functioning. Certain
maladaptive cognitive sets, unrealistic expectations, misinformation or lack of infor-
mation, and negative emotional reactions can also impinge upon sexual function.
Past sexual trauma and other negative experiences may set the foundation for sexual
problems as well (Meana et al., 2008). Socially, family-of-origin attitudes regarding
sexuality may be instilled early on and predispose the development of a sexual dys-
function. Assessing the quality of the individual’s current relationship is of utmost
importance, as problems between the members of the couple may be a cause and/
or a consequence of sexual problems. If so, these issues need to be appropriately
addressed. Areas of inquiry related to the couple should include anger, distrust, dis-
crepancies in sexual drive, and preferences, communication, and physical attraction
(Meana et al., 2008). The comorbidity of partner sexual dysfunction is common and

-- 395 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	375
should be assessed and addressed if the partner is willing to be present in the ses-
sions. In addition, ethnocultural and religious attitudes and beliefs are important, as
they can be implicated in the development and maintenance of sexual dysfunctions
(Hall & Graham, 2013; Meana et al., 2008).
Furthermore, the topics of sexual orientation and attractions (or the lack thereof),
as well as gender identity (and pronouns), form an important part of the assessment
process, and these areas should be thoroughly evaluated. Indeed, such information
can be essential to ensuring proper diagnosis and rapport building. Take the exam-
ple of differentiating between a diagnosis of HSDD/SIAD and one’s sexual identity
as asexual (i.e., someone who feels little or no sexual attraction to others). At first
glance, the presentation of both low desire/arousal and low/lack of sexual attraction
to others may seem indistinguishable, but follow-up questions about the context, the
associated distress, and one’s identity labels will clarify whether to diagnose this cli-
ent with a sexual dysfunction.
When there are multiple sexual aspects affected, it is key to begin with what the
client feels is most important, followed by further inquiries into other aspects of the
client’s multilayered sexual experiences, while respecting their pace and boundaries.
Although it is important to gather some basic information about sexual function/dys-
function early on in the assessment, other dimensions of sexuality can be broached
when the client is more comfortable and the therapeutic alliance is in place. Sexual-
ity is an intimate and at times uncomfortable topic, even for therapists, and as such
requires patience and a nonjudgmental attitude. The clinician should keep in mind
that opening up about sexuality can make a client feel very vulnerable, as this may
be the first time that they ever discuss these aspects of their private self with anyone,
including sexual trauma and sexual preferences perceived as less traditional.
ETIOLOGIES
Male Sexual Dysfunction
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Sexual desire is not easily defined or measured; it is considered to be the most com-
plex stage of the sexual response cycle because of its uniquely subjective aspects and
enormous variations over time, even within the same individual (Nimbi, Tripodi,
Rossi, Navarro-Cremades, & Simonelli, 2020). A commonly accepted definition of
“sexual desire” is a subjective state that includes psychological, physiological, affec-
tive, and cognitive components “to initiate and maintain human sexual behavior,
triggered by internal and/or external stimuli” (Nimbi et al., 2020, p. 59). It is linked
to sexual arousal (Nimbi, Tripodi, Rossi, & Simonelli, 2018) and comprises three bio-
psychosocial elements: drive (i.e., a biological component related to the integrity of
physiological systems involved in desire), motivation (i.e., a psychological component
consisting of mental state, relationship factors, and social context), and wish (i.e., a
cultural component that includes ideals, values, and rules related to sexual expres-
sion) (Levine, 2003).
Most current studies examining HSDD in men focus on those who are hetero-
sexual (Nimbi et al., 2020), and these studies often speak to the complex influence of

-- 396 of 498 --

376 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
biopsychosocial factors on sexual desire. Early studies on the etiology of low sexual
desire focused on the role of hormones—specifically, androgens—given that andro-
gens (particularly testosterone) play a role in male sexual desire. However, the rela-
tionship between androgens and sexual desire was found to be nonlinear: Although
a minimum level of androgens is needed to experience sexual desire, elevated levels
do not directly correlate with high levels of sexual desire (Rubio-Aurioles & Biva-
lacqua, 2013). This nonlinear relationship has been supported by recently published
consensus guidelines on male sexual desire stating that testosterone plays an impor-
tant role in modulating male sexual desire and arousal (Corona, Isidori, Aversa, Bur-
nett, & Maggi, 2016); therefore, it is clear that factors other than hormones are also
involved in the experience of desire. Indeed, HSDD has been associated with bio-
logical factors such as aging, medical conditions (e.g., androgen deficiency, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, epilepsy, heart failure, obesity, prostatitis/chronic
pelvic pain syndrome), and psychotropic and other medications (for a review, see
Nimbi et al., 2020).
Psychosocially, mental health problems (e.g., alexithymia, anxiety, depression,
posttraumatic stress disorder), the presence of other sexual dysfunctions (e.g., ED;
Nimbi et al., 2018), and the lack of erotic thoughts and presence of sexually dysfunc-
tional beliefs (Carvalho & Nobre, 2011) have been associated with low desire. In addi-
tion, psychological functioning has been associated with dyadic and solitary sexual
desire and activity: A study demonstrated optimal psychological functioning (i.e.,
high approach motivation, secure attachment, high self-control, and high mindful-
ness) in participants with high levels of dyadic sexual desire and activity, psychologi-
cal functioning characterized by impulsivity in those with high levels of dyadic and
solitary sexual desire and activity, and high avoidance motivation, insecure attach-
ment, and poor mindfulness in those with low levels of dyadic sexual desire and
activity (Dosch, Rochat, Ghisletta, Favez, & Van der Linden, 2016). Intimate relation-
ship dynamics can also influence the experience of desire, such as the experience of
rejection, lack of emotional connection with a partner (Murray, Milhausen, Graham,
& Kuczynski, 2017), and couple conflict (Ridley et al., 2006; see Sbarra, Manvelian,
Salinger, & Whisman, Chapter 12, this volume).
Erectile Disorder
The definition of “sexual arousal” consists of psychological and physiological com-
ponents: a positive mental engagement and focus in response to a sexual stimulus,
with genital changes indicative of sexual response (e.g., penile erection, vaginal
lubrication) that perhaps occur along with other bodily changes (e.g., increased heart
rate, nipple erection) (Althof et al., 2017). In men, one of the most obvious indicators
of sexual arousal is penile erection, and for those who adhere to strict sexual scripts
that emphasizes “sex” as being performed by an erect penis, issues with penile erec-
tion can significantly and negatively impact the person and their sexual relationship
(Wiegel, Scepkowski, & Barlow, 2007).
ED has been associated with numerous biological factors, for example, neuro-
genic (central nervous system [e.g., spinal cord injury], peripheral [e.g., sensory neu-
ropathy due to diabetes], efferent [e.g., due to radical pelvic surgery]), endocrinologi-
cal (e.g., hyperprolactinaemia), vasculogenic (e.g., arterial, venous, and sinusoidal),

-- 397 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	377
and local (e.g., cavernous fibrosis due to priapism) causes. ED is a well-established
predictor of cardiovascular disease (Kirby, 2015; Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013). In addi-
tion, aging (although there is increasing incidence among younger men; for a review,
see Nguyen, Gabrielson, & Hellstrom, 2017), certain types of medications (e.g., anti-
depressants), cigarette smoking, alcoholism, recreational drug use, systemic dis-
eases (e.g., cardiovascular disease), and general ill health (e.g., hyperlipidemia, obe-
sity, hypertension) have been associated with ED (Kirby, 2015; Shamloul & Ghanem,
2013). ED has also been associated with depression, anxiety, and lower relationship
happiness (Latini, Penson, Wallace, Lubeck, & Lue, 2006). Cognitively, men with ED
tend to make more internal and stable causal attributions for negative sexual events
than do men without ED, and they rate these events as more important (Scepkowski
et al., 2004). In addition, cognitive distraction directs attention away from erotic cues
and decreases erectile function in men with, but not in men without, ED (Abraham-
son, Barlow, & Abrahamson, 1989).
Delayed Ejaculation
DE has been associated with many biological, psychosocial, and sexual factors. Bio-
logical causes consist of genetic factors, congenital anatomical factors (e.g., Wolffian
duct abnormalities), neurogenic causes (e.g., multiple sclerosis), infections/inflam-
mations (e.g., prostatitis), endocrine issues (e.g., hypogonadism), and medications
(e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]). Psychosocial and sexual factors
include the following: fear (e.g., of pregnancy, of loss of control, of intimacy), anxiety
(e.g., about performance), and an autosexual orientation (i.e., preference of masturba-
tion to partnered sexual activity), which may be related to idiosyncratic masturba-
tion habits that do not easily translate into penetrative partnered sexual activity. For
reviews, see Abdel-Hamid and Ali (2018) and Shin and Spitz (2014).
Premature (Early) Ejaculation
Potential explanations for PE include the following: genetics (that may play a role
in a sensitivity of the ejaculatory response), anxiety, faster reflexes involved in
ejaculation, prostatic inflammation/infection, sexual conditioning (e.g., masturbat-
ing quickly and efficiently, which then over time, sets up speedy ejaculation laten-
cies), low frequency of ejaculation (Donatucci, 2006), younger age, erectile disorder,
greater capacity for partial erection, greater prevalence of hyperthyroidism, and life
stressors such as relationship or work dissatisfaction (Corona et al., 2004, 2006).
Female Sexual Dysfunction
Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder
Persistent difficulties with sexual desire and/or arousal are the most frequent reasons
for seeking sex therapy (Doss, Simpson, & Christensen, 2004; Rosen, 2000). Accord-
ing to empirically supported theories, SIAD is a result of hypofunctional excitation,
hyperfunctional inhibition, or both (Bancroft, Graham, Janssen, & Sanders, 2009;
Bitzer, Giraldi, & Pfaus, 2013; Toates, 2009). These systems are sensitive to a large

-- 398 of 498 --

378 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
number of biomedical and psychosocial factors that can hinder or facilitate sexual
desire and arousal (Bancroft et al., 2009; Toates, 2009). These factors are typically
studied separately given that SIAD is multifactorial and complex.
Lower estrogen production in menopause has been linked to lower sexual desire
and arousal (Dennerstein, Koochaki, Barton, & Graziottin, 2006; Leiblum, Koochaki,
Rodenberg, Barton, & Rosen, 2006). Although testosterone is linked to higher solitary
desire (i.e., masturbation), it is unrelated to desire for a partner (van Anders, 2012).
Oral contraceptives reduce androgen levels, yet evidence is mixed regarding the
link between contraceptive use and reduced desire (Davison, Bell, LaChina, Holden,
& Davis, 2008; Meston & Stanton, 2017; Wallwiener et al., 2010). Finally, activation
and inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system is linked to physiological sexual
arousal (Meston & Gorzalka, 1996).
Although most studies on SIAD are cross-sectional and characterized by the use
of single-occasion, retrospective measurements, distal and proximal associated fac-
tors have been identified. Societal pressures such as culture and media representa-
tions (e.g., sex is shameful, men’s desires are of higher value) may contribute to SIAD
(Richgels, 1992; Woo, Brotto, & Gorzalka, 2012), though there has been little investi-
gation in clinical samples. Childhood victimization has adverse effects on internal
sexual scripts and later sexual function, including desire and arousal (Leonard &
Mullen, 2002; Rellini, 2008). Cognitive distraction, negative sexual attitudes, perfor-
mance anxiety, and body image concerns direct attention away from erotic cues and
can interfere with desire and arousal (Barlow, 1986; DePesa & Cassisi, 2017; Dove &
Weiderman, 2000; Graham et al., 2004; Nobre & Pinto-Gouveia, 2006; Wiedermann,
2000). Depressive symptoms and low self-esteem are also correlated with SIAD
(Dennerstein et al., 2006; Hartmann, Heiser, Rüffer-Hesse, & Kloth, 2002; Shifren,
Monz, Russo, Segreti, & Johannes, 2008). However, a romantic partner is generally
the focus of sexual desire in a relationship (Rosen, Dubé, Corsini-Munt, & Muise,
2019).
Studies of interpersonal correlates are rare and focus on broad, atheoretical fac-
tors such as relationship satisfaction, and tend to exclude the partner, not taking into
account the dyadic nature of sexual desire. In a qualitative study of married women,
feelings of overfamiliarity, institutionalization of the marriage, and desexualization
of roles in the relationship were common themes for explaining their low desire
(Sims & Meana, 2010). In the limited quantitative research, sexual difficulties in the
partner, poor sexual compatibility, and relationship dissatisfaction have been linked
to SIAD (Goldstein et al., 2005; Hayes et al., 2008; Witting et al., 2008). In an early con-
trolled study of 20 couples in which the woman self-reported clinically low sexual
desire, the clinical couples reported poorer dyadic adjustment, more conflict about
sex, and a more limited sexual repertoire than did control couples (Trudel, Aubin, &
Matte, 1995; Trudel, Boulos, & Matte, 1993). Although there is evidence that relational
factors better account for women’s low desire than do biomedical correlates such as
low testosterone (Brotto, Petkau, Labrie, & Basson, 2011; Guthrie, Dennerstein, Taffe,
Lehert, & Burger, 2004; Hayes et al., 2008), the scarcity of rigorous studies on the
biopsychosocial determinants of SIAD precludes the establishment of conclusions
regarding causality. Moreover, despite the hypothesized predominant role of rela-
tionship factors in women’s sexual desire and arousal, the literature is characterized
by a significant lack of knowledge concerning the diversity of women’s relationship

-- 399 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	379
configurations and how they may be associated with women’s sexual experiences.
Nevertheless, the limited evidence to date suggests that women in same-sex dyads
may report higher sexual desire (Holmberg & Blair, 2009).
Orgasmic Disorder
Given that the experience of orgasm requires sufficient levels of sexual arousal,
OD is also conceptualized as a result of hypofunctional excitation, hyperfunctional
inhibition, or both (Bancroft et al., 2009; Bitzer et al., 2013; Toates, 2009). Biomedical
precursors of OD generally involve illnesses that cause damage to blood vessels or
nerves, such as diabetes, hypertension, smoking, spinal cord injury, and pelvic sur-
gery for gynecological and rectal cancer—including radical hysterectomy, as well
urinary incontinence and pelvic floor dysfunction (Levin et al., 2016). Some medica-
tions may also lead to OD, such as certain classes of antidepressants, mood stabiliz-
ers, and antihypertensives. The presence of medical risk factors may not always be
associated, however, with the subjective experience of sexual distress.
Understanding the causes of OD is complicated by the difficulty in identifying
the source of stimulation and reliance on women’s self-report. Some women believe
that they reach orgasm through penile–vaginal intercourse, yet, in most cases, this
involves simultaneous stimulation of the clitoris. Lack of education concerning female
genital anatomy can further bias women’s self-reports. Another challenge lies in the
significant difference between the measurement of genital arousal and orgasm in the
laboratory versus sexual activity with a partner. In most laboratory-based studies, no
significant differences were found between women with arousal/orgasmic difficul-
ties and women without (Levin et al., 2016). Hence, apart from underlying medical
conditions, complaints of OD may stem from psychosocial factors.
Inadequate erotic stimulation during partnered sexual activity or negative
evaluations of the stimulus or context (i.e., relationship factors) are the most com-
mon causes of OD (Laan, van Driel, & van Lunsen, 2008). However, studies to date
have been cross-sectional, and none included the partner or conducted dyadic analy-
ses. Furthermore, none focused on OD alone, but rather involved samples of mixed
female sexual dysfunction. Notwithstanding these caveats, two population-based
studies showed that the major predictors of most distressing female sexual dysfunc-
tions were relationship dissatisfaction, partner sexual dysfunction, and perceived
partner sexual incompatibility (Witting et al., 2008). Intraindividual factors associ-
ated with other female sexual dysfunctions also play a role in OD: Anxiety, depres-
sion, cognitive distraction, body image/appreciation, and childhood victimization
may all alter women’s orgasm capacity.
Genito‑Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Genito-pelvic pain has traditionally been conceptualized in a dualistic fashion, as
resulting from either physical factors or psychological and sexual difficulties, despite
research and theorizing that suggest these two perspectives should be combined.
We have proposed an integrated model taking into account the interdependency of
biopsychosocial factors in GPPPD and its associated impairments (Bergeron, Rosen,
& Morin, 2011).

-- 400 of 498 --

380 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
GPPPD can result from underlying physical pathologies such as endometriosis,
interstitial cystitis, lichen sclerosus, and other genital infections (e.g., candidiasis,
herpes, bacterial vaginosis), as well as from events such as childbirth and menopause
(Bergeron et al., 2020). However, provoked vestibulodynia (PVD)—an acute recurrent
pain localized within the vulvar vestibule—is the most frequent cause of GPPPD in
premenopausal women (Harlow et al., 2009). Controlled studies point toward the
following biomedical risk factors for PVD: early puberty and pain with first tam-
pon use, inflammation, early use of oral contraceptives, nociceptor proliferation and
sensitization, lower touch and pain thresholds, and pelvic floor muscle dysfunction
(Pukall et al., 2016a). Psychosocial processes also play an important role in the onset
and maintenance of GPPPD.
Population-based studies indicate that childhood victimization is a major deter-
minant of GPPPD (Harlow & Stewart, 2005; Khandker, Brady, Stewart, & Harlow,
2014; Landry & Bergeron, 2011). Victimization may complicate women and partners’
adjustment to the sexual, psychological, and relationship repercussions of genito-
pelvic pain (Rosen & Bergeron, 2019). Anxiety and depression have been found to
be robust affective precursors, consequences, and maintenance factors in the expe-
rience of GPPPD (Khandker et al., 2014; Paquet et al., 2018). Cognitive factors are
also associated with greater pain intensity and sexual dysfunction, and include pain
catastrophizing, hypervigilance to pain, lower pain self-efficacy, negative attribu-
tions about the pain, perceived injustice, negative cognitions about penetration, pain
acceptance and self-compassion. Avoidance of pain and sexual activity is the core
behavioral factor that may exacerbate GPPPD (Bergeron, Corsini-Munt, Aerts, Ran-
court, & Rosen, 2015).
According to the interpersonal emotion regulation model of women’s sexual
dysfunction (Rosen & Bergeron, 2019), distal interpersonal factors that play a role in
GPPPD include intimacy, romantic attachment, ambivalence over emotional expres-
sion, and sexual communication. The most studied proximal factors are partner
responses to pain, which can be solicitous (e.g., expressions of attention and sympa-
thy), negative (e.g., expressions of hostility, frustration), and facilitative (e.g., affection
and encouragement of adaptive coping), with the two former associated with more
negative woman and partner outcomes and the latter, with positive outcomes. In
summary, psychosocial factors may inhibit or promote adjustment to GPPPD, with
subsequent implications for the affected couple.
Clinical Implications
Sexual dysfunctions can be highly comorbid with each other; therefore, in addition
to asking about a client’s primary complaint, all aspects of sexual response should
be comprehensively assessed. In addition, one’s current and preferred frequency of
sexual activity and level of sexual satisfaction and distress should be evaluated given
that not all difficulties with sexual dysfunction warrant a diagnosis. There are many
intraindividual variations over the life cycle, as well as couple variations over the
course of a long-term relationship, that are not problematic, as long as both partners
are comfortable with, and adapt relatively well to, these variations. Working with the
client(s) to prioritize the focus of treatment can be useful, and it can aid in establish-
ing rapport and motivation for the treatment plan.

-- 401 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	381
Proximal and distal cognitive, affective, and behavioral factors also require care-
ful consideration. Distal cognitive factors may include issues related to social pres-
sure, value discrepancies between partners (e.g., regarding type and frequency of
sexual activity), work dissatisfaction/stress, and cultural/religious sexuality-related
norms, whereas distal affective factors may involve childhood trauma and associated
difficulties with trust and intimacy, as well as an insecure attachment style (Rosen &
Bergeron, 2019). Mood and anxiety disorders should be ruled out and/or treated when
comorbid to the sexual dysfunction. The importance of these comorbidities in the
treatment plan will depend on their severity and the extent to which they interfere
with sexuality and the individual’s overall functioning. When possible, the sexual
dysfunction and mood disorder should be treated concomitantly, as they likely share
bidirectional influences, and improvement in one area should lead to improvement
in the other. Given that many sexual dysfunctions result in negative affect (e.g., guilt,
shame, and a sense of inadequacy), these are important to assess as well. Cognitive
attributions about the sexual dysfunction may worsen the condition and create more
psychological distress (Jodoin et al., 2011); in addition, performance anxiety, preoc-
cupation with body image, and catastrophic thoughts immediately before, during,
and after sexual activity can also result in similar outcomes. Behaviorally, a pattern
of avoidance is common, both in terms of engaging in sexual interactions with the
partner and of communicating about the sexual dysfunction and its impact.
Given that any sexual problem can take a toll on the relationship, and relation-
ship factors play a role in the experience of sexual dysfunction, the dyadic or sys-
temic context requires a thorough evaluation. This evaluation could focus on partner
responses to the pain in the case of GPPPD, and for all sexual dysfunctions, on inti-
macy, attachment, sexual communication, and emotion regulation patterns. Because
more and more research indicates that relationship factors modulate sexual dysfunc-
tion, including the partner in assessment may be considered (see also the “Clinical
Implications” segment of the “Associated Clinical Features”). Finally, questions about
chronic illnesses, past surgeries, and use of medication, in addition to drug and alco-
hol consumption, are a prerequisite to the establishment of any treatment plan.
Considering the inherent biopsychosocial nature of sexual dysfunctions,
working within a multidisciplinary team with a variety of health care providers is
important for the development of a comprehensive yet individualized approach to
treatment. In addition, a full medical examination by someone in the field of sexual
medicine can streamline psychologically oriented treatments; for example, finding
evidence of retrograde ejaculation (i.e., when the ejaculate travels into the bladder
instead of through the penis) upon urological assessment in someone with what
appears to be DE can shorten therapy to work on psychoeducation, options for fertil-
ity, and any associated distress. Such an examination is not mandatory, but is likely
a relevant first step in any client over 40 years of age, where health problems and
hormonal changes begin to arise.
Last, establishing a clear understanding of sexual dysfunction within an indi-
vidual’s and/or a couple’s life requires careful consideration of sociocultural and
demographic factors, such as age, race, sexual orientation, sex assigned at birth and
gender identity, religion, trauma history, and so forth, and remaining cognizant of
how each of these will affect sexual function, satisfaction, and distress in order to
deliver culturally, diversity, and trauma competent care.

-- 402 of 498 --

382 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
COURSE AND TREATMENT OUTCOME
A common pattern with respect to course is that the frequency of sexual problems
increases with age (McCabe et al., 2016). Both medical and psychological interven-
tions exist for the treatment of sexual dysfunctions, and a combination of the two has
been shown to be more successful than one type of treatment alone for ED (Melnik,
Soares, & Nasello, 2008; Schmidt, Munder, Gerger, Frühauf, & Barth, 2014); however,
although clinically common, research studies on combination treatments are infre-
quent. Below, we briefly review medical and psychological treatments. Note that
medical treatments tend to differ depending on the sexual dysfunction reviewed,
but psychological interventions tend to highlight similar techniques and skills.
Male Sexual Dysfunction
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Problems with sexual desire tend to increase with age in men (Angst et al., 2015) and
may be more likely in those who, for example, never marry, are widowed, are unem-
ployed, are retired, engage in low levels of physical activity, have lower testosterone
levels, and have hypertension (Martin et al., 2014).
Treatment for HSDD typically falls into two sometimes overlapping categories:
sex therapy and pharmacotherapy. Although sex therapy is a common treatment rec-
ommended for HSDD, there are no scientifically rigorous studies examining psycho-
therapy outcome for this condition. Regardless, critical components of sex therapy for
the treatment of HSDD in men include the following components: decreasing inhibi-
tory (e.g., distracting thoughts, performance anxiety) and increasing excitatory (e.g.,
sexual fantasies, focusing on pleasure) factors (Bancroft et al., 2009) via exercises such
as sensate focus (Linschoten, Weiner, & Avery-Clark, 2016); working on communica-
tion of experiences, feelings, and preferences; addressing body image and relation-
ship concerns; tackling sexual myths (e.g., “Men must always want and be ready for
sex”; “Men who refuse sex are not real men”); and increasing knowledge about sexual
techniques and pleasure/eroticism (Parish & Hahn, 2016). In contrast to the lack of rig-
orous studies in the sex therapy realm, there are numerous methodologically sound
studies of men with androgen deficiency who receive testosterone replacement that
document improvements in sexual function; however, sexual outcomes are uncertain
for those who are not hypogonadal (for a review, see Corona et al., 2014).
Erectile Disorder
For some men, the development of ED is temporary, whereas others—especially
those who are older, have higher body mass indices, and who smoke cigarettes—are
less likely to experience symptom remission (Travison et al., 2007, 2011).
The first-line option for treatment of ED is pharmacological, and within this
class, the phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors (Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013)
are considered to be the treatment of choice. These oral medications have excellent
efficacy and safety profiles, especially when the dose is titrated to the maximum
tolerated dose (Hatzimouratidis et al., 2016). The most common side effects include
headache, flushing, dyspepsia, and nasal congestion (Hatzimouratidis et al., 2016),

-- 403 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	383
and PDE5 inhibitors cannot be taken with certain other medications (e.g., nitrates)
due to potentially fatal drug interactions. Importantly, some form of sexual inter-
est/arousal is needed for the PDE5 inhibitors to work. Increases in sexual function
and satisfaction, as well as in multiple other psychosocial domains (e.g., mood, self-
esteem, quality of life), have been documented as treatment outcomes (reviewed in
Hatzimouratidis et al., 2016). However, although many men (74%) report that they are
willing to take these medications, only a small percentage (7%) do so (Mulhall, King,
Glina, & Hvidsten, 2008). In addition, research has demonstrated that 31% of men
discontinued PDE5 inhibitors after the first prescription and 48% discontinued after
3 years (Sato et al., 2007), perhaps due to reasons such as side effect profile, dissatis-
faction with treatment outcome, relationship problems, and loss of sexual interest.
Other pharmacological approaches for the treatment of ED include two second-
line treatment options: intracavernosal injections and transurethral therapy, which
lead to predictable erections in a brief period of time. In the former approach, those
with erectile disorder and/or their partners learn to inject single or combination for-
mulations of erectogenic drugs (e.g., alprostadil, papaverine) into the penis with a
small gauge needle. Erection occurs within 10 minutes and is independent of sex-
ual desire, and side effects include mild pain and priapism (Shamloul & Ghanem,
2013); however, multiple studies have shown that this type of treatment is effica-
cious and safe (for a review, see Belew, Klaassen, & Lewis, 2015). For example, in
terms of sexual outcomes, one 4-year study found that 93.1% of injections resulted in
rigid erections and satisfactory sexual intercourse (Porst, Buvat, Meuleman, Michal,
& Wagner, 1998), and an additional study reported improvements in participants’
sex lives, relationships, quality of life, and confidence in sexual intercourse attempts
(Alexandre, Lemaire, Desvaux, & Amar, 2007). Transurethral therapy consists of
the insertion of an erectogenic drug (usually alprostadil) in the form of a pellet into
the urethra with a small applicator. Side effects include penile and/or urethral pain,
syncope, and priapism (Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013). Studies have reported a rate of
49–66% for erections that are sufficient for intercourse and a rate of 64% for success-
ful intercourse, but other studies have reported much lower success rates (reviewed
in Hatzimouratidis & Hatzichristou, 2005).
Nonpharmacological approaches to the treatment of erectile disorder include
vacuum constrictive devices, penile prostheses, and sex and/or couple therapy. Vac-
uum constriction devices involve the application of negative pressure to the penis,
drawing blood into the penis which is retained by a band placed at the base of the
penis (Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013). Erections obtained with this method are not
based on physiological erection pathways (i.e., they are mechanical), and they may
be described as “cold” in terms of sensation (Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013). However,
the rate for obtaining erections that are sufficient for intercourse is as high as 90%,
and satisfaction rates range between 27 and 94% (reviewed in Hatzimouratidis and
Hatzichristou, 2005). Penile prostheses involve the surgical implantation of either a
semirigid or an inflatable prosthesis. This option is the last resort for treatment of
erectile disorder; it irreparably damages the internal tissue of the penis (Shamloul &
Ghanem, 2013). Complications can include urethral injuries, infections, and mechan-
ical malfunction (Bertero & Antunes, 2015); however, satisfaction rates for quality of
life and sexuality are high for patients and partners (Caraceni & Utizi, 2014).
Psychological intervention is often recommended for ED for three main reasons:
the lack of negative physical side effects, the reestablishment of sexual functioning,

-- 404 of 498 --

384 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
and the increase of sexual satisfaction beyond symptom reduction (Frühauf, Gerger,
Schmidt, Munder, & Barth, 2013). The meta-analysis examining the effectiveness
of psychological interventions for sexual dysfunctions indicated that effect sizes
varied from very small to large effect sizes, with the large effect sizes attributed to
interventions utilizing variants of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) (Frühauf et
al., 2013). One such study that compared 12 weeks of rational– emotive therapy to a
wait-list condition found that participants in the active treatment group reported sig-
nificantly more sexual intercourse attempts and higher numbers of successful inter-
course attempts, as well as lower sexual anxiety, than did the control group (Mun-
jack et al., 1984). The other study compared the effectiveness of an Internet-based
CBT intervention to a wait-list condition. Results indicated that those who received
the active treatment reported significantly greater improvements in erectile function
and relationship satisfaction and quality as compared to the control group (McCabe,
Price, Piterman, & Lording, 2008).
Delayed Ejaculation
There is little information on the course of DE; however, it seems to increase after the
age of 59 years (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Treatment for DE is usually medical if either acquired or lifelong and due to
congenital abnormalities (Shin & Spitz, 2014). For example, the etiology of acquired
DE that appears postsurgery needs to be identified and treated; in addition, some
medications can be used off-label to treat this condition (Abdel-Hamid & Ali, 2018;
Shin & Spitz, 2014). If lifelong and congenital abnormalities have been ruled out and
off-label medications are unsuccessful or declined, then psychological intervention
targeting multiple areas specific to the client (e.g., lack of sexual knowledge, fear of
getting a partner pregnant) can be useful. Sensate focus can help in reducing perfor-
mance anxiety and maximizing pleasure, masturbation retraining can be beneficial
in the translation of pleasurable stimulation to intercourse, and stimulation to the
point of ejaculatory inevitability and the shifting immediately to vaginal penetration
can be useful in cases in which pregnancy is desired (reviewed in Shin & Spitz, 2014).
Reducing the amount of masturbation is also recommended (Perelman & Rowland,
2006).
Premature (Early) Ejaculation
Contrary to most other sexual dysfunctions, PE tends to be more common early in
life and decreases with increasing age (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
The many medical treatments for PE include the following: topical local anes-
thetics (to diminish penile sensitivity), SSRIs (off-label, to take advantage of the com-
mon side effect of increasing ejaculatory latency time), tramadol, PDE5 inhibitors,
and alpha-adrenergic blockers (reviewed in McMahon, 2015). Some experts recom-
mend that all men presenting with PE receive psychological intervention (McMahon,
2015), which is based on supporting evidence in the research literature (Althof et al.,
2014). Psychological interventions include education to dispel myths around ejacu-
latory latency time, for example, and consist of strategies to increase latency time,
gain confidence in sexual performance, decrease performance anxiety, modify rigid

-- 405 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	385
sexual repertoires, increase intimacy, address maintaining factors in the relation-
ship, increase effective communication, and tackle thoughts and feelings that inter-
fere with sexual function (reviewed in McMahon, 2015).
Female Sexual Dysfunction
Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder
Although the prevalence of low sexual desire tends to increase with age, with a peak
during and after menopause, sexual distress decreases, such that SIAD is not signifi-
cantly more prevalent among older women (Parish & Hahn, 2016). Until very recently,
there were no medications for SIAD; hence, most women and couples took part in
psychological interventions. Two medications have now been approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Flibanserin, indicated for premenopausal women,
is a systemic medication that is taken nightly and cannot be combined with any
alcohol; bremelanotide, a subcutaneous injection that is self-administered prior to
engaging in sexual activity, was approved in June 2019, such that patterns of use are
not yet established. A pooled analysis of three randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
demonstrated that flibanserin improved sexual desire and reduced sexual distress
in premenopausal women relative to placebo (Simon, Thorp, & Millheiser, 2019).
Similar findings were reported for bremelanotide (Clayton et al., 2016). A review
comparing medical—including flibanserin and bremelanotide—and psychological
treatments for low desire concluded that their effect sizes were equivalent (Pyke &
Clayton, 2018).
A recent meta-analysis examining the efficacy of mostly CBT modalities for
sexual dysfunction compared to wait-list controls indicated a large effect size for
improving women’s low desire and no significant treatment effect on their sexual
satisfaction; that is, on average, CBT was not superior to a wait-list control in enhanc-
ing sexual satisfaction for women with SIAD (Frühauf et al., 2013). One meta-analysis
indicated that including the partner in CBT may yield better outcomes (Gunzler &
Berner, 2012), and another found that evidence supporting the efficacy of psycho-
logical interventions for female sexual dysfunctions was stronger for couple and
group formats than for individual therapy (Frühauf et al., 2013). Given the strong
relational and psychosocial components of female sexual dysfunction, tackling its
dyadic dimensions head on via sex and couple therapy may be more productive than
using individual modalities that conceptualize the dysfunction as residing solely
in the woman herself, independent of context. Group formats hold the additional
advantage of normalizing many concerns that woman may hold regarding their sex-
uality, including a sense of guilt, shame, and inadequacy. Mindfulness-based group
therapy, although not studied using an RCT methodology, appears promising, as it
resulted in significant improvements in sexual desire, satisfaction, and overall sexual
function relative to a wait-list control in women with SIAD (Brotto & Basson, 2014).
Orgasmic Disorder
Treatment strategies for difficulties with orgasm include education about women’s
sexual response and sexual anatomy, directed masturbation, sexual skills training,

-- 406 of 498 --

386 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
and sensate focus in order to generalize newly learned skills to partnered sexual
activity. Findings from a meta-analysis examining the efficacy of CBT sex therapy
interventions for sexual dysfunction compared to wait-list controls indicated a
medium effect size for improving women’s orgasmic capacity and a medium effect
size for enhancing their sexual satisfaction, suggesting that psychological interven-
tions are effective in helping women achieve orgasmic success, whether secondary
or primary (Frühauf et al., 2013).
Genito‑Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Epidemiological studies suggest that genito-pelvic pain is more prevalent among
women in their twenties (Mitchell et al., 2013), and that remission rates are relatively
high, independent of treatment (Davis, Bergeron, Binik, & Lambert, 2013). Women
with GPPPD typically consult their family physicians and often receive a first-line
medical treatment, which can include topical applications and oral medications, the
most common of which are topical lidocaine and tricyclic antidepressants. How-
ever, recent guidelines suggest a lack of evidence supporting their efficacy, and
point toward psychological interventions and pelvic floor physical therapy as the
best approach (Pukall et al., 2016b). Vestibulectomy (a surgical intervention recom-
mended for PVD only) may be recommended if these are unsuccessful.
CBT generally focuses on reducing pain, improving sexual function and well-
being, as well as relationship satisfaction, by targeting the cognitive, affective,
behavioral, and relationship factors associated with GPPPD. In two RCTs, group CBT
has been shown to be superior to a first-line topical application (Bergeron, Khalifé,
Dupuis, & McDuff, 2016) and equivalent to vestibulectomy in terms of the primary
outcome of pain during intercourse (Bergeron, Khalifé, Glazer, & Binik, 2008). In
another RCT, Masheb, Kerns, Lozano, Minkin, and Richman (2009) also found that
individual CBT resulted in significantly greater reductions in pain and improve-
ments in sexual function than supportive psychotherapy. Although not studied as
rigorously, couple therapy and mindfulness-based approaches appear promising
in reducing pain and sexual distress (Brotto, Basson, Smith, Driscoll, & Sadownik,
2015).
In their systematic review of the effectiveness of physical therapy for PVD,
Morin, Carroll, and Bergeron (2017) concluded that although the literature is plagued
with methodological shortcomings, multimodal physical therapy showed consistent
effectiveness across studies, with a significant improvement in pain in 71–80% of
women. Such physical therapy typically involves education about pain and PVD;
manual therapy techniques comprise vulvar desensitization and pelvic floor muscle
stretching, myofascial release, conjunctive tissue desensitization, neuromuscular
reeducation and massage techniques in order to increase flexibility and release pel-
vic floor muscle tensions, as well as reduce vulvovaginal sensitivity; and biofeedback
to improve muscle relaxation, control, strength, speed of contraction, and endurance
(Morin et al., 2016). Furthermore, the overall effectiveness of multimodal physical
therapy surpassed that of isolated modalities (e.g., biofeedback alone). Although less
commonly included as a main endpoint, sexual function also improved after physi-
cal therapy. To this effect, the combination of physical therapy and CBT as a first-line
intervention in a multidisciplinary approach to treatment is promising.

-- 407 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	387
Clinical Implications
Sexual dysfunctions are most often treated using second- and third-generation
CBTs, whether at individual, group or couple levels. Hypothesized mechanisms
of change and targets of intervention include (1) reconceptualizing sexuality as a
relational phenomenon whereby both members of a couple function as a team to
improve their sexual well-being, (2) facilitating intimacy (i.e., empathic response and
self-disclosure) in the relationship and securing the attachment bond, (3) reducing
sexuality-related anxiety and associated behavioral and experiential avoidance via
skills training and behavioral activation, (4) promoting communication of sexual
needs and preferences, and (5) fostering self-efficacy, as well as acceptance of, and
compassion toward, oneself and one’s partner.
The first phase of sex therapy focuses on establishing the therapeutic alliance
and setting realistic goals for treatment, working toward a multidimensional under-
standing of the biopsychosocial aspects of sexual difficulties, as well as using psy-
choeducation and exercises such as journaling to observe the thoughts, feelings,
behaviors, and couple interactions that may be linked to sexual dysfunction. This
step is crucial, as without a strong alliance, clients cannot embark on the risky jour-
ney of confronting their sexual fears and difficulties, and tolerating the vulnerability
inherent to this process. Adopting an attitude of positive regard, nonjudgment, and
curiosity can facilitate self-disclosure of the client toward not only the therapist but
also the partner or group in the case of couple and group therapy formats. More
than other psychological difficulties, sexual dysfunction as a presenting complaint
is fraught with feelings of shame and inadequacy as a sexual partner. As shame can
be a powerful barrier to openness and progress in therapy, it is important that clini-
cians foster acceptance and compassion in the therapeutic relationship. As a thera-
pist, being willing to examine one’s own values, issues, and negative affect such as
anxiety and shame around sexuality and intimacy may facilitate this work.
However, despite one’s best intentions to focus on sexual dysfunction symptom-
atology in psychotherapy, the treatment of sexual dysfunction is complex and non-
linear. For example, some clients and their partners present with significant relation-
ship difficulties; these should be addressed in couple therapy, especially since they
may interfere with ongoing treatment, such as when a partner sabotages the client’s
efforts at improving their dysfunction, or exhibits angry and critical remarks on a
regular basis. In an ideal world, this can be done by the therapist already treating the
client’s sexual difficulties, especially since there are likely bidirectional associations
between the relationship conflict and the sexual problem.
At other times, clients could present with more than one sexual dysfunction,
such as a combination of GPPPD and SIAD, or ED and PE, which is common but more
challenging to treat. Another frequent caveat in cognitive-behavioral approaches is
patients’ refusal to comply with homework assignments. This presentation is often
related to fear and avoidance, and as such needs to be worked on in therapy but
never in a blaming fashion. The therapist can take responsibility for the homework
not working out and explore with the patient in a nonjudgmental, open, and curious
manner the reasons they did not do, or did not fully complete, the homework. Expe-
riential avoidance processed directly in the here and now of the therapy session may
pave the way for more successful homework completion in the future. Last, given

-- 408 of 498 --

388 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
that sexual dysfunctions are biopsychosocial phenomena and there exists a plethora
of medical options available to clients, resistance to psychological approaches is com-
mon, as it may be easier at times for them to attribute sexual difficulties to a medical
issue rather than to engage in the challenging work of confronting their fears and
changing their behaviors and relationships. Hence, moving too quickly in sharing
our psychosocial understanding of the clients’ sexual difficulties may lead to set-
backs and alliance ruptures. Importantly, therapists are not immune to espousing
dichotomic views of sexual problems and must also work hard to hold the complex-
ity of clients’ issues without giving in to simplistic, unidimensional conceptualiza-
tions that could lead them to believe that they either have all the answers, in cases
where there is an obvious psychosocial antecedent (e.g., a history of sexual trauma),
or none at all, in cases where medical evidence supports a clear involvement of bio-
logical factors (e.g., diabetes). The truth is that most sexual difficulties involve a com-
plex combination of biomedical and psychosocial precursors and maintenance fac-
tors, that can render sex and couple therapy a delicate balancing act requiring equal
attention to therapeutic relationship factors and to empirically supported interven-
tion strategies.
COMORBIDITIES
Sexual dysfunctions are highly comorbid with other mental health and medically
relevant conditions. Mood disorders are especially common in those with sexual
dysfunctions. In men, depression was associated with increased risk of ED in a Brit-
ish population study (Polland, Davis, Zeymo, & Venkatesan, 2018). In women, a
population-based study showed that anxiety and depression were both antecedent
and consequent to GPPPD related to vulvodynia (i.e., chronic vulvar pain) (Khandker
et al., 2011). Furthermore, up to 45% of women with GPPPD report a comorbid pain
condition, and having this comorbidity is associated with increased risk of worse
overall health, sleep, pain interference, physical pain, depression, and posttraumatic
stress disorder (Reed, Plegue, Williams, & Sen, 2016). Male partners of women with
GPPPD report increased rates of psychological distress, erectile dysfunction, and
decreased sexual satisfaction (Smith & Pukall, 2014).
Relative to healthy controls, women with SIAD report more depressive symp-
toms and anxiety and lower relationship satisfaction (Parish & Hahn, 2016; Rosen et
al., 2019; Sarin, Amsel, & Binik, 2016). These symptoms can be subclinical or a full-
blown mood or anxiety disorder. Partners of women with SIAD experience more
erectile difficulties, higher sexual distress, and lower sexual and relationship satis-
faction, compared to partners of women without sexual dysfunction (Rosen et al.,
2019). In addition, female partners of men with PE report more sexual dysfunction
and more anxiety as compared with female partners of men without PE (Verze et
al., 2018). Other potential comorbid mental health issues for female sexual dysfunc-
tions include posttraumatic stress disorder following childhood trauma/victimiza-
tion, revictimization in the form of psychological, sexual, and/or physical intimate
partner violence during adolescence and adulthood, and substance abuse.
Sexual dysfunction in men can also be negatively impacted by adherence to mal-
adaptive beliefs surrounding sexual performance, such as “men must maintain an

-- 409 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	389
erection at 100% rigidity throughout sex” (Nobre & Pinto-Gouveia, 2000). Indeed,
concerns about performance have been shown to be more common in men as com-
pared with women (Nelson & Purdon, 2011). A community sample study found that
men who experience more negative thoughts related to their sexual performance have
higher rates of psychological distress and sexual difficulties (Nelson & Purdon, 2011).
Furthermore, gay men appear to experience significantly more negative thoughts
related to their sexual performance, fears related to sexually transmitted infections,
and body image concerns relative to heterosexual men (Lacefield & Negy, 2012).
Clinical Implications
When psychological distress reaches clinical levels, this aspect of the patient’s pre-
sentation becomes more central. At this point, mental health professionals may need
to move beyond sexuality-focused psychotherapy. Clients with a preexisting or con-
sequent mood or anxiety disorder could require more intensive psychotherapy. They
may need additional psychological support and/or psychotherapy targeting their
mood or anxiety disorder directly, such as empirically validated therapies or anti-
depressant and/or anxiolytic medication. In this case, the therapist would scale back
the work on sexuality issues, at least temporarily. Depending on the severity of the
comorbidity, broad multitarget interventions that aim to improve mood as well as
sexual responsiveness, such as third-wave, acceptance-based approaches, may also
be helpful. Sexual dysfunctions are sometimes the point of entry to obtain treatment
for other disorders, such that complex cases are common, even in this specialized
area of clinical practice.
Another comorbidity that may be brought to the forefront of therapy is child-
hood and adolescent victimization, with or without posttraumatic stress symptoms.
It can become the focus of treatment if briefer interventions targeting the here and
now of the sexual dysfunction are ineffective, the clinician believes victimization is
playing a role in the client’s difficulties, and the client is ready to attend to this aspect
of the past more directly. Two lines of caution are warranted: (1) The mental health
professional needs to have sufficient experience and training in trauma-informed
psychotherapy and (2) childhood victimization must never be presented as the sole
cause of sexual difficulties given the multifactorial etiologies of sexual dysfunctions.
Focusing on victimization to the exclusion of other potential exacerbating factors
could prolong treatment unnecessarily and be less helpful.
In men with sexual dysfunction, assessing beliefs and adherence to strict models
of sexuality that focus on performance is key to providing areas of focus for therapy.
In addition, treating the couple, if appropriate, is warranted given that sexual dys-
function is experienced within a dynamic system that can influence, and be influ-
enced by, the other partner(s).
CONCLUSION
Sexuality is an integral part of one’s overall health and well-being, and it should
be assessed routinely in those who present with psychological and/or physical
complaints. Questions about the main sexual complaint, as well as other aspects of

-- 410 of 498 --

390 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
sexual function, should be asked, and appropriate referrals should be made, keep-
ing in mind the biopsychosocial and sociocultural underpinnings of sexual difficul-
ties. Assessment and treatment conducted by such referrals should focus on issues
related to distal contributing factors, for instance, child maltreatment, which may
pave the way for difficulties with sexuality and intimate relationships via more prox-
imal factors such as less adaptive thoughts, emotion regulation, and behaviors, as
they influence the experience of sexual desire, arousal, orgasm, and painful sex in
unique and varied interpersonal and sociocultural contexts. These distal and proxi-
mal factors will also shape how clients adjust to the medically based—and some-
times chronic—aspects of sexual dysfunctions and their treatment. The course of
treatment will often involve a multimodal approach targeting the different compo-
nents of the sexual dysfunction and require working with other health professionals,
such as a physician and physical therapist, with a tolerance for a multiplicity of views
and careful attention to the therapeutic alliance.
Relationship factors are an integral part of sexuality, and in many cases will
likely require specific attention via relationship therapy, or relationship-based sex
therapy. However, research in this area has only just begun, and the existing stud-
ies are methodologically limited. Although relationship factors are known to play
a role in sexual dysfunctions, the majority of treatment studies to date have not
included the partner. Furthermore, many have involved relatively short-term treat-
ment durations—from 8 to 12 weeks—that may not be sufficient to see significant
improvements in sexual satisfaction. In addition, most follow-up periods were rela-
tively short, such that the long-term effects of psychological interventions for sexual
dysfunctions were not documented. Considering the high prevalence of sexual dys-
functions, there are not enough state-of-the-art RCTs evaluating the efficacy of psy-
chological interventions in their treatment. Also, despite the fact that many individu-
als presenting with sexual dysfunctions and their partners will take part in different
models of psychotherapy, such as emotion-focused relationship therapy and psy-
chodynamic therapies, and have at least one comorbid condition, most studies have
evaluated individual and group CBT in relatively homogeneous groups of patients.
This attests to the large gap between science and practice in the field of sexual dys-
function. Finally, there remains an urgent need to better understand sexual dysfunc-
tion in the context of the individual more broadly. More research is needed among
samples that account for cultural, sexual, and gender diversity, as the lack thereof
impacts our ability to offer culturally competent and inclusive clinical care.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Hamid, I. A., & Ali, O. I. (2018). Delayed ejaculation: Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
treatment. World Journal of Men’s Health, 36(1), 22–40.
Abrahamson, D. J., Barlow, D. H., & Abrahamson, L. S. (1989). Differential effects of perfor-
mance demand and distraction on sexually functional and dysfunctional males. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 241–247.
Alexandre, B., Lemaire, A., Desvaux, P., & Amar, E. (2007). Intracavernous injections of pros-
taglandin E1 for erectile dysfunction: Patient satisfaction and quality of sex life on long-
term treatment. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 4(2), 426–431.

-- 411 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	391
Althof, S. E., McMahon, C. G., Waldinger, M. D., Serefoglu, E. C., Shindel, A. W., Adaikan, P.
G., . . . Torres, L. O. (2014). An update of the International Society of Sexual Medicine’s
guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of premature ejaculation (PE). Sexual Medi-
cine, 2(2), 60–90.
Althof, S. E., Meston, C. M., Perelman, M. A., Handy, A. B., Kilimnik, C. D., & Stanton, A.
M. (2017). Opinion paper: On the diagnosis/classification of sexual arousal concerns in
women. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 14(11), 1365–1371.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Angst, J., Hengartner, M. P., Rossler, W., Ajdacic-Gross, V., & Leeners, B. (2015). A Swiss lon-
gitudinal study of the prevalence of, and overlap between, sexual problems in men and
women aged 20 to 50 years old. Journal of Sex Research, 52(8), 949–959.
Bancroft, J., Graham, C. A., Janssen, E., & Sanders, S. A. (2009). The dual control model: Cur-
rent status and future directions. Journal of Sex Research, 46(2–3), 121–142.
Barlow, D. H. (1986). Causes of sexual dysfunction: The role of anxiety and cognitive interfer-
ence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 140–148.
Belew, D., Klaassen, Z., & Lewis, R. W. (2015). Intracavernosal injection for the diagnosis,
evaluation, and treatment of erectile dysfunction: A review. Sexual Medicine Reviews, 3(1),
11–23.
Bergeron, S., Corsini-Munt, S., Aerts, L., Rancourt, K., & Rosen, N. O. (2015). Female sexual
pain disorders: A review of the literature on etiology and treatment. Current Sexual
Health Reports, 7, 159–169.
Bergeron, S., Khalifé, S., Dupuis, M.-J., & McDuff, P. (2016). A randomized clinical trial com-
paring group cognitive-behavioral therapy and a topical steroid for women with dyspa-
reunia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 84, 259–268.
Bergeron, S., Khalifé, S., Glazer, H. I., & Binik, Y. M. (2008). Surgical and behavioral treatments
for vestibulodynia: Two-and-one-half year follow-up and predictors of outcome. Obstet-
rics and Gynecology, 111(1), 159–166.
Bergeron, S., Rosen, N. O., & Morin, M. (2011). Genital pain in women: Beyond interference
with intercourse. Pain, 152(6), 1223–1225.
Bergeron, S., Rosen, N. O., Pukall, C. P., & Corsini-Munt, S. (2020). Genital pain in women
and men. In K. Hall & Y. M. Binik (Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy (6th ed.,
pp. 180–201). New York: Guilford Press.
Bertero, E. B., & Antunes, D. L. (2015). Surgical treatment of erectile dysfunction. Sexual Medi-
cine Reviews, 3(4), 316–327.
Bitzer, J., Giraldi, A., & Pfaus, J. (2013). Sexual desire and hypoactive sexual desire disorder in
women: Introduction and overview: Standard Operating Procedure (SOP Part 1). Journal
of Sexual Medicine, 10, 36–49.
Brotto, L. A. (2010). The DSM diagnostic criteria for hypoactive sexual desire disorder in
women. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 221–239.
Brotto, L. A., Atallah, S., Johnson-Agbakwu, C., Rosenbaum, T., Abdo, C., Byers, E. S., . . .
Wylie, K. (2016). Psychological and interpersonal dimensions of sexual function and dys-
function. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 13, 538–571.
Brotto, L. A., & Basson, R. (2014). Group mindfulness-based therapy significantly improves
sexual desire in women. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 57, 43–54.
Brotto, L. A., Basson, R., Smith, K. B., Driscoll, M., & Sadownik, L. (2015). Mindfulness-based
group therapy for women with provoked vestibulodynia. Mindfulness, 6(3), 417–432.
Brotto, L. A., Petkau, A. J., Labrie, F., & Basson, R. (2011). Predictors of sexual desire disorders
in women. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 8, 742–753.
Caraceni, E., & Utizi, L. (2014). A questionnaire for the evaluation of quality of life after penile

-- 412 of 498 --

392 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
prosthesis implant: Quality of life and sexuality with penile prosthesis (QoLSPP): To
what extent does the implant affect the patient’s life? Journal of Sexual Medicine, 11(4),
1005–1012.
Carvalho, J., & Nobre, P. (2011). Predictors of men’s sexual desire: The role of psychological,
cognitive– emotional, relational, and medical factors. Journal of Sex Research, 48(2–3), 254–
262.
Clayton, A. H., Althof, S. E., Kingsberg, S., DeRogatis, L. R., Kroll, R., Goldstein, I., . . . Port-
man, D. J. (2016). Bremelanotide for female sexual dysfunctions in premenopausal
women: A randomized, placebo-controlled dose-finding trial. Womens Health (London),
12(3), 325–337.
Corona, G., Isidori, A. M., Aversa, A., Burnett, A. L., & Maggi, M. (2016). Endocrinologic con-
trol of men’s sexual desire and arousal/erection. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 13(3), 317–337.
Corona, G., Isidori, A. M., Buvat, J., Aversa, A., Rastrelli, G., Hackett, G., . . . Maggi, M. (2014).
Testosterone supplementation and sexual function: A meta-analysis study. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 11(6), 1577–1592.
Corona, G., Mannucci, E., Petrone, L., Ricca, V., Balercia, G., Giommi, R., . . . Maggi, M. (2006).
Psycho-biological correlates of free-floating anxiety symptoms in male patients with
sexual dysfunctions. Journal of Andrology, 27(1), 86–93.
Corona, G., Petrone, L., Mannucci, E., Jannini, E. A., Mansani, R., Magini, A., . . . Maggi, M.
(2004). Psycho-biological correlates of rapid ejaculation in patients attending an andro-
logic unit for sexual dysfunctions. European Urology, 46(5), 615–622.
Davis, S., Bergeron, S., Binik, Y. M., & Lambert, B. (2013). Women with provoked vestibu-
lodynia experience clinically significant reductions in pain regardless of treatment:
Results from a 2-year follow-up study. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 10, 3080–3087.
Davison, S. L., Bell, R. J., LaChina, M., Holden, S. L., & Davis, S. R. (2008). Sexual function in
well women: Stratification by sexual satisfaction, hormone use, and menopause status.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5, 1214–1222.
Dennerstein, L., Koochaki, P. E., Barton, I. P., & Graziottin, A. (2006). Hypoactive sexual desire
disorder in menopausal women: A survey of Western European women. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 3, 212–222.
DePesa, N. S., & Cassisi, J. E. (2017). Affective and autonomic responses to erotic images: Evi-
dence of disgust-based mechanisms in female sexual interest/arousal disorder. Journal of
Sex Research, 54, 877–886.
Donatucci, C. F. (2006). Etiology of ejaculation and pathophysiology of premature ejaculation.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 3(Suppl. 4), 303–308.
Dosch, A., Rochat, L., Ghisletta, P., Favez, N., & Van der Linden, M. (2016). Psychological fac-
tors involved in sexual desire, sexual activity, and sexual satisfaction: A multi-factorial
perspective. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 45(8), 2029–2045.
Doss, B. D., Simpson, L. E., & Christensen, A. (2004). Why do couples seek marital therapy?
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 35, 608–614.
Dove, N. L., & Weiderman, M. W. (2000). Cognitive distraction and women’s sexual function-
ing. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, 26, 67–78.
Frühauf, S., Gerger, H., Schmidt, H. M., Munder, T., & Barth, J. (2013). Efficacy of psychological
interventions for sexual dysfunction: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 42(6), 915–933.
Goldstein, I., Fisher, W. A., Sand, M., Rosen, R. C., Mollen, M., Brock, G., . . . Vardenafil Study
Group. (2005). Women’s sexual function improves when partners are administered
vardenafil for erectile dysfunction: A prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 2, 819–832.
Graham, C. A., Sanders, S. A., Milhausen, R. R., & McBride, K. R. (2004). Turning on and

-- 413 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	393
turning off: A focus group study of the factors that affect women’s sexual arousal.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33, 527–538.
Gunzler, C., & Berner, M. M. (2012). Efficacy of psychosocial interventions in men and women
with sexual dysfunctions—A systematic review of controlled clinical trials: Part 2—The
efficacy of psychosocial interventions for female sexual dysfunction. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 9(12), 3108–3125.
Guthrie, J. R., Dennerstein, L., Taffe, J. R., Lehert, P., & Burger, H. G. (2004). The menopausal
transition: A 9-year prospective population-based study: The Melbourne Women’s
Midlife Health Project. Climacteric, 7, 375–389.
Hall, K. S. K., & Graham, C. A. (2013). The cultural context of sexual pleasure and problems: Psycho-
therapy with diverse clients. New York: Routledge.
Harlow, B. L., & Stewart, E. G. (2005). Adult-onset vulvodynia in relation to childhood vio-
lence victimization. American Journal of Epidemiology, 161(9), 871–880.
Harlow, B. L., Vazquez, G., Maclehose, R. F., Erickson, D. J., Oakes, M., & Duval, S. J. (2009).
Self-reported vulvar pain characteristics and their association with clinically confirmed
vestibulodynia. Journal of Women’s Health, 18, 1333–1340.
Hartmann, U., Heiser, C., Rüffer-Hesse, G., & Kloth, G. (2002). Female sexual desire disorders:
Subtypes, classification, personality factors and new directions for treatment. World
Journal of Urology, 20, 79–88.
Hatzimouratidis, K., & Hatzichristou, D. G. (2005). A comparative review of the options for
treatment of erectile dysfunction: Which treatment for which patient? Drugs, 65(12),
1621–1650.
Hatzimouratidis, K., Salonia, A., Adaikan, G., Buvat, J., Carrier, S., El-Meliegy, A., . . . Khera,
M. (2016). Pharmacotherapy for erectile dysfunction: Recommendations from the fourth
International Consultation for Sexual Medicine (ICSM 2015). Journal of Sexual Medicine,
13(4), 465–488.
Hayes, R. D., Dennerstein, L., Bennett, C. M., Sidat, M., Gurrin, L. C., & Fairley, C. K. (2008).
Risk factors for female sexual dysfunction in the general population: Exploring factors
associated with low sexual function and sexual distress. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5,
1681–1693.
Holmberg, D., & Blair, K. L. (2009). Sexual desire, communication, satisfaction, and prefer-
ences of men and women in same-sex versus mixed-sex relationships. Journal of Sex
Research, 46(1), 57–66.
Jodoin, M., Bergeron, S., Khalifé, S., Dupuis, M. J., Desrochers, G., & Leclerc, B. (2011). Attri-
butions about pain as predictors of psychological symptomatology, sexual function,
and dyadic adjustment in women with vestibulodynia. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40(1),
87–97.
Kafka, M. P. (2014). What happened to hypersexual disorder? Archives of Sexual Behavior, 43,
1259–1261.
Khandker, M., Brady, S. S., Stewart, E. G., & Harlow, B. L. (2014). Is chronic stress during child-
hood associated with adult-onset vulvodynia? Journal of Women’s Health, 23(8), 649–656.
Khandker, M., Brady, S. S., Vitonis, A. F., Maclehose, R. F., Stewart, E. G., & Harlow, B. L. (2011).
The influence of depression and anxiety on risk of adult onset vulvodynia. Journal of
Women’s Health, 20(10), 1445–1451.
Kirby, M. (2015). The circle of lifestyle and erectile dysfunction. Sexual Medicine Reviews, 3(3),
169–182.
Laan, E., van Driel, E. M., & van Lunsen, R. H. (2008). Genital responsiveness in healthy women
with and without sexual arousal disorder. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5(6), 1424–1435.
Lacefield, K., & Negy, C. (2012). Non-erotic cognitive distractions during sexual activity in
sexual minority and heterosexual young adults. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41(2), 391–400.

-- 414 of 498 --

394 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Landry, T., & Bergeron, S. (2011). Biopsychosocial factors associated with dyspareunia in a
community sample of adolescent girls. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40(5), 877–889.
Latini, D. M., Penson, D. F., Wallace, K. L., Lubeck, D. P., & Lue, T. F. (2006). Clinical and psy-
chosocial characteristics of men with erectile dysfunction: Baseline data from ExCEED.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 3(6), 1059–1067.
Laumann, E. O., & Gagnon, J. H. (1995). A sociological perspective on sexual action. In R. G.
Parker & J. H. Gagnon (Eds.), Conceiving sexuality: Approaches to sex research in a postmodern
world (pp. 183–213). New York: Routledge.
Laumann, E. O., Paik, A., & Rosen, R. C. (1999). Sexual dysfunction in the United States: Preva-
lence and predictors. Journal of the American Medical Association, 281(6), 537–544.
Leiblum, S. R., Koochaki, P. E., Rodenberg, C. A., Barton, I. P., & Rosen, R. C. (2006). Hypoac-
tive sexual desire disorder in postmenopausal women: US results from the Women’s
International Study of Health and Sexuality (WISHeS). Menopause, 13, 46–56.
Leonard, L. M., & Mullen, P. E. (2002). Sexual functioning in women reporting a history of
child sexual abuse: Review of the empirical literature and clinical implications. Annual
Review of Sex Research, 13, 346–387.
Levin, R. J., Both, S., Georgiadis, J., Kukkonen, T., Park, K., & Yang, C. C. (2016). The physiology
of female sexual function and the pathophysiology of female sexual dysfunction (Com-
mittee 13A). Journal of Sexual Medicine, 13(5), 733–759.
Levine, S. B. (2003). The nature of sexual desire: A clinician’s perspective. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 32(3), 279–285.
Linschoten, M., Weiner, L., & Avery-Clark, C. (2016). Sensate focus: A critical literature review.
Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 31(2), 230–247.
Martin, S. A., Atlantis, E., Lange, K., Taylor, A. W., O’Loughlin, P., Wittert, G. A., & Florey Ade-
laide Male Ageing Study. (2014). Predictors of sexual dysfunction incidence and remis-
sion in men. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 11(5), 1136–1147.
Masheb, R. M., Kerns, R. D., Lozano, C., Minkin, M. J., & Richman, S. (2009). A randomized
clinical trial for women with vulvodynia: Cognitive-behavioral therapy vs. supportive
therapy. Pain, 141(1–2), 31–40.
McCabe, M. P., Price, E., Piterman, L., & Lording, D. (2008). Evaluation of an internet-based
psychological intervention for the treatment of erectile dysfunction. International Journal
of Impotence Research, 20(3), 324–330.
McCabe, M. P., Sharlip, I. D., Lewis, R., Atalla, E., Balon, R., Fisher, A. D., . . . Segraves, R. T.
(2016). Incidence and prevalence of sexual dysfunction in women and men: A consensus
statement from the fourth International Consultation on Sexual Medicine 2015. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 13(2), 144–152.
McMahon, C. G. (2015). Current and emerging treatments for premature ejaculation. Sexual
Medicine Reviews, 3(3), 183–202.
Meana, M., Binik, Y. M., & Thaler, L. (2008). Sexual dysfunction. In J. Hunsley & E. J. Mash
(Eds.), A guide to assessments that work (pp. 464–487. New York: Oxford University Press.
Melnik, T., Soares, B. G., & Nasello, A. G. (2008). The effectiveness of psychological inter-
ventions for the treatment of erectile dysfunction: Systematic review and meta-analysis,
including comparisons to sildenafil treatment, intracavernosal injection, and vacuum
devices. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5(11), 2562–2574.
Meston, C. M., & Gorzalka, B. B. (1996). Differential effects of sympathetic activation of sexual
arousal in sexually dysfunctional and functional women. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
105, 582–591.
Meston, C. M., & Stanton, A. M. (2017). Evaluation of female sexual interest/arousal disorder.
In W. W. Ishak (Ed.), The textbook of clinical sexual medicine (pp. 155–163). Cham, Switzer-
land: Springer International.
Mitchell, K. R., Mercer, C. H., Ploubidis, G. B., Jones, K. G., Datta, J., Field, N., . . . Wellings,

-- 415 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	395
K. (2013). Sexual function in Britain: Findings from the third National Survey of Sexual
Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3). Lancet, 382, 1817–1829.
Morgentaler, A., Polzer, P., Althof, S., Bolyakov, A., Donatucci, C., Ni, X., . . . Basaria, S. (2017).
Delayed ejaculation and associated complaints: Relationship to ejaculation times and
serum testosterone levels. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 14(9), 1116–1124.
Morin, M., Carroll, M. S., & Bergeron, S. (2017). Systematic review of the effectiveness of physi-
cal therapy modalities in women with provoked vestibulodynia. Sexual Medicine Reviews,
5(3), 295–322.
Morin, M., Dumoulin, C., Bergeron, S., Mayrand, M.-H., Khalifé, S., Waddell, G., . . . Provoked
Vestibulodynia Study Group. (2016). Randomized clinical trial of multimodal physio-
therapy treatment compared to overnight lidocaine ointment in women with provoked
vestibulodynia: Design and methods. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 46, 52–59.
Mulhall, J., King, R., Glina, S., & Hvidsten, K. (2008). Importance of and satisfaction with sex
among men and women worldwide: Results of the global better sex survey. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 5(4), 788–795.
Munjack, D. J., Schlaks, A., Sanchez, V. C., Usigli, R., Zulueta, A., & Leonard, M. (1984).
Rational-emotive therapy in the treatment of erectile failure: An initial study. Journal of
Sex and Marital Therapy, 10(3), 170–175.
Murray, S. H., Milhausen, R. R., Graham, C. A., & Kuczynski, L. (2017). A qualitative explora-
tion of factors that affect sexual desire among men aged 30 to 65 in long-term relation-
ships. Journal of Sex Research, 54(3), 319–330.
Nelson, A. L., & Purdon, C. (2011). Non-erotic thoughts, attentional focus, and sexual prob-
lems in a community sample. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40(2), 395–406.
Nguyen, H. M. T., Gabrielson, A. T., & Hellstrom, W. J. G. (2017). Erectile dysfunction in young
men—A review of the prevalence and risk factors. Sexual Medicine Reviews, 5(4), 508–520.
Nimbi, F. M., Tripodi, F., Rossi, R., Navarro-Cremades, F., & Simonelli, C. (2020). Male sexual
desire: An overview of biological, psychological, sexual, relational, and cultural factors
influencing desire. Sexual Medicine Reviews, 8(1), 59–91.
Nimbi, F. M., Tripodi, F., Rossi, R., & Simonelli, C. (2018). Expanding the analysis of psychoso-
cial factors of sexual desire in men. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 15(2), 230–244.
Nobre, P., & Pinto-Gouveia, J. (2000). Erectile dysfunction: An empirical approach based on
Beck’s cognitive theory. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 15(4), 351–366.
Nobre, P., & Pinto-Gouveia, J. (2006). Dysfunctional sexual beliefs as vulnerability factors to
sexual dysfunction. Journal of Sex Research, 43, 68–75.
O’Connor, S. R., Connaghan, J., Maguire, R., Kotronoulas G., Flannagan, C., Jain, S., Brady, N.,
& McCaughan, E. (2019). Patient Education and Counseling, 102, 850–863.
O’Loughlin, J. I., Basson, R., & Brotto, L. A. (2018). Women with hypoactive sexual desire dis-
order versus sexual interest/arousal disorder: An empirical test of raising the bar. Journal
of Sex Research, 55, 734–746.
Paquet, M., Rosen, N. O., Steben, M., Mayrand, M.-H., Santerre-Baillargeon, M., & Bergeron,
S. (2018). Daily anxiety and depressive symptoms in couples coping with vulvodynia:
Associations with women’s pain, women’s sexual function, and both partners sexual
distress. Journal of Pain, 19, 552–561.
Parish, S. J., & Hahn, S. R. (2016). Hypoactive sexual desire disorder: A review of epidemiol-
ogy, biopsychology, diagnosis, and treatment. Sexual Medicine Reviews, 4, 103–120.
Perelman, M. A., & Rowland, D. L. (2006). Retarded ejaculation. World Journal of Urology, 24(6),
645–652.
Polland, A., Davis, M., Zeymo, A., & Venkatesan, K. (2018). Comparison of correlated comor-
bidities in male and female sexual dysfunction: Findings from the third National Survey
of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3). Journal of Sexual Medicine, 15(5), 678–686.
Porst, H., Buvat, J., Meuleman, E., Michal, V., & Wagner, G. (1998). Intracavernous Alprostadil

-- 416 of 498 --

396 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Alfadex—An effective and well tolerated treatment for erectile dysfunction. Results of a
long-term European study. International Journal of Impotence Research, 10(4), 225–231.
Pukall, C. F., Eccles, T., & Gauvin, S. (2019). Sexual dysfunctions, gender dysphoria, and para-
philic disorders. In D. L. Segal (Ed.), Diagnostic interviewing (5th ed., pp. 349–373). New
York: Springer.
Pukall, C. F., Goldstein, A. T., Bergeron, S., Foster, D., Stein, A., Kellogg-Spadt, S., & Bachmann,
G. (2016a). Vulvodynia: Definition, prevalence, impact, and pathophysiological factors.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 13(3), 291–304.
Pukall, C. F., Goldstein, A. T., Bergeron, S., Foster, D., Stein, A., Kellogg-Spadt, S., . . . Damsted
Petersen, C. (2016b). Women’s sexual pain disorders. Presented at the 4th International Con-
sultation on Sexual Medicine (ICSM), Madrid, Spain.
Pyke, R. E., & Clayton, A. H. (2018). Effect size in efficacy trials of women with decreased
sexual desire. Sexual Medicine Reviews, 6(3), 358–366.
Reed, B. D., Plegue, M. A., Williams, D. A., & Sen, A. (2016). Presence of spontaneous pain and
comorbid pain conditions identifies vulvodynia subgroups. Journal of Lower Genital Tract
Disease, 20(1), 57–63.
Reese, J. B., Sorice, K., Beach, M. C., Porter, L. S., Tulsky, J. A., Daly, M. B., & Lepore S. J. (2017).
Patient–provider communication about sexual concerns in cancer: A systematic review.
Journal of Cancer Survivorship, 11, 175–188.
Rellini, A. H. (2008). Review of the empirical evidence for a theoretical model to understand
the sexual problems of women with a history of childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 5, 31–46.
Richgels, P. B. (1992). Hypoactive sexual desire in heterosexual women: A feminist analysist.
Women & Therapy, 12, 123–135.
Ridley, C. A., Cate, R. M., Collins, D. M., Reesing, A. L., Lucero, A. A., Gilson, M. S., & Almeida,
D. M. (2006). The ebb and flow of marital lust: A relational approach. Journal of Sex
Research, 43(2), 144–153.
Rosen, N. O., & Bergeron, S. (2019). Genito-pelvic pain through a dyadic lens: Moving toward
an Interpersonal Emotion Regulation Model of women’s sexual dysfunction. Journal of
Sex Research, 56, 440–461.
Rosen, N. O., Dubé, J., Corsini-Munt, S., & Muise, A. (2019). Partners experience consequences,
too: A comparison of the sexual, relational, and psychological adjustment of women
with sexual interest/arousal disorder and their partners to control couples. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 16, 83–95.
Rosen, R. C. (2000). Prevalence and risk factors of sexual dysfunction in men and women. Cur-
rent Psychiatry Reports, 2, 189–195.
Rubio-Aurioles, E., & Bivalacqua, T. J. (2013). Standard operational procedures for low sexual
desire in men. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 10(1), 94–107.
Sarin, S., Amsel, R., & Binik, Y. M. (2016). A streetcar named “Derousal”? A psychophysiologi-
cal examination of the desire–arousal distinction in sexually functional and dysfunc-
tional women. Journal of Sex Research, 53, 711–729.
Sato, Y., Tanda, H., Kato, S., Onishi, S., Nitta, T., & Koroku, M. (2007). How long do patients
with erectile dysfunction continue to use sildenafil citrate?: Dropout rate from treatment
course as outcome in real life. International Journal of Urology, 14(4), 339–342; discussion
343.
Scepkowski, L. A., Wiegel, M., Bach, A. K., Weisberg, R. B., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2004).
Attributions for sexual situations in men with and without erectile disorder: Evidence
from a sex-specific attributional style measure. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33(6), 559–569.
Schmidt, H. M., Munder, T., Gerger, H., Frühauf, S., & Barth, J. (2014). Combination of psy-
chological intervention and phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors for erectile dysfunction: A
narrative review and meta-analysis. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 11(6), 1376–1391.

-- 417 of 498 --

Sexual Dysfunctions 	397
Shamloul, R., & Ghanem, H. (2013). Erectile dysfunction. Lancet, 381(9861), 153–165.
Shifren, J. L., Monz, B. U., Russo, P. A., Segreti, A., & Johannes, C. B. (2008). Sexual problems
and distress in United States women. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 112, 970–978.
Shin, D. H., & Spitz, A. (2014). The evaluation and treatment of delayed ejaculation. Sexual
Medicine Reviews, 2(3–4), 121–133.
Simon, J. A., Thorp, J., & Millheiser, L. (2019). Flibanserin for premenopausal hypoactive sexual
desire disorder: Pooled analysis of clinical trials. Journal of Women’s Health, 28(6), 769–777.
Sims, K. A., & Meana, M. (2010). Why did passion wane?: A qualitative study of married
women’s attributions for declines in sexual desire. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, 36,
360–380.
Smith, K. B., & Pukall, C. F. (2014). Sexual function, relationship adjustment, and the relational
impact of pain in male partners of women with provoked vulvar pain. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 11, 1283–1293.
Toates, F. (2009). An integrative theoretical framework for understanding sexual motivation,
arousal, and behavior. Journal of Sex Research, 46, 168–193.
Travison, T. G., Sand, M. S., Rosen, R. C., Shabsigh, R., Eardley, I., & McKinlay, J. B. (2011). The
natural progression and regression of erectile dysfunction: Follow-up results from the
MMAS and MALES studies. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 8(7), 1917–1924.
Travison, T. G., Shabsigh, R., Araujo, A. B., Kupelian, V., O’Donnell, A. B., & McKinlay, J. B.
(2007). The natural progression and remission of erectile dysfunction: Results from the
Massachusetts Male Aging Study. Journal of Urology, 177(1), 241–246; discussion 246.
Trudel, G., Aubin, S., & Matte, B. (1995). Sexual behaviors and pleasure in couples with hypo-
active sexual desire. Journal of Sex Education and Therapy, 21, 210–216.
Trudel, G., Boulos, L., & Matte, B. (1993). Dyadic adjustment in couples with hypoactive sexual
desire. Journal of Sex Education and Therapy, 19, 31–36.
van Anders, S. M. (2012). Testosterone and sexual desire in healthy women and men. Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 41, 1471–1484.
Verze, P., Arcaniolo, D., Imbimbo, C., Cai, T., Venturino, L., Spirito, L., . . . Mirone, V. (2018).
General and sex profile of women with partner affected by premature ejaculation:
Results of a large observational, non-interventional, cross-sectional, epidemiological
study (IPER-F). Andrology, 6(5), 714–719.
Wallwiener, C. W., Wallwiener, L. M., Seeger, H., Muck, A. O., Bitzer, J., & Wallwiener, M.
(2010). Prevalence of sexual dysfunction and impact of contraception in female German
medical students. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7, 2139–2148.
Wiedermann, M. W. (2000). Women’s body image self-consciousness during physical inti-
macy with the partner. Journal of Sex Research, 37, 60–68.
Wiegel, M., Scepkowski, L. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2007). Cognitive–affective processes in sexual
arousal and sexual dysfunction. In E. Janssen (Ed.), The psychophysiology of sex (pp. 143–
165). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Witting, K., Santtila, P., Varjonen, M., Jern, P., Johansson, A., von der Pahlen, B., & Sandnabba,
K. (2008). Female sexual dysfunction, sexual distress, and compatibility with partner.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5, 2587–2599.
Woo, J. S. T., Brotto, L. A., & Gorzalka, B. B. (2012). The relationship between sex guilt and
sexual desire in a community sample of Chinese and Euro-Canadian women. Journal of
Sex Research, 49, 290–298.
Zhou, E. S., Bober, S. L., Nekhyludov, L., Hu, J. C., Kantoff, P. W., & Recklitis, C. J. (2016). Physi-
cal and emotional health information needs and preferences of long-term prostat cancer
survivors. Patient Education and Counseling, 99, 2049–2054.

-- 418 of 498 --

398
Sleep–wake disorders are prevalent and impactful conditions that are often poorly
assessed in the clinical setting. Undiagnosed sleep disorders can masquerade as
mental health conditions and worsen the outcomes associated with these conditions.
Furthermore, sleep disorders can develop from mental health conditions, and the
reverse is also true (particularly for mood disorders). Successful treatment of sleep
disorders requires a targeted approach. Therefore, understanding the difference
between normal sleep and a sleep disorder is important in the conceptualization and
treatment of mental health. Failure to effectively recognize and treat sleep disorders
leads to increased morbidity and mortality, accidents and injuries, absenteeism and
presenteeism, and reduced quality of life. Our goal in this chapter is to provide an
overview of common sleep disorders and to discuss implications for clinical practice.
NORMAL SLEEP
The three natural states of consciousness are wake, non-rapid-eye-movement
(NREM) sleep and rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep. Normal sleep progresses
through a series of stages, beginning with light sleep (NREM1–2), followed by deep
sleep (NREM3), then to a state during which the majority of dreaming takes place
(REM). Each cycle takes 90–120 minutes, and there is often a brief awakening during
the transition from REM to NREM1. NREM Stages 1–2 are characterized by alpha and
beta brain waves, and there is considerable variability of sleep quality in NREM2.
NREM Stage 3 is less variable and characterized by theta and delta waves. The REM
stage has brain activity similar to that of the wakeful period but with the absence of
motor activity and the presence of eye movements. As the sleep period progresses,
there is a reduction in deep, delta sleep (NREM3). The entire cycle from NREM1 to
REM is repeated four to five times during a nocturnal period.
C H A P T E R 1 4
Sleep–Wake Disorders
Norah Vincent
Judith R. Davidson

-- 419 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	399
The quality and quantity of sleep is largely determined by two factors: whether
the sleep window overlaps the naturally reoccurring cycles of sleep and wake (or
circadian time window) and the length of time that a person has been awake prior
to the sleep period. These are sometimes referred to as Process C (endogenous cir-
cadian) and Process S (homeostasis). Process C is driven by the circadian clock that
promotes wakefulness during the day and sleep during the night. Process S deter-
mines the amount and depth of sleep and increases with the length of time spent
awake. Proper alignment of the circadian timing of sleep–wake and other behaviors
are optimal for sleep. Within this cycle, sleep can become disrupted for a variety of
reasons, leading to insomnia. In what follows, we discuss some of the more common
sleep disorders that are likely to be encountered in clinical practice: insomnia disor-
der, circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders (CRSWDs), and parasomnias.
INSOMNIA DISORDER
Phenomenology and Symptoms
The most widely used classification systems for sleep disorders, including insom-
nia, are the third edition of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD-3;
American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014) and the fifth edition of the Diagnos-
tic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 2013). Both systems require the presence of problems with nocturnal sleep (e.g.,
sleep onset or sleep maintenance) with daytime consequences, despite opportunity
to sleep. Both ICSD-3 and DSM-5 specify that difficulty with sleep must occur at
least 3 nights per week and persist for 3 months or longer. Although not part of any
classification system, an arbitrary rule of 30 minutes is often used to quantify insom-
nia (e.g., requiring >30 minutes to fall or return to sleep, or awakening >30 minutes
before desired time). Recent revisions of these classification systems are notable for
recognition of the need to treat insomnia as a distinct condition requiring specific
intervention despite its frequent comorbidity with other psychological and medical
diagnoses (e.g., removal of the DSM-IV primary and secondary insomnia distinc-
tion in DSM-5) (Sateia, 2014). A diagnosis of insomnia disorder depends on a thor-
ough mental and physical health evaluation to determine whether the problem is
not “better explained” by another sleep disorder, medical condition, or substance or
mental health condition (e.g., post traumatic stress disorder, personality disorder).
Additionally, the new criteria have eliminated nonrestorative sleep and added early
morning awakening as reflective of insomnia disorder. Although not yet part of any
classification system, there is growing recognition of two phenotypes of insomnia,
a short-sleeping version (<6 hours per night) and a near-normal sleep duration ver-
sion. Of these, short-sleepers have more negative health care outcomes (Vgontzas &
Fernandez-Mendoza, 2013).
There is no definitive, objective test for insomnia. Various assessment tools exist,
each with advantages and disadvantages. Laboratory sleep studies or polysomnog-
raphy assess sleep stages and cycles, along with oxygen level in blood, heart rate,
breathing, eye and leg movements, and require that the subject spend one night in a
sleep laboratory. They have long been deemed the “gold standard” of objective sleep
assessment. These assessments are costly and the artificial environment impacts

-- 420 of 498 --

400 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
upon sleep, making them unsuitable for insomnia measurement. Other low-cost, less
obtrusive devices exist (e.g., wrist actigraphy, consumer wearable devices) that can
be used in the person’s natural environment ; however, these devices measure move-
ment and can therefore inaccurately classify periods of inactivity, when the individ-
ual is lying still and awake in bed, as time asleep. This problem becomes magnified
for those with fragmented sleep, typical of insomnia. Additionally, the lack of stan-
dardizing or publishing of metrics and norms for these commercial devices hinders
interpretation of their data.
DSM-5 describes the essential feature of insomnia disorder as dissatisfaction
with sleep quantity or quality, suggesting that subjective measures may be optimal
in quantifying the problem. The Consensus Sleep Diary (Carney et al., 2012) is a help-
ful tool to capture daily reports of the sleep experience. When used as intended for
14 days, daily diaries have the advantage of being less prone than questionnaires to
recall bias and providing a more representative assessment of an individual’s sleep
over time. Global self-report questionnaires are helpful in assessing the severity of
insomnia. Both the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI; Bastien, Vallieres, & Morin, 2001)
and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI; Buysse, Reynolds, Monk, Berman,
& Kupfer, 1989) demonstrate strong reliability and validity, including sensitivity to
change over time. The ISI covers a period of 2 weeks and the PSQI, slightly longer
(i.e., 1 month). A disadvantage of self-report measures is that they are subject to sleep
misperception. Some individuals underestimate the amount of time they are asleep.
This may be due to spending more time in NREM1, with greater cognitive arousal
than is experienced in deeper sleep stages. Furthermore, evaluation of sleep is com-
plex, as several other sleep disorders have similar symptoms. For example, restless
legs syndrome leads to discomfort in the extremities (often the legs) beginning in
the presleep period and during the sleep period. Restless legs can lead to significant
delay in sleep onset and numerous nocturnal arousals of which an individual is
often unaware. This is associated with poor quality sleep and daytime sleepiness.
Similarly, sleep-related breathing disorders, particularly sleep apnea, are associated
with nonrestorative sleep and can coexist with insomnia; see U.S. Preventive Ser-
vices Task Force, 2017, for a review).
Associated Clinical Features
Insomnia disorder is associated with a number of biological, cognitive, emotional,
social, and physical characteristics.
Neurobiological Features
The neurotransmitters gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and histamine are central
in promoting sleep through inhibition of arousal. The ascending reticular activating
system is inhibited by GABAergic transmission, leading to reduced activation of the
cerebral cortex and blocked transmission of thalamic relay neurons. This is a target
of many of the pharmacological agents for insomnia. Studies show that those with
insomnia disorder have lower levels of GABA (Winkelman et al., 2008), contributing
to hyperarousal. Hypocretin-1 and -2 (also known as orexin-A and -B) are neuro-
peptides produced by the hypothalamus that enhance arousal and wakefulness and
suppress REM (Saper, Fuller, Pedersen, Lu, & Scammell, 2010). Loss of these cells has

-- 421 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	401
been associated with the sleep disorder narcolepsy. Recently, research on adults with
insomnia disorder found them to have higher orexin-A plasma levels than normal
sleeping controls. Also, higher levels of this peptide were associated with longer
duration of insomnia disorder and with higher scores on the ISI, a self-report mea-
sure of insomnia (Tang et al., 2017). In contrast, melatonin, a hormone secreted by
the pineal gland in the absence of light, promotes sleep. Neurons originating in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus regulate the secretion of melatonin in the pineal gland. The
timing of the onset of melatonin release is important in understanding CRSWD dis-
turbance. However, evidence of decreased melatonin production among those with
insomnia disorder is mixed (see Macchi & Bruce, 2004) and most of the age-related
reduction in melatonin occurs in early adulthood, a time not typically associated with
significant sleep complaints (Kennaway et al., 1999). Biological features of insomnia
are of considerable interest, as they serve as targets for pharmacological agents.
Cognitive Features
The significant long-term health consequences of insomnia have been well docu-
mented. Some of these are in the realms of cognition, emotion and motivation, fatigue
and sleepiness, weight and hormonal fluctuation, and cardiovascular health. In the
cognitive area, a vast number of individuals with insomnia disorder report defi-
cits in attention, concentration, and memory. Recently, Cross and colleagues (2019)
studied processing speed, memory, and executive functions in 28,000 middle-aged
adults. After they adjusted for lifestyle and medical conditions, results showed that
having a probable diagnosis of insomnia disorder was associated with decreased
performance in auditory verbal learning but not inhibitory control or cognitive flex-
ibility. Other well-controlled but small studies have shown deficits in areas of work-
ing memory and divided attention among those with insomnia disorder relative to
healthy controls, but no differences in simple or sustained attention (Shekleton et al.,
2014). Notably, these deficits did not correlate with subjective sleepiness, suggest-
ing the intriguing possibility that a process other than chronic sleep deficiency may
explain the results. One possible explanation involves the effects associated with a
combination of hyperarousal and short sleep duration.
Emotional Features
Some of the puzzles in the sleep research world include why those with insomnia
disorder tend to overestimate delay in sleep onset and underestimate total sleep time.
Furthermore, many of those who awaken from objectively determined sleep (i.e.,
based on polysomnography) often deny sleeping. Additionally, those with insom-
nia disorder tend to report more improvements in sleep with hyperarousal-reducing
medication than are seen in objective sleep data. There is increasing recognition of
the role of hyperarousal in insomnia disorder.
Hyperarousal is a multidimensional construct with cognitive and somatic fea-
tures. Cognitive features of hyperarousal include worry about the sleep problem,
a tendency to misperceive sleep, and to fear the inability to sleep. Somatic features
of hyperarousal include elevations in heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature,
and cortisol. These symptoms are typical of chronic sympathetic nervous system
activation. More than two decades ago, Perlis, Giles, Mendelson, Bootzin, and Wyatt

-- 422 of 498 --

402 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(1997) found that hyperarousal is associated with greater beta and gamma power in
electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings among those with insomnia. This type of
EEG activity tends to reduce memory related to NREM1 sleep and the sleep-onset
period. This may explain why sleep is so often misperceived.
Social Features
The social interactions of those with insomnia are less well known. Studies show
that insomnia disorder is associated with reduced vocal expression (i.e., use of fewer
words, less expression of positive emotion), inappropriate intonation, and a percep-
tion that the sleep-deprived person is less attractive and healthy, and more sad and
fatigued (Axelsson et al., 2010; McGlinchey et al., 2011; Sundelin et al., 2013). Some
descriptions of sleep-deprived persons focus on the presence of dark circles around
the eyes, pale skin, droopy corners of the mouth, and hanging eyelids (Beattie, Kyle,
Espie, & Biello, 2015). Interpersonal distress has also been associated with difficulty
sleeping. Individuals with fear about their primary relationships have been shown
to have less NREM3 sleep and poorer sleep quality (Diamond, Hicks, & Otter-
Henderson, 2008). This has led some to suggest that individuals need to feel safe to
sleep. Furthermore, those who are lonely or socially isolated tend to have less favor-
able sleep quality (Kurina et al., 2011). Thus, there is likely a reciprocal relationship
between sleep and social connections.
Physical Health Features
Of interest is that most of those with insomnia disorder deny daytime sleepiness.
Instead, they report fatigue. The terms “sleepiness” and “fatigue” are not interchange-
able, and sleepiness refers to the propensity to doze and is, at the heart, a physiologi-
cal phenomenon. Fatigue refers to a sensation of tiredness and exhaustion associated
with maintaining activity levels or vigilance, which requires rest but not sleep for
recovery. This partially explains why those with insomnia disorder often have a very
difficult time having a daytime nap (i.e., they lack sleepiness and are hyperaroused).
Several decades of research converges on the idea that insomnia disorder can
lead to problems with blood sugar regulation, weight, and cardiovascular health.
Chronic insomnia has been shown to affect 45–71% of the diabetic population (Knut-
son, Ryden, Mander, & Van Cauter, 2006; Lamond, Tiggemann, & Dawson, 2000;
Lopes et al., 2005). Recently, variability in sleep length has been found to be strongly
associated with HbA1c in type 2 diabetes, with a U -shaped relationship between
sleep duration and HbA1c (Brouwer et al., 2020). A meta-analysis (Cappuccio, D’Elia,
Strazzullo, & Miller, 2010) of 10 prospective studies showed that gender may mod-
erate the relationship between short sleep duration and the development of type
2 diabetes, with males, more than females, at greater risk. Notably, these correla-
tional studies indicate neither a cause– effect nature nor the direction of relationship
between sleep and diabetes.
Regardless of the direction of the relationship between poor sleep and diabe-
tes, experimental laboratory studies clearly show that a deliberate reduction of sleep
time in healthy young adults (from 8 to 4 hours) leads to reduced glucose tolerance,
reduced thyrotropin concentration, and elevated evening cortisol (Spiegel, Leproult,
Van Cauter, 1999). Other investigations have shown that deliberately fragmenting

-- 423 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	403
the sleep of young healthy adults across varying sleep stages (while preserving total
sleep time), leads to reduced glucose metabolism, increased morning cortisol level,
and increased sympathetic nervous system activity (Stamatakis & Punjabi, 2010).
These studies show that deteriorating sleep has implications for processes important
in the development and maintenance of diabetes.
With some variability of findings, insomnia disorder (particularly in the pres-
ence of short sleep duration) has also been shown to significantly increase risk for
hypertension, coronary artery disease, and heart failure (Javaheri & Redline, 2017).
The mechanisms of action are not fully understood but there is emerging evidence
that dysregulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, increased
sympathetic nervous activation, and increased inflammation each play a role. In
normal sleepers, reducing total sleep time leads to increased blood pressure, inflam-
matory cytokines, C-reactive protein, tumor necrosis factor, and interleukin 6 (Java-
heri & Redline, 2017). These changes can cause damage to the structure of the heart,
coronary vasculature, and cardiac conduction system. In a large Norweigan epi-
demiological study, the HUNT study (Laugsand, Vatten, Platou, & Janszky, 2011),
52,610 adults were followed for 11 years to assess work performance and health sta-
tus. Results showed that insomnia increased risk of myocardial infarction (MI) by
27–45%, and that a delay in sleep onset was the most hazardous sleep symptom.
Multiple sleep problems led to greater risk estimates. Blood pressure fluctuations
within a 24-hour period follow a circadian pattern. Blood pressure is lower during
the nocturnal period and higher during the daytime. If there is <10% change in blood
pressure, this is abnormal and described as a “non-dipping” pattern. Research indi-
cates that those with insomnia are more likely to experience “non-dipping” (Jar-
rin, Alvaro, Bouchard, Jarrin, Drake, & Morin, 2018). Notably, several smaller studies
have recently shown that relatively small improvements (i.e., ≥ 30 minutes) in total
sleep time can significantly lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure. This magni-
tude of improvement can be achieved with evidence-based treatments; however, it
should be noted that outcomes tend to be less favorable for short sleepers (Bathgate,
Edinger, & Krystal, 2017). When providing such treatment to those with insomnia
disorder, the clinician should be aware that short sleepers (i.e., those sleeping <4
hours per night) may be less responsive to intervention, and may be at risk for car-
diovascular and metabolic disorders. Hence, some attention to adequate broad-based
medical assessment is warranted for this population.
Course, Outcome, and Treatment
Insomnia disorder often becomes a chronic problem. When it develops, insomnia
persists in 56–74% of adults in a 12-month period and in 46% in a 36-month period
(Morin et al., 2009; Pillai, Roth, & Drake, 2015). In a large longitudinal study, Janson,
Lindberg, Fislason, Elmasry, and Boman (2001) found that insomnia remitted in only
56% of cases over a 10-year period. Thus, insomnia disorder is more often persistent
than episodic in nature. Furthermore, individuals with sleep-maintenance insomnia,
compared to sleep-onset insomnia, tend to have the condition more reliably persist
(Pillai et al., 2015). The two most common treatments for insomnia include cognitive-
behavioral therapy (CBT-I) and pharmacotherapy. CBT-I, an evidence-based form
of psychological treatment, comprises five distinct strategies. These include sleep
restriction, stimulus control, relaxation therapy, cognitive therapy, and sleep hygiene/

-- 424 of 498 --

404 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
psychoeducation. Recent clinical practice guidelines from the American College of
Physicians recommend that all adults with insomnia disorder receive CBT-I as the
initial treatment (grade: strong, moderate-quality evidence) and that medication only
be considered after a discussion of harms, benefits, and costs, and only when CBT-I
is unsuccessful (grade: weak, low-quality evidence) (Qaseem, Kansagara, Forciea,
Cooke, & Denberg, 2016). This was echoed in recent guidelines from the European
Sleep Research Society (Riemann et al., 2017). Riemann and colleagues noted that
CBT-I has been shown to be effective in more than 15 different meta-analyses, with
positive effects on all aspects of sleep, as well as daytime fatigue, mood, and anxiety,
and with good stability of gains in the follow-up period. A number of pharmaceuti-
cal agents have been studied in the treatment of insomnia, but results have been less
favorable (with a grade of weak). A recent clinical practice guideline (Sateia, Buysse,
Krystal, Neubauer, & Heald, 2017) recommended eszopiclone, zaleplon, zolpidem,
triazolam, temazepam, and ramelteon for sleep-onset insomnia in adults. For sleep-
maintenance insomnia, suvorexant, eszopiclone, zolpidem, temazepam, and doxe-
pin were recommended. Of note, trazodone, tiagabine, diphenydramine, melatonin,
tryptophan, or valerian were not recommended for either type of insomnia.
Epidemiology
Approximately one-third of North American adults are sleeping less than recom-
mended for optimal health (i.e., 7 hours) (Chaput, Wong, & Michaud, 2017). Even
among those without sleep complaints, 21% report sleeping less than 7 hours per
night. Thus, in the absence of insomnia complaints, 1 out of 5 adults is obtaining
less sleep than needed, and recent estimates show that a large number of adults (i.e.,
25%) are dissatisfied with their sleep. Approximately 10–15% report problematic
sleep with daytime consequences (e.g., fatigue, irritability, mood disruption, cogni-
tive deficits), and 6–10% meet full criteria for insomnia disorder (Morin et al., 2011).
Using a nationally representative, cross-sectional survey approach with a sample of
22,000 adults, nocturnal sleep complaints were found to be more common among
adults than among adolescents or children, and more prevalent in women and in
those with less education and income (Chaput, Yau, Rao, & Morin, 2018). Women
tend to have better objective sleep quality than men; the latter show greater declines
in NREM3 sleep with age. Although women’s sleep tends to be of better quality,
women are more likely to have longer periods of wakefulness during the night than
men (Ohayon, Carskadon, Guilleminault, & Vitiello, 2004). There are some ethnic dif-
ferences, with Black Americans more than non-Hispanic White Americans tending
to have longer delay in falling asleep and less favorable sleep quality (Durrence &
Lichstein, 2006), and if a short sleeper, more likely to have insomnia disorder (Kalm-
bach, Pillai, Arnedt, & Drake, 2016).
In a multiyear longitudinal study in the United Kingdom, Chaput and colleagues
(2017) reported that the rate of sleep complaints among adults was found to be 24%,
and noted that this has increased from 16.8% in 2007 (42% increase). An earlier U.K.
study using standardized clinical interviews, and conducted between 1993 and 2007,
also showed an increase in the rate of sleep complaints (5%) and insomnia disorder
diagnoses, albeit smaller (3%). The problem of poor sleep may be truly accelerating in
society or the introduction of new commercial devices that purport to measure sleep,
may be leading to changes in how well we perceive we are sleeping.

-- 425 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	405
Comorbidity
Insomnia is frequently comorbid with a variety of psychiatric disorders (e.g., autism
spectrum disorders, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder [PTSD], substance use disorder, borderline
personality disorder), as well as suicidality, pain (e.g., fibfromyalgia, headache, rheu-
matoid arthritis), neurological (e.g., Parkinson’s disease and parkinsonian syndromes,
Huntington’s chorea, progressive dystonia, Tourette syndrome, and epilepsy), meta-
bolic (e.g., type 2 diabetes), and cardiovascular diseases (e.g., congestive heart failure
with symptoms of paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and orthopnea). Insomnia is also
often comorbid with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (with symp-
tom of dyspnea), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD; epigastric pain or burn-
ing, laryngospasm, acidic taste, sudden awakenings), and prostatic hypertrophy
(frequent nocturia). When coupled with short sleep duration, insomnia disorder is
highly associated with cardiometabolic and psychiatric disorders. This relationship
is much less significant for those with insomnia disorder and normal sleep duration
compared to those with shortened sleep duration (Kalmbach et al., 2016).
Etiology
A number of factors increase the risk of developing insomnia: female gender (Zhang
& Wing, 2006), family history of sleep problems (Dauvilliers et al., 2005), and chronic
stress (Drake, Pillai, & Roth, 2014). In the past 20 years, a number of models outlining
the development of insomnia have emerged. The first of these was Spielman’s model
(Spielman, Caruso, & Glovinsky, 1987) that describes the role of predisposing (e.g.,
hyperarousal), precipitating (e.g., stressful life events), and perpetuating factors (e.g.,
worry about sleep problem, conditioning of sleeplessness to bedroom). Perpetuating
factors are often the target of modern psychological sleep treatments. Morin’s (1993)
cognitive-behavioral model emphasizes factors that maintain the disorder. Some of
these include hyperarousal, conditioning of wakefulness to the bedroom environ-
ment, and circadian rhythm abnormalities. Last, Harvey’s (2002) cognitive model is
an adaptation of psychological anxiety treatment protocols to sleep, and emphasizes
the presence of “safety behaviors,” which refer to activities in which persons with
insomnia engage for the purpose of quelling fears of being unable to sleep. Some of
these behaviors include efforts to control thinking during the nocturnal period, con-
sumption of alcohol, napping behavior, and a tendency to avoid strenuous daytime
activities. Each of these psychological models has had a significant and enduring
impact on conceptualization and treatment approaches for insomnia disorder.
Clinical Implications
Individuals with inaccuracies in self-perception greatly benefit from receipt of nor-
mative information about sleep. For example, many sleep patients appreciate being
informed that healthy sleepers take up to least 30 minutes to fall asleep and to fully
awaken in the morning, and reach a point of wakefulness several times per night
(see Lichstein, Durrence, Riedel, Taylor, & Bush, 2004, for normative sleep data from
community-dwelling adults). Other implications are that several assessment meth-
ods may be necessary to measure this problem, and discrepancy among them is

-- 426 of 498 --

406 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
likely. Patients benefit from a discussion of the difficulty in measuring sleep, with
reference to sleep state misperception. In the clinical setting, patients’ perceptions
of sleep length and quality should be viewed as “to be determined” rather than
assumed. Frequently, patients present after attending a sleep laboratory, and have
either been directly or indirectly told that they “do not have a sleep problem.” This
invalidating message needs to be better explained at sleep centers. Others arrive at
the door of sleep centers because their commercial devices indicate that they have a
sizable sleep problem. Although enthusiastically adopted by many with sleep prob-
lems, such devices are error-prone, particularly for estimations of time awake during
the night. Relying on data from these devices is therefore not helpful.
The cognitive consequences of insomnia disorder tend to center around work-
ing memory, divided attention, and reaction time. Findings from cognitive studies
illustrate that there are far fewer objective cognitive deficits than subjectives ones. As
a result, those working with patients with sleep problems need to use cognitive tech-
niques to help individuals avoid magnification of subjective problems with atten-
tion, concentration, and memory. Rather than advise patients about recent research,
a better strategy may be to have individuals conduct experiments that test their theo-
ries that their attention, concentration, and memory are impaired. Many middle-
aged adults struggle with word finding, and attribute this common developmental
difficulty to poor sleep. Psychoeducation on working memory and divided attention
should be given, with suggestions to determine whether this processing can be mini-
mized on days following particular poor nights of sleep. Similarly, jobs that critically
emphasize working memory and divided attention (e.g., air traffic controller) might
be avoided entirely.
Laboratory findings point to problematic or infrequent social relationships
among those with insomnia. Although not part of any standardized sleep protocol,
successful treatment of sleep may require assessment of relationship quality and
encouraging patients to reduce loneliness through social engagement, particularly
in older age cohorts. Evidence-based protocols for sleep have typically not included
partners, and it remains to be seen whether this would be a helpful adjunct.
The prevalence of insomnia among endocrinology and cardiology patients sug-
gests that more emphasis on sleep in these medical clinics is warranted, particularly
for short sleepers. The finding that sleep disturbance may precipitate and worsen
comorbid medical conditions indicates that sleep treatment should be offered out-
side of traditional psychotherapy offices, particularly in the short-sleeping pheno-
types. Sleep interventions in medical clinics may require tailoring. For example,
providers might be cautious in using stimulus control interventions (specifically,
instruction to remove oneself from bed during the night when unable to sleep) in
those with cardiac conditions and in those with low blood pressure or with “non-
dipping” profiles. Similarly, those with seizure disorder or bipolar mood disor-
ders may need to avoid temporary sleep deprivation often associated with some
of the CBT-I techniques such as sleep restriction (see Johnson, Otto, Gold, & Elliott,
Chapter 10, this volume, for a discussion of the negative impact of sleep deprivation
for patients with bipolar disorders). In the family physician’s office, annual sleep
assessment (in-office) is likely warranted, and insomnia may be better viewed as
a chronic condition for some. Early intervention may reduce the likelihood of the
development of a persistent problem. Although often comorbid with other medical

-- 427 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	407
problems, providers should not neglect to specifically treat sleep problems. Atten-
tion to the role of medical and substance-induced causes of insomnia needs to be
considered in this medical assessment. For example, corticosteroids, opioids, and
psychotropics can all worsen sleep, and many individuals are entirely unaware of
this relationship.
Current evidence-based treatments for insomnia disorder (both psychologi-
cal and pharmacological) address a central predisposing factor (i.e., hyperarousal).
Psychological treatment also targets perpetuating factors (e.g., worry about sleep
problem, conditioning of wakefulness to the bedroom environment, circadian reen-
trainment, reduction of safety behaviors) through CBT-I. In the clinical setting, sleep
patients are often aware of the role of hyperarousal in contributing to sleep prob-
lems. Despite this awareness, interventions for reducing hyperarousal are often
looked upon with scepticism by the patient with insomnia disorder. Those who have
an exclusive problem with sleep-maintenance insomnia often do not understand
the importance of relaxing prior to sleep. In the clinical setting, patients are much
less aware of the negative impacts of conditioning of wakefulness to the bedroom
environment and circadian misalignment. The clinician, who may be aware of the
impact and interventions in each of these areas, has an array of treatment targets for
insomnia disorder (e.g., whether to prioritize arousal reduction, circadian factors, or
conditioning of wakefulness to the bedroom environment). More research is needed
to pit the impact of each of these factors against each other to determine how to prior-
itize intervention. A recent study of 100 adults with insomnia disorder who received
CBT-I through an Internet program, showed that both arousal reduction and one
type of circadian intervention (i.e., sleep scheduling) were related to improved out-
come, but efforts to de-condition the bedroom were not (Vincent & Walsh, 2013).
When treatment periods are brief due to limitations of insurance, it may make sense
to offer arousal reduction strategies initially.
Some of the implications of the widespread occurrence of sleep problems are
that many remain undiagnosed and untreated due to a perception that people should
be able to manage the condition, that their doctor will not attend to the problem, or
that it is a normal part of aging. If untreated, sleep problems can persist for decades.
CIRCADIAN RHYTHM SLEEP–WAKE DISORDERS
Circadian rhythms are common to all animal species and influence sleep and wake-
fulness, biological functioning, and activity. Generated by a pacemaker located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of the anterior hypothalamus, the rhythm approximates 24
hours and has inputs from light and other factors (called zeitgebers) that synchronize
the pacemaker to the environmental light–dark cycle. The most influential zeitgeber
is environmental light, but other zeitgebers are social or activity-based. Melatonin is
a marker of the timing of the endogeneous circadian system. For most people, mela-
tonin production occurs 2–3 hours before habitual bedtime, a time when core body
temperature is declining. Exogeneous melatonin administration (capsules) can also
shift the circadian rhythm. In the absence of light, the rhythm will operate with an
approximate 24-hour period. When the rhythm is synchronized to the environment,
this is called “entrainment.”

-- 428 of 498 --

408 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Phenomenology and Symptoms
The two major sleep diagnostic systems (i.e., DSM-5, ICSD-3) define CRSWDs as per-
sistent and recurring sleep disruption primarily due to misalignment between the
internal or endogenous circadian rhythm and the external or environmental sleep
schedule. A diagnosis requires that excessive daytime sleepiness, insomnia, or both
be present, and that the sleep problem causes impaired functioning. There are a num-
ber of subtypes of this disorder. A delayed sleep-phase-type circadian rhythm dis-
order occurs in the presence of a delay in both sleep and awakening time, with an
inability to fall asleep or awaken at the time required. This delay is substantial (i.e., >3
hours) and persistent (i.e., does not fluctuate within a week). These latter two features
often help to differentiate insomnia disorder from CRSWD. An advanced-phase-type
circadian rhythm disorder occurs when there is an inability to remain awake or asleep
until the desired time. ICSD-3 (American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014) addition-
ally requires that CRSWD not be better explained by another medical/sleep/mental
disorder, that the duration of the problem exceed 3 months, and that when individu-
als can sleep on their preferred schedule, sleep quality and duration improve.
The CRSWDs are sometimes described as “intrinsic” (e.g., delayed sleep phase,
advanced sleep phase, non-24-hour, irregular) or “extrinsic” (e.g., shift-work subtype,
jet-lag subtype). In both delayed- and advanced-phase conditions, there is a “non-24-
hour sleep–wake subtype.” These individuals report a consistent daily drift from
one day to the next, with progressively later or earlier sleep onset and wake times.
Many of these individuals are blind, and the failure to entrain is due to a lack of light
input. This is one of the most impairing circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders seen
in clinical practice and is fortunately quite rare. Of the advanced CRSWDs, an “irreg-
ular sleep–wake subtype” is characterized by temporary disorganization, such that
the timing of sleep–wake is variable through 24 hours. This problem occurs more
often in those with developmental disorders, and in certain neurological diseases
(Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, Huntington’s).
Of the extrinsic CRSWDs, a “shift-work subtype” of the CRSWDs describes
insomnia occuring during the time the individual wishes to be alert and awake.
ICSD-3 describes a “jet-lag subtype” of CRSWDs; this develops when sleep is shifted
as result of a movement between time zones and accompanying light exposure. It
should be noted that circadian disturbance is not limited to those who meet these
criteria. For example, shifting sleep–wake cycles associated with changes in sleep–
wake timing between weekdays and weekends can result in poor quality sleep.
Circadian rhythms can be assessed using measurement of plasma melatonin/
core body temperature, self-reported sleep–wake cycles using sleep diaries, sleep–
wake recording through actigraphy, or chronotype questionnaires. Laboratory-based
assessment of dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) has become the “gold standard”
for assessment of circadian rhythms, which is the time when endogenous melato-
nin levels begin to rise in dim light, on average about 2–3 hours before bedtime.
Laboratory assessment of melatonin provides a controlled environment to accurately
assess circadian rhythms. DLMO is costly, often unavailable, and occurs in an arti-
ficial environment unlike the patient’s home. Actigraphy assessment of circadian
rhythms is supported by ease of use, collection of data pertaining to environmental
light exposure, and automaticity of recording that does not rely on a conscientious

-- 429 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	409
patient or a patient with normal cognitive functioning. Actigraphy assessment is rec-
ommended by ICSD-3 for both daytime function (work/school) and free days (days
when individual is allowed to have unrestricted sleep time). The disadvantages of
actigraphy are that circadian rhythms can only be inferred, and environmental light
exposure can affect the results. With similar disadvantages to actigraphy, the posi-
tive features of sleep diary measurement of circadian rhythms are low cost, ease of
use, and ability to collect data on use of electronics, napping, caffeine, medications,
and alcohol (all of which may affect sleep). Chronotype questionnaires are inexpen-
sive methods to assess circadian rhythm through examination of preferred times for
daily activities and sleep. Chronotype is often assessed at the midpoint of sleep on
work-free days or days without work or school commitments. Common measures are
the Morningness–Eveningness Questionnaire, the Munich Chronotype Question-
naire, and the Munich Chronotype Questionnaire for Shift-Workers (Horne & Ost-
berg, 1976; Roenneberg, Wirz-Justice, & Merrow, 2003). The disadvantages of ques-
tionnaire assessment of circadian rhythms are that they only indirectly measure the
construct, lack detail as to the timing of sleep phases, and measure preferences and
not behaviors and thus may be unreliable.
Associated Clinical Features, Course, and Outcome
When permitted to sleep according to preference, those with delayed- and advanced-
phase CRSWDs have normal sleep architecture and sleep duration. When conven-
tion does not align with the individual’s circadian rhythm, a variety of negative
health outcomes may ensue. Some of these include increased sympathetic nervous
system activity and immune system dysfunction, as well as impairment of pancre-
atic, gastrointestinal, and endocrine function (Potter et al., 2016). CRSWDs are asso-
ciated with increased prevalence of hyperglycemia and insulin resistance, and the
shift-work subtype is associated with increased risk of MI, cardiovascular disease
(Knutsson, Hallquist, Reuterwall, Theorell, & Akerstedt, 1999), and cancer (Megdal,
Kroenke, Laden, Pukkala, & Schernhammer, 2005; Sigurdardottir et al., 2012).
Treatment for CRSWDs involves prescribing the timing of sleep and wakeful-
ness, physical activity or exercise, implementation of light therapy and/or avoidance
of light, and use of medications to phase shift. Recent clinical practice guidelines
from the American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommend evening light therapy
for advanced sleep–wake phase disorder (grade: weak), and strategically timed mel-
atonin for both delayed sleep–wake phase disorder (grade: weak) and non-24-hour
sleep–wake disorder (grade: weak). Light timed in the evenings before the minimum
core body temperature will lead to phase delays, and light timed in the mornings
after the minimum core body temperature will lead to phase advances. In general,
the more intense the light and the longer duration of exposure, the greater will
be the effect. The responsiveness of the circadian rhythm to light depends on the
recent amount of light exposure (i.e., less exposure leads to greater response to light)
and wavelength (i.e., blue light produces the most phase shifting). The guidelines
strongly advise against the use of pharmacotherapy and weakly against the use of
melatonin (either alone or in combination with light therapy) for elderly adults with
dementia with irregular sleep–wake phase disorder (Auger et al., 2015). Research
in this area has often been conducted with healthy adults, and there is a dearth of

-- 430 of 498 --

410 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
research involving actual patients with CRSWDs, leading to slow advancement of
this field. For example, a recent study contrasting use of a digital reader versus read-
ing a book prior to the sleep period illustrated that the former was significantly more
likely to disturb sleep and next-day functioning (Grønli et al., 2016). This particular
study raises the intriguing possibility that light exposure might be more powerful in
affecting sleep than conditioning of wakefulness to the bedroom environment (such
as occurs during reading in the bedroom).
Epidemiology
Delayed sleep–wake phase disorder is the most common of the CRSWDs. Estimates
are that 1.5–8.9% of the adult population (Paine, Fink, Gander, & Warman, 2014;
Schrader, Bovim, & Sand, 1993) and 7% of those with insomnia complaints (Lewy,
Cutler, & Sack, 1999) are affected. Onset of symptoms typically occurs in adolescence
or early adulthood. Advanced sleep–wake phase disorder has been less well studied.
The prevalence of this condition among those living in the community has been
shown to range from 0.25 to 7% (Paine et al., 2014) and may be even lower in sleep
clinics, suggesting underidentification of cases (Curtis et al., 2019). The prevalence
of advanced sleep–wake phase disorder is higher among men and increases with
age. The prevalence of delayed sleep–wake phase disorder is higher among those
living in more deprived areas and decreases with age. A recent large-scale epidemio-
logical study revealed that after researchers controlled for a variety of demographic
variables, individuals with advanced sleep–wake phase disorder are more likely to
report sleepiness, whereas those with delayed sleep–wake phase disorder are more
likely to report poor health (Paine et al., 2014).
Comorbidity
CRSWD has been associated with a variety of comorbid conditions. Some of these
include insomnia disorder, which can develop after extensive time spent in bed
when awake. Additionally, a variety of psychiatric diagnoses, including bipolar dis-
order, obsessive– compulsive disorder, major depressive disorder, and substance use
disorders, have been associated with a delayed circadian rhythm (Reid et al., 2012;
Robillard et al., 2013; Turner et al., 2007). Much less is known about comorbid condi-
tions associated with advanced sleep–wake phase disorder.
Etiology
The causes of CRSWDs can be both biological and behavioral. Genetic alterations in
the core circadian clock genes (for advanced phase) and in the per3 gene (for delayed
phase) have been postulated as contributors to these disorders (Hida et al., 2012), as
have the aging process, blindness, and particular disease states such as Alzheimer’s
(Potter et al., 2016). Shift work, social jet lag, early school start times, and living in
a polar region are behavioral factors that can cause CRSWDs (Potter et al., 2016).
Another common cause of delayed circadian phase is use of electronics. Many elec-
tronic devices produce blue light, to which photosensitive retinal ganglion cells are
especially sensitive. As a result, nighttime exposure to iPads, iPhones, and e-books

-- 431 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	411
delays sleep and melatonin production, and negatively impacts upon next day alert-
ness. Of these electronic devices, use of social media and the Internet (browsing)
are most associated with staying up later, taking longer to fall asleep, and sleeping
an objectively shorter period of time. Last, poor sleep hygiene can lead to the devel-
opment of a CRSWD if the individual “sleeps in” or takes daytime naps. Irregular
bedtimes and wakeup times, varying by hours from day to day, may lead to these
sleep disorders.
Clinical Implications
Implications of these findings are that special attention might be paid to the sleep of
older persons in geriatric medical and mental health clinics, to better detect advanced
sleep–wake phase patterns. In contrast, delayed sleep phase should be suspected
when patients, especially adolescents or young adults, present with insomnia and
have a pattern of delayed sleep and wakefulness in relation to school or work sched-
ules. Patients in a variety of settings should be encouraged to reduce use of devices
that emit blue light during critical periods (e.g., in the evenings for delayed-phase
patients, and in the mornings for advanced-phase patients). Blue-blocking glasses
and apps to filter short-wavelength emissions from electronic devices (Gringras,
Middleton, Skene, & Revell, 2015; van der Lely et al., 2015) may better regulate the cir-
cadian rhythm. Similarly, delaying school start times increases the amount of sleep
that students obtain, and might also improve mood (Minges & Redeker, 2016).
Due to comorbidity with mental health conditions, individuals with CRSWDs
may lack motivation for adhering to a prescribed, timed sleep–wake and/or a physi-
cal activity intervention or prescribed light exposure. Furthermore, medications to
assist with phase shifting, or to promote sleepiness or wakefulness, may interact
with medicines to treat the comorbid conditions. Last, the comorbid condition may
contribute to the CRSWD (e.g., depressed persons who awaken early and dwell on
negative thoughts thus advance their circadian rhythm; anxious patients who stay
up late to quell worrying delay their circadian rhythm).
PARASOMNIAS
“Parasomnias” are unwanted physical or mental events that occur during sleep or
during arousal from sleep. The states of wakefulness, NREM, and REM, are normally
distinct and occur in an organized and predictable pattern over the 24-hour period.
However, in parasomnias, aspects of more than one state co-occur and intermix.
This is referred to as a temporary “state dissociation” (American Academy of Sleep
Medicine, 2014). The nature of each parasomnia is determined by the sleep state from
which it emerges, whether NREM or REM. Although ICSD-3 (American Academy
of Sleep Medicine, 2014) recognizes 10 categories of parasomnias, DSM-5 (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013) describes four of these, including two NREM para-
somnias (sleepwalking and sleep terrors) and two REM parasomnias (nightmare dis-
order and REM sleep behavior disorder [RSBD]). It is these four parasomnias that we
discuss here, and they are the ones most likely to be encountered in psychological
clinical practice.

-- 432 of 498 --

412 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
NREM Parasomnias
Phenomenology and Symptoms
Sleepwalking and sleep terrors are NREM parasomnias, and they occur when there
is a sudden shift from deep NREM sleep, called slow-wave sleep (SWS), to partial
wakefulness. Because of this sudden and unusual shift, they are also called “dis-
orders of arousal.” Neurologically, there appears to be activation of local and sub-
cortical networks, with deactivation of prefrontal cortical control (Nobili & Arnulf,
2014). This is thought to produce automatic motor behaviors or fear responses that
in normal wakefulness are inhibited or controlled by the prefrontal cortex (Ameri-
can Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014). Behaviors occur with limited conscious
awareness. They may include confusional arousals (person sits up in bed and looks
around, appearing confused; included as a NREM parasomnia in ICSD-3 but not
in DSM-5), ambulation (sleepwalking), or sleep terrors (person screams and exhib-
its extreme fear). In some cases, aggression, sleep-related eating, and sleep-related
sexual behavior may occur. NREM parasomnias share the features of repeated epi-
sodes of incomplete arousal from deep sleep, unresponsiveness to efforts of others
to intervene, absence of associated dream imagery, and amnesia or partial amnesia
for the episode. Because these events occur from deep NREM sleep, they occur most
frequently in the first third of sleep, when SWS is prominent.
With sleepwalking, the sleeping person leaves the bed and walks around, star-
ing blankly. Behaviors can involve routine things done at inappropriate times or
places, for example, urinating in a closet or rearranging items in the home. Calm,
quiet sleepwalking is common—especially in children; however, dangerous and life-
threatening behaviors can occur: Sleepwalkers may leave the bedroom, and even
the building, with some exiting through a window, or over a balcony. Injuries can
arise from bumping into furniture and sometimes from self-inflicted burns and cuts
(more common in adults than in children). In some cases, violent behaviors result in
injury to another person, particularly when that person tries to restrain or awaken
the sleepwalker. The sleepwalker is disoriented and usually incoherent, and slow in
responding to questions. The typical duration of episodes ranges from 1 to 20 min-
utes (Howell, 2012). The sleepwalker may return to bed on their own and continue to
sleep, or may lie down and sleep in another place (e.g., a closet or wherever they have
wandered), eventually waking up in an unexpected location.
With sleep terrors, the person has sudden episodes of intense fear that typically
begin with a piercing scream and are accompanied by signs of autonomic arousal:
tachycardia, tachypnea, pupil dilation, and sweating. If awakened, the person is dis-
oriented, remains fearful, and may take some time to settle down. Episodes typically
last 5–20 minutes (Howell, 2012). Sleep terrors are most often experienced by young
children and witnessed by their parents.
In is important to differentiate NREM parasomnias from nightmares, nocturnal
panic attacks, and seizures. Whereas NREM parasomnias occur most frequently in
the first third of the night (in SWS), nightmares are most likely to happen in the
second half of the night (in REM sleep). NREM parasomnias are not associated with
dream imagery and are not recalled, whereas nightmares are frightening, easily
recalled dreams. Awakenings from NREM parasomnias are associated with confu-
sion and disorientation, whereas awakening from a dream is rapid, and the person

-- 433 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	413
is not confused. Nocturnal panic attacks are episodes of waking from sleep in a
state of panic. They tend to occur during the transition from Stage NREM2 to Stage
NREM3 sleep (Hauri, Friedman, & Ravaris, 1989). Most people with nocturnal panic
attacks also experience daytime attacks. Memory of the event is vivid, most occur
1–3 hours after going to sleep, and people may delay going to bed, fearing an attack
(Craske & Tsao, 2005). Seizures associated with frontal lobe epilepsy can occur
during sleep (“nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy” [NFLE]) and can be confused with
NREM parasomnias, especially sleepwalking. NFLE seizures usually occur during
Stage NREM2 sleep (Provini et al., 1999) rather than SWS. Epileptic events are more
likely to be short (less than 2 minutes), to occur more frequently during the night
(more than three times), and to be partially recalled (Derry et al., 2006). An aura, and
dystonic or tonic posturing and repeated, stereotyped behaviors rather than complex
behaviors, are indicative of NFLE (Derry et al., 2006). A neurological assessment is
warranted if NFLE-type symptoms are present.
Associated Clinical Features
In general, NREM parasomnia events are primed by conditions that increase sleep
pressure and triggered by sleep-disrupting factors. They are more likely to occur
following sleep restriction or deprivation, when SWS rebounds. Immediate triggers
of sleepwalking in adults are sleep disruptions associated with sleep-disordered
breathing, periodic limb movements, noises and touch (Pressman, 2007). Pilon,
Montplaisir, and Zadra (2008) induced episodes in adult sleepwalkers, but not in
non-sleepwalkers, with specific auditory stimuli and this effect was accentuated
under conditions of prior sleep deprivation.
A variety of psychiatric medications, including short- or intermediate-acting
hypnotics have been implicated in NREM parasomnia events as recorded in case
reports (Pressman, 2007). Ohayon, Guilleminault, and Priest (1999) reported that
adults with NREM parasomnias, especially those with sleep terrors, were more
likely than those without, to report drinking alcohol at bedtime. This may have
contributed to a common belief that alcohol could set the stage for a NREM event
in a predisposed individual. However, current research suggests the opposite—at
least for sleepwalking: Alcohol may reduce the likelihood of sleepwalking through
inhibition of motor activity (Pressman, 2019). For people who are predisposed to
NREM parasomnias and who also have sleep-disordered breathing (i.e., sleep apnea,
upper airway resistance syndrome), alcohol can indirectly increase the occurrence of
NREM parasomnias by increasing the likelihood of breathing-related sleep disrup-
tions (American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014).
Course, Outcome, and Treatment
It is often a family member, rather than the person with the NREM parasomnia,
who initiates consultation with a health professional. The high incidence of NREM
arousal disorders in young children means that it is usually parents seeking help.
Indeed, parents are understandably concerned, especially in the case of sleep ter-
rors, when they hear piercing screams and witness distress signs in their child. The
affected individual is likely not aware of these events. Most cases of childhood sleep

-- 434 of 498 --

414 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
terrors and sleepwalking resolve without intervention by early adolescence; a small
proportion of individuals continue to experience NREM parasomnias in adulthood.
In adults with NREM parasomnias, the request for help may come from fam-
ily or friends, or from the individual. Sleepwalking adults may report waking up
in odd places in their home, such as a closet. Diagnosis of NREM parasomnias is
usually based on the individual’s history and observations of others, although in
some severe or forensic cases (e.g., someone has committed a crime while apparently
asleep), overnight polysomnography may be used. The latter is not a clear diagnostic
tool unless the person happens to experience an episode while in the sleep lab.
The intervention called “scheduled awakening” is a technique in which an indi-
vidual is awakened 15–30 minutes before the usual timing of an NREM parasom-
nia episode. Among children with persistent sleepwalking (Frank, Spirito, Stark, &
Owens-Stively, 1997) or sleep terrors (Durand & Mindell, 1999), this type of preemp-
tive awakening by a parent was successful at minimizing or eliminating episodes
in small, uncontrolled studies. To our knowledge, trials of scheduled awakening
for adult patients are lacking. Scheduled awakening is a promising technique that
requires further exploration through randomized controlled trials and lab research
to understand the mechanisms of its effects. Hypnosis has been tried as a psycho-
therapeutic approach for NREM parasomnias (Hauri, Silber, & Boeve, 2007; Hurwitz,
Mahowald, Schenck, Schluter, & Bundlie, 1991); however, the science and evidence
of effectiveness are not yet compelling. Pharmacotherapy, with benzodiazepines or
antidepressants, is used for persistent NREM parasomnias, but there are few ran-
domized controlled trials of medications, and the results are mixed (Howell, 2012).
Epidemiology
Prevalence estimates for NREM parasomnias vary widely across studies. Most rely
on reports by the individual or a family member via surveys. Rates are very likely
to be underestimates, since the person has no memory of these nocturnal events
and they are only recognized if they are observed and reported by another person.
NREM parasomnias are most common in childhood. For sleepwalking, peak child-
hood prevalence (13%) has been observed at age 10 (Petit et al., 2015). A recent meta-
analysis estimated the lifetime prevalence of sleepwalking at 6.9%, with the cur-
rent prevalence for children at 5.0%, and that for adults at 1.5% (Stallman & Kohler,
2016). Sleep terrors occur predominantly in very young children. Petit and colleagues
(2015) reported a prevalence of 34% at 18 months of age, followed by a sharp decrease
to 13% by age 5, and a slow decline to 5% at 13 years. The lifetime prevalence of
sleep terrors has been estimated at 10.4%, and the current prevalence in adults at
2.7% (Bjorvatn, Grønli, & Pallesen, 2010). The rates of NREM parasomnias appear not
to vary significantly by gender, either in childhood (Petit et al., 2015) or adulthood
(Ohayon et al., 1999).
Comorbidity
The age-old beliefs that sleepwalkers and those with sleep terrors are “possessed”
or mad (Riva et al., 2010) have gone by the wayside. However, people with NREM
parasomnias may be more likely than those without to have more common mental

-- 435 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	415
health symptoms. For example, sleepwalkers often report stressful events or strong
positive emotions as triggers, and are more likely than controls to have elevated
depressive and anxiety symptoms (Lopez et al., 2013). However, another study of 105
comprehensively screened sleepwalkers reported that mean depression and anxiety
scores were similar to those of community samples (Labelle, Desautels, Montplaisir,
& Zadra, 2013).
In a telephone survey of a representative sample (N = 4,972) of people ages 15–100
in the United Kingdom, the relationship between various mental health factors and
the occurrence of NREM parasomnias was explored (Ohayon et al., 1999). Those with
any type of NREM parasomnia were more likely than those without to find their
lives “highly stressful.” For example, 38% of those with sleep terrors reported their
lives to be highly stressful versus 17% of those without a NREM parasomnia. Hav-
ing any type of NREM parasomnia was also associated with a higher likelihood of
having a current or past mood or anxiety disorder. The rates were particularly high
in the sleep terror group, 30 and 34% of whom had a concurrent mood or anxiety
disorder, respectively. So, although the majority of adults with NREM parasomnias
do not report a stressful life or mental health problems, the rates may be elevated—
particularly in those with sleep terrors—compared to the nonaffected population.
Interestingly, treating concurrent anxiety or depression with psychiatric medication
or psychotherapy was not found to reduce the incidence of sleepwalking in a small
subsample of young adult sleepwalkers (Guilleminault et al., 2005). Similar research
on the effects of treating concurrent mental health problems on the occurrence of
sleep terrors seems to be absent.
Etiology
Family history and genetics may contribute to a person’s predisposition to NREM
parasomnias. The genotype HLA DQB1*05:01 is found in higher rates in affected
individuals (Heidbreder et al., 2016; Lecendreux et al., 2003) and an inheritance study
of a family with many sleepwalkers implicated chromosome 20q12-q13.12 (Licis, Des-
ruisseau, Yamada, Duntley, & Gurnett, 2011). Prevalence of NREM parasomnias in
children increased with the degree to which parents were affected (Petit et al., 2015).
NREM parasomnias are most prevalent in early childhood, when the central
nervous system (CNS) is undergoing rapid development. The early stages of CNS
maturational processes are believed to contribute to vulnerability to NREM para-
somnias because of reduced inhibition of motor mechanisms combined with a not-
yet-mature prefrontal cortex (Kotagal, 2009). The peak incidence of night terrors is
earlier than that of sleepwalking (Petit et al., 2015), and this possibly relates to stage
of neural development, with locomotor coordination coming later. The two disorders
share many features and can occur in the same individual. In a longitudinal study of
1,940 young children (Petit et al., 2015), one-third of those who had early-childhood
sleep terrors went on to develop sleepwalking while still in childhood.
Studies of brain structure and function in adults with NREM parasomnias have
found some apparent abnormalities: activation of motor and cingulate cortices con-
current with deactivation of frontal parietal areas (Bassetti, Vella, Donati, Wielepp,
& Weder, 2000; Castelnovo et al., 2016; Heidbreder et al., 2017). This is consistent
with an understanding of NREM parasomnias as emerging from a disassociation

-- 436 of 498 --

416 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
of neural processes that normally work together to maintain the separate states of
wakefulness and NREM sleep. Although it can happen, the emergence of a NREM
parasomnia in adulthood, without a prior history in childhood, is rare.
Clinical Implications
As we have seen, NREM parasomnias are mostly likely to occur in predisposed indi-
viduals, when there has been a buildup of SWS pressure, combined with disruption
to sleep by noise, touch, or another sleep disorder. Interventions should therefore
focus on psychoeducation, prevention of SWS pressure buildup (i.e., by avoid-
ing sleep deprivation), and minimization of sleep disturbance due to external and
internal disruptors. These three approaches are described below. Because partners
and family members are affected by NREM parasomnia events, interventions must
include them along with the patient.
PSYCHOEDUCATION
It is important to explain the nature of NREM parasomnias and to offer reassur-
ance that their occurrence does not mean there is major psychopathology. In the case
of sleepwalking, it is important for the patient and family to create a safe physical
environment, to prevent the sleepwalker from tripping, falling, exiting the home, or
otherwise moving into harm’s way. This may involve extra indoor locks on doors and
windows, moving furniture to create a clear passage, sleeping on main floors, and
avoidance of upper bunks. During a sleepwalking event, the individual should not
be awakened, touched, or forced back to bed. This is to reduce the risk of the sleep-
walker, in their disoriented state, striking out at the observer. Rather, the observer
can make a gentle verbal suggestion to return to bed and lie down, knowing that this
is the extent of reasonable intervention in the moment.
PREVENTION OF SWS BUILDUP
Because sleep deprivation builds up SWS pressure, patients need to get good sleep
each night. Having a constant bedtime and rise time 7 days a week can support sleep
stability. Patients should be advised against restricting their sleep by avoiding late
nights, early mornings, and by taking afternoon naps, if they are helpful. It some-
times happens that adults, in an effort to prevent NREM parasomnia events, can
become cautious about sleep times and conditions, avoiding late nights and sleeping
only at home. In early adulthood, this can pose a problem for dating and romantic
relationships, and the patient may need support in sorting out lifestyle routines that
prevent episodes while maintaining relationships.
MINIMIZATION OF SLEEP DISTURBANCE
Based on the evidence, sleeping in a noise-controlled environment, and avoidance of
interruptions by bed partners, family members, or pets, especially in the first third
of the night, is recommended. As for internal sleep disruptors, it is important for
the clinician to recognize and treat comorbid sleep disorders, such as periodic limb

-- 437 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	417
movement disorder, and especially sleep-disordered breathing (Guilleminault et
al., 2005). These sleep disorders require a medical referral. Insomnia should also be
treated, the latter with CBT-I without sleep restriction (which builds up SWS pres-
sure).
A further clinical implication of the NREM parasomnia research is that it should
not be automatically assumed that patients who have NREM parasomnias have a
major mental illness. However, clinicians need to be aware of any comorbid stress,
anxiety, and depression, especially in those with night terrors. Evidence-based treat-
ment of these psychological conditions is relevant, although this alone may not affect
the incidence of parasomnia episodes.
REM Parasomnias
Nightmare disorder and RSBD occur in REM sleep. Nightmare disorder is character-
ized by repeated, extended, very distressing dreams that involve threats to survival
or safety. Unlike sleep terrors, there is a well-remembered dream story. The person
awakens rapidly to an alert state. The nightmares and the associated awakenings
cause significant distress or impairment in functioning. RSBD is characterized by
episodes of REM sleep associated with vocalization or complex motor behaviors,
which are consistent with dream enactment. The person is alert and not confused
upon awakening. Episodes of both disorders rarely occur within the first 90 minutes
of sleep (with the exception of posttraumatic nightmares), but are most common in
the latter half of the sleep period, when most REM sleep occurs. With RSBD, poly-
somnography shows REM sleep “without atonia”; that is, there is no loss of skeletal
muscle tone. Fuller descriptions of these two REM parasomnias follow.
Nightmare Disorder
PHENOMENOLOGY AND SYMPTOMS
“Posttraumatic” nightmares are distinguished from “idiopathic” nightmares. The
former replay aspects of a traumatic event, and the person experiences emotions
similar to those experienced at the time of the trauma. Indeed, nightmares are a core
intrusive symptom of DSM-5 PTSD (see Bryant, Lott, & Keane, Chapter 6, this vol-
ume). In contrast, idiopathic nightmares have imaginative stories that do not directly
reflect actual events.
ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES AND COMORBIDITY
Most dreaming occurs in REM sleep, which occurs predominantly in the second half
of nighttime sleep, especially the early morning hours. Therefore, nightmares usu-
ally occur within this time frame. However, posttraumatic nightmares, more so than
idiopathic nightmares, sometimes occur in NREM sleep (e.g., Stage NREM2), earlier
in the night. Posttraumatic nightmares are associated with greater sleep disturbance
(Germain & Nielsen, 2003) and depression than idiopathic ones (Davis, Pruiksma,
Rhudy, & Byrd, 2011). Nightmares, of either type, are likely to be reported during
periods of increased stress and are associated with mental health symptoms of

-- 438 of 498 --

418 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
depression, anxiety, schizophrenic symptoms, and distress (Nielsen & Levin, 2007).
Importantly, recurrent nightmares are associated with a heightened risk of suicide
(Tanskanen et al., 2001).
COURSE, OUTCOME, AND TREATMENT
A longitudinal study of nightmare occurrence in 406 pregnant women followed them
6 months after giving birth and 4 years later (Schredl et al., 2019). The authors found
that nightmare frequency was very stable over time. Krakow (2006) found that adult
sleep patients with nightmares reported having had them for an average of 14.3 years
(SD = 17.5). Both of these observations suggest that nightmare problems tend to persist
if left untreated. Furthermore, Krakow found that patients often do not believe that
the nightmares can be treated. They tend to seek help from sleep labs for other prob-
lems, such as poor sleep quality, breathing problems at night, insomnia and move-
ment complaints. However, there are effective treatments for nightmare disorder.
A treatment with substantial evidence of efficacy is imagery rehearsal therapy
(IRT) (Augedal, Hansen, Kronhaug, Harvey, & Pallesen, 2013; Morgenthaler et al.,
2018). With this technique, nightmares are revised—either in writing or in the imagi-
nation only—to make them less distressing and more satisfactory, then rehearsed
on a daily basis. Such a treatment protocol is described in detail by Krakow and
Zadra (2006). Exposure-based treatments, which can include various components
but often involve writing down or imagining the nightmare in its original form, also
show evidence of efficacy. These treatments typically involve more sessions than
IRT does. Unlike IRT, the longer the exposure-based therapy, the greater the reduc-
tion in nightmare frequency (Hansen, Hofling, Kroner-Borowik, Stangier, & Steil,
2013). It is not yet clear whether IRT or exposure-based treatment is more effective
(Hansen et al., 2013). Both appear to deliver medium effect sizes (Augedal et al., 2013;
Hansen et al., 2013). Comparisons are difficult due to the heterogeneity of treatments
(variations of IRT and exposure-based PTSD or not) and measures (e.g., nightmare
frequency, distress; prospective or retrospective reports).
In a thorough examination of ideas on the possible mechanisms of action of
nightmare treatments, Rousseau and Belleville (2018) analyzed the mechanistic
themes in the literature and empirical evidence for each theme. They assembled the
themes of mastery, prevention of avoidance, belief modification, decreased arousal,
and restoration of sleep functions under the overarching theme of emotional pro-
cessing of the fear structure, which they believe to be the central mechanism respon-
sible for reducing nightmare frequency and severity.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
According to several large epidemiological studies, approximately 2–5% of the gen-
eral population experience frequent nightmares (Sandman et al., 2013). The preva-
lence is somewhat higher (i.e., 7–11%) among children (Gieselmann et al., 2019). After
young adulthood (e.g., age 25), the prevalence then increases with age (Sandman et
al., 2013). In general, the prevalence is higher in women than in men throughout the
lifespan, and there may be a peak of nightmare prevalence in the perimenopausal
years (women ages 50–55) (Sandman et al., 2013). By ages 55–60, the rate in men
approaches that of women (Sandman et al., 2013). Nightmare disorder is especially

-- 439 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	419
prevalent among people exposed to war (7–11%; Sandman et al., 2013), and those with
psychiatric disorders (16–67%; Gieselmann et al., 2019), particularly PTSD (50–70%;
Spoormaker & Montgomery, 2008).
ETIOLOGY
Because of the strong association between nightmares and trauma and distress, most
models concerning the development of nightmare disorder stem from psychology.
Recent models implicate hyperarousal and impaired fear extinction (Gieselmann
et al., 2019). In the neurocognitive “affective network dysfunction” model, Nielsen
and Levin (2007) propose that dreams normally serve to extinguish fear memories,
and that nightmares occur when this process fails. The dysfunction is believed to be
facilitated by “affect load” (stressful events) and “affect distress” (heightened nega-
tive emotional reactivity); childhood trauma and adversity predispose individuals to
affect distress (Carr & Nielsen, 2017).
A cognitive model has also been proposed for recurrent nightmares (Spoor-
maker, 2008). In this model, the story line of a recurrent nightmare is represented in
the memory as a “script” or fixed expectation pattern. When neutral dream elements
remind the dreamer of nightmare elements, the nightmare script replays (Spoor-
maker, 2008). This process is augmented by negatively biased interpretations and the
strength of the fear memory. Furthermore, cognitive avoidance maintains the fearful
sequence of scenes (Spoormaker, 2008). The pathway to nightmare disorder appears
to be complex and, like the function of dreaming, the dysfunction that produces
nightmares remains a topic of intensive research and debate.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS
Assessment is made through clinical interview and by ruling out other nocturnal
disorders such as NREM parasomnias and nocturnal panic attacks. Because of the
high rates of anxiety, depression, distress, trauma exposure, and other psychiatric
symptoms in patients with nightmare disorder, a full mental health assessment
should be done to detect these possible comorbidities. In all cases of nightmare dis-
order, it is important to let patients know that effective treatments exist, since few
realize this.
Being a principal symptom of nightmare disorder, posttraumatic nightmares
are sometimes overlooked as an entity to be separately treated. However, nightmares
often do not resolve with trauma therapy alone, and nightmare disorder is now seen
as its own disorder, requiring specific treatment (Spoormaker & Montgomery, 2008).
It is diagnosed along with PTSD if the nightmare symptoms are causing significant
distress or impairment in functioning (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Nightmare treatment has been shown to not only improve sleep but also reduce
PTSD symptoms (Ho, Chan, & Tang, 2016) and is associated with a reduction in sui-
cidal ideation (Ellis, Rufino, & Nadorff, 2017). Because of these benefits and its brev-
ity, IRT has been suggested as a starting point in the treatment of PTSD, and clinical
trials are under way to examine IRT as a first-line treatment for PTSD and suicidality
(Gieselmann et al., 2019).
There is an unusually high prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing, particularly
obstructive sleep apnea, among people with PTSD (Jaoude, Vermont, Porhomayon, &

-- 440 of 498 --

420 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
El-Solh, 2015) and treating the breathing disorder lowers nightmare frequency and
distress in patients with PTSD (Zhang et al., 2019). Therefore, it is important to also
check for comorbid sleep apnea in cases of nightmare disorder.
There has been some debate about the importance of exposure to nightmare
content for treatment efficacy. Certainly, the opposite—active suppression of con-
tent—is not recommended, since suppression of thoughts, especially negative ones,
can lead to their resurfacing in dreams (Taylor & Bryant, 2007). Similarly, cognitive
avoidance may facilitate maintenance of fear and nightmare recurrence (Spoor-
maker, 2008). However, lengthy exposure may be unnecessary: IRT with minimal
exposure works well to reduce nightmares (Krakow et al., 2001). Patients may prefer
IRT over exposure-based treatments in order to avoid the most unpleasant aspects of
the nightmare. Adherence to IRT may be better than that of exposure for this reason.
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
PHENOMENOLOGY AND SYMPTOMS
In addition to REMs, a cardinal sign of REM sleep is a distinct reduction in muscle
tone. This loss of muscle tone, termed “atonia,” is due to skeletal muscle inhibition,
which prevents dreams from being acted out. In RSBD, the atonia is lost, and move-
ments consistent with dream stories are played out by the individual. A range of
vocalizations and movements is possible, from subtle hand movements to large, sud-
den movements, including punching, hitting, and kicking. Injuries to self and the
bed partner are not uncommon and can be severe. For example, violent behaviors
may occur if the person is dreaming of being threatened by a human or animal
entity and is trying to defend oneself. Despite the range of movements during REM,
people with RSBD rarely walk around the room or leave the bedroom. Unlike NREM
parasomnias (e.g., sleepwalking), most episodes of RSBD occur in the second half of
the night, the person’s eyes are closed, and there is often an abrupt awakening, with
clear recall of the dream content. Polysomnography shows an abnormally elevated
muscle tone in the electromyogram channel during REM sleep.
COURSE, OUTCOME, AND TREATMENT
Because of the relation to neurodegenerative processes (see “Etiology” section), and
the paucity of targeted treatments, the natural course of RSBD is a worsening of the
condition. The clinical emphasis is on managing the risk of inadvertent self-harm or
harm to others while acting out dreams, and medical monitoring for signs of Par-
kinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Practice guidelines for RSBD
recommend modifying the sleep environment (Level A), clonazepam, and melatonin
(both Level B) (Aurora et al., 2010).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The risk of RSBD increases with age, and the prevalence of RSBD in the population
over age 60 is roughly 1% (Dauvilliers et al., 2018). The population prevalence for
men and women is similar (Haba-Rubio et al., 2018), although it is possible that men
come to the attention of clinicians more often due to more violent dream enactment

-- 441 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	421
behaviors (Dauvilliers et al., 2018). RSBD is especially prevalent (30–70%) among peo-
ple with Parkinson’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, multiple system atrophy,
and narcolepsy (Dauvilliers et al., 2018).
ETIOLOGY
Many cases of RSBD are considered secondary to neurodegenerative diseases,
especially alpha-synucleinopathies, for example, Parkinson’s disease, dementia
with Lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy (Howell, 2012; Santamaria, 2014).
RSBD can occur with other neurological and immune disorders (brainstem lesions,
stroke, dementia, narcolepsy type 1, Guillain–Barré syndrome) (Dauvilliers et al.,
2018; Nobili & Arnulf, 2014). Even in cases of RSBD without obvious neurological
disease—so-called “idiopathic” RSBD—the subsequent development of a neurode-
generative disease is likely (Dauvilliers et al., 2018; Nobili & Arnulf, 2014). Based on
postmortem examination, the likelihood of neurodegenerative pathology after diag-
nosis of idiopathic RSBD was estimated to be 35% at 5 years, 73% at 10 years, and 93%
at 14 years (Iranzo et al., 2013).
From studies of RSBD with animal models, the etiology of the disorder is
believed to involve interruption of the REM atonia pathway and/or disinhibition of
motor pattern generators in the brainstem (American Academy of Sleep Medicine,
2014). Several pathologies can lead to RSBD, including synuclein-associated and non-
synuclein-associated neurodegeneration, orexin dysfunction, and toxicity from anti-
depressant medication (Howell, 2012).
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS
In addition to a history of episodes of complex motor behaviors and/or vocalization
during sleep, predominantly in the last half of the night, with alertness and orienta-
tion upon awakening, the diagnosis of RSBD requires polysomnographic recording
showing REM sleep without atonia. If a polysomnographic recording is not possible,
then RSBD can be diagnosed when there is a history suggestive of RSBD in a person
with a diagnosis of a synucleinopathy such as Parkinson’s disease (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2013). In the clinical interview, RSBD is distinguishable from
NREM parasomnias by the timing of occurrence (second vs. first half of the night),
the eyes being closed, the report of dream enactment behavior, the longer duration
of episodes, the low likelihood of walking or leaving the room, the more vigorous
behaviors that are consistent with dream content and the alertness upon awakening.
Psychoeducation about RSBD is a helpful initial step. The importance of making
the sleeping environment safe (e.g., replacing hard surfaces or sharp edges near the
bed with soft ones) should be stressed. Given the potential for harm to the bed part-
ner, that person must be involved in these conversations. The bed partner is often
relieved to have the problem openly addressed, and a decision is often made to sleep
in separate locations.
An injury prevention device that provides calming audio commands (record-
ings of a familiar voice) to the person with RSBD when their movements reach a cer-
tain threshold shows preliminary evidence of efficacy (Howell, Arneson, & Schenck,
2011). Another possible injury reduction strategy for people with RSBD would be to
borrow the nightmare disorder treatment of IRT to attempt to reduce the proportion

-- 442 of 498 --

422 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
of agitated dreams and nightmares; this idea has yet to be tested. Much more needs
to be learned about how RSBD might be effectively treated or, better yet, prevented.
CONCLUSION
All sleep disorders are important to recognize, assess, and treat as early as possible.
Insomnia disorder, CRSWDs, and parasomnias are the sleep–wake disorders often
encountered in psychological practice. These conditions have widespread impacts,
and the patient usually has an incomplete understanding of the problem. Established
and emerging research in these areas informs clinical practice; however, much more
research is needed into these pervasive problems, particularly the CRSWDs and
parasomnias.
REFERENCES
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2014). International classification of sleep disorders (3rd
ed.). Darien, IL: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Augedal, A. W., Hansen, K. S., Kronhaug, C. R., Harvey, A. G., & Pallesen, S. (2013). Random-
ized controlled trials of psychological and pharmacological treatments for nightmares:
A meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 17(2), 143–152.
Auger, R. R., Burgess, H. J., Emens, J. S., Deriy, L. V., Thomas, S. M., & Sharkey, K. M. (2015).
Clinical practice guideline for the treatment of intrinsic circadian rhythm sleep–wake
disorders: Advanced sleep–wake phase disorder (ASWPD), delayed sleep–wake phase
disorder (DSWPD), non-24-hour sleep–wake rhythm disorder (N24SWD), and irregular
sleep–wake rhythm disorder (ISWRD): An update for 2015. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medi-
cine, 11(10), 1199–1236.
Aurora, R. N., Zak, R. S., Maganti, R. K., Auerbach, S. H., Casey, K. R., Chowdhuri, S., . . .
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2010). Best practice guide for the treatment of
REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD). Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 6(1), 85–95.
Axelsson, J., Sundelin, T., Ingre, M., Someren, E. J. W. V., Olsson, A., & Lekander, M. (2010).
Beauty sleep: Experimental study on the perceived health and attractiveness of sleep
deprived people. British Medical Journal, 341, c6614.
Bassetti, C., Vella, S., Donati, F., Wielepp, P., & Weder, B. (2000). SPECT during sleepwalking.
Lancet, 356(9228), 484–485.
Bastien, C. H., Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation of the insomnia severity index as
an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine, 2(4), 297–307.
Bathgate, C. J., Edinger, J. D., & Krystal, A. D. (2017). Insomnia patients with objective short
sleep duration have a blunted response to cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia.
Sleep, 40(1), Article zsw012.
Beattie, L., Kyle, S. D., Espie, C. A., & Biello, S. M. (2015). Social interactions, emotion and sleep:
A systematic review and research agenda. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 24, 83–100.
Bjorvatn, B., Grønli, J., & Pallesen, S. (2010). Prevalence of different parasomnias in the general
population. Sleep Medicine, 11(10), 1031–1034.
Brouwer, A., van Raalte, D. H., Rutters, F., Elders, P. J. M., Snoek, F. J., Beekman, A. T. F., &
Bremmer, M. A. (2020). Sleep and HBA1c in patients with type 2 diabetes: Which sleep
characteristics matter most? Diabetes Care, 43, 234–243.

-- 443 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	423
Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., & Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh
Sleep Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry
Research, 28(2), 193–213.
Cappuccio, F. P., D’Elia, L., Strazzullo, P., & Miller, M. A. (2010). Quantity and quality of sleep
and incidence of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care,
33(2), 414–420.
Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., &
Morin, C. M. (2012). The consensus sleep diary: Standardizing prospective sleep self-
monitoring. Sleep, 35(2), 287–302.
Carr, M., & Nielsen, T. (2017). A novel differential susceptibility framework for the study of
nightmares: Evidence for trait sensory processing sensitivity. Clinical Psychology Review,
58, 86–96.
Castelnovo, A., Riedner, B. A., Smith, R. F., Tononi, G., Boly, M., & Benca, R. M. (2016). Scalp
and source power topography in sleepwalking and sleep terrors: A high-density EEG
study. Sleep, 39(10), 1815–1825.
Chaput, J. P., Wong, S. L., & Michaud, I. (2017). Duration and quality of sleep among Canadi-
ans aged 18 to 79. Health Reports, 28(9), 28–33.
Chaput, J. P., Yau, J., Rao, D. P., & Morin, C. M. (2018). Prevalence of insomnia for Canadians
aged 6 to 79. Health Reports, 29(12), 16–20.
Craske, M. G., & Tsao, J. C. (2005). Assessment and treatment of nocturnal panic attacks. Sleep
Medicine Reviews, 9(3), 173–184.
Cross, N. E., Carrier, J., Postuma, R. B., Gosselin, N., Kakinami, L., Thompson, C., . . . Dang-
Vu, T. (2019). Association between insomnia disorder and cognitive function in middle-
aged and older adults: A cross-sectional analysis of the Canadian Longitudinal Study on
Aging. Sleep, 42(8), Article zsz114.
Curtis, B. J., Ashbrook, L. H., Young, T., Finn, L. A., Fu, Y.-H., Ptáĉek, L. J., & Jones, C. R. (2019).
Extreme morning chronotypes are often familial and not exceedingly rare: The esti-
mated prevalence of advanced sleep phase, familial advanced sleep phase, and advanced
sleep–wake phase disorder in a sleep clinic population. Sleep, 42(10), Article zsz148.
Dauvilliers, Y., Morin, C., Cervena, K., Carlander, B., Touchon, J., Besset, A., & Billiard, M.
(2005). Family studies in insomnia. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 58(3), 271–278.
Dauvilliers, Y., Schenck, C. H., Postuma, R. B., Iranzo, A., Luppi, P. H., Plazzi, G., . . . Boeve, B.
(2018). REM sleep behavior disorder. Nature Reviews Disease Primers, 4(1), 19.
Davis, J. L., Pruiksma, K. E., Rhudy, J. L., & Byrd, P. (2011). A comparison of lifelong and post-
trauma nightmares in a civilian trauma sample: Nightmare characteristics, psychopa-
thology, and treatment outcome. Dreaming, 21(1), 70–80.
Derry, C. P., Davey, M., Johns, M., Kron, K., Glencross, D., Marini, C., . . . Berkovic, S. F. (2006).
Distinguishing sleep disorders from seizures: Diagnosing bumps in the night. Archives
of Neurology, 63(5), 705–709.
Diamond, L. M., Hicks, A. M., & Otter-Henderson, K. D. (2008). Every time you go away:
Changes in affect, behavior, and physiology associated with travel-related separations
from romantic partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(2), 385–403.
Drake, C. L., Pillai, V., & Roth, T. (2014). Stress and sleep reactivity: A prospective investigation
of the stress– diathesis model of insomnia. Sleep, 37(8), 1295–1304.
Durand, V. M., & Mindell, J. A. (1999). Behavioral intervention for childhood sleep terrors.
Behavior Therapy, 30(4), 705–715.
Durrence, H., & Lichstein, K. L. (2006). The sleep of African Americans: A comparative review.
Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 4(1), 29–44.
Ellis, T. E., Rufino, K. A., & Nadorff, M. R. (2017). Treatment of nightmares in psychiatric
inpatients with imagery rehearsal therapy: An open trial and case series. Behavioral Sleep
Medicine, 17(2), 1–14.

-- 444 of 498 --

424 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Frank, N. C., Spirito, A., Stark, L., & Owens-Stively, J. (1997). The use of scheduled awakenings
to eliminate childhood sleepwalking. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 22(3), 345–353.
Germain, A., & Nielsen, T. A. (2003). Sleep pathophysiology in posttraumatic stress disorder
and idiopathic nightmare sufferers. Biological Psychiatry, 54(10), 1092–1098.
Gieselmann, A., Aoudia, M. A., Carr, M., Germain, A., Gorzka, R., Holzinger, B., . . . Pietrowsky,
R. (2019). Aetiology and treatment of nightmare disorder: State of the art and future per-
spectives. Journal of Sleep Research, 28(4), Article e12820.
Gringras, P., Middleton, B., Skene, D. J., & Revell, V. L. (2015). Bigger, brighter, bluer-better?:
Current light-emitting devices—adverse sleep properties and preventative strategies.
Frontiers in Public Health, 3, 233.
Grønli, J., Byrkjedal, I. D., Bjorvatn, B., Nødtvedt, O., Hamre, B., & Pallesen, S. (2016). Reading
from an iPad or from a book in bed: The impact on human sleep: A randomized con-
trolled crossover trial. Sleep Medicine, 21, 86–92.
Guilleminault, C., Kirisoglu, C., Bao, G., Arias, V., Chan, A., & Li, K. K. (2005). Adult chronic
sleepwalking and its treatment based on polysomnography. Brain, 128(5), 1062–1069.
Haba-Rubio, J., Frauscher, B., Marques-Vidal, P., Toriel, J., Tobback, N., Andries, D., . . . Heinzer,
R. (2018). Prevalence and determinants of REM sleep behavior disorder in the general
population. Sleep, 41(2), Article zsx197.
Hansen, K., Hofling, V., Kroner-Borowik, T., Stangier, U., & Steil, R. (2013). Efficacy of psy-
chological interventions aiming to reduce chronic nightmares: A meta-analysis. Clinical
Psychology Review, 33(1), 146–155.
Harvey, A. G. (2002). A cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40(8),
869–893.
Hauri, P. J., Friedman, M., & Ravaris, C. L. (1989). Sleep in patients with spontaneous panic
attacks. Sleep, 12(4), 323–337.
Hauri, P. J., Silber, M. H., & Boeve, B. F. (2007). The treatment of parasomnias with hypnosis: A
5-year follow-up study. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 3(4), 369–373.
Heidbreder, A., Frauscher, B., Mitterling, T., Boentert, M., Schirmacher, A., Hortnagl, P., . . .
Hogl, B. (2016). Not only sleepwalking but NREM parasomnia irrespective of the type is
associated with HLA DQB1*05:01. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 12(4), 565–570.
Heidbreder, A., Stefani, A., Brandauer, E., Steiger, R., Kremser, C., Gizewski, E. R., . . . Scher-
fler, C. (2017). Gray matter abnormalities of the dorsal posterior cingulate in sleep walk-
ing. Sleep Medicine, 36, 152–155.
Hida, A., Kitamura, S., & Mishima, K. (2012). Pathophysiology and pathogenesis of circadian
sleep disorders. Journal of Physiological Anthropology, 31(1), 7.
Ho, F. Y., Chan, C. S., & Tang, K. N. (2016). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for sleep distur-
bances in treating posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: A meta-analysis of random-
ized controlled trials. Clinical Psychology Review, 43, 90–102.
Horne, J. A., & Ostberg, O. (1976). A self-assessment questionnaire to determine morning-
ness eveningness in human circadian rhythms. International Journal of Chronobiology, 4(2),
97–110.
Howell, M. J. (2012). Parasomnias: An updated review. Neurotherapeutics, 9(4), 753–775.
Howell, M. J., Arneson, P. A., & Schenck, C. H. (2011). A novel therapy for REM sleep behavior
disorder (RBD). Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 7(6), 639A–644A.
Hurwitz, T. D., Mahowald, M. W., Schenck, C. H., Schluter, J. L., & Bundlie, S. R. (1991). A ret-
rospective outcome study and review of hypnosis as treatment of adults with sleepwalk-
ing and sleep terror. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179(4), 228–233.
Iranzo, A., Tolosa, E., Gelpi, E., Molinuevo, J. L., Valldeoriola, F., Serradell, M., . . . Santama-
ria, J. (2013). Neurodegenerative disease status and post-mortem pathology in idiopathic
rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder: An observational cohort study. Lancet
Neurology, 12(5), 443–453.

-- 445 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	425
Janson, C., Lindberg, E., Gislason, T., Elmasry, A., & Boman, G. (2001). Insomnia in men—a
10-year prospective population based study. Sleep, 24(4), 425–430.
Jaoude, P., Vermont, L. N., Porhomayon, J., & El-Solh, A. A. (2015). Sleep-disordered breathing
in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder. Annals of the American Thoracic Society,
12(2), 259–268.
Jarrin, D., Alvaro, P., Bouchard, M.-A., Jarrin, S., Drake, C., & Morin, C. (2018). Insomnia and
hypertension: A systematic review. Sleep Medicine, 41, 3–38.
Javaheri, S., & Redline, S. (2017). Insomnia and risk of cardiovascular disease. Chest, 152(2),
435–444.
Kalmbach, D. A., Pillai, V., Arnedt, J. T., & Drake, C. L. (2016). DSM-5 insomnia and short sleep:
Comorbidity landscape and racial disparities. Sleep, 39(12), 2101–2111.
Kennaway, D. J., Lushington, K., Dawson, D., Lack, L., Heuvel, C., & Rogers, N. (1999). Urinary
6-sulfatoxymelatonin excretion and aging: New results and a critical review of the litera-
ture. Journal of Pineal Research, 27(4), 210–220.
Knutson, K. L., Ryden, A. M., Mander, B. A., & Van Cauter, E. (2006). Role of sleep duration
and quality in the risk and severity of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Archives Internal Medicine,
166(16), 1768–1774.
Knutsson, A., Hallquist, J., Reuterwall, C., Theorell, T., & Akerstedt, T. (1999). Shiftwork and
myocardial infarction: A case– control study. Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
56(1), 46–50.
Kotagal, S. (2009). Parasomnias in childhood. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 13(2), 157–168.
Krakow, B. (2006). Nightmare complaints in treatment-seeking patients in clinical sleep medi-
cine settings: Diagnostic and treatment implications. Sleep, 29(10), 1313–1319.
Krakow, B., Hollifield, M., Johnston, L., Koss, M., Schrader, R., Warner, T. D., . . . Prince, H.
(2001). Imagery rehearsal therapy for chronic nightmares in sexual assault survivors
with posttraumatic stress disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 286(5), 537–545.
Krakow, B., & Zadra, A. (2006). Clinical management of chronic nightmares: Imagery rehearsal
therapy. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 4(1), 45–70.
Kurina, L. M., Knutson, K. L., Hawkley, L. C., Cacioppo, J. T., Lauderdale, D. S., & Ober, C.
(2011). Loneliness is associated with sleep fragmentation in a communal society. Sleep,
34(11), 1519–1526.
Labelle, M. A., Desautels, A., Montplaisir, J., & Zadra, A. (2013). Psychopathologic correlates of
adult sleepwalking. Sleep Medicine, 14(12), 1348–1355.
Lamond, N., Tiggemann, M., & Dawson, D. (2000). Factors predicting sleep disruption in type
II diabetes. Sleep, 23(3), 415–416.
Laugsand, L. E., Vatten, L. J., Platou, C., & Janszky, I. (2011). Insomnia and the risk of acute
myocardial infarction. Circulation, 124(19), 2073–2081.
Lecendreux, M., Bassetti, C., Dauvilliers, Y., Mayer, G., Neidhart, E., & Tafti, M. (2003). HLA
and genetic susceptibility to sleepwalking. Molecular Psychiatry, 8(1), 114–117.
Lewy, A. J., Cutler, N. L., & Sack, R. L. (1999). The endogenous melatonin profile as a marker
for circadian phase position. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 14(3), 227–236.
Lichstein, K. L., Durrence, H. H., Riedel, B. W., Taylor, D. J., & Bush, A. J. (2004). Epidemiology of
sleep: Age, gender, and ethnicity. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Licis, A. K., Desruisseau, D. M., Yamada, K. A., Duntley, S. P., & Gurnett, C. A. (2011). Novel
genetic findings in an extended family pedigree with sleepwalking. Neurology, 76(1), 49–52.
Lopes, L. A., Lins, C. M., Adeodato, V. G., Quental, D. P., de Bruin, P. F., Montenegro, R. M.,
& de Bruin, V.M. (2005). Restless legs syndrome and quality of sleep in type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care, 28(11), 2633–2636.
Lopez, R., Jaussent, I., Scholz, S., Bayard, S., Montplaisir, J., & Dauvilliers, Y. (2013). Functional
impairment in adult sleepwalkers: A case– control study. Sleep, 36(3), 345–351.

-- 446 of 498 --

426 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Macchi, M. M., & Bruce, J. N. (2004). Human pineal physiology and functional significance of
melatonin. Frontiers of Neuroendocrinology, 25(3–4), 177–195.
McGlinchey, E. L., Talbot, L. S., Chang, K.-H., Kaplan, K. A., Dahl, R. E., & Harvey, A. G. (2011).
The effect of sleep deprivation on vocal expression of emotion in adolescents and adults.
Sleep, 34(9), 1233–1241.
Megdal, S. P., Kroenke, C. H., Laden, F., Pukkala, E., & Schernhammer, E. S. (2005). Night work
and breast cancer risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal of Cancer,
41(13), 2023–2032.
Minges, K. E., & Redeker, N. S. (2016). Delayed school start times and adolescent sleep: A sys-
tematic review of the experimental evidence. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 28, 86–95.
Morgenthaler, T. I., Auerbach, S., Casey, K. R., Kristo, D., Maganti, R., Ramar, K., . . . Kartje, R.
(2018). Position paper for the treatment of nightmare disorder in adults: An American Acad-
emy of Sleep Medicine position paper. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 14(6), 1041–1055.
Morin, C. M. (1993). Insomnia: Psychological assessment and management. New York: Guilford
Press.
Morin, C. M., Belanger, L., Leblanc, M., Ivers, H., Savard, J., Espie, C. A., . . . Gregoire, J. P.
(2009). The natural history of insomnia: A population-based 3-year longitudinal study.
Archives of Internal Medicine, 169, 447–453.
Morin, C. M., Leblanc, M., Bélanger, L., Ivers, H., Mérette, C., & Savard, J. (2011). Prevalence
of insomnia and its treatment in Canada. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 56(9), 540–548.
Nielsen, T., & Levin, R. (2007). Nightmares: A new neurocognitive model. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 11(4), 295–310.
Nobili, L., & Arnulf, I. (2014). Parasomnias: Pathophysiology and psychopathology. In C. Bas-
setti, Z. Dogas, & P. Peigneaux (Eds.), Sleep medicine textbook (pp. 377–388). Regensburg,
Germany: European Sleep Research Society.
Ohayon, M. M., Carskadon, M. A., Guilleminault, C., & Vitiello, M. V. (2004). Meta-analysis of
quantitative sleep parameters from childhood to old age in healthy individuals: Devel-
oping normative sleep values across the human lifespan. Sleep, 27(7), 1255–1273.
Ohayon, M. M., Guilleminault, C., & Priest, R. G. (1999). Night terrors, sleepwalking, and con-
fusional arousals in the general population: Their frequency and relationship to other
sleep and mental disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(4), 268–276.
Paine, J., Fink, J., Gander, P., & Warman, G. R. (2014). Identifying advanced and delayed sleep
phase disorders in the general population: A national survey of New Zealand adults.
Chronobiology International, 31(5), 627–636.
Perlis, M. L., Giles, D. E., Mendelson, W. B., Bootzin, R. R., & Wyatt, J. K. (1997). Psychophysi-
ological insomnia: The behavioral model and a neurocognitive perspective. Journal of
Sleep Research, 6(3), 179–188.
Petit, D., Pennestri, M. H., Paquet, J., Desautels, A., Zadra, A., Vitaro, F., . . . Montplaisir, J.
(2015). Childhood sleepwalking and sleep terrors: A longitudinal study of prevalence
and familial aggregation. JAMA Pediatrics, 169(7), 653–658.
Pillai, V., Roth, T., & Drake, C. L. (2015). The nature of stable insomnia phenotypes. Sleep, 38(1),
127–138.
Pilon, M., Montplaisir, J., & Zadra, A. (2008). Precipitating factors of somnambulism: Impact of
sleep deprivation and forced arousals. Neurology, 70(24), 2284–2290.
Potter, G. D., Skene, D. J., Arendt, J., Cade, J. E., Grant, P. J., & Hardie, L. J. (2016). Circadian
rhythm and sleep disruption: Causes, metabolic consequences, and countermeasures.
Endocrinology Review, 37(6), 584–608.
Pressman, M. R. (2007). Factors that predispose, prime and precipitate NREM parasomnias in
adults: Clinical and forensic implications. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 11(1), 5–30; discussion
31–33.
Pressman, M. R. (2019). The neurophysiological and neurochemical effects of alcohol on the

-- 447 of 498 --

Sleep–Wake Disorders 	427
brain are inconsistent with current evidence based models of sleepwalking. Sleep Medi-
cine Reviews, 43, 92–95.
Provini, F., Plazzi, G., Tinuper, P., Vandi, S., Lugaresi, E., & Montagna, P. (1999). Nocturnal
frontal lobe epilepsy: A clinical and polygraphic overview of 100 consecutive cases.
Brain, 122(6), 1017–1031.
Qaseem, A., Kansagara, D., Forciea, M. A., Cooke, M., & Denberg, T. D. (2016). Management
of chronic insomnia disorder in adults: A clinical practice guideline from the American
college of physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine, 165(2), 125–133.
Reid, K. J., Jaksa, A. A., Eisengart, J. B., Baron, K. G., Lu, B., Kane, P., . . . Zee, P. C. (2012).
Systematic evaluation of Axis-I DSM diagnoses in delayed sleep phase disorder and
evening-type circadian preference. Sleep Medicine, 13(9), 1171–1177.
Riemann, D., Baglioni, C., Bassetti, C., Bjorvatn, B., Groselj, L. D., Ellis, J. G., . . . Spiegelhalder,
K. (2017). European guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia. Journal of
Sleep Research, 26, 675–700.
Riva, M. A., Sironi, V. A., Tremolizzo, L., Lombardi, C., De Vito, G., Ferrarese, C., & Cesana, G.
(2010). Sleepwalking in Italian operas: A window on popular and scientific knowledge
on sleep disorders in the 19th century. European Neurology, 63(2), 116–121.
Robillard, R., Naismith, S. L., Rogers, N. L., Ip, T. K., Hermens, D. F., Scott, E. M., & Hickie, I. B.
(2013). Delayed sleep phase in young people with unipolar or bipolar affective disorders.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 145(2), 260–263.
Roenneberg, T., Wirz-Justice, A., & Merrow, M. (2003). Life between clocks: Daily temporal
patterns of human chronotypes. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 18(1), 80–90.
Rousseau, A., & Belleville, G. (2018). The mechanisms of action underlying the efficacy of
psychological nightmare treatments: A systematic review and thematic analysis of dis-
cussed hypotheses. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 39, 122–133.
Sandman, N., Valli, K., Kronholm, E., Ollila, H. M., Revonsuo, A., Laatikainen, T., & Paunio,
T. (2013). Nightmares: Prevalence among the Finnish general adult population and war
veterans during 1972–2007. Sleep, 36(7), 1041–1050.
Santamaria, J. (2014). Parasomnias: Clinical picture and diagnosis. In C. Bassetti, Z. Dogas, &
P. Peigneaux (Eds.), Sleep medicine textbook (pp. 1–131). Regensburg, Germany: European
Sleep Research Society.
Saper, C. B., Fuller, P. M., Pedersen, N. P., Lu, J., & Scammell, T. E. (2010). Sleep state switching.
Neuron, 68(6), 1023–1042.
Sateia, M. J. (2014). International classification of sleep disorders—third edition. Chest, 146(5), 1387–
1394.
Sateia, M. J., Buysse, D. J., Krystal, A. D., Neubauer, D. N., & Heald, J. L. (2017). Clinical practice
guideline for the pharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia in adults: An American
Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical practice guideline. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine,
13(2), 307–349.
Schrader, H., Bovim, G., & Sand, T. (1993). The prevalence of delayed and advanced sleep
phase syndromes. Journal of Sleep Research, 2(1), 51–55.
Schredl, M., Gilles, M., Wolf, I., Peus, V., Scharnholz, B., Sütterlin, M., . . . Deuschle, M. (2019).
Nightmares and stress: A longitudinal study. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 15(9), 1209–
1215.
Shekleton, J. A., Flynn-Evans, E. E., Miller, B., Epstein, L. J., Kirsch, D., Brogna, L. A., . . . Raja-
ratnam, S. M. W. (2014). Neurobehavioral performance impairment in insomnia: Rela-
tionships with self-reported sleep and daytime functioning. Sleep, 37(1), 107–116.
Sigurdardottir, L. G., Valdimarsdottir, U. A., Fall, K., Rider, J. R., Lockley, S. W., Schernham-
mer, E., & Mucci, L. A. (2012). Circadian disruption, sleep loss, and prostate cancer risk:
A systematic review of epidemiologic studies. Cancer Epidemiologic Biomarkers Prevention,
21(7), 1002–1011.

-- 448 of 498 --

428 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Spiegel, K., Leproult, R., & Van Cauter, E. (1999). Impact of sleep debt on metabolic and endo-
crine function. Lancet, 354(9188), 1435–1439.
Spielman, A. J., Caruso, L. S., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1987). A behavioral perspective on insomnia
treatment. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 10, 541–553.
Spoormaker, V. I. (2008). A cognitive model of recurrent nightmares. International Journal of
Dream Research, 1(1), 15–22.
Spoormaker, V. I., & Montgomery, P. (2008). Disturbed sleep in post-traumatic stress disorder:
Secondary symptom or core feature? Sleep Medicine Reviews, 12(3), 169–184.
Stallman, H. M., & Kohler, M. (2016). Prevalence of sleepwalking: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 11(11), e0164769.
Stamatakis, K. A., & Punjabi, N. M. (2010). Effects of sleep fragmentation on glucose metabo-
lism in normal subjects. Chest, 137(1), 95–101.
Sundelin, T., Lekander, M., Kecklund, G., Someren, E. J. W. V., Olsson, A., & Axelsson, J. (2013).
Cues of fatigue: Effects of sleep deprivation on facial appearance. Sleep, 36(9), 1355–1360.
Tanskanen, A., Tuomilehto, J., Viinamaki, H., Vartiainen, E., Lehtonen, J., & Puska, P. (2001).
Nightmares as predictors of suicide. Sleep, 24(7), 844–847.
Tang, S., Huang, W., Lu, S., Lu, L., Li, G., Chen, X., . . . Tang, J. (2017). Increased plasma orexin-
A levels in patients with insomnia disorder are not associated with prepro-orexin or
orexin receptor gene polymorphisms. Peptides, 88, 55–61.
Taylor, F., & Bryant, R. A. (2007). The tendency to suppress, inhibiting thoughts, and dream
rebound. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(1), 163–168.
Turner, J., Drummond, L. M., Mukhopadhyay, S., Ghodse, H., White, S., Pillay, A., & Fine-
berg, N. A. (2007). A prospective study of delayed sleep phase syndrome in patients with
severe resistant obsessive– compulsive disorder. World Psychiatry, 6(2), 108–111.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2017). Screening for obstructive sleep apnea in adults:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 317(4), 407–414.
van der Lely, S., Frey, S., Garbazza, C., Wirz-Justice, A., Jenni, O. G., Steiner, R., . . . Schmidt,
C. (2015). Blue blocker glasses as a countermeasure for alerting effects of evening light-
emitting diode screen exposure in male teenagers. Journal of Adolescent Health, 56(1),
113–119.
Vgontzas, A. N., & Fernandez-Mendoza, J. (2013). Insomnia with short sleep duration: Noso-
logical, diagnostic, and treatment implications. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 8(3), 309–322.
Vincent, N., & Walsh, K. (2013). Hyperarousal, sleep scheduling, and time awake in bed as
mediators of outcome in computerized cognitive-behavioral therapy (cCBT) for insom-
nia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51(3), 161–166.
Winkelman, J. W., Buxton, O. M., Jensen, J. E., Benson, K. L., O’Connor, S. P., Wang, W., & Ren-
shaw, P. F. (2008). Reduced brain GABA in primary insomnia: Preliminary data from 4T
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS). Sleep, 31(11), 1499–1506.
Zhang, B., & Wing, Y. K. (2006). Sex differences in insomnia: A meta-analysis. Sleep, 29(1),
85–93.
Zhang, Y., Ren, R., Yang, L., Zhou, J., Sanford, L. D., & Tang, X. (2019). The effect of treat-
ing obstructive sleep apnea with continuous positive airway pressure on posttraumatic
stress disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis with hypothetical model. Neuro-
science and Biobehavioral Reviews, 102, 172–183.

-- 449 of 498 --

429
Suicide is a leading cause of death worldwide. In 2016, approximately 1.4% of all
deaths were due to suicide (World Health Organization [WHO], 2020c). Moreover,
suicide is the second leading cause of death among adolescents and young adults
(ages 15–29) and accounts for more deaths in this age range than cancer, heart disease,
or homicide (WHO, 2020a). We summarize in this chapter current knowledge about
suicide, including the state of suicide research, theory, and treatment. We address
these issues in three major sections: a first section describing the phenomenology of
suicide, a second one describing factors involve in its etiology, and a third present-
ing psychological approaches that have received empirical support in reducing sui-
cidal thoughts and behaviors. We also present clinical implications and principles of
change derived from models and findings to help practitioners in their assessment,
monitoring, and management of suicidality.
PHENOMENOLOGY
Definition and Classification
It is important to begin by defining key terms. “Suicide” refers to death resulting
from self-inflicted injury, with at least some intent to die. A “suicide attempt” refers
to self-inflicted injury, with at least some intent to die, which may or may not end in
death. “Suicide ideation” refers to thoughts about suicide or suicide attempts, ranging
from passive desire for death to active intent to die by suicide. These definitions are
consistent with those offered by Turecki and Brent (2016). We begin with these defi-
nitions because, over the years, confusion and inconsistency regarding definitions
and terminology have been considerable. Terms such as “parasuicide,” “self-harm,”
“self-inflicted violence,” “self-mutilation,” “self-injury,” “suicidal gesture,” and “sui-
cidal threat” are used throughout the scientific and clinical literature in different
C H A P T E R 1 5
Suicide
Craig J. Bryan
E. David Klonsky

-- 450 of 498 --

430 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
ways by different researchers and practitioners. For example, the term “parasuicide”
is sometimes used to include all forms of self-inflicted injury, regardless of suicidal
intent (i.e., both suicidal and nonsuicidal forms of self-injury), and other times it is
used specifically to mean nonsuicidal forms of self-injury. Thus, when reading an
article or chapter that uses one or more of these terms, it is important to check the
definition being used by the authors. In general, we recommend against the terms
“committed suicide,” “completed suicide,” “failed attempt,” “nonfatal suicide,” “suc-
cessful suicide,” “suicidal gesture,” “suicide threat,” “self-mutilation,” and “parasui-
cide,” because they are considered misleading or vague, and in some cases pejorative
(Klonsky, May, & Saffer, 2016).
A key definitional issue in the field is the distinction between suicidal and non-
suicidal forms of self-harm. Historically, self-injurious behaviors with and without
suicidal intent were often lumped together into a single category of self-harm behav-
iors. However, researchers around the world are increasingly emphasizing the dis-
tinction between suicide attempts and nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI). Specifically,
suicide attempts refer to self-injury with at least some intent to die, whereas NSSI refers
to self-injury without intent to die (International Society for the Study of Self-Injury,
2020). The distinction is important because suicide attempts and NSSI also differ
in several other important ways. These include frequency (NSSI is more frequent),
methods (common suicide attempt methods include firearm, overdose, and hanging,
whereas common NSSI methods include cutting and scratching), medical severity
(NSSI rarely requires medical attention), motivations (NSSI is most often performed
to cope with intense negative emotions), and treatment (suicide attempts or intent
sometimes require hospitalizations, including involuntary hospitalizations, which is
very rarely required for NSSI) (Klonsky, Victor, & Saffer, 2014). At the same time, it
is important to recognize that suicide attempts and NSSI can and often do co-occur
within the same person; for example, it is possible for a given individual to some-
times use NSSI to regulate intense negative emotions and at other times to have sui-
cide ideation or attempt suicide. The relationship between suicide attempts and NSSI
is the subject of considerable research and theory (Hamza, Stewart, & Willoughby,
2012; Klonsky, May, & Glenn, 2013), and for this reason is addressed further in the
“Associated Features” section.
Another important issue is the place of suicide and suicide attempts in the
diagnostic manuals that guide the classification of mental disorders. Historically,
diagnostic manuals have not included separate sections for suicide; instead, suicide,
suicide attempts, and suicide ideation are only referenced when considered relevant
for describing other mental disorders. For example, in the fourth edition of the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 1994), the diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder included
“recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats,” and the diagnostic criteria for
major depression included “recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or
a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide” (as a side note, these
criteria use older terms—“gestures,” “threats,” “committing”—that we now consider
unhelpful and pejorative).
More recently, there have been calls for suicide to be classified as an indepen-
dent diagnostic entity. The Appendix of the most recent edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) includes a proposal for a psychiatric

-- 451 of 498 --

Suicide 	431
diagnosis called suicidal behavior disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
According to the proposed criteria, most individuals who have attempted suicide
during the preceding 2 years would qualify for the diagnosis. Both advantages and
limitations of this proposal have been articulated (Obegi, 2019; Oquendo & Baca-
Garcia, 2014). Since publication of DSM-5, alternative suicide diagnoses or syn-
dromes have also been proposed. Whereas the DSM-5 proposal puts the emphasis
on behavior (i.e., requiring a recent suicide attempt), other proposals elaborate on the
affective and cognitive experiences of those at risk for suicide. These include acute
suicidal affective disturbance, which emphasizes rising suicidal intent, social alien-
ation, hopelessness, and agitation, and suicide crisis syndrome, which emphasizes
the persistent feeling of entrapment (Rogers, Galynker, Yaseen, DeFazio, & Joiner,
2017). Knowledge about the validity and clinical utility of these proposals is only
beginning to accumulate. Thus, it remains unclear whether suicide will ultimately
be recognized as a distinct diagnostic entity.
A final consideration we note is whether suicide should be classified as a mental
health problem. Those who advocate viewing suicide as a mental health problem
cite data that more than 90% of those who die by suicide meet criteria for one or
more mental disorders at the time of their death (Arsenault-Lapierre, Kim, & Turecki,
2004). However, others suggest that in some populations this figure is closer to 50%,
which means that approximately half of those who die by suicide do not have a men-
tal disorder (Phillips, 2010). Moreover, it is well established that the vast majority of
individuals with mental disorders do not die by suicide, and a recent meta-analysis
found that sociodemographic characteristics and stressful life events predict suicide
more strongly than do mental disorders (Franklin et al., 2017). In short, while mental
disorders can be important contributors to suicide, a full understanding of suicide
must consider a range of sociological, interpersonal, psychological, and biological
contexts and causes.
Epidemiology
Most of what is known about the epidemiology of suicide comes from data obtained
and reported by the WHO (2020a, 2020b, 2020c). Worldwide, approximately 800,000
people die by suicide each year. In 2016, the global age-standardized suicide rate was
10.5 per 100,000. In general, suicide rates are highest among people experiencing
crises, violence, abuse, loss, or isolation, and for vulnerable groups that experience
discrimination, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender and other sexual
minorities (LGBTQ+), indigenous populations, and refugees. Suicide rates are also
higher among those with mental illness.
Suicide trends can vary greatly by geography and context. For example, suicide
rates tend to be highest in Southeast Asia, Europe, and Africa, and lowest in the East-
ern Mediterranean area. Other trends tend to be more generalizable and consistent.
For example, in most regions around the world, the suicide rate is higher in men than
in women, even though women attempt suicide more often. Globally, the suicide rate
is 1.8 times higher for men than for women. One reason for this pattern may be that
men tend to choose methods that more often end in death, such as firearms, whereas
women tend to choose methods that less often end in death, such as overdose/poi-
soning. Suicide rates in the United States mirror these global trends. Suicide in the

-- 452 of 498 --

432 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
United States also varies considerably across racial identity (rates are highest among
individuals identifying as White or Native Americans) and age groups (rates are
highest among middle-aged adults and older adults).
Most suicide attempts do not end in death. For every suicide death, there are
many who have made nonfatal attempts and even more who have considered suicide
without making an attempt. Worldwide, approximately 9% of people have seriously
considered suicide, and approximately 2% have made suicide attempts (Nock et al.,
2008). These rates are even higher in the United States, where an estimated 16% have
seriously considered suicide and 5% have made a suicide attempt (Nock et al., 2008).
It is fair to say that a large minority of people have experienced suicide ideation at
some point in their lives.
When considering the epidemiology of suicide, it is important to consider chal-
lenges in obtaining accurate data. The suicide data reported by different countries
are not always high quality, especially given that suicide is a sensitive topic—and in
some countries it is illegal. It is therefore likely that suicide is often underreported.
It is also likely that many suicide deaths are misclassified, for example, recorded as
accidental falls or overdoses. For these reasons, the WHO and others interested in
the epidemiology of suicide are continually working to improve the quality of data
collection and reporting methods.
Typical Symptoms and Associated Features
Research has identified an incredibly diverse range of correlates and predictors of
suicide, suicide attempts, and suicide ideation. However, these factors do have one
thing in common: They are very poor predictors of future suicide, suicide attempts,
and suicide ideation (Franklin et al., 2017). A comprehensive review of this topic is
far beyond the scope of this chapter. Here, we identify what are arguably the most
important symptoms and features associated with suicide, suicide attempts, and sui-
cide ideation, and also address some important misconceptions.
Motivations for Suicide
Perhaps the most consistent finding in suicidology are the motivations for suicide
reported by those who have made suicide attempts. Different theorists have proposed
different motivations for suicide. These include social isolation, pain, hopelessness,
low belongingness, perceived burdensomeness, a “cry for help,” and many others.
Importantly, a recent body of work has found evidence that two of these motiva-
tions are most common and near-universally reported by those who attempt suicide:
pain and hopelessness (May & Klonsky, 2013; May, O’Brien, Liu, & Klonsky, 2016;
May, Pachkowski, & Klonsky, 2020). Suicide is usually motivated by a combination
of overwhelming psychological pain and hopelessness that the pain can be stopped.
This finding has been replicated in both adults and adolescents who have attempted
suicide, and both clinical and nonclinical populations. Furthermore, there is both a
compelling body of literature that psychological pain is closely tied to suicide, and
especially the experience of suicide ideation (Ducasse et al., 2018; Hinze et al., 2019),
and a vast literature that suggests hopelessness predicts suicide, suicide attempts,
and suicide ideation more strongly than do depressive symptoms (Ribeiro, Huang,

-- 453 of 498 --

Suicide 	433
Fox, & Franklin, 2018). Taken together, this body of research has led one theorist to
conclude that “the combination of pain and hopelessness is what causes suicide ide-
ation to develop” (Klonsky & May, 2015b, p. 117).
Stressful Life Events
Some of the strongest near-term predictors of suicide attempts and death are stress-
ful life events, especially those of an interpersonal nature. Dozens of studies over
several decades link stressful life events to suicide ideation and attempts (Liu &
Miller, 2014). A review of “psychological autopsy studies” (studies that carefully
examine the lives of people who have died by suicide, sometimes in comparison
to the lives of people who did not die by suicide) concluded that nearly all suicide
decedents studied were found to have experienced one or more significant negative
life events in the months preceding the suicide (Foster, 2011). These events tended to
include interpersonal conflict, and to relate to suicide death independent of histories
of mental disorder. Another study using a timeline followback method revealed that
negative life events, particularly interpersonal ones involving a romantic partner,
tended to precede nonfatal suicide attempts (Bagge, Glenn, & Lee, 2013). Further-
more, meta-analytic work supports a link between stressful life events and suicide:
This work, as previously mentioned, has also found that life events predict suicide
death more strongly than do mental disorders (Franklin et al., 2017). Unfortunately,
it is challenging to study the periods of time immediately preceding suicide attempts
and death. As a result, the field still has much to learn regarding the immediate ante-
cedents and causes of suicide.
Mental Disorders
Most mental disorders have been found to be associated with suicide ideation,
attempts, and death. Interestingly, the association seems to be strongest for suicide
ideation: Rates of mental disorders are much higher in those with histories of sui-
cide ideation compared to those without, whereas rates of mental disorder are only
modestly higher in those with histories of suicide attempts compared to those with
histories of ideation but not attempts (Kessler, Borges, & Walters, 1999; May & Klon-
sky, 2016). The magnitudes of associations with suicide, suicide attempts, and sui-
cide ideation are different for different mental disorders. In general, suicide attempts
appear to be most common in bipolar disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and
depression (Nock et al., 2009). A full accounting of the associations of mental dis-
orders with suicide, suicide attempts, and suicide ideation is beyond the scope of
this chapter. Here, we elaborate on suicide risk in two disorders, depression and
posttraumatic stress disorder, the former because many assume almost all suicides
are due to depression, and the latter because it is somewhat unique among mental
disorders for increasing risk of not only suicide ideation but also progression from
ideation to suicide attempts.
Depression has long been emphasized as a correlate and cause of suicide. How-
ever, the overall pattern of research suggests that depression is most tightly linked
to suicide ideation (as opposed to suicide attempts or death). For example, in a large
epidemiological study in the United States, a major depressive episode was strongly

-- 454 of 498 --

434 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
associated with a history of suicide ideation, but only weakly associated with pro-
gression from ideation to a suicide attempt (Kessler et al., 1999). Similarly, a more
recent meta-analysis revealed that depression was significantly elevated in people
with histories of suicidal ideation, but that depression was similar in people who had
attempted suicide compared to people with suicidal ideation who had never made a
suicide attempt (May & Klonsky, 2016). A similar pattern is apparent in longitudinal
studies. Depression predicts future suicide ideation better than it predicts future
suicide attempts or deaths (Ribeiro et al., 2018).
Unlike depression, posttraumatic stress disorder appears to increase risk for
both the development of suicide ideation and the progression from suicide ideation
to attempts. Meta-analytically, like many disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder
exhibits a strong relationship to a history of suicide ideation (May & Klonsky, 2016).
However, in this same meta-analysis, posttraumatic stress disorder had the stron-
gest effect size when it came to distinguishing those who had attempted suicide
from those who had suicide ideation without attempts. A similar pattern emerged in
WHO data across 21 countries (Nock et al., 2009); specifically, posttraumatic stress
disorder stood out for its ability to distinguish those who attempted suicide from
those who had suicide ideation without progressing to attempts.
Impulsivity
Another variable emphasized in the suicidology literature is impulsivity. The field’s
view of impulsivity has changed over time. Initially, impulsivity was thought to be a
key factor in determining whether suicide ideation would be acted upon and lead to
a suicide attempt. For example, a highly cited clinical model of suicide suggests that
those who attempt suicide are “more impulsive and, therefore, more likely to act on
suicidal feelings” (Mann, Waternaux, Haas, & Malone, 1999, p. 181). Another early
perspective suggested that impulsivity “may actually be a more significant indica-
tor of suicide attempt than the presence of a specific suicide plan” (Bryan & Rudd,
2006). These perspectives suggest that impulsivity should be higher in those who
attempt suicide compared to those who have suicide ideation but do not attempt.
Though this perspective is intuitive and logical, it turns out to be incorrect. Mul-
tiple studies using different measures of impulsivity have found that impulsivity
is similar in those who attempt suicide and in those with suicidal ideation who do
not make suicide attempts (for a review, see Klonsky & May, 2015a). Interestingly,
these same studies indicate that impulsivity is higher in those with suicidal ideation
compared to those without suicidal ideation. In addition, few individuals report that
they attempted suicide due to impulsivity (May et al., 2020). Some speculate that
impulsivity is a marker, and possibly a cause, for a life filled with more stressful
events, which in turn raises risk for suicide ideation and attempts (Anestis, Soberay,
Gutierrez, Hernández, & Joiner, 2014).
An alternative perspective is that traditional models of impulsivity, which often
conceptualize impulsivity as a trait-like personality feature, may be limited. Indeed,
there is little debate that individuals can shift very quickly from low-risk states to
high-risk states (Bryan et al., 2020). For example, pain and hopelessness, which most
often motivate suicide, can fluctuate quite a bit over time, and can increase dramati-
cally and rapidly in response to negative life events, experiences, and contexts; in
turn, suicidal desire can fluctuate over time and at times increase dramatically and

-- 455 of 498 --

Suicide 	435
rapidly. However, rapid transition from one state to another does not, by itself, reflect
impulsivity. In other words, an individual who may reasonably be characterized
as “nonimpulsive” by traditional standards may, under the right conditions or cir-
cumstances, nonetheless experience a sudden and dramatic increase in suicide risk.
The impulsivity–suicide link has yet to be fully clarified, though it appears safe to
assume that impulsivity as traditionally conceptualized is not as central to suicide
as once thought.
Nonsuicidal Self‑Injury
The relationship of suicide attempts to NSSI has also generated considerable interest.
NSSI refers to a range of behaviors, including self-cutting, hitting, and scratching
that are likely to result in bleeding or bruising but are performed without suicidal
intent and cause only mild tissue damage. As noted earlier, suicide attempts and
NSSI differ in terms of method, frequency, medical severity, and motivation, among
other characteristics. At the same time, NSSI is a particularly strong correlate and
predictor of suicide attempts. This relationship has been demonstrated both cross-
sectionally (Klonsky et al., 2013) and longitudinally (Franklin et al., 2017).
In summary, suicide attempts and NSSI are distinct behaviors, yet often co-
occur. There are several possible explanations for this pattern (Hamza et al., 2012;
Klonsky et al., 2013). A leading possibility is that NSSI increases risk for both sui-
cide ideation and attempts. Regarding suicide ideation, NSSI is a correlate of depres-
sion, anxiety, and histories of abuse, all of which are among the top five predic-
tors of suicide ideation (Franklin et al., 2017). Thus, NSSI is a marker for increased
risk of suicide ideation, even if it does not cause suicide ideation. Regarding suicide
attempts, NSSI is a form of self-inflicted violence, and thus signifies an increased
capability to act on suicide ideation should it develop. Theorists such as Joiner (2005)
note that most people with suicide ideation do not make suicide attempts, in large
part because people are biologically and evolutionarily wired to fear and avoid pain,
injury, and death. These barriers must be overcome in order for someone to attempt
suicide. Someone who has a history of self-inflicted violence, such as NSSI, has had
opportunity to habituate to these barriers and approach them with less fear, and is
thus more able and likely to act on suicide ideation and to progress from ideation
to attempts. In short, even though NSSI is distinct from suicide attempts, it can be
viewed as a “double-trouble” suicide risk factor (Klonsky et al., 2013), in that it signi-
fies increased risk for both suicide ideation and attempts.
Prior Suicide Ideation and Attempts
In general, past suicide ideation and attempts are important predictors of future ide-
ation and attempts. In the seminal meta-analysis by Franklin and colleagues (2017),
the strongest predictor of future ideation was past ideation, and past suicide attempts
were a top predictor of future suicide attempts. Similarly, future suicide death was
predicted by prior suicide attempts and prior suicide ideation. There were some
interesting caveats to these patterns, however. Specifically, past NSSI was the stron-
gest predictor of future suicide attempts (even stronger than past suicide attempts),
and past psychiatric hospitalizations were the strongest predictor of suicide death
(even stronger than past suicide attempts and ideation). Overall, these patterns

-- 456 of 498 --

436 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
highlight the importance of distinguishing different types of self-injurious thoughts
and behaviors rather than aggregating these various thoughts and behaviors into a
composite “suicidality” construct.
These relationships between past and future instances of suicide ideation and
attempts have important caveats. First, many people who die by suicide do so on
their first attempt; thus, while it is true that past suicide attempts predict future
suicide attempts, one must not lose sight of the fact that a first suicide attempt often
results in death (Botswick, Pabbati, Geske, & McKean, 2016). Second, many people
who attempt suicide do not go on to make another attempt; in fact, a vast majority of
individuals who make suicide attempts do not go on to die by suicide. This happens
in part because people change their minds (Nordentoft, Madsen, & Erlangsen, 2016).
Many people who feel suicidal at one time will feel differently if they survive the
suicidal crisis. Third, the method used during a suicide attempt has a strong role in
whether the attempt ends in death. Specifically, suicide attempts by firearms result
in death more than 90% of the time, and hanging and drowning also frequently
result in death; in contrast, suicide attempts by poisoning or cutting rarely result in
death (Miller, Azrael, & Hemenway, 2004). For these reasons, some feel that “means
safety”—reducing access to the most lethal methods of suicide attempt—represents
the most effective and important approach to suicide prevention currently available
(Anestis et al., 2017).
Connectedness
To this point, we have focused on factors that increase risk for suicide ideation,
attempts, and death. We conclude this section with a focus on a key variable that
reduces suicide risk: connectedness. Connectedness is sometimes defined narrowly,
to focus on key relationships with family, significant others, or close friends. Oth-
ers define connectedness more broadly, to include connections to various sources
of purpose or meaning. Connectedness shows up in numerous theories of suicide
in different forms, such as the social isolation emphasized by Durkheim (1897/1951),
and the thwarted belongingness and perceived burdensomeness emphasized by
Joiner (2005). Numerous sources of connectedness have been found to be protective
against suicide risk. These include (1) one’s sense of purpose or meaning in life; (2)
key relationships, including marriage, parenthood, and other sources of social sup-
port; (3) connection to religious communities; (4) reliable and high-quality employ-
ment; and (5) pets and/or other nonhuman companions. Each of these kinds of con-
nection has layers and nuances that go beyond the scope of this chapter (for a review,
see Zareian & Klonsky, 2020). Connections to important people, communities, and
sources of meaning increase desire to live, and the absence of such connections are
common in those who consider and attempt suicide (Bryan, Bryan, Rozek, & Leifker,
2019; Frankl, 1959; Kleiman & Beaver, 2013).
Course and Outcomes
Suicide risk is an inherently dynamic construct. Although researchers and clinicians
have recognized this for decades, only in the past decade or so have technological
advances provided researchers with the tools needed to easily and reliably quantify

-- 457 of 498 --

Suicide 	437
this property. The advent of smartphones, for instance, has enabled researchers
to repeatedly assess individuals’ suicidal thoughts with very high frequency—in
some cases up to four to six times per day (Kleiman & Nock, 2018)—using ecologi-
cal momentary assessment (EMA) methods. These studies have consistently shown
that suicide ideation and other risk variables (e.g., mood, perceived burdensome-
ness, loneliness) rise and fall during the course of a typical day. Moment-to-moment
change in suicide ideation can sometimes be very large in magnitude and occur
very rapidly. In a 4-week study using EMA methods, Kleiman and colleagues (2017)
found that over 90% of suicidal individuals experienced a large (i.e., one standard
deviation or more) shift in suicide ideation at least once. Other researchers have simi-
larly observed nonlinear change processes in the social media content of individuals
who have died by suicide and, as described below, have found that fluctuations in
multiple variables tended to increase in magnitude and intensity in the months and
weeks leading up to suicide death (Bryan et al., 2018).
The fluid vulnerability theory of suicide (FVT; Rudd, 2006) provides a use-
ful model for understanding the time course of suicide. Central to the FVT is the
assumption that suicide risk is most usefully conceptualized along two dimensions:
baseline and acute. “Baseline risk” refers to the elements of suicide risk that tend
to persist or remain relatively constant over time (e.g., trauma history, biological or
genetic predispositions, previous suicidal behavior); “acute risk,” by contrast, refers
to the elements of suicide risk that tend to change (e.g., mood state, hopelessness,
situational stressors). According to the FVT, individuals with elevated baseline risk
experience more frequent and longer duration suicidal crises because they are sen-
sitized to aversive life stressors and shifts in negative internal states. In other words,
it is easier for high-baseline individuals to become—and remain—suicidal. An active
suicidal crisis is resolved when the variables that precipitate and perpetuate the cri-
sis are sufficiently disrupted, for example, through intervention or treatment.
Newer findings based on the FVT suggest that higher risk states are charac-
terized by qualitatively distinct temporal patterns in suicide ideation and other
risk variables than lower risk states. Individuals who have made multiple suicide
attempts, for example, show greater variability in suicide ideation than do individu-
als who have never attempted suicide or who made only one prior attempt (Bryan &
Rudd, 2018b; Witte, Fitzpatrick, Joiner, & Schmidt, 2005; Witte, Fitzpatrick, Warren,
Schatschneider, & Schmidt, 2006). Increased variability in suicide ideation after a
first suicide attempt has also been shown to signal vulnerability for a second suicide
attempt (Bryan, Rozek, et al., 2019). Indeed, fluctuations in suicide ideation, but not
severity of suicide ideation, distinguish patients who subsequently attempt suicide
(Bryan, Rozek, et al., 2019). These findings are not limited to suicide ideation; vari-
ability in negative affective states and negative cognitions (e.g., hopelessness, per-
ceived burdensomeness) have also been shown to distinguish between individuals
who die by suicide and those who die of nonsuicide causes (Bryan, Butner, et al.,
2018).
Recent research further suggests that higher and lower risk states also differ
from each other with respect to more complex, coordinated change processes among
multiple risk variables and/or dimensions of suicide risk. For example, the wish to
live and the wish to die have traditionally been conceptualized as competing psy-
chological forces that influence the emergence of suicidal behaviors (Brown, Steer,

-- 458 of 498 --

438 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Henriques, & Beck, 2005; Harris, McLean, Sheffield, & Jobes, 2010; Jobes & Mann,
1999; Kovacs & Beck, 1977). Although the wish to live and the wish to die are often
inversely related to each other, this is not always the case because, like other facets
of suicide risk, the wish to live and the wish to die ebb and flow over time, but not
necessarily in a coordinated manner. In other words, it is not always the case that
when the wish to live increases, the wish to die decreases, and vice versa. Sometimes
the wish to live increases but the wish to die remains elevated; sometimes the wish
to live decreases and so does the wish to die. Indeed, these two aspects of suicide risk
often fluctuate independent of the other (Bryan, Rudd, Peterson, et al., 2018). Under
certain circumstances, however, the wish to live and the wish to die do fluctuate
in a coordinated manner. When this occurs, the probability of suicidal behavior is
reduced (Bryan, Rozek, et al., 2018). Coordinated change patterns that characterize
nonsuicidal states have been observed in other studies as well (Bryan et al., 2016),
further supporting the perspective that lower and higher risk states are character-
ized by qualitatively distinct temporal processes.
The existence of two qualitatively distinct risk states is also implicated by taxo-
metric analyses that indicate suicide risk is categorical in nature, with one category
corresponding to a high-risk state and the other category corresponding to a low-
risk state (Rufino, Marcus, Ellis, & Boccaccini, 2018; Witte, Holm-Denoma, Zurom-
ski, Gauthier, & Ruscio, 2017). Research utilizing machine learning methods have
similarly identified two distinct subgroups of suicide risk, one characterized by a
low probability of suicidal behavior and the other characterized by a much higher
probability of suicidal behavior (Kessler et al., 2015). Because these lower and higher
risk states are so distinct, the shift from the lower to the higher risk state often occurs
suddenly, seemingly coming out of the blue in response to relatively little provoca-
tion or change. If an individual attempts suicide after one of these sudden shifts,
their suicidal behavior is very likely to be characterized as “impulsive,” although
this descriptor may not be accurate, as discussed previously. The emergence of sui-
cidal behavior is not always sudden or “impulsive,” however. In some cases, suicidal
behavior emerges after an extended, gradual change process that is more likely to
be associated with prolonged and specific suicidal planning. These multiple time
courses implicate different types of interventions and prevention strategies (Bryan
et al., 2020).
Clinical Implications
Suicide results from complex interactions among multiple risk and protective factors.
Within this context, clinicians need to be aware that it disproportionately affects vul-
nerable groups who have historically experienced abuse, discrimination, and mental
illness (especially bipolar disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and depression).
Clinicians also need to be aware that research has led to changes in the conceptu-
alization of suicidal thoughts and behaviors, which in turn have important clini-
cal implications. Suicidal thoughts and behaviors have traditionally been concep-
tualized as existing on a spectrum; multiple lines of evidence suggest that various
forms of suicidal and self-injurious exist and have distinct risk and protective fac-
tors. Accordingly, practitioners need to assess and address various factors that may
have more or less clinical importance for some clients than others. These include

-- 459 of 498 --

Suicide 	439
the client’s level of pain and hopelessness, stressful live events, NSSI, past suicidal
ideation and attempts, access to lethal means (e.g., firearms), and connections with
others and/or with sources of meanings. Furthermore, suicidal thoughts and behav-
iors have traditionally been conceptualized as symptoms of mental disorders, but
accumulating evidence indicates they are better understood as discrete phenomena
that often co-occur with, but do not result from, psychological and behavioral dis-
orders. Consistent with this line of evidence, treatments that effectively reduce the
symptoms and features of psychological and behavioral disorders tend to reduce
suicidal thoughts but do not necessarily reduce the occurrence of suicidal behaviors.
Treatments that target factors that are specific to suicidal behaviors, regardless of an
individual’s associated mental health condition, have been shown to reliably reduce
suicidal behaviors.
First, effective treatments for suicide risk consider both the acute and baseline
risk dimensions, as articulated by the FVT. With respect to the acute risk dimension,
effective treatments must be able to disrupt positive feedback loops that exacerbate
and sustain high-risk states, thereby facilitating rapid resolution of the suicidal crisis
and a shift back to a lower risk state. Suicide risk fluctuates as a result of change in
its many associated features. For example, a stressful event can lead to momentary
shifts in emotional distress and hopelessness, thereby increasing suicide risk. This
shift in psychological state may be more pronounced for individuals with a mental
health condition such as depression or posttraumatic stress disorder. If that person
reaches out to a loved one for support, the resulting connectedness may offset or
counteract their emotional distress, thereby reducing their emotional distress, hope-
lessness, and suicide risk. If, however, the loved one rebuffs the individual, emo-
tional distress, hopelessness, and suicide risk may increase instead. Under these
conditions, the individual may perceive their emotional distress as overwhelming
or unbearable, and begin to contemplate suicide (e.g., “I should just kill myself”),
thereby increasing the probability of suicidal behavior.
Effective treatments also monitor patients’ temporal patterns through repeated
assessment of suicide ideation and/or other relevant risk variables (e.g., sleep dis-
turbance, mood state). This can enable clinicians to observe and quantify the ebb
and flow of suicide risk over the course of treatment and make appropriate adjust-
ments to the treatment plan. Symptom monitoring can be accomplished with widely
available symptoms scales that include items that directly ask about suicide-related
thoughts. Bryan, Rozek, Butner, and Rudd (2019), for instance, showed that session-
to-session monitoring of suicide ideation using a single item from a larger symptom
scale could detect change patterns that distinguished patients who subsequently
attempted suicide from those who did not. Patients whose suicide ideation rating
fluctuated from session to session were the ones most likely to eventually attempt
suicide. Patients who showed less variability in scores—even those who consistently
provided higher item ratings—were the least likely to attempt suicide.
Treatments that focus only on managing episodes of acutely elevated risk are
insufficient, however; effective treatment must also dismantle the processes and
mechanisms that activate these feedback loops in the first place, thereby reducing the
probability of shifting to a high-risk state. The most effective treatments and inter-
ventions for reducing suicidal behaviors all share a common focus on self-regulation
skills training. Critically, these treatments teach patients how to self-monitor

-- 460 of 498 --

440 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
fluctuations in suicide risk and how to recognize the early signs of feedback loops
that lead to high-risk states. The aforementioned treatments use simple strategies to
help patients understand how their many risk and protective factors can influence
one another and, under certain circumstances, result in high-risk states. Clinicians
who collaboratively engage their patients in the case conceptualization process can
help them to more readily understand how and why they are thinking, feeling, and
behaving in uncomfortable and/or undesirable ways. If the warning signs of a transi-
tion to higher risk states can be identified much sooner, acute episodes of risk can
potentially be averted.
ETIOLOGY
As for many important behavioral phenomena, the etiology of suicide is not well
established. In this section, we describe some of the leading empirical and theoreti-
cal perspectives on this topic. One way to approach the etiology of suicide is to start
with its proximal causes. As noted earlier, an increasing body of evidence suggests
that suicide attempts are motivated by overwhelming pain and by hopelessness that
the causes of one’s pain will not improve (May & Klonsky, 2013; May et al., 2016, 2020).
As a result, one theory argues that the path to suicide begins with pain (Klonsky &
May, 2015b). However, this same theory notes that even if we put the focus on pain
as a starting point, pain can have an essentially infinite number of different causes
for different people: Pain can be due to social isolation, financial difficulties, sudden
relationship dissolution, discrimination, societal inequities, abuse, physical disor-
ders, and mental disorders, in short, any context, event, or experience that someone
may experience as intensely aversive, miserable, or painful. Thus, understanding
the etiology of overwhelming pain, let alone other factors that increase suicide risk,
means embracing a variety of possible biopsychosocial causes that can have different
relevance for different people.
In this context, theories of suicide strive to identify the pathways or factors that
have near-universal relevance for causing suicide. Early theories of suicide tended
to emphasize single factors as the causes of suicide, such as Durkheim’s (1897/1951)
focus on social isolation, Beck’s (1967) and Abramson’s (Abramson et al., 2000) focus
on hopelessness, Baumeister’s (1990) focus on negative self-cognitions, and Shneid-
man’s (1993) focus on psychological pain. These theories have been tremendously
influential and helpful for providing foundational knowledge. Indeed, as will
become evident later in this section, the factors emphasized by these early theories
are also found in contemporary theories of suicide.
The Ideation‑to‑Action Framework
The early perspectives on suicide we noted earlier share a key limitation: They treated
suicidality as a single phenomenon in need of a single explanation. In contrast, con-
temporary perspectives are increasingly guided by an ideation-to-action framework
(Klonsky & May, 2014). From this perspective, (1) the development of suicide ideation
and (2) the progression from suicide ideation to attempts are viewed as distinct pro-
cesses with different predictors and explanations. Several lines of research led to

-- 461 of 498 --

Suicide 	441
this framework becoming popular. First, most people with suicide ideation do not
attempt suicide. For example, epidemiological data suggest that only about 40% of
those with serious suicide ideation eventually make a suicide attempt (Nock et al.,
2008). Thus, a strong suicide theory must explain why ideation sometimes leads to
suicide attempts but usually does not. Second, a growing body of evidence indicates
that variables commonly described as suicide risk factors are indeed strong predic-
tors of suicide ideation but are weak predictors of attempts among ideators (May
& Klonsky, 2016). For example, several studies find that depression, hopelessness,
and impulsivity, though strong correlates of suicide ideation, are similar in those
who attempt suicide compared to those with suicide ideation who do not make an
attempt (Klonsky & May, 2010, 2014; May & Klonsky, 2016). In short, many commonly
cited risk factors for suicide do not appear to be meaningfully higher in attempters
compared to ideators. Thus, contemporary researchers and theorists have sought to
identify factors that explain and predict progression from suicide ideation to suicide
attempts, and to distinguish these factors from those that explain and predict suicide
ideation (Klonsky, Qiu, & Saffer, 2017).
The Interpersonal–Psychological Theory of Suicide
The first theorist to explicitly offer distinct explanations for suicide ideation ver-
sus suicide attempts was Thomas Joiner (2005; Van Orden et al., 2010). Joiner’s
interpersonal–psychological theory of suicide (IPTS) suggests that the combination
of thwarted belongingness and perceived burdensomeness causes desire for suicide,
whereas the acquired capability to attempt suicide makes it possible for some people
to act on their ideation and make a potentially lethal suicide attempt. The construct
of acquired capability was a novel contribution to the field and is now referred to
more broadly as “capability for suicide” or “suicide capability” (May & Victor, 2018)
Joiner (2005) noted that people have evolved to have strong fears of pain, injury,
and death, and that these fears are substantial barriers to making a suicide attempt.
Thus, most people do not have the capability to attempt suicide, even if desire for sui-
cide is present. Joiner argued that this capability can be acquired over time through
exposure to “painful and provocative events” (PPEs). In short, PPEs are events that
expose people to pain, injury, or death, and that thereby habituate people to fears
of pain, injury, and death, and in turn increase their capability to overcome these
barriers and make a suicide attempt. PPEs are hypothesized to take a variety of
forms, including physical abuse; combat exposure; NSSI histories; exposure to life-
threatening injuries and death common for first responders, and exposure to pain,
injury, and death common for medical professionals, among many others. This per-
spective may help explain why past self-injurious behavior is the strongest predictor
of future suicide attempts: past self-injury is a PPE that increases comfort with and
reduces fear of self-inflicted violence.
The IPTS has been enormously influential and highly cited. This large body
of literature has led to a series of meta-analyses and systematic reviews examining
the theory’s various postulates. In brief, evidence for the theory’s various postu-
lates is mixed (Chu et al., 2017; Ma, Batterham, Calear, & Han, 2016). Perhaps the
theory’s greatest contribution is not its specifics but the heuristic value of its frame-
work: The IPTS can be viewed as the first ideation-to-action theory of suicide, and

-- 462 of 498 --

442 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
it has inspired and informed a new generation of suicide theories (Klonsky, Saffer,
& Bryan, 2018).
The Integrated Motivational–Volitional Model
The integrated motivational–volitional theory (IMV; O’Connor, 2011) represents the
second ideation-to-action theory. The IMV has a similar structure to the IPTS. It pos-
tulates that defeat and entrapment are the primary variables that motivate suicidal
desire, and lists a separate set of variables (acquired capability for suicide, access
to lethal means, planning, and impulsivity, among others) that predict and explain
the progression from ideation to attempts. Only a handful of studies examining the
theory have been conducted, though support for the theory’s tenets is promising
(Wetherall, Cleare, Zortea, & O’Connor, 2020).
The Three‑Step Theory of Suicide
The three-step theory (3ST) is the most recent ideation-to-action theory of suicide
(Klonsky & May, 2015b). The 3ST is a parsimonious theory that explains suicide in
terms of just four variables: pain, hopelessness, connectedness, and suicide capabil-
ity. Step 1 of the theory postulates that suicidal desire is caused by the combination
of pain and hopelessness. The 3ST’s emphasis on pain is based on the behavioral
principle of punishment: In short, people avoid doing things that are punished (i.e.,
paired with aversive outcomes). Thus, someone who experiences life as aversive/mis-
erable/painful is being punished for engaging with life and will want to escape their
current life circumstances. If one has hope that the pain can be stopped through
effort or time, their aim will be to achieve a better, less painful future. However, if
one does not have this hope, a desire to escape current life circumstances becomes a
desire to stop living.
Step 2 of the 3ST states that desire for suicide escalates when pain exceeds or
overwhelms connectedness. Connectedness is what makes life worth living. Con-
nectedness includes connections to family, friends, communities, valued roles or
jobs, or any sense of meaning and purpose. As defined by the 3ST, connectedness is
a broad construct and includes other important constructs, such as loneliness, social
isolation, thwarted belongingness, meaning, and anything that influences one’s feel-
ing of connection to the world. Connectedness can make life worth living even in
the presence of pain. Thus, someone with both pain and hopelessness, but also con-
nectedness, may still experience occasional desire for suicide, but they will not have
high or persistent desire for suicide. In contrast, if pain gets so great as to exceed or
impede their connectedness, suicidal desire becomes strong.
Step 3 suggests that strong desire for suicide can only progress to a suicide
attempt if one has the capability to attempt suicide. The 3ST agrees with the IPTS that
capability for suicide can be acquired over time and experience, but it also identifies
two additional contributors to suicide capability: dispositional contributors, such as
a genetically high threshold for pain or low fear of death, and practical contribu-
tors, such as knowledge of, expertise in, or access to lethal means. Practical capabil-
ity may be particularly important and changeable. For example, an Internet search
can quickly teach an adolescent about lethal over-the-counter medications that are

-- 463 of 498 --

Suicide 	443
readily available; this knowledge would represent a fast and meaningful increase
in suicide capability. Conversely, someone with suicidal desire who owns a firearm
could temporarily give the firearm or ammunition to a friend, thus drastically reduc-
ing practical capability.
In short, the 3ST explains suicide in terms of just four factors: pain, hopelessness,
connectedness, and capability. Evidence for the 3ST is growing rapidly and includes
studies indicating that pain and hopelessness are the most common motivations
for suicide (Klonsky & May, 2013; May et al., 2016, 2020), direct tests of the theory’s
three steps across three countries (Dhingra, Klonsky, & Tapola, 2019; Klonsky & May,
2015b; Yang, Liu, Chen, & Li, 2019), and studies that indicate pain and hopelessness
are the most common proximal antecedents of suicide attempts and death (Winter-
steen, 2014). The 3ST also suggests clear targets for treatment: Any intervention or
prevention method will reduce suicide risk to the extent it can (1) decrease pain, (2)
increase hope, (3) enhance connectedness, and/or (4) reduce capability for suicide.
At the same time, because the theory does not specify or limit the possible contribu-
tors to pain, hopelessness, connectedness, and suicide capability, it can account for
tremendous individual variability (the stories of pain, hopelessness, connection, and
capability will be different for an 84-year-old widow and 13-year-old boy), while still
explaining suicide risk and treatment in terms of four variables. The theory is also
consistent with a wide variety of biological, psychological, and sociological risk fac-
tors for suicide, in that any variable influencing pain, hopelessness, connectedness,
or suicide capability would be expected to influence suicide risk. Thus, the 3ST is a
parsimonious theory of suicide that is evidence-based, concise, and clinically useful,
yet adaptable to suicide risk across diverse people and contexts.
TREATMENT
Several decades of research support a handful of treatments and interventions
that reliably and consistently reduce suicidal thoughts and behaviors. Two treat-
ment packages—dialectical behavior therapy (DBT; Linehan, 2018) and cognitive-
behavioral therapy for suicide prevention (CBT-SP; Bryan & Rudd, 2018a; Wenzel,
Beck, & Brown, 2009)—have been shown in multiple randomized clinical trials and
multiple correlational studies to significantly reduce suicide attempts as compared
to treatment as usual (Brown, Ten Have, et al., 2005; Rudd et al., 2015; Sinyor et al.,
2020). One treatment package—the collaborative assessment and management of sui-
cidality (CAMS; Jobes, 2016)—has been shown in multiple randomized clinical trials
and multiple correlational studies to significantly reduce suicide ideation faster than
treatment as usual (Comtois et al., 2011; Ellis, Green, Allen, Jobes, & Nadorff, 2012;
Jobes, Wong, Conrad, Drozd, & Neal-Walden, 2005; Jobes et al., 2017). A procedure
extracted from DBT and CBT-SP called the crisis response plan (CRP) was shown in
one randomized clinical trial to significantly reduce suicide attempts and suicide
ideation as compared to treatment as usual (Bryan et al., 2017). The safety planning
intervention (SPI), which is similar in design to the CRP, was shown in two quasi-
experimental studies to reduce suicidal behaviors as compared to treatment as usual
(Miller et al., 2017; Stanley et al., 2018). Finally, mentalization-based psychotherapy
(MBP; Bateman & Fonagy, 2010) and the Attempted Suicide Short Intervention

-- 464 of 498 --

444 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Program (ASSIP; Gysin-Maillart, Schwab, Soravia, Megert, & Michel, 2016) have each
been shown in one randomized clinical trial to significantly reduce suicide attempts
as compared to treatment as usual.
The results of multiple meta-analyses have shown that DBT and CBT-SP are
associated with significantly reduced rates of suicide attempts as compared to other
psychological treatments (DeCou, Comtois, & Landes, 2019; Hetrick, Robinson, Spit-
tal, & Carter, 2016; Kliem, Kröger, & Kosfelder, 2010; Panos, Jackson, Hasan, & Panos,
2014; Tarrier, Taylor, & Gooding, 2008). Although rates of reduction vary across stud-
ies, on average, patients receiving one of these therapies are around 50% less likely to
make a suicide attempt during or soon after treatment than patients receiving other
treatments. Although these treatments have been shown to reduce rates of suicide
attempts, reductions in suicide mortality have not yet been observed in these—or any
other—psychological treatments due to low base rates, which would require very
large sample sizes. A recent simulation study using original clinical trial data from
Rudd and colleagues’ (2015) study of brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide
prevention (BCBT)—one particular type of CBT-SP—suggests that reductions in sui-
cide mortality among individuals receiving this treatment are probable, however
(Bernecker et al., 2019). In that study, researchers estimated that one to three suicide
deaths could be averted for every 100 suicidal patients receiving BCBT instead of
traditional mental health treatments. Results of a recent meta-analysis further sug-
gest that suicide-focused treatments in general are likely associated with statistically
significant reductions in suicide mortality (Hofstra et al., 2020), although we do not
yet know if any particular type of suicide-focused treatment is more or less effective
for reducing suicide mortality.
Principles of Change
DBT and CBT-SP overlap considerably with respect to their underlying conceptual
model and constituent components. Both treatments conceptualize suicide as a cop-
ing strategy for reducing or avoiding intense psychological pain, and both focus on
teaching patients how to identify, develop, and use self-regulatory skills (e.g., mind-
fulness, relaxation, cognitive restructuring) as alternatives to suicidal and other
self-injurious behaviors. Skills training is one of six principles of change that are
believed to underlie the effectiveness of these suicide-focused treatments (Bryan &
Rudd, 2018a; see Table 15.1). Newer research further suggests that therapeutic alli-
ance is correlated with better outcomes (i.e., larger reductions in suicide ideation,
lower suicide attempt rates) within suicide-focused treatments but does not appear
to be correlated with suicide-related outcomes in traditional mental health treat-
ments (Bedics, Atkins, Harned, & Linehan, 2015; Bryan, Rozek, Burch, et al., 2018),
suggesting that both interpersonal process and technique are important for reducing
suicide risk.
The primary differences between DBT and CBT-SP involve complexity and dura-
tion. DBT typically lasts for 6–12 months and involves a multimodal package that
includes a combination of individual therapy, group skills training classes, between-
session phone-based crisis support services, and clinician consultation. CBT-SP, by
contrast, typically lasts no longer than 3 months and involves individual therapy

-- 465 of 498 --

Suicide 	445
only. Group-based models of CBT-SP have recently been developed and pilot-tested
(Sinyor et al., 2020), but they have not yet been subjected to rigorous empirical exami-
nation. The CRP, MBP, and ASSIP were also associated with large reductions in sui-
cide attempts in each of their respective clinical trials, but these findings have not
yet been replicated.
Although DBT and CBT-SP consistently outperform comparison treatments with
respect to reducing suicide attempts, these treatments do not necessarily outperform
other treatments with respect to reducing suicide ideation and psychological symp-
tom severity. Patients who receive DBT and CBT-SP report significant reductions on
all of these variables, but so do patients who receive traditional mental health treat-
ments. The same pattern was reported in the MBP and ASSIP trials as well. In con-
trast, multiple CAMS trials have found the opposite pattern: Patients who receive
CAMS report significantly faster and larger reductions in suicide ideation and psy-
chological symptom severity than patients who receive other treatments, but rates of
suicide attempts across CAMS and other treatments are typically comparable. CAMS
therefore outperforms comparison treatments with respect to reducing suicide ide-
ation and emotional distress, but it does not necessarily reduce the probability of
TABLE 15.1. Six Central Principles of Change within Empirically Supported Suicide‑Focused Treatments
Change principle 	Description
Easy-to-understand model
of suicide
Effective treatments use simple case conceptualization models
that provides a platform for patients to understand how their
experiences, thoughts, feelings, and emotions interact with one
another and contribute to their decisions and behaviors. The
interventions and methods used in treatment should be based
upon this model.
Clinician fidelity 	Effective treatments outline certain procedures and methods
that are known to decrease the probability of suicidal behaviors.
Reliably administering these procedures and methods increases
the probability of reducing suicidal behaviors.
Patient adherence 	Effective treatments increase patient engagement and adherence
by addressing motivational factors and barriers to treatment.
Skills training 	Effective treatments provide opportunities to demonstrate and
practice specific activities designed to strengthen a patient’s
ability to respond more effectively to life stressors. Effective
treatments allow clinicians and patients to customize these skills
to the unique needs and circumstances of each patient.
Patient responsibility 	Effective treatments emphasize shared responsibility for decision
making and clinical outcomes across clinicians and patients,
rather than consolidating responsibility for decision making and
outcomes within clinicians.
Easy access to crisis services 	Effective treatments clearly delineate the steps to be followed
during acute crises and emergencies.

-- 466 of 498 --

446 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
suicidal behaviors. Taken together, these results suggest that the mechanisms under-
lying reductions in suicide attempts are not the same mechanisms that underlie
reductions in suicide ideation and psychological symptoms.
The mechanisms that directly impact reductions in suicidal behaviors across
various treatments are as-yet unknown, but researchers have hypothesized a cen-
tral role for self-regulatory processes, notably, emotion regulation and cognitive
flexibility (Bryan & Rozek, 2018). According to this perspective, treatments that
reduce suicidal behaviors strengthen cognitive control processes involved in deci-
sion making, especially during stressful and/or uncertain situations. As cognitive
control strengthens, individuals become less sensitized to life stressors, such that
negative emotional reactions to these circumstances are less pronounced. Individu-
als also learn how to inhibit avoidance-based behavioral responses such as suicide
attempts. In other words, patients learn to “hit the brakes” before acting on intense
negative emotions and emotional pain, which affords them enough time to consider
and select alternative response patterns.
The inverse patterns observed across CAMS and DBT and CBT-SP may be
attributable to differences in their constituent components. Whereas DBT and CBT-
SP prescribe specific procedures and techniques designed to enhance patients’ self-
monitoring and self-regulatory skills, CAMS does not require or expect clinicians to
use any particular combination of techniques or procedures. CAMS instead encour-
ages clinicians to collaboratively identify and target each patient’s unique “driv-
ers” of suicide risk, then choose the procedures and techniques that they believe
will reduce these drivers. Because CAMS allows for more variability in treatment
planning than DBT and CBT-SP, clinicians may not always use procedures and tech-
niques that build or promote self-monitoring and self-regulatory skills. CAMS may,
however, encourage clinicians to use procedures and techniques that target mecha-
nisms that are more directly related to suicide ideation and emotional distress. This
does not mean that DBT and CBT-SP are overly rigid or inflexible, however. Both
treatments allow clinicians to tailor the specified procedures to the unique needs
of each patient, thereby striking a balance between the reliable administration of
empirically supported procedures and the need to address patient-specific issues.
Research focused on identifying and isolating the underlying mechanisms
of action in suicide-focused treatments is currently under way. If successful, such
research could not only lead to important advances in treatment development and
refinement but also improve our understanding of why some people attempt suicide
and others choose not to make an attempt despite experiencing significant emotional
pain and adversity.
CONCLUSION
Suicide results from complex interactions among multiple risk and protective factors,
and it affects a wide range of communities and groups. Although the science of sui-
cide prevention is relatively “young” as compared to research focused on other clini-
cal psychological and behavioral conditions, theoretical and conceptual advances
have fueled rapid growth of suicide-focused studies during the past few decades,

-- 467 of 498 --

Suicide 	447
leading to a number of critical advances in our understanding of suicide’s phenom-
enology, etiology, and treatment. Of note, researchers and theorists are coming to
better understand not only who develops suicidal ideation but also the contexts in
which ideation is most likely to progress to potentially lethal suicide attempts. In
addition, converging evidence supports the efficacy of certain types of interventions
and treatments for reducing rates of suicidal behaviors (DBT and CBT-SP) and the
intensity of suicidal thinking (CAMS). Additional treatment modalities have also
shown promise, although they have not yet been sufficiently researched. Although
some of these treatments are relatively simple and brief in duration, they are not yet
widely used by clinicians. We hope that this chapter will encourage clinicians to
learn more about these treatments and to seek out training to use them effectively.
We are also optimistic that ongoing and future research will uncover new strategies
and methods that complement existing treatments, thereby providing more options
for clinicians and those struggling with suicidal thoughts and urges.
REFERENCES
Abramson, L. M., Alloy, L. B., Hogan, M. E., Whitehouse, W. G., Gibb, B. E., Hankin, B. L., &
Cornette, M. M. (2000). The hopelessness theory of suicidality. In T. E. Joiner & M. D.
Rudd (Eds.), Suicide science: Expanding the boundaries (pp. 17–32). Norwell, MA: Kluwer
Academic.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Anestis, M. D., Law, K. C., Jin, H., Houtsma, C., Khazem, L. R., & Assavedo, B. L. (2017). Treat-
ing the capability for suicide: A vital and understudied frontier in suicide prevention.
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 47(5), 523–537.
Anestis, M. D., Soberay, K. A., Gutierrez, P. M., Hernández, T. D., & Joiner, T. E. (2014). Recon-
sidering the link between impulsivity and suicidal behavior. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Review, 18(4), 366–386.
Arsenault-Lapierre, G., Kim, C., & Turecki, G. (2004). Psychiatric diagnoses in 3275 suicides: A
meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 4(1), 37.
Bagge, C. L., Glenn, C. R., & Lee, H. J. (2013). Quantifying the impact of recent negative life
events on suicide attempts. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122, 359–368.
Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2010). Mentalization based treatment for borderline personality
disorder. World Psychiatry, 9(1), 11–15.
Baumeister, R. F. (1990). Suicide as escape from self. Psychological Review, 97, 90–113.
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression. New York: Harper & Row.
Bedics, J. D., Atkins, D. C., Harned, M. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2015). The therapeutic alliance
as a predictor of outcome in dialectical behavior therapy versus nonbehavioral psycho-
therapy by experts for borderline personality disorder. Psychotherapy, 52, 67–77.
Bernecker, S. L., Zuromski, K. L., Curry, J. C., Kim, J. J., Gutierrez, P. M., Joiner, T. E., . . . Bryan,
C. J. (2020). Economic evaluation of brief cognitive behavioral therapy vs treatment as
usual for suicidal US army soldiers. JAMA Psychiatry, 77, 256–264.
Bostwick, J. M., Pabbati, C., Geske, J. R., & McKean, A. J. (2016). Suicide attempt as a risk fac-
tor for completed suicide: Even more lethal than we knew. American Journal of Psychiatry,
173(11), 1094–1100.

-- 468 of 498 --

448 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Brown, G. K., Steer, R. A., Henriques, G. R., & Beck, A. T. (2005). The internal struggle between
the wish to die and the wish to live: A risk factor for suicide. American Journal of Psychia-
try, 162(10), 1977–1979.
Brown, G. K., Ten Have, T., Henriques, G. R., Xie, S. X., Hollander, J. E., & Beck, A. T. (2005).
Cognitive therapy for the prevention of suicide attempts: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 294(5), 563–570.
Bryan, C. J., Bryan, A. O., Rozek, D. C., & Leifker, F. R. (2019). Meaning in life drives reductions
in suicide risk among acutely suicidal soldiers receiving a crisis response plan. Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology, 38, 774–787.
Bryan, C. J., Butner, J. E., May, A. M., Rugo, K. F., Harris, J. A., Oakey, D. N., . . . Bryan, A. O.
(2020). Nonlinear change processes and the emergence of suicidal behavior: A concep-
tual model based on the fluid vulnerability theory of suicide. New Ideas in Psychology, 57,
100758.
Bryan, C. J., Butner, J. E., Sinclair, S., Bryan, A. B. O., Hesse, C. M., & Rose, A. E. (2018). Pre-
dictors of emerging suicide death among military personnel on social media networks.
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 48, 413–430.
Bryan, C. J., Mintz, J., Clemans, T. A., Leeson, B., Burch, T. S., Williams, S. R., . . . Rudd, M. D.
(2017). Effect of crisis response planning vs. contracts for safety on suicide risk in US
Army soldiers: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Affective Disorders, 212, 64–72.
Bryan, C. J., & Rozek, D. C. (2018). Suicide prevention in the military: A mechanistic perspec-
tive. Current Opinion in Psychology, 22, 27–32.
Bryan, C. J., Rozek, D. C., Burch, T. S., Leeson, B., & Clemans, T. A. (2018). Therapeutic alliance
and intervention approach among acutely suicidal patients. Psychiatry: Interpersonal and
Biological Processes, 82, 80–82.
Bryan, C. J., Rozek, D. C., Butner, J., & Rudd, M. D. (2019, April 9). Patterns of change in suicide
ideation signal the recurrence of suicide attempts among high-risk psychiatric outpa-
tients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 120. [Epub ahead of print]
Bryan, C. J., & Rudd, M. D. (2006). Advances in the assessment of suicide risk. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 62(2), 185–200.
Bryan, C. J., & Rudd, M. D. (2018a). Brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention. New
York: Guilford Press.
Bryan, C. J., & Rudd, M. D. (2018b). Nonlinear change processes during psychotherapy char-
acterize patients who have made multiple suicide attempts. Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 48(4), 386–400.
Bryan, C. J., Rudd, M. D., Peterson, A. L., Young-McCaughan, S., & Wertenberger, E. G. (2016).
The ebb and flow of the wish to live and the wish to die among suicidal military person-
nel. Journal of Affective Disorders, 202, 58–66.
Chu, C., Buchman-Schmitt, J. M., Stanley, I. H., Hom, M. A., Tucker, R. P., Hagan, C. R., . . .
Joiner, T. E., Jr. (2017). The interpersonal theory of suicide: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of a decade of cross-national research. Psychological Bulletin, 143, 1313–1345.
Comtois, K. A., Jobes, D. A., S. O’Connor, S., Atkins, D. C., Janis, K. E., Chessen, C., . . . Yuodelis-
Flores, C. (2011). Collaborative assessment and management of suicidality (CAMS): Fea-
sibility trial for next-day appointment services. Depression and Anxiety, 28(11), 963–972.
DeCou, C. R., Comtois, K. A., & Landes, S. J. (2019). Dialectical behavior therapy is effective for
the treatment of suicidal behavior: A meta-analysis. Behavior Therapy, 50(1), 60–72.
Dhingra, K., Klonsky, E. D., & Tapola, V. (2019). An empirical test of the Three-Step Theory
of suicide in UK university students. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 49(2), 478–487.
Ducasse, D., Holden, R. R., Boyer, L., Artéro, S., Calati, R., Guillaume, S., . . . Olié, E. (2018). Psy-
chological pain in suicidality: A meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 79(3), Article
16r10732.

-- 469 of 498 --

Suicide 	449
Durkheim, E. (1951). Suicide: A study in sociology. New York: Free Press. (Original work pub-
lished 1897)
Ellis, T. E., Green, K. L., Allen, J. G., Jobes, D. A., & Nadorff, M. R. (2012). Collaborative assess-
ment and management of suicidality in an inpatient setting: Results of a pilot study.
Psychotherapy, 49(1), 72–80.
Foster, T. (2011). Adverse life events proximal to adult suicide: A synthesis of findings from
psychological autopsy studies. Archives of Suicide Research, 15, 1–15.
Frankl, V. (1959). Man’s search for meaning. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Franklin, J. C., Ribeiro, J. D., Fox, K. R., Bentley, K. H., Kleiman, E. M., Huang, X., . . . Nock, M.
K. (2017). Risk factors for suicidal thoughts and behaviors: A meta-analysis of 50 years of
research. Psychological bulletin, 143, 187–232.
Gysin-Maillart, A., Schwab, S., Soravia, L., Megert, M., & Michel, K. (2016). A novel brief ther-
apy for patients who attempt suicide: A 24-months follow-up randomized controlled
study of the Attempted Suicide Short Intervention Program (ASSIP). PLOS Medicine,
13(3), e1001968.
Hamza, C. A., Stewart, S. L., & Willoughby, T. (2012). Examining the link between nonsuicidal
self-injury and suicidal behavior: A review of the literature and an integrated model.
Clinical Psychology Review, 32, 482–495.
Harris, K. M., McLean, J. P., Sheffield, J., & Jobes, D. (2010). The internal suicide debate hypoth-
esis: Exploring the life versus death struggle. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 40(2),
181–192.
Hetrick, S. E., Robinson, J., Spittal, M. J., & Carter, G. (2016). Effective psychological and
psychosocial approaches to reduce repetition of self-harm: A systematic review, meta-
analysis and meta-regression. BMJ Open, 6(9), e011024.
Hinze, V., Crane, C., Ford, T., Buivydaite, R., Qiu, L., & Gjelsvik, B. (2019). The relationship
between pain and suicidal vulnerability in adolescence: A systematic review. Lancet
Child and Adolescent Health, 3, 899–916.
Hofstra, E., van Nieuwenhuizen, C., Bakker, M., Ozgul, D., Elfeddali, I., de Jong, S. J., & van
der Feltz-Corenlis, C. M. (2020). Effectiveness of suicide prevention interventions: A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. General Hospital Psychiatry, 63, 127–140.
International Society for the Study of Self-Injury. (2020). What is self-injury? Retrieved May 9,
2020, from https://itriples.org/category/about-self-injury.
Jobes, D. A. (2016). Managing suicidal risk: A collaborative approach. New York: Guilford Press.
Jobes, D. A., Comtois, K. A., Gutierrez, P. M., Brenner, L. A., Huh, D., Chalker, S. A., . . . Crum-
lish, J. (2017). A randomized controlled trial of the collaborative assessment and manage-
ment of suicidality versus enhanced care as usual with suicidal soldiers. Psychiatry, 80(4),
339–356.
Jobes, D. A., & Mann, R. E. (1999). Reasons for living versus reasons for dying: Examining the
internal debate of suicide. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 29(2), 97–104.
Jobes, D. A., Wong, S. A., Conrad, A. K., Drozd, J. F., & Neal-Walden, T. (2005). The collabora-
tive assessment and management of suicidality versus treatment as usual: A retrospec-
tive study with suicidal outpatients. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 35(5), 483–497.
Joiner, T. (2005). Why people die by suicide. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kessler, R. C., Borges, G., & Walters, E. E. (1999). Prevalence of and risk factors for lifetime
suicide attempts in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(7),
617–626.
Kessler, R. C., Warner, C. H., Ivany, C., Petukhova, M. V., Rose, S., Bromet, E. J., . . . Fullerton, C.
S. (2015). Predicting suicides after psychiatric hospitalization in US Army soldiers: The
Army Study to Assess Risk and Resilience in Servicemembers (Army STARRS). JAMA
Psychiatry, 72(1), 49–57.

-- 470 of 498 --

450 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Kleiman, E. M., & Beaver, J. K. (2013). A meaningful life is worth living: Meaning in life as a
suicide resiliency factor. Psychiatry Research, 210, 934–939.
Kleiman, E. M., & Nock, M. K. (2018). Real-time assessment of suicidal thoughts and behav-
iors. Current Opinion in Psychology, 22, 33–37.
Kleiman, E. M., Turner, B. J., Fedor, S., Beale, E. E., Huffman, J. C., & Nock, M. K. (2017). Exami-
nation of real-time fluctuations in suicidal ideation and its risk factors: Results from two
ecological momentary assessment studies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126, 726–738.
Kliem, S., Kröger, C., & Kosfelder, J. (2010). Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline person-
ality disorder: A meta-analysis using mixed-effects modeling. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 78(6), 936–951.
Klonsky, E. D., & May, A. (2010). Rethinking impulsivity in suicide. Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 40, 612–619.
Klonsky, E. D., & May, A. M. (2014). Differentiating suicide attempters from suicide ideators:
A critical frontier for suicidology research. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 44, 1–5.
Klonsky, E. D., & May, A. M. (2015a). Impulsivity and suicide risk: Review and clinical impli-
cations. Psychiatric Times, 32(8), 13–21.
Klonsky, E. D., & May, A. M. (2015b). The three-step theory (3ST): A new theory of suicide
rooted in the “ideation-to-action” framework. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy,
8, 114–129.
Klonsky, E. D., May, A. M., & Glenn, C. R. (2013). The relationship between nonsuicidal self-
injury and attempted suicide: Converging evidence from four samples. Journal of Abnor-
mal Psychology, 122, 231–237.
Klonsky, E. D., May, A. M., & Saffer, B. Y. (2016). Suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal ide-
ation. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 12, 307–330.
Klonsky, E. D., Qiu, T., & Saffer, B. Y. (2017). Recent advances in differentiating suicide attempt-
ers from suicide ideators. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 30, 15–20.
Klonsky, E. D., Saffer, B. Y., & Bryan, C. J. (2018). Ideation-to-action theories of suicide: A con-
ceptual and empirical update. Current Opinion in Psychology, 22, 38–43.
Klonsky, E. D., Victor, S. E., & Saffer, B. Y. (2014). Nonsuicidal self-injury: What we know and
what we need to know. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 59, 565–568.
Kovacs, M., & Beck, A. T. (1977). The wish to die and the wish to live in attempted suicides.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33(2), 361–365.
Linehan, M. M. (2018). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York:
Guilford Press.
Liu, R. T., & Miller, I. (2014). Life events and suicidal ideation and behavior: A systematic
review. Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 181–192.
Ma, J., Batterham, P. J., Calear, A. L., & Han, J. (2016). A systematic review of the predictions of
the interpersonal–psychological theory of suicidal behavior. Clinical Psychology Review,
46, 34–45.
Mann, J. J., Waternaux, C., Haas, G. L., & Malone, K. M. (1999). Toward a clinical model of
suicidal behavior in psychiatric patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156(2), 181–189.
May, A. M., & Klonsky, E. D. (2013). Assessing motivations for suicide attempts: Development
and psychometric properties of the inventory of motivations for suicide attempts. Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 43, 532–546.
May, A. M., & Klonsky, E. D. (2016). What distinguishes suicide attempters from suicide ide-
ators?: A meta-analysis of potential factors. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 23(1),
5–20.
May, A. M., O’Brien, K., Liu, R. T., & Klonsky, E. D. (2016). Descriptive and psychometric
properties of the Inventory of Motivations for Suicide Attempts (IMSA) in an inpatient
adolescent sample. Archives of Suicide Research, 20, 467–482.
May, A. M., Pachkowski, M. C., & Klonsky, E. D. (2020). Motivations for suicide: Converging

-- 471 of 498 --

Suicide 	451
evidence from clinical and community samples. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 123, 171–
177.
May, A. M., & Victor, S. E. (2018). From ideation to action: Recent advances in understanding
suicide capability. Current Opinion in Psychology, 22, 1–6.
Miller, I. W., Camargo, C. A., Arias, S. A., Sullivan, A. F., Allen, M. H., Goldstein, A. B., . . .
Boudreaux, E. D. (2017). Suicide prevention in an emergency department population:
The ED-SAFE study. JAMA Psychiatry, 74(6), 563–570.
Miller, M., Azrael, D., & Hemenway, D. (2004). The epidemiology of case fatality rates for sui-
cide in the northeast. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 43(6), 723–730.
Nock, M. K., Borges, G., Bromet, E. J., Alonso, J., Angermeyer, M., Beautrais, A., . . . Williams,
D. (2008). Cross-national prevalence and risk factors for suicidal ideation, plans and
attempts. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 98–105.
Nock, M. K., Hwang, I., Sampson, N., Kessler, R. C., Angermeyer, M., Beautrais, A., . . . De
Graaf, R. (2009). Cross-national analysis of the associations among mental disorders and
suicidal behavior: Findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLOS Medi-
cine, 6(8), e1000123.
Nordentoft, M., Madsen, T., & Erlangsen, A. (2016). You seldom get a second chance with a
gunshot: Lethality of suicidal acts. American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 1069–1070.
Obegi, J. H. (2019). Rethinking suicidal behavior disorder. Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Interven-
tion and Suicide Prevention, 40(3), 209–219.
O’Connor, R. C. (2011). The integrated motivational-volitional model of suicidal behavior. Cri-
sis, 32, 295–298.
Oquendo, M. A., & Baca-Garcia, E. (2014). Suicidal behavior disorder as a diagnostic entity
in the DSM-5 classification system: Advantages outweigh limitations. World Psychiatry,
13(2), 128–130.
Panos, P. T., Jackson, J. W., Hasan, O., & Panos, A. (2014). Meta-analysis and systematic review
assessing the efficacy of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT). Research on Social Work Prac-
tice, 24(2), 213–223.
Phillips, M. R. (2010). Rethinking the role of mental illness in suicide. American Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 167, 731–733.
Ribeiro, J. D., Huang, X., Fox, K. R., & Franklin, J. C. (2018). Depression and hopelessness as
risk factors for suicide ideation, attempts and death: Meta-analysis of longitudinal stud-
ies. British Journal of Psychiatry, 212(5), 279–286.
Rogers, M. L., Galynker, I., Yaseen, Z., DeFazio, K., & Joiner, T. E. (2017). An overview and
comparison of two proposed suicide-specific diagnoses: Acute suicidal affective distur-
bance and suicide crisis syndrome. Psychiatric Annals, 47(8), 416–420.
Rudd, M. D. (2006). Fluid vulnerability theory: A cognitive approach to understanding the
process of acute and chronic suicide risk. In T. E. Ellis (Ed.), Cognition and suicide: Theory,
research, and therapy (pp. 355–368). Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa-
tion.
Rudd, M. D., Bryan, C. J., Wertenberger, E. G., Peterson, A. L., Young-McCaughan, S., Mintz,
J., . . . Bruce, T. O. (2015). Brief cognitive-behavioral therapy effects on post-treatment
suicide attempts in a military sample: Results of a randomized clinical trial with 2-year
follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 441–449.
Rufino, K. A., Marcus, D. K., Ellis, T. E., & Boccaccini, M. T. (2018). Further evidence that sui-
cide risk is categorical: A taxometric analysis of data from an inpatient sample. Psycho-
logical Assessment, 30(11), 1541–1547.
Shneidman, E. S. (1993). Suicide as psychache: A clinical approach to self-destructive behavior.
Northfield, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Sinyor, M., Williams, M., Mitchell, R., Zaheer, R., Bryan, C. J., Schaffer, A., . . . Selchen, S.
(2020). Cognitive behavioral therapy for suicide prevention in youth admitted to hospital

-- 472 of 498 --

452 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
following an episode of self-harm: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 266, 686–694.
Stanley, B., Brown, G. K., Brenner, L. A., Galfalvy, H. C., Currier, G. W., Knox, K. L., . . . Green,
K. L. (2018). Comparison of the safety planning intervention with follow-up vs usual
care of suicidal patients treated in the emergency department. JAMA Psychiatry, 75(9),
894–900.
Tarrier, N., Taylor, K., & Gooding, P. (2008). Cognitive-behavioral interventions to reduce sui-
cide behavior: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Behavior Modification, 32(1), 77–108.
Turecki, G., & Brent, D. A. (2016). Suicide and suicidal behaviour. Lancet, 387(10024), 1227–1239.
Van Orden, K. A., Witte, T. K., Cukrowicz, K. C., Braithwaite, S. R., Selby, E. A., & Joiner, T. E.,
Jr. (2010). The interpersonal theory of suicide. Psychological Review, 117, 575–600.
Wenzel, A., Brown, G. K., & Beck, A. T. (2009). Cognitive therapy for suicidal patients: Scientific
and clinical applications. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Wetherall, K., Cleare, S., Zortea, T., & O’Connor, R. (2020). Status of the integrated motivational-
volitional model of suicidal behaviour. In D. De Leo & V. Poštuvan (Eds.), Reducing the
toll of suicide: Resources for communities, groups, and individuals (pp. 169–184). Göttingen,
Germany: Hogrefe.
Wintersteen, M. B. (2014, October). A retrospective account of youth suicide warning signs and its
impact on prevention efforts. Paper presented at the 48th meeting of the Association of
Cognitive and Behavioral Therapist, Philadelphia, PA.
Witte, T. K., Fitzpatrick, K. K., Joiner, T. E., Jr., & Schmidt, N. B. (2005). Variability in suicidal
ideation: A better predictor of suicide attempts than intensity or duration of ideation?
Journal of Affective Disorders, 88(2), 131–136.
Witte, T. K., Fitzpatrick, K. K., Warren, K. L., Schatschneider, C., & Schmidt, N. B. (2006). Natu-
ralistic evaluation of suicidal ideation: Variability and relation to attempt status. Behav-
iour Research and Therapy, 44(7), 1029–1040.
Witte, T. K., Holm-Denoma, J. M., Zuromski, K. L., Gauthier, J. M., & Ruscio, J. (2017). Individu-
als at high risk for suicide are categorically distinct from those at low risk. Psychological
Assessment, 29(4), 382–393.
World Health Organization. (2020a). Causes of death. Retrieved May 9, 2020, from www.who.
int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/causes- of-death/GHO/causes- of-death.
World Health Organization. (2020b). Causes of death. Retrieved May 19, 2020, from www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide.
World Health Organization. (2020c). Suicide data. Retrieved May 9, 2020, from www.who.int/
mental_health/prevention/suicide/suicideprevent/en.
Yang, L., Liu, X., Chen, W., & Li, L. (2019). A test of the three-step theory of suicide among
Chinese people: A study based on the ideation-to-action framework. Archives of Suicide
Research, 23, 648–661.
Zareian, B., & Klonsky, E. D. (2020). Connectedness and suicide. In A. Page & W. Stritzke
(Eds.), Alternatives to suicide (pp. 135–158). London: Academic Press.

-- 473 of 498 --

453
As for its first edition, the goals for this book were twofold. First, we aspired to pro-
vide the field with expert reviews of the research literature on psychopathology, pre-
dominantly as it pertains to the most commonly treated psychological disorders. With
graduate students and residents (as well as experienced clinicians and researchers)
in mind, we intended to offer an overview of what we know, scientifically, regard-
ing how these disorders manifest themselves, the clinical issues frequently related
to them, and the specific vulnerabilities that may be involved in their origin and/or
maintenance. To provide broader coverage of the clinical reality, the current edition
also includes chapters on three problems that were associated with most of the dis-
orders examined in the original volume: sexual dysfunctions, sleep difficulties, and
suicide. It is noteworthy that for the first two of these transdiagnostic difficulties, a
number of specific disorders were delineated.
Second, we asked the authors to tackle the difficult but exciting challenge of
deriving clinical implications from the basic research. Our thought was that these
implications (derived by recognized psychopathology and/or psychotherapy schol-
ars) could provide clinicians with useful guidelines for assessment and treatment
interventions, irrespective of their theoretical orientation, professional background,
and level of experience. We reasoned that by providing a rigorous and distinctive
source of knowledge, basic research could enrich and expand current efforts toward
evidence-based practice.
C H A P T E R 1 6
Psychopathology Research
and Clinical Interventions
BROAD CONCLUSIONS AND GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Louis G. Castonguay
Thomas F. Oltmanns
Abigail Powers Lott

-- 474 of 498 --

454 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
BROAD CONCLUSIONS
A number of conclusions, some obvious and others less so, can be drawn by taking a
broad perspective on the information presented in the previous chapters. First, when
described purely in terms of symptoms, it is clear that psychopathology takes many
different forms. The clinical problems covered in this book involve a wide array of
maladaptive ways of being and reacting. The obvious implication of such diversity
is that clinicians, researchers, and students must be aware of the various ways in
which different disorders can become manifest, in order to practice clinically, con-
duct research in abnormal behavior, or simply learn about psychopathology. In other
words, they must be able to assess, measure, and retain the distinctive prototypical
criteria by which psychological disorders have been identified in our diagnostic clas-
sifications.
It is also clear, however, that as clinical and theoretical constructs, these disorders
represent much more than lists of symptoms (Morey, 1991). Understanding depres-
sion, for instance, also requires knowledge about its associated (nonsymptomatic)
clinical features, epidemiology and, of course, etiology. Interestingly, a second broad
conclusion that can be drawn from this book is that basic research has revealed con-
siderable convergence across disorders with regard to these and other core aspects of
psychopathology. Furthermore, and in line with one of the main goals of this book,
several specific clinical implications have been derived from these issues for each of
the problems covered in this book—including suicide, which is not identified as a
diagnostic category.
CLINICAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Although the particular foci (in terms of target of assessment or interventions) of
these clinical implications and particular ways of implementing them vary across
clinical problems, a number of general recommendations can be formulated from
them.
Relational Factors
Basic research clearly demonstrates that psychopathology appears within relational
contexts. All clinical problems covered in this book have been associated with inter-
personal (including marital) and social difficulties. These relational difficulties have
been identified as consequences of the individual psychopathology and, in some
cases, as factors that may cause, maintain, or exacerbate a person’s suffering. Accord-
ingly, clinicians should assess clients’ interpersonal situations and functioning (in
terms of needs, gratification, skills, environmental opportunities, and support), irre-
spective of clients’ reported symptoms and/or difficulties. Such assessment should
be made early in therapy, as well as during and before termination of treatment.
Unmet needs, lack of resources, adversities (e.g., neglect, rejection, and hostility),
and/or personal deficiencies (with regard to how an individual seeks, receives, and

-- 475 of 498 --

Psychopathology Research and Clinical Interventions 	455
provides support, validation, and affection) should be the target of clinicians’ inter-
ventions and/or referral to other appropriate services.
Expect Comorbidity
Even if the focus is limited to symptomatology, research shows that psychopathol-
ogy is quite complex. None of the clinical problems covered in this book stands
alone: Comorbidity appears to be an intrinsic characteristic of most, if not all, diag-
nostic conditions. Similarly, high risk of suicide frequently occurs in the context of
symptoms that meet the criteria of one or more psychological disorders. The most
frequent “comrades in arms” are depression, anxiety disorders, substance abuse,
and personality disorders. Far from being mere statistical trivia, the high likelihood
of comorbidity or co-occurrence carries important clinical implications.
It warns against the limitation and potential inadequacy of a brief assessment.
One short intake session is not likely to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the
clinical problems commonly seen in practice, and that may require therapeutic atten-
tion. Comorbidity or co-occurrence also complicate assessment and case formula-
tion. Once the various problems experienced by clients are identified, it behooves
clinicians to establish whether and how these difficulties are functionally related.
The relationship between clinical problems can, of course, be bidirectional: While
the impairment and distress associated with substance abuse, for example, can lead
to depression, the reverse may also take place. Moreover, multiple problems can be
caused by the same underlying factor. Although stated within the context of sub-
stance use disorders, Pihl, Stewart, and Mahu’s (Chapter 8, this volume, p. 228) criti-
cism may also be relevant to the assessment of other disorders: “Perhaps the most
significant error in current practice is the pervasive blindness to common underly-
ing vulnerabilities.”
Comorbidity or co-occurrence further raises important questions with regard
to treatment plans: If therapy is to focus primarily on one issue, what should it be? If
two clinical problems need to be addressed, what should receive attention first, and
how might treatment be conducted so that other clinical difficulties are not ignored
and do not interfere with therapeutic progress? Comorbidity also alerts clinicians
that therapy may be less effective (or may need to last longer) than might be antici-
pated because it has been associated with treatment complications or worse progno-
ses for several disorders (e.g., Beutler, Blatt, Alimohamed, Levy, & Angtuaco, 2006;
Newman, Stiles, Janeck, & Woody, 2006).
Furthermore, comorbidity or co-occurrence points to the importance of ongo-
ing assessment. While the successful treatment of a predominant problem might
lead to the reduction of other difficulties, this may not always be the case. Even if
one clinical problem has been precipitated by another (e.g., the use of a substance
to abate anxiety), with time, it may have become functionally independent from its
initial determining factor. Therefore, an evaluation of clients’ difficulties during and
before the end of therapy is indicated to increase the probability that all serious prob-
lems are sufficiently and adequately addressed. As simple and straightforward as
it may first seem, comorbidity or co-occurrence of psychological problems dictate
upon clinical practice the acquisition of extensive knowledge, sophisticated clinical

-- 476 of 498 --

456 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
judgment and skills, as well as extensive and repeated assessments of client’s dis-
tress and impairments.
Sleep and Sex
As mentioned earlier, this volume includes chapters describing several specific sleep
and sexual dysfunction disorders. It is important to keep in mind that even when
they do not meet criteria for specific disorders (in terms of severity and/or specific-
ity), difficulties with sleep and sexual functioning are found in addition to (or, in
some cases, as part of) the symptomatic picture of many problems covered in this
book. These difficulties may frequently go undetected by many clinicians, either
because of a lack of attention to these issues as part of their training or lack of time
for comprehensive evaluation during intake and therapy sessions. Nevertheless,
these issues increase distress and impairment, and they can also prevent an indi-
vidual (and their significant other) from achieving full life satisfaction. Because cli-
ents may not always think about (or be comfortable with) reporting such difficulties,
it falls to clinicians to inquire about them (verbally and/or via self-report measures)
at different time points of their treatment and to provide (or refer to) comprehensive
assessment and/or appropriate interventions to address them. Fortunately, clinicians
will find in Chapters 13 (Pukall & Bergeron) and 14 (Vincent & Davidson) specific
guidelines to help them with these important tasks.
Work and Medical Problems
Also directly related to a client’s quality of life are work functioning and medical
health. These are not always sufficiently emphasized in theoretical models underly-
ing many psychological treatments of psychopathology. Because these problems may
prevent, delay, or otherwise interfere with use of many traditional forms of psycho-
logical therapies, a full understanding of these factors should be part of clinicians’
case formulation and treatment plan, in order to guide choices of what interventions
to implement, how and when to conduct them, and what other services (occupational
and medical) a client should receive and when.
Suicide
A most unfortunate but inescapable reality associated with psychopathology is the
possibility of suicide. Although the danger of suicide attempt or completion is well
known for some disorders such as depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia,
increased risk of suicidal ideation and/or attempts has also been associated with
most of the anxiety disorders, marital discord, eating disorders, and personality dis-
orders. As a consequence, the possibility of suicide should never be underestimated
by clinicians—even when working with “less severe” forms of psychopathology
and/or high-functioning clients—and monitoring of suicidal risk (perhaps as part of
routine use of brief, noninvasive, and valid self-report measures) should be encour-
aged in clinical practice. As for the case of sleep and sexual dysfunction difficulties,
guidelines to assess and address suicidality are presented in this book (see Bryan &
Klonsky, Chapter 15).

-- 477 of 498 --

Psychopathology Research and Clinical Interventions 	457
Chronic and Recurring Problems
Basic research clearly demonstrates that for most forms of psychopathology, a limited
amount of suffering, distress, and impairment is more the exception than the norm.
The course of some disorders may vary (e.g., posttraumatic stress disorder, eating
disorders, and substance use disorder), but many of the clinical problems covered
in this book have been described as chronic conditions. Several of them are charac-
terized by frequent recurrence and substantial rates of relapse after treatment. For
clinicians, this suggests that, in addition to inquiring about the presence of symp-
toms at the beginning of treatment, it is also important to examine the history of the
symptoms reported by the client. For some disorders, the duration of the problem is
associated with poor prognosis (e.g., Newman et al., 2006) and may thus suggest lon-
ger and/or more intense treatment. Moreover, the high rates of relapse in many dis-
orders should lead clinicians to (1) do a systematic assessment of symptoms before
ending a treatment (to make sure that residual problems are adequately addressed),
(2) ensure that clients have acquired skills (e.g., relapse prevention strategies) to cope
with future triggers of maladaptive reactions, and (3) inform clients that booster ses-
sions and/or additional incidences of therapy can be anticipated and are likely to be
beneficial.
Demographics Matter
Empirical findings related to a factor as global as gender can provide useful clini-
cal prediction and even explanation. Research informs clinicians that when work-
ing with individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia, they should anticipate that the
prognosis of their male clients will be worse than that of their female clients. More-
over, gender appears to be the primary risk factor for eating disorder, as well as a
robust marker of one etiological pathway for depression (i.e., rumination—which has
been found to explain, at least in part, why women are two times more vulnerable
to depression than men). Furthermore, as indicated in a number of chapters in this
book, the manifestations of psychopathology (e.g., the content of worry) may differ
across gender, age, education, religion, ethnicity, and/or sexual orientation. These
sociocultural components, which in part define who we are, should be taken into
account when conducting assessment, as well as when building case formulation
and treatment plans.
Biology Matters
Psychopathology research provides indisputable evidence that biological vulner-
abilities are involved, more or less extensively, with all clinical problems reviewed in
this book (including marital discord). Although this might dispel the hope, if there
ever was one, that psychological and/or social treatments might eventually lead to a
cure of psychiatric difficulties (or problems of living), it does not imply that nonbio-
logical interventions have negligible impact on abnormal behavior. A more nuanced
conclusion that might be drawn is that psychosocial interventions are likely to have
boundaries in terms of the change that they can foster, at least for some individu-
als. Such a “therapeutic ceiling” may in part explain why some clients either do not

-- 478 of 498 --

458 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
respond (fully or at all) to or relapse from psychological treatments (even those that
are empirically supported).
Although very tentative, one recommendation that may be derived from what
we know about biological vulnerabilities and correlates is that it may be wise for the
clinician to inquire about the extent of psychopathology in a client’s relatives (past
and current) and be prepared to provide longer treatment (and/or arrange for the
prescription of medication) if the incidence of psychological disorders is extensive
in the client’s pedigree. We should also mention, however, that even for disorders
with firmly established biological vulnerabilities, current biological treatments are
far from being panaceas. As noted in this book, medication is typically not sufficient
as an effective and comprehensive treatment of bipolar disorders and schizophrenia,
and research suggests that psychosocial interventions can help to reduce symptoms
and risk for relapse for people with these severe and chronic problems. Similarly,
while medication is an effective form of therapy for depression (another disorder for
which there is strong evidence of biological determinants), the relapse rate observed
after its discontinuation is higher than what has been found following cognitive
therapy (Hollon & Dimidjian, 2009).
The Psychosocial Core
Also dispelled by research is the contention (some may say “the myth”) that psychi-
atric disorders are purely, and simply, medical diseases. For each of the disorders
covered in this book, several psychological and social vulnerabilities have been iden-
tified, such as cognitive (e.g., dysfunctional views of self, world, and future; biases or
deficits in attention, information processing, and/or memory; maladaptive attribu-
tions; deficits in inhibition and cognitive control; worry; intolerance of uncertainty;
low self-efficacy expectations; difficulties in anticipating pleasure), emotional (e.g.,
maladaptive emotional regulation strategies; fear of emotional contrasts; emotional
avoidance; deficits in emotional expression), interpersonal (e.g., parental neglect and/
or abuse; attachment problems; family interaction patterns such as high level of hos-
tility expression; dysfunctional interpersonal styles such as excessive reassurance
seeking), personality traits (e.g., neuroticism, perfectionism, impulsivity, sensation
seeking, and antagonism), maladaptive learning (operant and classical conditioning,
modeling), skills deficits (e.g., social and communication skills; problem-solving and
stress coping skills), and sociocultural (e.g., stress, traumatic life events and condi-
tions, low social support; financial difficulties; social pressures such as cultural
views of beauty and cultural norms about substance use) variables. Biological factors
are, of course, more than likely to be involved in, or related to, these psychosocial
issues. What the massive amount of research on psychosocial risk factors clearly
conveys, however, is that genetic predispositions, as well as biochemical and ana-
tomical abnormalities, cannot explain all the variables playing a role in the onset,
maintenance, recurrence, and/or relapses of psychiatric disorders.
Fortunately, and as illustrated in this book, a number of empirically supported
treatments address some of the psychosocial vulnerabilities investigated by basic
researchers. While most of these treatments have been tied to particular theoretical
models (especially but not exclusively cognitive-behavioral), all of the authors in this
book have also derived targets, general strategies, or principles of change underlying

-- 479 of 498 --

Psychopathology Research and Clinical Interventions 	459
their respective techniques and procedures. Formulated without jargon, these pro-
vide guidelines that therapists of all orientations should seriously consider assimi-
lating (even if specialized training may in some cases be required for them to do so)
into their intervention repertoires. Interestingly, the general strategies and principles
identified in this book converge with and expand on other sets of empirically based
change principles that emerged from initiatives co-led by one of us (L. C. G.; Caston-
guay & Beulter, 2006; Castonguay, Constantino, & Beutler, 2019). However, none of
these efforts has remotely encompassed all of the clinical implications highlighted in
the previous chapters of this book. We hope the implementation of these new recom-
mendations and guidelines will help to increase the validity of our assessment and
the effectiveness of our treatments.
Embrace Complexity
Perhaps the main implication that one can derive from the rich empirical findings on
the etiology factors (biological, psychological, and social) presented in this book is
that with regard to psychopathology, many roads lead to Rome, and most pathways
to get there intersect. None of the previous chapters has identified a unique, isolated
vulnerability factor in the onset and maintenance of abnormal behavior, and most of
the authors who wrote these chapters have explicitly mentioned that different risk
factors interact with each other. Practically, this suggests that clinicians are likely to
benefit from assessing all possible determinants (and their functional and/or syner-
getic relationships) of their clients’ difficulties and focusing their interventions on
what are likely to be the most important and current determining factors, yet also
assessing and targeting other variables that are likely to be involved in the onset and
maintenance of the problems experienced by their clients.
Needless to say, such practical suggestions assume a difficult balance of focus (or
cohesiveness) and flexibility (and comprehensiveness) on the part of a psychotherapist.
If based on a firm grasp of empirical and theoretical knowledge, as well as sophis-
ticated clinical skills, maintaining this delicate balance may improve our efforts to
decrease distress and suffering, and reduce the probability of relapse, while also trying
to increase coping skills, level of functioning, and overall quality of life (in terms of
not only satisfaction and accomplishment but also meaning, purpose, affiliation, and
attachment). Considering the advances made in our understanding of the variables
related to effective treatments (client–therapist, relationship, and technical factors; see
Castonguay & Beutler, 2006; Castonguay et al., 2019; Castonguay & Hill, 2017; Lambert,
2013; Norcross & Lambert, 2019; Norcross & Wampold, 2019), as well as the implications
that can be derived from psychopathology (and other basic) research, Rome (however
beautiful it is metaphorically) does not have to be a long-lasting destination.
While these 10 general recommendations are far from being comprehensive and
do not do justice to the rich and detailed clinical implications described in the previ-
ous chapters, they do, as a whole, allow for a third broad conclusion: Basic psychopa-
thology research can be clinically relevant. By adding another avenue for evidence-
based practice, it is our hope that the clinical implications derived from such research
will further enrich the integration of science and practice that is crucial for future
progress in the field of mental health.

-- 480 of 498 --

460 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
REFERENCES
Beutler, L. E., Blatt, S. J., Alimohamed, S., Levy, K. N., & Angtuaco, L. A. (2006). Participant fac-
tors in treating dysphoric disorders. In L. G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles
of therapeutic change that work (pp. 13–63). New York: Oxford University Press.
Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Principles of therapeutic change that work. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Castonguay, L. G., Constantino, M. J., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2019). Principles of change: How
psychotherapists implement research in practice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (Eds.). (2017). How and why some therapists are better than others:
Understanding therapist effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hollon, S. D., & Dimidjian, S. (2009). Cognitive and behavioral treatment of depression. In I. H.
Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 586–603). New York:
Guilford Press.
Lambert, M. J. (Ed.). (2013). Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change
(6th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Morey, L. C. (1991). Classification of mental disorders as a collection of hypothetical con-
structs. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 289–293.
Newman, M. G., Stiles, W. B., Janeck, A., & Woody, S. R. (2006). Integration of therapeutic fac-
tors in anxiety disorders. In L. G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeu-
tic change that work (pp. 187–202). New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 1.
Evidence-based therapist contributions (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 2.
Evidence-based responsiveness (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

-- 481 of 498 --

461
Acamprosate, 244–245
Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)
anorexia nervosa, 199
OCD, 136–137
Acceptance-based behavioral treatment, 204
ACT. See Acceptance and commitment
therapy
Actigraphy assessment, 408–409
Acute stress disorder (ASD), 152, 156–157,
169
Adapted meditation, 335
Addictive disorders. See Substance-related
and addictive disorders
Adolescents and young adults
cannabis use and cognition, 234
college students and substance use,
223–224, 231–232
depression, 21, 34
personality disorders, 276, 278
trajectory for addictive disorders, 224–225
Advanced sleep–wake phase disorder, 408,
409, 410
Affective network dysfunction model, 419
Affiliation, 257
African Americans
bipolar disorder, 296
insomnia, 404
panic disorder, 99
personality disorders, 274
racial diagnostic bias, 102, 274, 275, 296,
319, 321
schizophrenia, 319, 321, 325
Agonist substitution, 243–244
Agoraphobia
comorbidity, 103–104
course, 90–93
depression and, 22
epidemiology, 98–100
symptoms and clinical features, 80–82
Alcohol use/alcohol use disorder
college students and, 223–224
comorbidity, 227–228, 229
cue exposure and, 240
NREM parasomnias and, 413
prevalence, 5, 6, 223
social and health problems associated
with, 225, 226
social anxiety disorder and, 83–84, 104
treatment, 242–243, 244–245
See also Substance-related and addictive
disorders
Alogia, 324
Alternative model for personality disorders
(AMPD), 262, 267–269
Index
Note. Page numbers in italic indicate a figure or a table.

-- 482 of 498 --

462 	Index
AMPD. See Alternative model for
personality disorders
Amygdala
depression, 34
PTSD, 155, 161
Anankastic domain, 269
Androgens, 376
Anger
depression, 19, 23–24
panic disorder, 87
Anhedonia
depression, 35
schizophrenia, 324, 328, 329–330, 331
Anorexia nervosa
clinical implications, treatment planning,
and treatment, 195–199, 209–210, 362
epidemiology, 190
etiology, 192–194
medication use, 206
symptoms, course, comorbidity, and
features, 185–187
Antagonism, 267
Antagonist treatments, 243
Anticipatory pleasure, 324, 330
Anticonvulsants, 300
Antidepressant medication
bipolar disorder, 300
GAD, 62
panic disorder, 91
personality disorders, 280
Antipsychotic medication
anorexia nervosa, 206
bipolar disorder, 300
personality disorders, 280
schizophrenia, 331–332
Antisocial behavior, 236
Antisocial personality disorder
alcohol use disorder and, 227
defined, 264
dimensional model applied to, 268–269
genetic factors, 277–278
prevalence, 272, 273
Anxiety disorders
alcohol use disorder and, 227
bipolar disorder and, 296
comorbidity
clinical implications, 105–106
panic disorder and agoraphobia,
103–104
social anxiety disorder, 104
specific phobia, 105
course
clinical implications, 97–98
overview, 89–90
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 90–93
social anxiety disorder, 93–95
specific phobia, 95–97
depression and, 22, 23
epidemiology
clinical implications, 102–103
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 98–100
social anxiety disorder, 100–101
specific phobia, 101–102
etiology
clinical implications, 110–111
general biological vulnerabilities,
106–108
general psychological vulnerabilities,
108–109
specific psychological vulnerabilities,
109–110
GAD and, 64
OCD and, 132
overview and summary, 77–78, 111–112
PTSD/trauma and, 154–155, 160
schizophrenia and, 319
severity and prevalence, 5, 6
sexual dysfunctions and, 374, 388
symptoms and clinical features
clinical implications, 85–89
overview, 78–80
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 80–82
social anxiety disorder, 82–84
specific phobia, 84–85
Anxiety sensitivity cognitive concerns, 82
ASD. See Acute stress disorder
Asociality, 323
ASSIP. See Attempted Suicide Short
Intervention Program
Ataques de nervios, 8
Atonia, 420
Attachment theory
emotion-focused couple therapy, 359–360
GAD, 67
marital discord, 354–355
Attempted Suicide Short Intervention
Program (ASSIP), 443–444, 445
Attentional biases
addictive disorders, 240
depression, 28–29
Aversive treatments, 242–243
Avoidance, of therapy, 86

-- 483 of 498 --

Index 	463
Avoidant personality disorder
defined in DSM-5, 265
versus dependent personality disorder,
265–266
prevalence, 272
social anxiety disorder and, 83, 104, 265
social motivation and, 260
treatment-related issues, 282
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
clinical implications, treatment planning,
and treatment, 204–206, 211
epidemiology, 191–192
symptoms, course, comorbidity, and
features, 189
Avolition, 323–324, 330, 333
BD. See Bipolar disorder
Behavioral inhibition, 107
Benzodiazepines
alcohol withdrawal, 236
bipolar disorder, 300
GAD, 62
panic disorder, 91
Binge drinking, 224
Binge-eating disorder
clinical implications, treatment planning,
and treatment, 202–204, 211
epidemiology, 191
etiology, 192–194
medication use, 207
symptoms, course, comorbidity, and
features, 188–189
Biological preparedness theory, 110
Biological treatments. See Medication
Bipolar disorder (BD)
bipolar I disorder, 227, 295, 296
bipolar II disorder, 295, 296
etiology
genetic factors, 297
psychosocial risk factors, 298–300
phenomenology
associated clinical features, 295–296
clinical implications, 297
comorbidity, 296–297
epidemiology, 296
typical symptoms and course, 294–295
prevalence, 5, 6, 296
summary, 305, 307
treatment
pharmacological treatments, 300
psychosocial treatment, 301–305
Black Americans. See African Americans
Blood–injection–injury phobia, 85, 96
Blunted affect, 324, 329, 330–331
Body dysmorphic disorder, 128
Borderline personality disorder
age and lifespan issues, 273, 276, 277
childhood adversity and, 278
defined in DSM-5, 264
defined in ICD-11, 269
dimensional model applied to, 268–269
gender differences in symptoms, 272
genetic factors, 277
marital discord and, 352, 359
PTSD and, 160, 167
race/ethnicity and, 274
suicide/suicidality and, 260, 261
treatment-related issues, 280, 281, 282
Bowlby’s model of attachment, 67
Brain. See Neurobiology
Brain injury, 171
Bremelanotide, 385
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, 326
Bulimia nervosa
clinical implications, treatment
planning, and treatment, 199–202,
210–211
cultural factors in, 7, 9
epidemiology, 190–191
etiology, 192–194
medication use, 206–207
symptoms, course, comorbidity, and
features, 187–188
Buprenorphine–naloxone, 244
Buspirone, 62
Butyrophenones, 331
Caffeine use disorder, 222
CAMS. See Collaborative assessment and
management of suicidality
Cannabis use, 224, 227, 234
Caribbean peoples, 8
Cascade model of marital dissolution, 353
Catatonia, 323
CBT. See Cognitive-behavioral therapy
Checking compulsions, 127, 140
Childhood adversity
bipolar disorder and, 298
depression and, 35–36
personality disorders and, 278, 279
schizophrenia and, 319
sexual dysfunctions and, 380, 389

-- 484 of 498 --

464 	Index
Children
GAD, 67
personality disorders, 274, 275, 278, 279
PTSD, 167–168
sleep–wake disorders, 215, 412, 413–414,
418
specific phobia, 95
Children in the Community study, 275
Chlorpromazine, 331
Chronic PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress
disorder
Chronotype questionnaires, 409
Cigarette use. See Smoking
Circadian rhythms
assessment of, 408–409
defined, 407
Circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders
(CRSWDs)
associated clinical features, course, and
outcome, 409–410
clinical implications, 411
comorbidity, 410
epidemiology, 410
etiology, 410–411
overview, 407
phenomenology and symptoms, 408–409
Citicoline, 297
Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative
Symptoms, 326
Clinical interviews
schizophrenia, 326–327
sexual dysfunctions, 374–375
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis
Symptom Severity, 326
Clomipramine, 136, 138
Clozapine, 332
Cocaine use, 224, 228
Cognitive-behavioral models
insomnia, 405
OCD, 133–135
relationship functioning, 354
Cognitive-behavioral social skills training,
333–334
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
addictive disorders, 238–240
anorexia nervosa, 197–198
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder,
205–206
binge-eating disorder, 203
bipolar disorder, 302
bulimia nervosa, 200–201
children and, 167–168
depression, 18, 39–43
eating disorders, 194–195, 197–198,
200–201, 203, 205–206, 208
GAD, 61–62, 65
insomnia, 403–404, 407
marital discord, 358
OCD, 133–135
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 90–91, 92
personality disorders, 280
PTSD, 164–166, 167–168, 169
schizophrenia, 333–334, 336
sexual dysfunctions, 384, 385, 386
social anxiety disorder, 93–94
suicide prevention, 443, 444–445, 446
Cognitive biases
anxiety disorders, 94–95, 108–109
depression, 28–30, 37–39
Cognitive control, 29, 38–39
Cognitive processing therapy, 166
Cognitive remediation therapy, 198
Cognitive restructuring
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 90–91
PTSD, 164, 165, 170
social anxiety disorder, 93
Cognitive retraining, 240
Cognitive specificity theory, 133–134
Collaborative assessment and management
of suicidality (CAMS), 443, 445, 446
Collaborative Longitudinal Personality
Disorders Study, 274
College students
alcohol use, 223–224
stimulant drug use, 231–232
Community Assessment of Psychic
Experiences, 327
Comorbidity
alternative ways to view, 105–106
concept and clinical problems of, 12–13
as feature of psychopathology, 455–456
Complex PTSD, 156, 166–167
Compulsions, 126, 127
Computerized cognitive retraining, 240
Concurrent validity, 11
Conditioning/learning theory
addictive disorders, 233
anxiety disorders, 109
GAD, 66–67
OCD, 133
PTSD, 160–161, 164
Connectedness, 436, 442

-- 485 of 498 --

Index 	465
Consensus Sleep Diary, 400
Consummatory pleasure, 324
Contamination obsessions, 126, 139–140
Contingency management, 239
Coping skills training, 239
Cortisol, 33–34
Couple-based assessment, 346–347
Couple therapy
to reduce marital discord, 357–360
role in treating psychopathology, 361–362
for sexual dysfunctions, 385, 387
Crisis response plan (CRP), 443, 445
Critical incident stress debriefing, 168
CRP. See Crisis response plan
CRSWDs. See Circadian rhythm sleep–wake
disorders
Cue exposure, 239–240
Cultural Formulation Interview, 9
Culture
addictive disorders and, 235–236
anxiety disorder treatment and, 102–103
culture-bound syndromes, 8–9
depression and, 24–25, 26–27
eating disorders and, 189–192
panic attacks and, 100, 102
PTSD prevalence and, 158
role in psychopathology, 7–9
schizophrenia and, 7, 320
social anxiety disorder and, 100–101
specific phobia and, 101–102
See also Race/ethnicity
Cyclothymic disorder, 295
Day treatment programs
anorexia nervosa, 209–210
bulimia nervosa, 210–211
DBT. See Dialectical behavior therapy
D -cycloserine, 96–97, 167
DE. See Delayed ejaculation
Decontamination, 127
Defusion strategies, 137
Delayed ejaculation (DE)
course and treatment outcome, 384
defined, 372
etiology, 377
Delayed-onset PTSD, 153
Delayed sleep–wake phase disorder, 408,
409, 410
Delusions
OCD symptoms distinguished from, 129
schizophrenia and, 322, 336
Demand–withdraw communication, 354
Dependent personality disorder, 265–266, 352
Depression
alcohol use and, 228
anxiety disorders and, 103, 104
etiology
clinical implications, 37–43
cognitive theories, 28–30
emotion regulation, 30–33
interpersonal and developmental
contributions, 35–37
introduction, 27
neuroendocrinology, 33–34
neuroimaging, 34–35
OCD and, 139
overview and summary, 17–18, 43–44
phenomenology
associated clinical features, 19–20
clinical implications, 23–27
comorbidity, 20, 21–23
course, 21
epidemiology, 20–21
typical symptoms, 18
prevalence, 5, 6, 17, 20–21, 26–27
PTSD/trauma and, 155, 160
schizophrenia and, 319
sexual dysfunctions and, 374, 388
suicide ideation and, 433–434
Detachment, 267
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 3rd edition (DSM-3), 151
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-4), 430
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5)
acute stress disorder, 157
bipolar disorder, 295
culture-bound syndromes, 8–9
development of, 10
limitations, problems, and possible
improvements, 11–14, 88–89, 266
marital and relational discord, 346
personality disorders, 262–269
psychopathology described by, 3
PTSD, 151–152, 155, 156
schizophrenia, 317, 320–321
sexual dysfunctions, 370, 371
sleep–wake disorders, 399, 408, 411
substance use and addictive disorders,
222
suicide and suicide attempts, 430–431

-- 486 of 498 --

466 	Index
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
binge-eating disorder, 204
bulimia nervosa, 201
personality disorders, 280
suicide prevention, 443, 444, 445, 446
Dimensional models
hierarchical taxonomy of
psychopathology, 3–4
for personality disorders, 262, 266–270
Dim light melatonin onset, 408
Disability
GAD and, 57–58
psychopathology and, 6
Disease avoidance model, 85
Disgust, 85, 87
Disinhibition, 268
Disorganized speech/behavior, 322–323
Dissociative amnesia, 9
Distraction, 31–32, 40
Disulfiram, 242–243
Divalproex, 300
Divorce rates, 350
Dopamine
role in addictive disorders, 231, 235
role in bipolar disorder, 299
Dorsal system, 34
Dorsolateral PFC, 34–35
Drinking. See Alcohol use/alcohol use
disorder
Drug use. See Substance-related and
addictive disorders
DSM. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders
Dyadic Adjustment Scale, 349
Early ejaculation. See Premature
ejaculation
Early interventions, PTSD and, 168–169
Eating disorders
clinical implications, treatment planning,
and treatment
anorexia nervosa, 195–199
avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder, 204–206
binge-eating disorder, 202–204
bulimia nervosa, 199–202
epidemiology
anorexia nervosa, 190
avoidant-restrictive food intake
disorder, 191–192
binge-eating disorder, 191
bulimia nervosa, 190–191
global burden of disease and
prevalence, 189–190
etiology, 192–194
medication use, 206–207
multivariate models of onset and
maintenance, 194–195
process of change in treatments, 208
symptoms, course, comorbidity, and
features
anorexia nervosa, 185–187
avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder, 189
binge-eating disorder, 188–189
bulimia nervosa, 187–188
treatment intensity
anorexia nervosa, 209–210
avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder, 211
binge-eating disorder, 211
bulimia nervosa, 210–211
treatment motivation, 207–208
E-cigarettes, 223, 244
Ecological momentary assessment methods,
437
ED. See Erectile disorder
Electronic devices, 410–411
Emotional disclosure, 32, 39–40
Emotional processing, 60
Emotion-focused couple therapy, 359–360
Emotion-focused meditation, 335
Emotion regulation (ER)
bipolar disorder, 298
depression, 30–33, 39–40
personality disorders, 261
Epidemiologic Catchment Area community
survey, 57–58
Epigenetics, 230, 245
Epilepsy, 413
ER. See Emotion regulation
Erectile disorder (ED)
comorbidity, 388
course and treatment outcome, 382–384
defined, 372
etiology, 376–377
Erectogenic drugs, 383
ERP. See Exposure and response prevention
Estrogen, 378
Ethnicity. See Race/ethnicity
Etiological validity, 11
Executive functioning, 295–296

-- 487 of 498 --

Index 	467
Expectancy challenge, 239
Exposure and response prevention (ERP,
EX/RP)
anorexia nervosa, 198–199
OCD, 135–136, 139–141, 143–144
Exposure therapies
anorexia nervosa, 198–199
depression, 40–41
nightmare disorder, 418
OCD, 135–136, 139–141, 143–144
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 90
PTSD, 165–166, 169
social anxiety disorder, 93–94
specific phobia, 95–96
use of relaxation, 97–98
Expressed emotion, 298
Expressive suppression, 32
EX/RP. See Exposure and response
prevention
Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing, 166
False-suffocation alarm theory, 108
Family
anxiety disorders and, 89
ataques de nervios and, 8
OCD symptoms and, 145
schizophrenia symptoms and, 325, 331
substance use and, 235–236, 241
Family therapy/interventions
addictive disorders, 241
anorexia nervosa, 197
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder,
206
bipolar disorder, 302–303
bulimia nervosa, 202
NREM parasomnias, 416–417
schizophrenia, 331, 334
Fatigue, 402
Fentanyl, 225
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders, 225
FFM. See Five-factor model of personality
Fight-or-flight reaction, 79
Firearms, 436, 443
First-generation antipsychotic medication,
331–332
Five-factor model of personality (FFM),
258–259, 267
Flibanserin, 385
Fluid vulnerability theory of suicide, 437
Fluoxetine, 206–207
GAD. See Generalized anxiety disorder
Gambling disorder
defined in DSM-5, 222
prevalence, 223, 224
suicide and, 225
treatment, 237, 243
See also Substance-related and addictive
disorders
Gamma-aminobutyric acid, 400
Gay men
anxiety disorders, 89, 102
sexual difficulties, 389
Gender
addiction, 231
anxiety disorders, 99, 101, 108
depression, 20–21, 31
eating disorders, 192–194
GAD, 64
personality disorders, 272
role in psychopathology, 6, 457
sleep–wake disorders, 402
See also Men; Women
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
comorbidity, 64–66
course and outcome, 61–63
depression and, 22
epidemiology, 63–64
etiology, 66–68
versus OCD, 128–129
summary, 68–69
symptoms and features, 56–61
Genetics
addictive disorders, 230, 236
anxiety disorders, 106–107
bipolar disorder, 297
eating disorders, 193
GAD, 66
personality disorders, 277–278
PTSD, 163
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
(GPPPD)
comorbidity, 388
course and treatment outcome, 386
defined, 372
etiology, 379–380
Genomewide association studies, 163
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010, 6, 189
Glucocorticoid, 167
Goals
bipolar disorder and dysregulation of, 299
role in treating personality disorders, 281–282

-- 488 of 498 --

468 	Index
GPPPD. See Genito-pelvic pain/penetration
disorder
Group therapy
OCD, 144–145
personality disorders, 280
sexual dysfunctions, 385, 386
Guided self-help using CBT
binge-eating disorder, 203
bulimia nervosa, 200–201
Hallucinations, 322
Harvey’s cognitive model of insomnia, 405
Hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology
(HiTOP), 3–4, 13–14
Hispanics
ataques de nervios, 8
personality disorders, 274
PTSD, 159
Histrionic personality disorder, 264–265
HiTOP. See Hierarchical taxonomy of
psychopathology
Hopelessness, suicide motivation and, 19,
432–433, 442, 443
HPA axis, depression and, 33–34
HSDD. See Hypoactive sexual desire
disorder
Hyperarousal, 401–402, 407
Hypnosis, 414
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD)
course and treatment outcome, 382
defined, 371
etiology, 375–376
Hypocretin-1 and -2, 400–401
Hypomanic episodes, 294
ICD. See International Classification of
Diseases
Ideation-to-action framework for suicide,
440–441
“Idioms of distress,” 8
Illness anxiety disorder, 128
Imagery rehearsal therapy (IRT), 418, 419,
420
Impulsivity
as feature of bipolar disorder, 298
relationship to suicide, 434–435
Individualism, 27
Inflammation
depression and, 20
marital discord and, 348
PTSD and, 164
Inhibitory learning, 137–138
Injury prevention, 421–422
Inpatient treatment, for anorexia nervosa,
209
Insight, poor, 138
Insomnia disorder
associated clinical features, 400–403
clinical implications, 405–407
comorbidity, 405
course, outcome, and treatment, 403–404
epidemiology, 404
etiology, 405
phenomenology and symptoms, 399–400
Insomnia Severity Index, 400
Integrated motivational–volitional model of
suicide, 442
Integrative behavioral couple therapy,
358–359
International Classification of Diseases, 11th
edition (ICD-11)
development of, 10
eating disorders, 185, 187, 189
personality disorders, 262, 269–270
PTSD and acute stress reactions, 155–156
International Classification of Sleep Disorders,
3rd edition, 399, 408
Internet gaming disorder, 222
Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy,
304
Interpersonal difficulties
depression and, 19, 35–37, 41–43
as feature of psychopathology, 454–455
GAD and, 58, 60–61, 65–66
insomnia and, 402
personality disorders and, 258, 259
See also Marital and relational discord
Interpersonal–psychological theory of
suicide, 441–442
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
binge-eating disorder, 203–204
bipolar disorder, 304
bulimia nervosa, 201
process of change, 208
Interpretation bias, 29, 38
Intracavernosal injections, 383
IPT. See Interpersonal psychotherapy
Irregular sleep–wake disorder, 408, 409
Irritability, 19
IRT. See Imagery rehearsal therapy
Jet-lag sleep–wake disorder, 408

-- 489 of 498 --

Index 	469
Khmer refugees, 100
Khyâl attacks, 100
Lamotrigine, 300
Latinos. See Hispanics
Learning theory. See Conditioning/learning
theory
Lisdexamfetamine, 207
Lithium, 300
Loving-kindness meditation, 335
Lurasidone, 300
Major depression
couple therapy as treatment for, 361
GAD and, 64
prevalence, 5, 6
See also Depression
Major depressive disorder (MDD)
comorbidity, 20, 22–23
versus GAD, 65
medical conditions and, 20
neuroendocrinology of, 33–34
OCD and, 131–132
suicide and, 19
See also Depression
Manic episodes
defined, 294
triggers for, 298–300
MAP-SR, 327
Marijuana use. See Cannabis use
Marital and relational discord (MRD)
associated clinical features, 347–349
classification, 349–350
comorbidity, 351–353
epidemiology, course, and outcomes,
350–351
etiology
attachment theory, 354–355
clinical implications, 356
cognitive-behavioral model of
relationship functioning, 354
contextual variables, 355–356
overview, 353
overview and summary, 345–346, 362
personality disorders and, 259, 352
treatments and treatment outcome
clinical implications, 360–362
preventing marital discord, 356–357
reducing marital discord, 357–360
typical symptoms, 346–347
Marital satisfaction, 350–351
Marital Satisfaction Inventory – Brief Form,
349
Marriage rates, 350
Masturbation, 377, 384
Maudsley approach to family therapy, 197,
202
MBP. See Mentalization-based
psychotherapy
MDD. See Major depressive disorder
MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymeth-
amphetamine), 167
Medical health
bipolar disorder and, 297
depression and, 20
GAD and, 58
insomnia and, 402–403
marital discord and, 347–348
personality disorders and, 259
as relevant to psychopathology, 456
symptom overlap with panic disorder,
104, 105
Medication
addictive disorders, 242–245
bipolar disorder, 300
eating disorders, 206–207
GAD, 62–63
insomnia, 404
limitations of, 458
OCD, 138
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 91–92
personality disorders, 280
PTSD, 167
schizophrenia, 331–332
sexual dysfunctions, 382–383, 385
social anxiety disorder, 94
specific phobia, 96–97
Meditation, 335
Melatonin, 401, 407
Memory
depression and, 28, 38
GAD and, 57
trauma and, 161–162
Memory specificity training, 38
Men
addictive disorders, 223
bipolar disorder, 296
depression, 20
gay men, 89, 102, 389
marital discord/satisfaction, 348, 351
personality disorders, 272
PTSD, 158

-- 490 of 498 --

470 	Index
Men (cont.)
schizophrenia, 319
sexual dysfunctions, 370, 371, 372, 375–377,
382–385, 388–389
sleep–wake disorders, 410, 418
suicide rate, 431
Mental disorders. See Psychopathology
Mentalization-based psychotherapy (MBP),
443–444, 445
Mental rituals, 127, 140–141
Methadone, 244
Military
soldiers and PTSD, 153, 163
Vietnam veterans and PTSD, 163, 164
Mindfulness
addictive disorders and, 240
bipolar disorder and, 304
meditation-based treatments for
schizophrenia, 335
OCD and, 146
sexual dysfunctions and, 385
Mixed episodes bipolar disorder, 295
Mood disorders
alcohol use disorder and, 227
panic disorder/agoraphobia and, 103
severity and prevalence, 5, 6
sexual dysfunctions and, 388
Morin’s cognitive-behavioral model of
insomnia, 405
Morningness–Eveningness Questionnaire, 409
Mortality rates
anorexia nervosa, 186
depression, 20
Motivated cognition, 354
Motivational interviewing
addictive disorders, 237–238
OCD, 142
Motivation and Pleasure Scale-Self Report
(MAP-SR), 327
Mowrer’s theory of fear acquisition, 109, 133
MRD. See Marital and relational discord
Multimodal physical therapy, 386
Munich Chronotype Questionnaire, 409
Nalozone, 244
Naltrexone, 243, 245
Narcissism, 257
Narcissistic personality disorder, 265
Narcolepsy, 401
National Comorbidity Survey Replication
(NCS-R), 5, 22
Native Americans
alcohol addiction, 223
depression, 20
panic disorder, 99
NAVIGATE approach, 334
NCS-R. See National Comorbidity Survey
Replication
Negative affect, 267
Negative affectivity, 355
Negative feedback seeking, 37
Negative reciprocity, 354
“Network theory” model of
psychopathology, 4
Neurobiology
anxiety disorders, 107
bipolar disorder, 299
depression, 33–35
insomnia, 400–401
OCD, 132–133
PTSD, 155, 161
substance use and addiction, 230–232
Neurodegenerative diseases, 421
Nicotine replacement therapy, 243
Nightmare disorder, 417–420
Nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, 413
Nocturnal panic attacks, 82, 413
Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder, 408, 409
Non-rapid-eye-movement parasomnias
associated clinical features, 413
clinical implications, 416–417
comorbidity, 414–415
course, outcome, and treatment, 413–414
epidemiology, 414
etiology, 415–416
phenomenology and symptoms, 412–413
Non-rapid-eye-movement sleep (NREM),
398
Nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI), 430, 435
NREM. See Non-rapid-eye-movement sleep
NSSI. See Nonsuicidal self-injury
Nucleus accumbens, 35
Obsessions, 125–126
Obsessive Compulsive Cognitions Working
Group, 134
Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD)
clinical implications
client variables and treatment planning,
144
engaging patients, motivation, and
collaboration, 141–143

-- 491 of 498 --

Index 	471
exposure and response prevention,
143–144
group therapy, 144–145
other treatment approaches, 146
partner or family involvement in
symptoms, 145
personality disorders, 139
poor insight, 138
relapse prevention, 145–146
severe depression, 139
symptom presentations and treatment
planning, 139–141
comorbidity, 131–132
couple therapy as treatment for, 362
course and associated features, 130–131
epidemiology, 131
etiology
biological models, 132–133
psychological models, 133–135
prevalence, 5, 6
summary, 146–147
symptom presentation and classification
clinical implications, 130
differentiating from similar disorders,
128–129
overview, 125–128
treatment outcome
acceptance and commitment therapy,
136–137
exposure and response prevention,
135–136
hypothesized mechanisms of change,
137–138
Obsessive–compulsive personality
disorder
defined in DSM-5, 266
versus OCD, 129
prevalence, 272
social motivation and, 260
OCD. See Obsessive–compulsive disorder
OD. See Orgasmic disorder
Oklahoma City Bombing, 155
Olanzapine, 206, 300
Older adults
anxiety disorders, 99, 102
divorce rates, 350
Opioid epidemic, 223, 225
Opioid use disorder, 244
Oral contraceptives, 378
Order/symmetry obsessions, 126, 140
Orexin-A and -B, 400–401
Orgasmic disorder (OD)
course and treatment outcome, 385–386
defined, 372
etiology, 379
Orlistat, 207
OurRelationship program, 358–359
Outcome expectancies, 233, 239
“Out of control” feelings, 87–88
Overgeneral memory, 28
Pain
painful and provocative events, 441
suicide motivation and, 19, 432–433, 440,
442, 443
Panic attacks
anxiety disorders and, 80–81, 88
biological triggers, 107–108
cognitive model of, 109
cross-cultural differences, 100, 102
nocturnal, 82, 413
specific phobia and, 84
symptom overlap with medical illnesses,
104, 105
Panic disorder
anger and, 87
comorbidity, 103–104, 105
course, 90–93
cross-cultural differences in, 100, 102
epidemiology, 98–100
limitations of DSM-5 in diagnosing, 88–89
“out of control” feelings and, 87–88
suicide risk and, 82
symptom overlap with medical illnesses,
104, 105
symptoms and clinical features, 80–82
Paranoid beliefs, 258
Paranoid personality disorder, 263
Parasomnias. See Non-rapid-eye-movement
parasomnias; Rapid-eye-movement
parasomnias
Parasuicide
borderline personality disorder and, 261
defined, 430
Parent-focused treatment, 197
Paroxetine, 62
Partners/spouses
OCD symptoms and, 145
partner aggression associated with
personality disorders, 259, 352
romantic difficulties associated with
depression, 36–37

-- 492 of 498 --

472 	Index
Partners/spouses (cont.)
schizophrenia symptoms and, 325
See also Marital and relational discord
PE. See Premature ejaculation
Pelvic floor physical therapy, 386
Penile prostheses, 383
Personality
defined, 255
five-factor model of, 258–259
Personality difficulty, 269–270
Personality disorders
bipolar disorder and, 296
classification
alternative dimensional model in DSM-
5, 267–269
clinical implications, 270–272
DSM-5 categories, 262–266
problems with categorical definitions,
266
related traits model in ICD-11, 269–270
course and outcome, 275–277
depression and, 22
epidemiology
age-related factors, 273–274
clinical implications, 274–275
gender differences, 272
prevalence in community samples, 272
race and ethnicity, 274
etiology
clinical implications, 279
environmental adversity, 278
genetic factors, 277–278
GAD and, 65
marital discord and, 259, 352
OCD and, 132, 139
overview and summary, 255–256, 283–284
panic disorder/agoraphobia and, 104
treatment, 279–283
typical symptoms and associated features
clinical implications, 260–262
cognitions and perceptions of self and
others, 257–258
disturbance in interpersonal
functioning, 259
disturbances in health and physical
functioning, 259–260
overview, 256–257
social motivation, 257
temperament and personality traits,
258–259
Personality disorder trait specified, 268
Personality systematics, 273
Peters et al. Delusions Inventory, 327
Pharmacotherapy. See Medication
Phenelzine, 94
Phenothiazines, 331
Phobias. See Specific phobia
Phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors,
382–383
Physical Anhedonia Scale, 328
Physical therapy, 386
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, 400
Polydrug use, 228
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale, 326
Positive memory enhancement training, 38
Posttraumatic nightmares, 417–418
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
associated clinical features, 157–158
classification
acute stress disorder, 156–157
clinical considerations, 157
posttraumatic stress disorder, 154–156
clinical implications and principles of
change, 169–171
comorbidity, 159–160
couple therapy as treatment for, 362
course, 152–154
depression and, 22, 23
epidemiology, 158–159
etiology
cognitive models, 161–162
learning/biological theories, 160–161
nightmare disorder and, 419
risk factors, 162–164
schizophrenia and, 319
suicide associated with, 433, 434
treatment
CBT for children, 167–168
chronic PTSD, 164–167
global early interventions, 168
targeted early interventions, 169
typical symptoms, 151–152
Power, personality disorders and, 257, 260
Predictive validity, 11
Premature ejaculation (PE)
course and treatment outcome, 384–385
defined, 372
etiology, 377
Prevention and Relationship Enhancement
Program, 357

-- 493 of 498 --

Index 	473
Principles of change
addictive disorders, 245–246
anxiety disorders, 98, 111–112
bipolar disorder, 305, 306
depression, 26
eating disorders, 208
personality disorders, 280
PTSD, 169–171
schizophrenia, 335–336
sexual dysfunctions, 387
suicide-focused treatments, 444–446
Process–experiential therapies, 42
Project PREDICT, 245
Prolonged exposure therapy, 165–166
Provoked vestibulodynia, 380
Psychiatric classification
development, 9–10
evaluation, 10–11
Psychodynamic therapy
depression and, 39, 42
panic-focused, 92
personality disorders and, 280
Psychoeducation
bipolar disorder, 301–302
NREM parasomnias, 416
panic disorder and agoraphobia, 90
REM sleep behavior disorder, 421
schizophrenia, 334
Psychological first aid, 168
Psychopathology
biological factors in, 457–458
chronic and recurring nature of, 457
classification, 9–10
comorbidity as feature of, 455–456
cultural and demographic factors, 7–9,
457
defined, 2–4
epidemiology, 4–6
evaluation of psychiatric classification,
10–11
gender as relevant to, 6, 457
interpersonal difficulties as feature of,
454–455
limitations of and possible improvements
to DSM-5, 11–14
marital discord associated with, 351–352,
361–362
prevalence, 5, 6
psychosocial core of, 458–459
research and clinical interventions, 453–459
sleep and sex as features of, 456
suicide associated with, 433–434, 456
work and medical problems as relevant
to, 456
Psychoticism, 268
Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales, 326
PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder
Quetiapine, 300
Race/ethnicity
anxiety disorders, 99, 102–103
depression, 20
diagnostic bias, 102, 274, 275, 296, 319, 321
GAD, 61
insomnia, 404
marital discord/satisfaction, 351, 357
personality disorders, 274
PTSD prevalence, 159
as relevant to psychopathology, 457
schizophrenia, 319, 321, 325
specific phobia, 101
See also African Americans; Culture;
Hispanics; Native Americans
Rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, 295
Rapid-eye-movement parasomnias
nightmare disorder, 417–420
REM sleep behavior disorder, 420–422
Rapid-eye-movement sleep (REM), 398
Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep behavior
disorder, 420–422
Rational–emotive therapy, 384
Reality testing, 261
Reappraisal, 32–33
Recovery-focused CBT, 302
Relapse
addictive disorders, 240
bipolar disorder, 301–302
depression, 21
as feature of psychopathology, 457
OCD, 145–146
schizophrenia, 334
Relational difficulties. See Interpersonal
difficulties; Marital and relational
discord
Relationship education programs, 356–357
Relationship Quality Interview, 347
Relaxation techniques, 86, 97–98
Religious obsessions, 126
REM. See Rapid-eye-movement sleep

-- 494 of 498 --

474 	Index
Repeating compulsions, 127
Research Domain Criteria framework, 14
Responsibility obsessions, 126, 140
Restless leg syndrome, 400
Retrograde ejaculation, 381
Reward system
addiction, 231
bipolar disorder, 299
schizophrenia, 330
Risperidone, 300
Romantic difficulties, 36–37
Rumination, 31
Rumination-focused CBT, 39
SAD. See Social anxiety disorder
Sadness, 87
Safety planning intervention, 443
Scheduled awakening technique, 414
Schedule disruption, 299–300
Schizoid personality disorder, 263
Schizophrenia
assessing symptoms
clinical implications, 328
clinical interviews, 326–327
self-report measures, 327–328
clinical descriptions and significance of
symptoms
clinical implications, 325
disorganization symptoms, 322–323
negative symptoms, 323–324
positive symptoms, 321–322
structure of symptoms, 324–325
course, associated clinical features, and
comorbidity, 319–321
culture and, 7, 320
epidemiology, 318–319
OCD distinguished from, 129
overview and summary, 316–317, 336
racial diagnostic bias and, 274, 319, 321
translational research related to negative
symptoms, 329–331
treatment
medication, 331–332
principles of change, 335–336
psychosocial treatments, 332–335
typical symptoms and classification,
317–318
Schizotypal personality disorder
defined, 263, 269
genetic factors, 277
race/ethnicity and, 274
Second-generation antipsychotic medication,
332
Seizures, 413
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs)
GAD, 62
OCD, 138
panic disorder, 91
Self-efficacy expectancies, 233, 239
Self-harm, 430
Self-image, 257–258
Self-monitoring, 60
Self-report measures
schizophrenia symptoms, 327–328
sleep–wake disorders, 400, 409
September 11 terrorist attack, 159
Serotonin hypothesis, 132
Serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs)
GAD, 62
panic disorder, 91
Sex/gender. See Gender
Sex therapy, 382, 385, 386, 387–388
Sexual arousal, 376
Sexual desire, 375
Sexual dysfunctions
comorbidities, 388–389
course and treatment outcome
clinical implications, 387–388
female sexual dysfunction, 385–386
male sexual dysfunction, 382–385
etiologies
clinical implications, 380–381
female sexual dysfunction, 377–380
male sexual dysfunction, 375–377
as feature of psychopathology, 456
marital discord and, 348
overview and summary, 369, 389–390
personality disorders and, 260
substance use and, 226, 374
typical symptoms and epidemiology
associated clinical features, 372–373
clinical implications, 373–375
overview, 369–372
Sexual interest/arousal disorder (SIAD)
comorbidity, 388
course and treatment outcome, 385
defined, 371–372
etiology, 377–379
Sexual obsessions, 126
Shame, 387

-- 495 of 498 --

Index 	475
Shift-work sleep–wake disorder, 408, 409
Shyness, 83
SIAD. See Sexual interest/arousal disorder
Sibutramine, 207
Skills training
in affective and interpersonal regulation
for PTSD, 166–167
coping skills for addictive disorders, 239
social skills for schizophrenia, 333–334
for suicide-focused treatments, 439, 444,
445
Sleep apnea, 226, 400, 419–420
Sleep diaries, 400, 409
Sleep difficulties
bipolar disorder and, 299–300, 303–304
as feature of psychopathology, 456
personality disorders and, 260
schizophrenia and, 319
substance use and, 226
See also Sleep–wake disorders
Sleep-disordered breathing, 400, 419–420
Sleepiness, 402
Sleep terrors, 412, 413–414, 415
Sleep–wake disorders
circadian rhythm disorders
associated clinical features, course, and
outcome, 409–410
clinical implications, 411
comorbidity, 410
epidemiology, 410
etiology, 410–411
overview, 407
phenomenology and symptoms,
408–409
insomnia disorder
associated clinical features, 400–403
clinical implications, 405–407
comorbidity, 405
course, outcome, and treatment,
403–404
epidemiology, 404
etiology, 405
phenomenology and symptoms,
399–400
normal sleep, 398–399
parasomnias
NREM, 412–417
overview, 411
REM, 417–422
Sleepwalking, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416
Slow-wave sleep, 412, 416
Smoking
health problems associated with,
225–226
heritability of, 236
prevalence, 224
treatment, 243–244
See also Substance-related and addictive
disorders
SNRIs. See Serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors
Social Anhedonia Scale, 328
Social anxiety disorder (SAD)
avoidant personality disorder and, 83, 104,
265
behavioral inhibition and, 107
cognitive biases and, 109
comorbidity, 104
course, 93–95
depression and, 22
epidemiology, 100
genetics and, 107
limitations of DSM-5 in diagnosing,
88–89
sadness and, 87
symptoms and clinical features, 82–84
Social learning theory, 233
Social motivation, 257, 260
Social skills training, 333–334
Soldiers. See Military
Southeast Asian populations, 100
Specific phobia
comorbidity, 105
course, 95–97
epidemiology, 101–102
limitations of DSM-5 in diagnosing, 88
onset of, 109–110
symptoms and clinical features, 84–85
Spielman’s model of insomnia, 405
Spouses. See Partners/spouses
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
State dissociation, 411
Stimulant drug use, 231–232
Stress
addictive disorders and, 235
depression and, 33–34, 35–37, 40–41
marital discord and, 355–356
suicide and stressful life events, 433
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
Disorders, 326
Subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, 34–35

-- 496 of 498 --

476 	Index
Substance-related and addictive disorders
associated clinical features, 225–227
bipolar disorder and, 296
comorbidity, 227–229
couple therapy as treatment for, 362
course, 224–225
depression and, 22, 23
epidemiology, 223–224
etiology
addiction and the brain, 230–232
cognitive factors, 233–234
genes, 230
interactions, 236
overview, 229
social–cultural–familial factors, 235–236
stress, 235
GAD and, 65
panic disorder/agoraphobia and, 103
principles of change, 245–246
PTSD and, 160
schizophrenia and, 319
sexual dysfunctions and, 226, 374
treatment
biological treatments, 242–245
CBT, 238–240
motivational interviewing, 237–238
overview, 236–237
social context interventions, 241
treatment matching, 241–242
typical symptoms, 221–222
Substance use. See Substance-related and
addictive disorders
Suicidal behavior disorder, 431
Suicide attempts, defined, 429
Suicide capability, 441, 442–443
Suicide ideation, defined, 429
Suicide/suicidality
addictive disorders and, 225
bipolar disorder and, 296
depression and, 19, 24
etiology
ideation-to-action framework, 440–441
integrated motivational–volitional
model, 442
interpersonal–psychological theory,
441–442
three-step theory, 19, 442–443
GAD and, 58
panic disorder and, 82
personality disorders and, 259–260, 261
phenomenology
clinical implications, 438–440
course and outcome, 436–438
definition and classification, 429–431
epidemiology, 431–432
typical symptoms and associated
features, 432–436
psychopathology associated with,
433–434, 456
PTSD and, 158
social anxiety disorder and, 84
summary, 446–447
treatment, 443–446
Suppression, 32
Symmetry/order obsessions, 126, 140
Synthetic opioids, 225
Taijin kyofusho, 100
TBCT. See Traditional behavioral couple
therapy
Teens. See Adolescents and young adults
Telemedicine, 202
Temperament, 258–259
Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale, 328
Testosterone, 376, 378
Therapeutic alliance
anxiety disorders, 86, 97
personality disorders, 280–281
schizophrenia, 336
sexual dysfunctions, 387
suicide-focused treatments, 444
Therapy homework, 387
Thioxanthenes, 331
Thought suppression, 32
Three-step theory of suicide, 19, 442–443
Tobacco use. See Smoking
Topiramate, 207
Traditional behavioral couple therapy
(TBCT), 358–359, 362
Transdiagnostic strategies, for depression,
25–26
Transurethral therapy, 383
Trauma
early interventions following, 168–169
memory and, 161–162
prevalence, 158
psychopathology related to, 155, 319
trauma-focused psychotherapy, 164–167
See also Childhood adversity;
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

-- 497 of 498 --

Index 	477
Traumatic brain injury, 171
Treatment matching
addictive disorders, 241–242, 245
personality disorders, 270
Treatment motivation
addictive disorders, 237–238
eating disorders, 207–208
OCD, 141–143
Treatment Outcome Package, 349
Tricyclic antidepressants
GAD, 62
panic disorder, 91
Trúng gió attacks, 100
12-step treatments, 241
Urge surfing, 240
Vacuum constrictive devices, 383
Validity, 11
Valproate, 300
Valproic acid, 297
Vaping. See E-cigarettes
Venlafaxine XR, 62
Ventral striatum, 35
Ventral system, 34
Vestibulectomy, 386
Veterans. See Military
Vietnam veterans, 151, 163, 164
Violence
marital discord and, 346
obsessions involving aggression and, 126
PTSD risk and, 159
self-inflicted, 435
Willingness, 136–137
Women
anxiety disorders, 99, 100, 101, 108
ataques de nervios, 8
bipolar disorder, 296
depression, 20–21
eating disorders, 7, 192–194
GAD, 61, 64
marital discord, 347, 348
personality disorders and women/girls,
272, 278
PTSD, 158
schizophrenia, 319
sexual dysfunctions, 370, 371–372, 377–380,
385–386, 388
sleep–wake disorders, 404, 418
substance use disorder, 228, 229
suicide attempts, 431
Worry, 56–57, 59–60
Yohimbine, 167
Zeitgebers, 407

-- 498 of 498 --

