Oh, oh. Oh. So are right. Yeah. Uh. Oh. Sorry for the temporary blindness from the projector. Right? Yeah. It's nothing. Well, how's everyone doing? So. Okay. Um, we finally did get discovery figured out with, uh, the assignments. But I realized this afternoon that in the fix, all of the due dates were being changed from 17. Um, so I have fixed those to the due dates in the syllabus were still inactive. So I saw that many of you were able to upload your, uh, vignette number three. Right. Okay. I want to make sure I, uh. So with that, uh, I apologize with the challenge with last time, and then that just kind of snowballed into me getting responses out late. Uh, basically, if you did not hear from me, you get the. Points. And then if there were questions or, uh, comments that I had, I just responded to your email that you provided me, uh, when you uploaded the vignette with, uh, some comments. So if I did ask, um, questions or if you have questions of me or related to my feedback, feel free to let me know. But overall, um, I appreciate there's varying types of vignettes anywhere from pretty short but yet clear to more details. And both of those are okay. Uh, one of the things I will not make sure that you are including the diagnosis as an accurate diagnosis and a full diagnosis, meaning it includes the ICD number. The number, um, and then, uh, any sort of specifiers. And the next one is make sure that you're only including specifiers if DSM for that disorder includes specifiers. Okay. In your vignette you could or I've had some students provide kind of a a description or rationale for why they are including, uh, Thomas, their processes, including their narrative. And if their you want to include conversation around severity or those types of things, even if there's not specifiers, you can do that if it helps you kind of work through the process. But overall, I think, uh, by and large, everyone is doing a great job of connecting with the symptoms leading to the story that helps us get to the possibility of a diagnosis. Any questions about the vignettes? Okay. Oh, yeah. I just know general diagnosis. Do we have it, or do you have to have it specified? No. Yeah. No. But make sure if you include a specifier that you allude to it or are able to get to it in your role play. Okay. For example, if it's moderate or with depressed or melancholic features or those types of things. Make sure that you allude to it to give me the sense if I know where you're going. Uh, because in reality, if a client comes in, do they have to have specifiers? They may not. And so, uh, yeah. So you have a little bit of, uh, the creative freedom in that one. And then I see another question I just wanted to ask. Um, is there anything else is going to be the same or. We just need to be prepared for the, uh, the content type. We've learned more and more or. Uh, yeah. My expectation is that, as I've talked about, the vignette should become in some ways increasingly vague but more complex. So in some ways, with, uh, you could probably provide like three sentences and allude to a diagnosis and you're like, okay, I see where you're going without all of the detail. However, be sure, as we did in the roleplay last week when even when I or last session, uh, when I roleplaying in class, you do need to be able to answer the question. So if more detailed is better for your process, more detailed is okay. But think about more complexity, more vague in the way that, uh, the description of the symptoms are, are included. So rather than walking through the diagnostic features or the diagnostic criteria allude to, um, the underlying experience. So giving your classmates a little bit, um, more of a challenge to ask questions, kind of you allude to rather than state. Does that make sense? Okay, good. Yes. So then as the story gets more complex, they, um. 13 year old doesn't have to. You don't have to be able to make that decision just based on the information in you. Uh, basically, you don't have to provide all of the information in the vignette that leads me to a diagnosis. You, as role playing, need to be able to provide all the information that confirms that diagnosis. I need to be able to read it and look at the diagnosis to take those to match. If they don't match, I'll let you know. And usually a couple points are deducted. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just as a point of feedback, I was going to say, I think I found it like I had I did all my video reviews before going quickly. I approached it slightly differently. Uh, yeah. Maybe less specifically. Um, right. And since the first class, likely the first one, you may not know, but from then on it should be. Yeah, yeah. But I'm hearing, you know, maybe in the syllabus make sure that that comment. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Which actually leads to one of the things we have talked about a see just like that. So thank you. All right. Um, so, uh, let's let's talk about tonight. I have, uh, slipped the schedule a little bit. Uh, I have we're going to talk about the final exam because we're halfway through the semester. That just doesn't make anyone else feel kind of like, where's the time going? Um, and then, so I'll provide, uh, some conversation around, uh, the final exam. Then I have a couple of questions that I always ask in the fourth session, kind of how things are going and get some feedback, make sure we're all tracking. Then we'll talk about, um, just a brief overview of some of the mental health disorders that we've been reading about. And then we'll break. And like I promised last time, we'll do vignette practice a little early. Then I want to talk about the the steps of differential diagnosis. And then I'll provide kind of a a couple of comments. How do we put all of the information so far together. And then actually what I would like to do is give you an opportunity to walk through the process of the final exam with a vignette as a group. So you'll break up into small groups and kind of just start working through that process. So that way again, it's not um, there's nothing about the final exam that is going to be a surprise. Everything we're doing should get you there. So it, uh, in some ways, it's just confirming, you know, the process that makes sense. Uh, so let's walk through things. All right. So at this point in the semester, I always like to ask three questions. Um, what's going well? Because I like to make sure I know. Why don't we continue doing what's working? What? Uh, the other part is, if something was going puppy, much like you just mentioned. Hey, you know, actually, if I had known, it would have been better. Great. I actually make a lot of small adjustments like that. And then finally. Any other thoughts comments towards my Sunday school lesson? Any reviews, rebuttals or questions? Um, just anything that would be helpful for me to know about the class. So, um, let's talk a little bit about what's going well. What do you like so far? Compared to last semester. Homework and reading feels better. Are you ready to practice? You know how to work with homework. Okay, so overall, in general, the program feels like more balanced. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Very variant. What's that? You're very understanding. Oh my God. It is a hazard of the profession. So, uh, particularly about this class, do you feel like, uh, the process of interpreting how we approach that going well, anything not going well, and it's okay if it's not going well? Yeah. But on the syllabus, this is only class that has a bar where you have like the bigger class of all the readings, assignments and then the week off. The class is also looking at reading. Yeah. The way that happens I mean for myself I think. When I graduated I've been nothing but that. Okay. Okay. Yeah. So, um, what I'm hearing, it's in the syllabus, but I think that we really got to my effort, and, uh, maybe I'll ask a clarifying question, so I'll see what I can do and then. Yes. So the intention with that is to give you a map. If you read these, even in the off weeks, these chapters, these sections, you'll stay on course for the entire section. So would it be helpful to label or include that narrative or what would be helpful to clarify? I guess for me, I'd just like look at what the class says, because if you expect to have the full class, like looking at the classes, I look at, you know, I obviously can't take my records, but I mean, I'll think about it. There's a way to clarify that. Yeah, I agree. Throw that in there. I've missed that. Like oh what. Uh oh yeah. So a little bit okay. Well that's good. Again the intention is to put it all out there. And because it can get lost. Right. You need to read all of this. Well how do I accomplish all that reading? Well, if you stay on track with the reading and reading the off weeks between class. So it's more so kind of to give a, uh, maybe I could change that. Let me ask, would it be helpful to maybe move that into a suggested reading schedule? Yeah or no, I, I think I'll speak for myself. I think that most often I do everything for whatever class, like in the days preceding my class. Okay. Um, and generally don't like, if I have psychopathology. Two weeks. I'll wait until, like, three days before. Right. Great. Well, I will see. I will look at the syllabus and say, hey, is there a better way to describe that, recognizing that, uh, I hope regardless of when you're doing the reading, it is just before today. Um, so, uh, not a not a prescription, but a recommendation. But I appreciate that feedback. Something else. Yeah. Different topic. Uh, what's going on for me is knowing at the beginning of the semester to approach specifically to the final, um, like being open book with a few of them has allowed me, I think, to just soak in without the pressure of memorization. Um, because we're trying to categorize all of that in my head and, like, so that that really freed me up. I think just with the mental space, um, to appreciate more generalized, larger, uh, features, uh, and there's no way I can reference that, um, has been really effective. Okay. Thank you. Um, so I'm hearing maybe address for you guys all but keep, uh, the concept of putting the information about the final exam on the front. That's helpful. Okay. Anything else helpful? Anything else not working? Yes. I think that books and readings been really good. Like, um, I think they're structured around in the psychopathology book. And then going back on the DSM, I think has been really helpful for knowledge perspective for me. Okay. So just, uh, the collection and the process of reading and covering is good. Okay. Okay. Anything else I should be aware of? I'm going to make some notes here and just ask a clarifying question. Um, I think for next week's reading you only have chapter 13 and Morrison listed, but I assume you want us to do 1336, like normal, like your chapters. Yeah. Again, that's a recommended. So I would say yes cover coven as much. Leading up to chapter 13 and beyond. Um, so this. Okay. Any other thoughts? Questions? Comments? Yeah. Oh, that's also from, um, how I'm understanding the, uh, subject and everything. Like, uh, for example, he lost the microphone was an amazing exercise, which is really, really helped me feel like a second language learner. Um, she, um, she divided us for the goals. And I gave a very important topic from the book, and, and we need to create something like that. And, uh, it's really, really push your brain to work, uh, if possible, to do this with me as well, like, for example, with Covid and be presenting because that's how I can ask questions. I can see how other people do it, because when we do, like, together, uh, it's it's something I still want to quit questioning. And, uh, when I watch somebody and we have many questions from other people, that's how I can say the information in a different perspective as well or not. So with the vignettes, would that be having almost like, uh, the group process of working through a vignette together? Yeah. And, uh, and presenting might be something that we can have a lookout on the people doing it just very help me, for example, to understand even on zoom. Right. Well, let me think about if there's a way. Sorry, guys. Um, and actually, one of the exercises I've introduced in the question that comes out of feedback from last time, um, and so practice for the final course feedback I received last time for at least kind of being able to conceptualize that. So let me think. I don't know the way the rest of the class is structured. We we'll get through something like that. But I hear maybe I can generalize that and say more examples of working through a case group or, or even if we just switched partners. I think different perspectives too. I think it could be an. Well, last time when we did vignettes, and I promise you it'll be with a few people. I think that helpful, but I don't think I made my question clear. Chapter 13. Okay. It's in your, um, what do you call this syllabus. Yeah. That, um, and all the other chapters are more than four chapters. And on this particular week, two only listed one. But then next week you say to pick up that chapter 17. Yeah, it may be based on the content. I'll have to look at it in some ways, kind of looking at what we're covering here for you to read the other chapters. Okay. But I was I was wanting to make sure we highlight chapter. Okay. Thank you, thank you. Yeah. Um. Other questions. Yeah. Um, it's going well. But just like in general, the lectures are very broad. It's a lot of, um, reading, which is good, but for me, I'm a little bit more auditory, so, so, like, go through those and make sure know this is all right. That's like really crucial to my training as well okay. So including not only but improving matters the process of diagnosis better description of key disorders and symptoms. And so yeah I know right okay. Yeah I agree. Like even on top of that uh, when it's just like your information what you like, what you explain, it really helps you like okay how to what should my thinking process get enough information? Okay. Okay. So the content of what we're covering in class seems like it's beneficial. Yeah okay. Okay, great. Well, if there, um, is anything that you wanted to share, but maybe not in this context, feel free to either connect with me individually or just send me an email. Uh, I'm happy to hear again. Anything. Okay. You know, after the after class, I thought about it. You know, what would be helpful? And, uh, again, I taken into consideration, much like the concept of a presentation based on the real estate of time. Um, but I like the idea of hearing what would be helpful to make sure that you engage in the process. All right. Um, so let's talk a little bit about the final exam. And, uh, everyone's objectives is subjective units of discomfort. Just want to, um, so as the reason why I want to provide context is because it is a key assignment in the, in the program. It is one of those markers that you need to be able to work through the process and demonstrate your ability to support a diagnosis and come up with an accurate diagnosis. So a couple of things to keep in mind is remember that this as a key assignment, um, it's not a. You need to pass that assignment to pass the class. If you don't have the assignments, there is opportunity for a make up or a redo, and that will involve a conversation with me. We talk about, hey, this is the area that was missing. Uh, we talk through and see if we can, uh, um, get you the skill you need to be able to to pass the exam. Nothing should be a surprise, because, again, my goal is for you to be able to demonstrate that skill. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about what I expect. Uh, I'm going to provide a vignette. And in that provided vignette there's going to be a clear diagnosis possible. Now something to keep in mind, much like the vignettes that, uh, we'll walk through tonight. It actually comes out of a casebook. It's not one that I made. And that is two reasons. One, it's clear, but it's also something that is objective. It is a diagnosis that has been, uh, worked through the editors of the text, the, uh, the psychiatrist psychologists have submitted that it's clearly been a, um, a very good vignette that supports the diagnosis. There's rationale for that diagnosis. So it protects you against maybe even just my thinking about it gives us the ability to be a little bit objective. Uh, so in this process you must provide an accurate diagnosis, including all appropriate coding. So if you use the format that we've been using in the vignettes, the number, the title of the disorder is specifier specifier specifier. Great. No problem. Then you need to include all relevant specifiers. Again, if there's not specifiers listed in the DSM and you put specifiers in, those will be points against you. Okay. You need to provide a clear description of how the symptoms meet diagnostic criteria. And so what I mean by that, for example, when you're looking at criterion, uh, for major depressive disorder, you need to be able to look at what is criteria A for major depressive disorder low mood. You may be able to attach that to the symptom the client has, um in the vignette or at least of that conversation or the narrative that points to that vignette. So basically what I'm doing is I'm asking you to provide a point by point rationale to support your diagnosis, not something that you necessarily need to do after the exam, like in your practice, but in your mind, you're going to need to do point by point in connection with all the diagnostic criteria in order to support your diagnosis. And. You need to include a discussion of all the diagnostic criteria. For example, my DSM is currently open to post-traumatic stress disorder and that goes through criteria each. So you would need to have an H and discuss each one. Uh, in order to, uh, get to the point of diagnosis, you need to provide a thorough but not exhaustive differential diagnosis. And here I recommend as a starting point, you go to the differential diagnosis section of the DSM for that disorder. And you have a discussion about the disorders that are listed in that section. Now just like in real life practice, if there are other things you need to confirm or rule out based on the client story, based on their experience, then you need to have a conversation about that as well. Okay, so the at the bare minimum, the starting point is the difference and the DSM and then a differential ruling and ruling out of anything else that makes sense. Okay. So uh, that doesn't mean you need to go through every single disorder in the DSM and say it's not this because it's not this because you just need to say based on the client saying this, but there's not enough evidence because x, Y or Z symptom is missing. Okay. Now, this is something we haven't talked much about. But, um, when we get to the specific rationale for why you are ruling out, for example, if, um, the client, um, does not mention, uh, anything other than feeling tired and kind of roll him, um, maybe hypersomnia that's related to depression, you would need to maybe have a conversation around one other issues and how you move those out. But you don't need to go through all of the diagnostic criteria for a sleep disorder. You just need to say it's not this disorder to think about. Uh, in the same way you're providing criteria. Okay, this is generalized anxiety disorder because they have this symptom the opposite of that. And you can say it's not a sleep disorder because this symptom is missing in some ways. You can rule it out because you can just find that feature of that symptom that's not present. Because if you remember, if you go through the diagnostic criteria and let's just say it's a through therapy and you get to see and diagnose and the criteria is not met, they don't have that disorder because they don't meet that diagnostic criteria. So in some ways for your differential for the final same thing I'm considering this, but I ruled it out because this feature of the symptom is not there. Therefore you toss it out. So that makes sense. So you want to be able to provide rationale why you're selecting that disorder and why you're ruling out others. And then we're going to include all of the steps of differential diagnosis, which we will talk about tonight. Okay. So I can provide you with the rubric. So this is how the exam is created. So if you see number one accurate diagnosis in order to get an A and includes all the accurate diagnoses with all specifiers, detailed symptoms of each criteria, differential diagnosis includes all of the steps. It's accurate, thorough and there's a clear rationale for ruling out. Now this piece we haven't talked a lot about but it's one of the key things has okay. So based on that diagnosis what's your treatment plan. Now we're not talking a lot about treatment plans because that's other classes. But you should have at least a working knowledge. And I believe I still have built in. And we can build in a conversation and exercise that where we break up into groups and the class goes through the different diagnoses and looks at what's the best evidence based treatment for these. Okay. But the idea is for this. It's not a detailed step by step manual ization of a treatment. Like here's the first ten weeks of therapy with this client. No, it's based on the client's symptoms. I would use CBT acceptance therapy, emotional focus therapy, dialectical behavioral therapy because uh and it's known. Right. So you would just be able to make that connection 1 or 2 maybe three sentences that come up for treatment. Right. Yeah. I was wondering what I was like reading the, uh, eating disorders chapter. There's like five different types of CBT that they describe. Yeah, right. Do you feel like that if that was a detail that would be more like, uh, like an appropriate form of CBT. Okay. Because again, sometimes general CBT. Yeah. Uh, but then you could look uh, homophobic or you know, regarding immediate issues or others, they have broken uh, CBT down quite a bit. Yeah. But the expectation would be in order to use that therapy you would need to be treated that CBT. But at this point, um, just general evidence based treatment that it's known to treat those disorders. So the study for that, given you are taking other classes related to, um, uh, treatment modalities, I would just say be familiar. And even in your textbook it describes, hey, these are approaches that are good for these disorders. Now I will let you know that then that is not something to trick you. It is straightforward. It is something that you would see commonly in everyday practice. It's not going to be obscure. It's not going to be, uh, something really rare or unusual or vague. It's going to be clear. But remember, part of this is not necessarily just that you can get to the right answer. This is to show me. And if you look at the process, it's to show me you understand how to get the right answer. Because you if you know how to get the right answer, you're better off and you're better able to demonstrate that you'll come up with the right answer. Most commonly. And because we don't strive for perfection, you're never going to get there. But we can have excellence in our process. Make sense? Okay. Any questions about this? Yes. Okay. Yeah. Um. Is he going to be online or in writing? It's going to be, um, not handwritten. It'll be in your computer in the DSM, but no internet. Okay. Um, and I'm going to put the directions to you, like the directions will be included on the vignette. Um, so everything that basically, uh, is included in this, um, in this room here is listed as what's required on the exam. Okay. Yeah. Who will be allowed to use this? No, just the DSM. Okay, so we need to start memorizing some of the treatments or at least be familiar with kind of the mainstream, uh, disorders. And then what would be an evidence based treatment? Again, I'm not expecting you to be able to walk through and go detail. Here's how it would work with this client. Because the expectation is this. It depends. How are you going to go about working with that client? But at the same time, you may give a general sense of, um, for someone experiencing anxiety. Cognitive behavioral therapy would be beneficial because it would help, you know, um, uh, to create, um, new narrative or new understanding and new thoughts around addressing the maladaptive thoughts that are anxious, right? Or acceptance and commitment therapy creating cognitive diffusion. Um, in order to create even less distress around. So we have to give this explanation. But we don't have a rationale like what we will talk about. Right? Okay. Just like a statement of rationale of why this. Right. Uh, because it's known to help clients XYZ. I would love to have a blank piece of paper. Um, yeah. Yeah. And so you'll get a paper copy of the vignette which you're able to write on, and I will collect that back. Um, and then of a blank, I'll provide one flagship paper so you can take notes and kind of figure it out. And the same vignette for everybody or. Yeah, same vignette for everybody. Because that would be fair. So some vignettes, as we know. Uh, they're not all the same. Right. Different complexity. Yeah. Uh, so for some of the stories, there's like often it was that like, also like circumventing the other criteria for research as well. If we have that where it meets the signals, the criteria 246 somewhere to where it could be another diagnosis. We like about that. Like I wanted more based on this criteria. Excuse me. Or is it possible there will be more than one? Uh, yes. And actually, thank you for saying that, because the rule of thumb on this exam is tell me what you're thinking because it's a static vignette. You can't ask that question for clarification. Um, and actually, I have had instances where in the exam, uh, they got it wrong, but because of the interpretation of it. And yet they said if the client has stated this, I would have gone this way and it would have been this. But because the way they interpret it, they took it and it went this way, but because they told me if it went this way, they actually got the right answer. Um, so in some ways it's if you tell me what you're thinking. Well, actually, it's not clear. It could be this disorder. Could be this disorder. So I would need to ask the client this and confirm. Because if it's this, then it'll go that way. If not, go this way. Uh, so all of that type of thinking is part of the process? Yeah. There could be more than a diagnosis. Um, well, yes, technically, it could be a comorbid diagnosis. Um, but it will be something that is clear and identifiable. Yeah. Yeah. Um, and anyone like a previous class is not part of time. Um, I get plenty of time. Um, but if there is need for more time, we can. We can work that out. Yep. Other questions? We'll probably talk about this at least one more time. Right. But you will definitely know what, what's expected and how to get there. Because again, you need to memorize the DSM. You need to know how to work with the DSM. And so be able to work through find what you need to confirm will get you practice before the exam. What's that practice before the exam like oh we will today. Yeah yeah. If we get there. So let's go. All right. So just a couple of brief things. And actually I know I did a little bit of this, but, uh, let's keep the session brief so we can make sure we give enough time for everything. So we talked last time about clinical interviewing. Like, how is it different than therapy? Not direct. Was that more direct household? Yeah. Serious crime or what? Yeah. Trying to get specific specifics. Right. Driving towards specificity. You're trying to get specific information. How else is it different? Yeah she complained. And Kylie as well. It's very important that you the. Yeah. So chief complaint that's what you're following. And then, um, you need to press for time, right? You need to be direct. It'll probably be more you talking than the client. Which is unusual for a session. So a little bit more you driven rather than quiet? Yeah. That kind of is not quite right center, but is more important. Yeah. Absolutely. Right. So I mentioned what, uh, last time a little bit about what information do we follow. We have the presenting concerns mentioned. What else do you follow? Possible the closest possible diagnosis. What what might be information that would lead us to a possible diagnosis. You're looking for now. Can't you learn what to listen for? They talked about an experience. You hear something they talk about? Uh, in some ways. Or they talk about a lot of things, but something's missing. You're looking for the symptom. And the other piece is emotion. Follow emotion. Um. Not quite in the same way you follow emotion in therapy, but, um, did you deep into too fast, and now you're in therapy mode and you can't get back out, but you want to listen to and follow some of those, um, because oftentimes if you follow emotion with, uh, with fear for symptoms, you're going to understand things related to distress, anger, um, anxiety, worry, fear. All of those types of things might lead you to an understandable diagnosis. Yeah, I feel like examples are included in the part of the clinical interview as well. That may be mental status. Yeah, yeah. Uh, yes, it can be. Um, definitely. You would want to pay attention to things like is the person oriented, uh, by three person place and time? Um, do they have an understanding of where they are, who they are, those types of things and mental. You can build in, um, any mental status exam. Um. In some ways, maybe not a full maybe mental status exam. You may not look at neurocognitive function unless the client reports something that makes you think you should. If they do, then you might shift gears and include as part of your self care. But that'll be assessment and test testing and assessment. Next uh, next semester. All right. So any other questions about what we covered in class so far last time. Okay. So we're going to talk a little bit about some of the disorders that were covered in the reading. Um, I'm going to leave eating disorders for if we have a chance to get them to them at the end of class. But I want to at least cover travel related and dissociative related disorders. Um, and I include dissociative related disorders because not really covered in the same way. So, uh, but especially as we look at, uh, trauma and stress related disorders, dissociation is common. And so I just wanted to give some context there. Uh, so we'll have a brief conversation about this, and then we will pause and go into vignette practice. Okay. So, uh, one of the things that we see for trauma and stress related disorders is that there needs to be exposure to trauma or stress. Now, uh, we talked a little bit about the concept of trauma, um, in how society and culture is kind of utilized that term in a way that now is a little bit misunderstood. It allows for real trauma, actually is um, and I know I'm kind of a joke about it, but someone will talk about being in line at Starbucks for and it took so long to get that right. I totally was traumatized by that. It's like. But society and culture has kind of looked at this concept of trauma being, um, challenges day to day type challenges, and they kind of use that word inappropriately. But, um, have you heard the concept of, um, big T or little T traumas? Right. Big tree T trauma, significant life threatening, uh, uh, major, uh, sexual abuse, those kinds of things. And that little Trump little T traumas could be things that are actually traumatizing, but they're not necessarily like, um, maybe to the same magnitude or same type as big T traumas. But here what we're talking about is exposure to true trauma. Now, does that mean that if I encountered something that I, uh, experienced as traumatic, so does that mean there's a common definition of what that is? No there's not. And so one of the things we have to realize is, uh, a lot of client feels is traumatic. Is, uh. Could be somewhat subjective there before you that it. However, there's also the type of what would be kind of a reasonable catch around what is traumatic. Like I mentioned, waiting in line too long or getting cut off in the freeway, and it doesn't necessarily do anything to irritate you. Or if you almost crash that maybe that could be considered traumatic or life threatening. But this classification of disorders includes reactive attachment disorder, just habits, social engagement disorder, PTSD, and acute stress and adjustment disorders. So let's talk about reactive attachment. This is going to be something that we see more commonly in uh children. And you're going to see onset before age of five. And this is going to be difficult to use uh, with primary attachments. And this is going to present itself in a, in a couple of different ways, but primarily it's going to it's going to be limited or even no connection with caregivers. Uh, they don't uh, when there is distress, the child will not seek comfort from. There's not the typical comfort seeking behaviors. So with that, you're going to see, um, there's, um, limited social engagement. There's that connection. And, uh, it can even be like a lack of, uh, I've worked with, uh, um, some children in the who have been in the foster care system. More likely, uh, those that would have this type of experience have experienced severe neglect or child abuse or other childhood traumas. And so, uh, but there's typically just the almost, uh, people are just around. They're not a strong connection. There's evidence that these individuals, uh, children can actually make primary attachments. And one of the really cool things I've seen, um, in the context of, uh, this camp I worked at is I've seen children with, um, reactive attachment disorder actually make reasonably strong connections with individuals who were there and kind and attentive. So it's possible it's just there's, um, a noticeable deficit and a connection with the caregiver. Okay. And again, we must have experienced neglect. So a child that does not have has not experienced extreme would be assured, but likely would not have a reactive attachment disorder. So adjustment disorders. Now um, sometimes this is even called like change of life or um, season of life disorder. But ultimately this is going to be a disorder in which, uh. All right. Uh, but this is emotional or behavioral response to a known stressor. Now, if you look at the DSM, the the difference here, I see that on the set, um, is really going to be that the response either emotional behavioral response is kind of disproportionate to the stressor. Uh, because you can have someone that engages in, uh, like their wife. If we look at those, um, that we looked at last time where there is significant like, uh, challenges within, like, socio socio economic challenges, homelessness, loss of job, those types of stressors can lead to adjustment disorder. But what we're going to see here, you can look at is there response maybe even more significant than what the stressor actually is. Does that make sense. So it can't be proportionate but also disproportionate. Yeah I saw your question about. Okay. Um, so for your experience for humans and how in reading the word uh, what do you. Good. Um, uh, honestly, in that it was, uh, a lot of just, uh, both, uh, Christian camp and really just being present and just unconditional positive regard. Really. And it wasn't necessarily for a treatment based camp. It's just an experience. Yeah. So just someone being there, consistently showing kindness, care, love, making a connection in that way. Uh, just being a positive, um, positive person in that child's life. That's what makes a difference. So again, looking at the concepts, if I were to put that into a therapeutic context, having good rapport, um, being aware of the child and recognizing that the child may not connect with you right away. Um, and so that may be one of the challenges you have in building that rapport for work is that there's just a presentation. So does that make sense? Yeah. We would be like if you want to try different treatment challenges, you know, they're a recommended one. Yes. Um, I mean yes. And you would have to look at something that would be reasonable, right. Not ethics would say not nothing experimental. It's not like you're trying to do a groundbreaking treatment on the child. But if it is a known treatment that helps children who have experienced trauma. Then, you know, making a reasonable application seems like it would be a reasonable approach and that would be a good thing. Uh, if you're under supervision, talk to your supervisor about or, um, if you're not under supervision, being a good counsel and say, hey, this is what I'm thinking. What do you think? And just but it's an excellent question to continue to ask yourself, is this an ethical decision I make? Yes. I heard from my, um, is that she said it's usually she's actually giving the adjustment disorder for a lot of people cause, um, immigrants coming, kids, teenagers coming to the school and changing their life settings and everything. And they have this, um, symptoms, which is, um. And I want to ask, oh, this, uh, this one could be enzymes or something else. And she said. And why she said, she said that just. And I was like, yeah, that means much easier. Or it was a little bit confused. Yeah, yeah. So let's talk a little bit more about the adjustment disorder. And then we can kind of tackle that that question. All right. So all we're going to see is that there is at least one or multiple stressors or events in that person's life. This is where there has to be an identifiable stressor. For example, on um, moving to the country, losing your job, um, ending, uh, a long term relationship and even things that may be even more significant. Although we might include grief like loss, uh, they might also experience adjustment that, as we see at the end of this chapter in the DSM, there's also, um, like the concept of, uh, prolonged grief, what happens when it goes beyond what is kind of a typical grief expression? Um, but that one's hard. And we'll talk about that with respect. Um, so symptoms experienced within three months. So here's when we look at the diagnostic criteria. So did this event happen three months or sooner from their experience. And the other thing is that it usually resolves six months after the stressor stops. So what we see is it is almost as if there is an acute type of experience with that meaning. It's the the the disorder happens while that event is going on. Now we do look at um, this concept prolonged coming to mind, but I don't think that's the word. But you can see almost a persistent experience. But what that is, it's not that the symptoms, um, persist six months after the stressor stops, but the stressor persists longer than six months, okay? Because regardless the stressor at the end, it's anticipated that the experience with the stress will end within six months. If it doesn't, it's not adjustment disorder any longer. You might look at some other classification. So. And this could be quite a few things in life. Now this is where we have a little bit of latitude. When someone has a change of life something significant that happens. Uh, we can look at this as a possibility. And when we look at the steps of differential diagnosis later this evening, you'll see that one of the steps is we have to actually look at adjustment or change of life as a reasonable consideration for a diagnosis. Because they can be depressed, they can be anxious. There's other things going on that actually may be, um, depression, uh, depressive disorder, not specified or specified, or it could be adjustment. So one of the things we need to do is confirm is there a life event. It's almost like the concept of situational depression, right. An event happens. I feel now my life is challenged. I have this overall experience of low mood and worthless and challenging. That would be compressive symptoms. But is it related to a depressive disorder, or is it belated to describe events that created that experience? Okay, so what we need to do is um, uh, look at, um, is there anything going on in the client's life that might be considered an adjustment disorder? And to your point, this is in some ways, uh, I don't like the word lazy, but it's coming to mind. Right? It's a little bit easier to justify sometimes than, um, a depressive or anxiety or other type of disorder. My first method is don't use those as your go to, uh, because in some ways it's easier to rationalize. Uh, client is currently, um, looking for a job. Well, why are they looking for a job? Did they lose their job? Didn't you decide to leave? That is something that would be considered a life of stressful life event, right? It's easy to justify or rationalize that experience. Take care of this disorder. If they have one. Feel free to get the gist. But sometimes it's a little bit easier to justify than others. Um. Now can maybe have a major depressive disorder and an adjustment disorder. Likely. But which one makes more sense? Which one? Actually. Uh, in some ways, uh, that's where your clinical judgment is going to come in. Is it this or is it this? Does that make sense? Okay. Any questions about adjustment disorders? Yeah. This this or that okay. We chose to, um, diagnosed, uh, within three months. And, uh, and after that, like, for next year. Its symptoms is gone. Is everything is all right. And this person is mostly getting. And I have the same situation. Let me see if this is more than likely. Definitely staying with the person. It doesn't matter what the symptoms or symptoms go on. Or we can have like the termination of the diagnosis. And after in a year or two years people. And again I just trying to yeah. So in some ways is it uh it's there like a limitation to the number of adjustment disorders the person can experience. And the answer is no. Uh, I would look at if there is the same challenge adjusting to look at the same life issue, there might be some other underlying clinical things you might want to look at, um, like what's going on that they're moving so often. And then what's the, uh, what's the attachment to the home that's creating the distress related to moving forward? Uh, again, I would be more curious to what's going on. That may be completely out of the client's circumstance, uh, their ability to control their circumstances, uh, maybe their military, their parents or military or, uh, their job, you know, is in a very volatile field and seasonal work or company starts up and then it closes. And so they have to go somewhere else. And so there's a lot of other things that could be, but there's no there's no limit to the number of adjustment disorders someone can experience in their life. But again keeping in mind that it needs the stress happens three months from the onset of the event and in six months after the psych. So if someone, um, they moved and that created distress, you know, within six months likely that that should be resolved because now they're settled in unless there's some other reason that's causing the distress to them. So again, it's not going to be continual long term. It's it's limited in scope unless someone has persistent circumstances that create ongoing distress. So does that make sense. Yeah. So I did go through different diagnosis. Yeah. I saw and that's what I wanted clarification on on the symptom. So what was the symptom the event happened. Or the symptom. What the person's experiencing the distress. Uh, their the symptoms are what they are experiencing. But we need to have an event that leads to that experience. It goes over six months. You label it as something right? Adjustment if the circumstances go longer than six months, because it says if the symptoms I thought it says it can indicate persistence of symptoms for longer than six months. That's why I'm talking to you. So on page 320. There it is. Okay. So if you were to look at the. Map there. So briefly, if you were to look at the specifiers, by definition, adjustment disorder must resolve within six months of termination of the stressor or its consequences. However, the symptoms may persist in the prolonged period of longer than six months if they occur in response to a persistent stressor. Um, so, uh, a chronic disabling medical condition or the stressor has enduring consequences such as financial or emotional duties. So the duration of the symptoms of an adjustment disorder can be indicated by using the acute or persistent specifier, um and the persistent specifier used to indicate the presence of symptoms longer than six months or longer. But the latter specifier applies when the duration of the disturbance is longer than six months. So if, uh. And that's where if you look at someone that has ongoing financial struggles, you meet with them and they're having an adjustment disorder face to job change, but their financial situation lasts for two years. They can have that experience longer than the six months, but it's because of the situation last longer than six months that as soon as that resolves, within six months of the resolve of the event, it would be anticipated that the symptoms stop. Does that make sense? Clear as month. I'll keep working on that. Yeah. The stress, the worst stressor was the, uh, losing job. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, like, let's say the symptoms last longer than six months for the stressors. And that would mean that you consider that you might either be classified or look for something else that's going on. Again, because you cannot you cannot provide a diagnosis adjustment disorder if like, uh, the stressors result. Is variation of the stressor. Uh, would it be okay to in this case? Okay. This is my provisional diagnosis because I don't want circumstances. And then, um, if they become normal that we've. Just been a and so while in some ways, again, in order to provide this service, if you're not sure these are professional, you could also look at, um other specified. Unspecified related. Illness distress syndrome or set up provisional techniques or that you're looking to do some sort of trauma research. Yeah. That's right. You would think about as you as. The fact. That um, but other questions I have real quick. Yeah. Um, what about postpartum depression? Would that be, like, also included in this order or. Uh, no, likely. That would be very specific to the postpartum experience. And that being said, if you want to go back and say, like, you know, if it's challenges related to just be careful, that might be an adjustment that you would have to move out. For example, let's just say it's not, um, it's not mom, but the father of the baby is experiencing like, uh, distress. Oh my goodness, my life is upside down. It's crazy. Uh, I have just the stress of feeling, uh, I don't know how we're going to make it. I'm tired. I can't take aspirin. Then you look at maybe there's an attachment disorder. Uh, mother can be the same thing, but you're going to look at. You need to then look at what are the symptoms, and this one makes sense or the other. And then see what the DSM says. It can be possible that you would be able to provide both if they don't concern you. Yeah. Great questions. All right. So let's look at acute stress. Now this is if you look at the diagnostic criteria for this in PTSD. What do you notice. Right. Yeah. The. Similarity is very similar. I am recalling acute stress. It appears in a certain time frame. Right. It's within. Uh, now my brain is as both and usually like a week or a month of the symptoms for PTSD. But acute stress happens almost right away. But it's one month and the last longer than one month. That's post-traumatic stress disorder. So in some way, as you look at there, there are some differences. For example, for um, acute stress disorder, it's going to be to stress related to trauma or stress that lasts three days to one month. You know, oftentimes, for example, it would be pretty reasonable for someone who gets in a pretty serious car accident to have some distress related to that. And that could last again anywhere between three days to one month. Now, they still may be affected, but the severity of their, uh, experience likely trails off. And then there's kind of ongoing processing of the event. Um, but, uh, for this, much like post-traumatic stress disorder, the symptoms include, uh, significant anxiety, re-experiencing the events. There's also dissociation, uh, emotional instability and reactivity. And, uh, what we see is that for this one particular, it's three days to one month. And, um, if you look at the diagnostic criteria, there are different categories, including the intrusive nature of symptoms, negative mood dissociation, avoidance and arousal. And what we need for acute stress disorder is they need a total of nine within those categories. So if someone experienced a sexual assault injury, uh, they fall off the ladder. For example, they might experience acute stress, but if it persists longer than a month. Then we're going to move into post-traumatic stress. And if you look at the diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic stress, so a little bit different in that they don't need nine overall, but there's at least one sometimes a minimum of two within each one of those categories. But one of the things we need to look at here is this atypical stress response. Or is that something that would be disordered. Again, what's a reasonable response? If you look at there is social, interpersonal and other areas of life that are disrupted because of their significant avoidance. Maybe they got hurt at work. And now because of the nature of their job being in construction, they can't fulfill their job versus it would be reasonable. Someone gets hurt at work, they go back, they're kind of timid. They have to kind of work their way back in. But how is that working for them? Is it is their avoidance is impacting their relationships? Is it impacting different spheres of life? So again, we need to look at what's the clinical significance to stress. And does that client make that work. So the answer is likely that that mixed in is subjective. But you as a clinician get to determine clinically the stress. Questions about acute stress disorder. Yeah. So it's the least in terms of something like traditionally associated with trauma. But the military really soon after that one. Will they always. Been classified as PTSD or is it like is it. Always something you know. So you would if you see someone within a month like in that period a lot. Yeah. Um, they're experiencing something, but you're thinking like. And if you're working towards, like, let's just say someone, they might come in and see right away. They might come in year three. You're like, well, okay. So they've already been experiences two, three weeks. The likelihood of post-traumatic stress likely. So even if you do they meet full criteria for stress disorder. Yes. And then you have secondary PTSD provisional. And that provisional would be based on. Yes. Not yet. But you would only get that provisional if you're feeling it's likely like a really strong that there would be that criteria. And then after they pass that threshold of time, then you would need to confirm do they have all of the symptoms in every category. You would actually be that pretty provisional. Uh, but like you have a different survival system right. And if they meet that for duration. So you would get that. Thank you for all right. Other questions. Okay. So PTSD, uh, very similar. Uh, you're going to have negative mood arousal states. But let's talk a little bit about uh, there's going to be uh, some key features and one that you see commonly, uh, presented in a culture society is, uh, kind of flashbacks reliving, uh, and that is something to keep in mind that it could be partial. They just kind of have the image in their head and then kind of replay it in their mind. Maybe they go to the intersection where an accident happened, or maybe if they were assaulted where that happened and they, they get, um, kind of feel like they're, they're all the way to the point where, um, they some can almost dissociate fully and feel like they are 100% back there again. So, for example, someone that may have experienced, uh, combat, they can have flashbacks all the way to for almost being reimbursed and as if I'm actually there. So their reality almost becomes, uh, different. Uh, the other thing you're going to see is that there's hyper alertness, uh, hypervigilance, there's, uh, negative, uh, cognitions related to self kind that, uh, no one has good large generalizations that are negative nations of the world. And overall, um, uh, but you're going to look for again, what is there, um, a life threatening event. And I had it open because I was going to read an opportunity here. Okay. So criterion is an important one to attend to. Is exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one or more distinctive ways. Now, keep in mind that is, directly experiencing witnessing in person, learning that the event or tracking of tragic events occurred to a close family member or friend, or experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to adverse details, such as in first responders. So that's almost like the concept of secondary trauma. Uh, they may not have actually been in the accident. They respond. And they also, um, I have them actually worked with someone who, um, their, uh, they knew. Firefighters who were responding to the landslide that happened, uh, a number of years ago. Never again. They themselves didn't encounter the landslide, but by working in that environment created a post-traumatic stress response. But I want to get back down to. I know I had a hard. This is why I normally make my notes instead of rely on the DSM. Um, one of okay. Criterion eight for this does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television, movies, pictures, unless this exposure is work related. So one of the things to keep in mind is that, uh, there's this concept of if we view traumatic things on television, it can impact us and create a trauma response. DSM is clear that that is not the case unless it's work related, which I need to even do more research. So how watching TV or unless it's something related to um. Again their work. I'm not sure what they mean by that one, except in the general population watching violence on television, dramatic things on television could not and does not result in PTSD. And uh, in my mind, this comes to even experiencing, um, one of those flashbulb memories that we have is when we look at 911 and the falling of the Twin Towers. Some may have thought that they experienced, uh, PTSD related to that experience watching it on TV. Oh my goodness, I thought that was me. That is not something that we actually would diagnose PTSD if we were watching that. Now we might be talking about a stress response, but it won't be PTSD. Does that make sense? Okay. All right. One of the things to keep in mind is that the DSM, if you look on page 303, is that there's a civic requirements for children that are six years old or younger. So recognizing that if you're going to diagnose post-traumatic stress, um, and you're working with children, make sure you're aware of the, the differences in the diagnostic criteria. The other. And the last piece I'll say about post-traumatic stress is keep in mind the individual number of, uh, criteria that must be met. And acute stress here was nine in all of the collective categories here. Each category, uh, is either one or more or two or more is difficult. So make sure you're very aware you diagnosed you you go through each section, each diagnostic criteria. How many symptoms doesn't quite mean. So sometimes it's one. Sometimes it's more okay. Thank you. Mind that it's not just the first one. Where they have experienced something that is life threatening, but they need to make all of the other criteria as well. So if someone experienced something life threatening and they don't meet the other criteria, does that mean that they're not experiencing distress? You know, their distress could be real. But what we want to do then look at and look at. Is there another trauma stress related disorder stuff? I can specify that, um, that they would be criteria for even if they don't have post-traumatic stress. Okay. All right. That's some of the examples. For example. Example for example, um, quite a lot of um. NLP as far as is approximately in the ABC. Yeah. Um, so many symptoms. Yeah. You it's easy to be diagnosed with PTSD and how many it's actually within. That's what you say saying before that we have to see the all of that. That's right. But if not see something that is we need to look at something different. Um, but this one is quite a lot. It is a lot. But again, they don't need to meet all of the diagnostic criteria. And each section okay. Through each they may need to only mean one or maybe two of those symptoms. And again those symptoms may be representative. Not exactly like in the concept of hyper vigilance. What that looks like may be different than maybe what's described there. But they're definitely hyper vigilant. And so you would need to look at uh, even though for example, uh, let's look at criterion. Uh, he has one through five, but it says presence of one or more of the following intrusive symptoms. So they may have, uh, reoccurring involuntary thoughts, recurrent distressing dreams. They may have associative reactions. They may have intense or prolonged psychological distress or psychological reactions, a reminder of the tragic event. They just need one of those. Right? But they they need to have criteria and be represented by something in that those category. That makes sense. Yeah. Okay. That means that the, the uh that how many like abcdefg until the junior prom. I mean, some of them, um, that needs to be, you know, uh, something in A and B. Yeah. Something needs to be represented for like two some. I get that right. So I'm sorry. Yeah. That's, um, one or more. And again, you would be able to walk through walk through the client. Uh, now, if we were talking about, um, the process of clinical interviewing, for example, and you're working with the client and, you know, they experienced post-traumatic stress, or they're experienced something, um, that could be related to cosmetic stress disorder. You need to at least have an understanding of what are the kind of the key features, so that you can ask questions to confirm or rule out the presence of that disorder. Now, if you can't get there, remember, you can be provisional. You're like, wow, okay, so the client described everything except what's in criteria and see. So I need to go back and ask the client so you can give a provisional diagnosis likely if they meet you know k through G minus criteria and C you're likely going to get there. And we just think to confirm. And if not if they don't then you will go back and check your technicians. Um, if you have clients that might have a. Recurring tonight and say they've been experiencing it over like a four month time period, is it possible to have both PTSD and acute stress or, um, in that case, or would, you know, in some way to look at what's the duration, when did symptoms start? And if they have persisted longer than one month from the from the first event? Um, then it would be post-traumatic stress. Not sure that, um, yeah. Yeah. So again, there needs to be an identifiable event, uh, let's say like maybe there was the first incidence of domestic violence. When was that? The symptoms start after that. So one of the things as we look at the clinical interviewing process, as you pointed out, we drive towards the specifics. Right? Okay. Yeah. So I've been experiencing you know, my partner is really aggressive okay. So what does aggressive mean. Uh, does he hit you. Yes. Does he punch. Yes. Has he. Okay. And then you start walking through, um, uh, maybe not the list of everything. Okay. So when was the first time you experienced this? You know, after that experience, did you feel that? Similarly? No. Okay. So when did you start experiencing any symptoms? Well, actually, only last week, because it escalated. This was the first time he pulled out a knife and she pulled out a knife. Whatever it is. And you're like, okay, so now we're one weekend. Domestic violence has been going on, but the experience with these symptoms started with them. That context here, does that make sense and could have started a year ago when it first started. But what we're talking about is when did the symptoms first start like a common combat. Right? Right. And so the idea of that's where we ask those good questions to get to specifics around duration, frequency, time, uh, onset. Um, when does it not happen? Does it ever not happen? You know, those are questions that we might ask. Yeah. Great. Other questions. All right. All right. We're going to give dissociative disorders and, uh, then take them break. Now, I will admit I thought we would be all the way through dissociative disorders by now, actually into our diagnostic process. So this is what we get when we change the script. So stay with me. All right. Let's talk a little bit about dissociative disorders. Because when you have acute stress post-traumatic stress disorders oftentimes those experiences can include dissociative disorder. Um experience. Now if you notice in the PowerPoint for like the last three sessions, I've had dissociative disorders listed, possibly because it's something that it's not included in in our reading. But I, we need to talk about that because it happens even in the context of, um, other mental health disorders. Now, what constitutes a dissociative disorder versus a dissociative experience? So if we were to look at dissociation, um, really it's kind of just a disconnection from self or like being present. So have you ever been maybe driving and you kind of look up, you're like, when did I get to this exit on the freeway? Dissociation. We were just kind of up in our head and disconnected. But that doesn't mean you have to the disorder again. Disorder. Meaning that it goes beyond what a typical experience would be. So I think, uh, we all have moments where we dissociate and levels of dissociation that would be considered maybe more common even when things get hard. Uh, there's there's something that happens when you're working with clients and you start pressing on, um, something that they're uncomfortable with, and you're asking questions and they bounce. Um, I was working with a client one time, and we were asking questions related to, um, potential sexual trauma. And, um, the client actually went, made this noise point and then went on to something else, and she physically, like, bounced. That's not a full dissociation, that's avoidance. But at the same time, she started to feel disconnected. She started to mentally go where she was uncomfortable. She started to go back to that that situation. So she bounced. So dissociation. Um, you could see it in a lot of different ways. Even as a client who has experienced anxiety, distress or who has experienced trauma. Uh, they you need to look for signs of dissociation and treatment. Um, I'm going where? I shouldn't go with that. Um, but the reality is, uh, let me just offer you this one. It's not for free, but, um, because you're here. Uh, but the reality is you should have grounding tools in your toolkit all the time. Uh, you know, tell me, you know, five things. You you see, what are the things you hear? One of the things you smell. Things you feel. Uh, different breathing techniques. Um, having, uh, one of the best I ever had was, uh, was a crucial, you know, those are that are almost unavailable here. It's like a space forward to you. But that one something tactile as Christ associates who put this in your hand, what do you notice? Just pay attention to what's in your head. Bring something back. Okay. So, uh, if you're working with clients, always having those things around and are great with kids, too, but, um, so often we're looking at dissociative disorders. Uh, we're getting into this cluster of things that happen now. If you look at the DSM and, uh, oftentimes one of the key features, if you look at the environmental components to the onset and of course it's going to be trauma, oftentimes sexual trauma. So keeping in mind that if you're working with clients who experienced sexual abuse or other types of trauma. There's there at a higher percentage for dissociative disorders. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about, uh, dissociative identity disorder. Uh, represented in the movie split. Not like that. Um, commonly what we're here is two or more distinct personality states. And if you read through the diagnostic features of the DSM, what you see is that those are not always like extreme differences, where someone has a full shift and those distinct personality traits, they can shift and be different gender, different age, different electricity, their eyesight. One personality will require glasses, the other does not. They shift handedness, their physical walk, their gait can change. There can be significant shifts, but for many, it's subtle shifts. It's not necessarily, um, like a full. They go from being a 45 year old construction man to a 14 year old female, and they shift between identities. Right. But you have these two distinct personality shifts. And so what we see is, uh, often it's going to be identified in gaps of time or awareness of events. And so for the individuals, there's almost like this awareness or sometimes a lack of awareness of a shift. They find themselves, they become aware, why am I in the kitchen? I don't know how I got here, or they find themselves at the grocery store. They don't remember how they got there. There's going to be things in the house that they don't recall purchasing or getting. Uh, they're going to maybe even fully find themselves in a different city and different time has elapsed or they're like, hey, so, uh, where were you last Thursday? I don't know. There's gaps in time. So oftentimes what we're going to notice is when there's gaps in time or lack of awareness of your practice, there's confusion. You know, uh, those individuals can experience, um, uh, dissociation in a couple of different ways. Sometimes, like I said, there's an awareness of or other times, um, where they almost become observers of the other self and they there's a sense of lack of control or if there's no awareness, things just happen. And they almost have a sense of confusion about what's going on. But there's a couple of different types of dissociative um selves. Um, possession or non possession forms. And possession really is this perception of outside control is going to be the distinction. And um, according to the DSM, when you look at possession types are going to be those that have much more common significant shifts and type of expression of personality, of self. Um. Something to keep in mind here is that it must not be attributed to a culturally or spiritually approved practice. So altered it states, whether that be through a substance or, um, maybe even those that are considered where they, uh, have patients or they, uh, have an experience that would be considered a possession type. Where are they? Or, um, feel like their, um, deity, spiritual leader or something takes over and causes them to do something? We cannot diagnose dissociative identity disorder if it's in the context of what would be culturally or spiritually approved practice. And so one of those good intake questions is, is there any aspect of faith or spirituality that you ascribe to you want that wrapped into your work together? Yeah. Okay. So that's how you start seeing and hearing about these things. You might have context to be able to understand is what we're dealing with. Uh, dissociative identity disorder or is this something that is appropriate within the context of their, uh, faith or cultural practice? Questions about the idea. And if you have a client that has experienced, um, uh, trauma, abuse, neglect, higher risk. And so if you have an intake, uh, adverse childhood questionnaire, for example, um, adverse childhood experiences cases, uh, and you know that there is that as a part of the past, this is something you just kind of keep in mind, is there, um, dissociative experiences that they, um, that they have? Um, just as a know, one of the leading concepts and treatment modalities. So this is internal family systems and the concept of, uh, oftentimes the self emerge, the split happens related to trauma. And there's usually like a protect yourself or and uh, there's usually the person that is in the front is not the true self. And so keeping in mind that there's that trauma and you do find out that there is, um, uh, multiples than you would likely want to refer unless you yourself are interested in working with individuals. But uh, I would say look at internal family systems. The whole concept is that you work with almost like in family therapy. You get the, the, the alters to work together and come to a point of results. So, um, it's incredibly fascinating and far beyond the concept of, um, what we can cover. But keep in mind trauma watch for dissociative dissociative identity disorder. It's not here on TV, but just pay attention for you. Look at, um. Uh, this is what I need to stick to my notes. Uh, the dissociative disorders. If there's a disruption or a continuity of the normal integration. So this is going to be consciousness, emotions, perception, identity. And so there's just a disconnect between the normal integration of self, the experience of self, and kind of connection with um, uh, what is real. So it includes a ninja depersonalization g realization. And um, people are not always aware of this shift. But if we look at dissociative amnesia, uh, what we have is this is, uh, lack of autobiographical recall, and it's not associated with normal forgetfulness or something that may be related to age, memory decline, uh, Alzheimer's, dementia. Uh, but it's going to be something that goes beyond, um, normal. And usually you're going to see it in three different ways of life selective, generalized. And uh, if you were to look at the concept of often related to trauma, it's about, um, forgetting about a period of time, for example, the child that maybe experienced sexual abuse between the ages of seven and 9th May not recall the ages of seven. And, um, so it's a localized, uh, this is also selective that they may remember from age 7 to 9, but there's points that are missing. They're forgetting about some events, but not others. And then generalized for loss of memory or identity. Now dissociative identity disorder can include dissociative amnesia. But the difference is you can have dissociative amnesia without, um, dissociative identity disorder. And the key feature of d.i.d is two or more distinct personality states. Here you may just have amnesia without the distinct personality states. Does that make sense? Okay. And, um, you need to include the specifier with or without fugue. And fugue is uh, sometimes, uh, what can appear to be aimless or unplanned travel. It's almost like someone will just disconnect from who they are in themselves and they will wander. And that could even include, uh, finding themselves in, uh, different state people having been identified, uh, without a new life and an identity. And during that, uh, just substitute a field and then maybe they come back to you remembering who they are and where they were. But it's not necessarily just momentary in the long term. So fugue is just that concept of wandering without, uh, okay, more purpose. So one of the other things that happens often, even in the context of, uh, some anxiety disorders or stress related disorders is this concept of depersonalization and relaxation. So keeping in mind that depersonalization is that out of body experience, almost like they become an observer of themselves, they personalize, they disconnect from themselves, whereas the realization is going to be that my life is a kind of a fog. It's unreal. And in this, uh, circumstance, oftentimes, um, even partially, things become, um, or the distorted voices become different. It's almost like almost in the movies where they kind of blur everything out and the voices become maybe deeper or curvier or slower, or it's just disconnection. Uh, then it's like a fog. It's not real versus depersonalization. Almost like I'm an observer of myself and circumstances, and I have no control of what's going on, or everything just doesn't seem real. It's foggy. Okay. And now this is in order to be so you can have experiences with depersonalization and generalization in different contexts. But for this disorder you need to see persistent and recurrent. If this is something that happens frequently or for long periods of time, and you look at a disorder versus depersonalization can actually happen in the context of other things, other disorders. Question. Uh, personalization. When the. Evil is the killings in the surgery room. And sometimes before they like a clinical path, they see what they see in the cotton, the cold that they see, they they actually also. Yeah, that might be a completely different experience. And we're now maybe getting into the existential. But the reality is could of substance create that experience possibly. Could there be like a near-death experience. And then they come back that that might be a little bit different here some ways that the personalization may feel like that, but it wouldn't be in the context of, um, you might be able to identify like that experience in the surgery room as a depersonalization. But now that if it's near-death versus like as I'm standing here and I've experienced trauma and different things and something kind of triggers me or thought and then I almost become like, I'm up here watching myself and I'm not necessarily disconnected. It's not like I'm in a, uh, vegetative or, um, unresponsive. You can be fully connected, but almost like your experience is just watching from a distance. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. So not that what you're saying can't be do personalization. But this is a little bit different than that. Like could be very easy to throw away a 50 to 1 come back to. Yeah that that could be a whole lot of different but could be this depersonalization experience. But uh, it could be a depersonalization disorder because they're probably only having that experience there. Right. Yeah. Okay. All right. Let's go ahead and take a break here until 8:00 o'clock. Come on back if you're a hero on that one. And we have. A. Five minute.