I just want to know what you know about you. I don't know. I mean, I don't know about. You. But. Lisa. Welcome back. I don't know if anyone has had a chance to sign the law. It's going to be right up here on this. It'll make sure you do that for tonight. All right, so let's start with a conversation about what is psychopathology. I know we talked a little bit about, uh, what is health mental illness. And simply put it is the scientific study of mental health disorders. So in your understanding, why why do we study? Why is it important for us to study? Uh, scientifically. Mental health disorders. If there are people suffering, is our people suffering? Yes, definitely. Because everybody can, uh, get an idea through Google. We have to do something better and more equipped than anybody else and not remain as quacks. So what we're what we're doing is study so that we are informed and avoiding people, just googling and making stuff up and thinking that we don't know what we're talking about. I'm a semicolon. Like, I just haven't gotten diagnosed. Um, so that would be open to people. So that's true in their understanding. So helping people who with their experience that helped them through what that experience. Yeah, it helps us and helps us to find. Right. All of these are correct. Ultimately, we study psychopathology because it helps us have, uh, an understanding of what these other, um, individuals experiences are unique and specific to them. There's strong similarities, right? There's general things that kind of occur within these disorders. So we'll talk about, uh, the classification of the mental health disorders. But ultimately it gives us the ability to understand what that experience means. And then as you highlighted, being able to help kind of walk them through it, it informs. Then if we understand what the experience is, how it occurs and when it occurs, we can also study what helps. And ultimately we're moving towards helping people. As you mentioned, working towards the, uh, more positive experience. So ultimately, by studying psychopathology, it gives us that, uh, that ability to inform treatment. And as we'll look at later, uh, it actually gives us the ability to understand if treatment, treatment is working. We're not just doing something and we think it's working and we really don't have anything to measure. Okay. So what fears, questions, concerns, excitement and apprehensions do you have about studying psychopathology? I want to say again from the country where I am, I had a lot of years to make mistakes in the diagnosis, something in the labor for people, which they continue to live with. Um, and I know that America and Europe is a little bit different, but still, I, my colleagues, the employees here, that I have to be more aware of that, um, situation. And also what is the normal, what is the pathology? Is that what was the question. Because someone this will be like we said, someone is Asian. They have much more resistance about some kind of diagnosis or diseases like obesity. And some of them you couldn't put them. They needed they need diagnosis because they need that help. Right? That's why I think I've been struggling with them. And there's definitely a fear of labels goes, uh, across, uh, cultures. But in some more specifically, um, thank you for sharing. Yeah. Yeah, I guess, yeah. Giving a diagnosis is a great thing when somebody says you are this. Yeah, I can affect somebody every time I think. Yeah. And in some ways I don't want to like keep it in my head. Hold on to that. Because that gravity that's that's real. And we need to then balance that with confidence, understanding that we have knowledge and skill to be able to then understand, um, the meaning of those labels, not only how to prescribe treatments so I can hang on to that and don't let it stop. Yeah, yeah. Uh, probably just that like this diagnosis. Is not going to be like this labeling their experiences. They're also like guiding them towards a path. And even then, I know going to them if I get it wrong. So what happens if you get a. Consequences. There will be consequences, potentially. But what happens if you get a phone call? And I want to ask you another question. We have to leave. We like that we could repair and repair that. Uh, yes. And because of how heavy it is and what it means, there's also potential implications. But here's here's the reality. And, uh, I got a call. Move ahead in my notes. The process of diagnosing the owner literally captures what the client's experiences are up to that moment, and what you see in front of you. Based on the reports of. A whole host of people or the person sitting in the chair opposite. So ultimately, we have to use our best clinical judgment about what that is. And in this context, to make a decision based on what we know. Referring to the diagnostic manual, you know. This is what I believe, correct. But part of the skill this class is going. Here's why I think it's that. And what we can do is and I think sometimes in some ways, because of the label, it feels like if once we put it out there, it can't be too hard. But the reality is diagnoses. Taking diagnoses can go from being active to a mission or pathology weapon if this diagnosis is not correct. This is why it works. For example, uh, client comes in and experiences depressive disorder. When you talk about one of the key things that we need to evaluate and experience with depressive disorder is that there have been manic or hypomanic experiences because that changes from depressive disorder to bipolar disorder. So what happens if your client comes in and they don't disclose? Or within the next six months, they have a hyper manic collaboration where you, um, based on what you saw. So in some way hold that heaviness and recognize you have heard me say this and again, over and again, uh, not only in this class, but in and, um, anytime you connect with me in different ways, we cannot strive for perfection. We cannot be bound by perfection. You'll never reach it. But you can strive for excellence. You can strive to be correct in every comment and then do your due diligence. Be professional. You have to stand behind your diagnosis with evidence, and then you know that this is what I said. And here's why. Oh, okay. That was incorrect. Um, and then we repair some substance. So just a question on that is how how do you balance with clients being professional and also acknowledging that you could be wrong? I think in those two ways, I think sometimes like a practical like. But it sounds like to me that, you know, uh, I'm still in a, like a, like I am a knowledge base, but, I mean, so how do you present yourself to clients? Yeah, in some ways, that's, uh, being genuine. Authentic to you are. But also, I think two characteristics. And this is just my my perspective. It's more attached from my, my perspective is you need to be called humility and confidence. And in any given moment does need to be about I need to be able to confidently trust my training, my inside, my clinical judgment, my expertise, and then be humble enough to be human for the client. And oftentimes, if you begin the process of working with the client through understanding their diagnoses, uh, in some ways there's ways that we can phrase that is, it seems that based on what we're seeing here, this is the best purchase. Absolutely. You have one of the challenges we have, and this is where oftentimes we can sometimes be called the soft science, right, is because there's a lot of subjectivity. It's not like in chemistry where or uh, they do a blood test and it's for cholesterol and they can count how many particles or whatever. I'm not a medical doctor, but they they can tell how much cholesterol the percentage of. Right. That's a hard fact. That's verifiable. What we do is we use a good, solid understanding of research, uh, these skills, these diagnostic classifications use our clinical judgment and insight and go, this is what it seems to me. And so with that, there's a little bit of just humility walking in and trusting the rapport you have with the client to be able to say, you know, actually, based on what you're telling me now, it may be something different than what we thought before. So let's talk about that, right? We're not we're not perfect. We're human. Yeah. Uh, I don't know who's who. I think for in those at first. No, we'll come back here. Yeah. Like, what are the people? Or if you don't, when there should be a game a night. Ah, there they go. Uh, that's the tension we're going to carry. Yes. And if we're really diligent and faithful and follow our process and have good documentation and be able to, uh, and here's one of the things that we'll, we'll talk about is it's this diagnosis because this is the information I have. So when I take this information, I come to this conclusion using my clinical judgment and this data. Okay. So it's never used that. Why is it different. Yeah. And so there are there's always a tension, um, legal and ethical considerations about, um, to provide a diagnosis, not to diagnose. What if you missed a diagnosis? Again, if we are good, responsible, um, diligent and, uh, attuned to our craft and do what we need to do, you'll be okay. And the reality is, sometimes we make mistakes. Sometimes we miss things. We're not perfect. And so just carrying that tension of making sure you're doing things in the, in the upright way. And then that will that will help. Doesn't mean that there won't be bumps or bruises or challenges or issues. But if you do your faith to be faithful, to do what you know is right, you'll be fine. Does that make sense? Yeah. And oftentimes, uh, in my experience, clients don't come and go. This is my diagnosis, right? We talked about that. Others, they might go. That's not it. You know, there's denial, there's resistance. There's who? Uh, I had someone, um, come and see me, and, uh, no diagnosis can be reached. Not even, like, adjustment disorder or other things where it was just seasoned like nothing. They wanted a diagnosis. So insurance would pay for it. But ethically, I couldn't come up with the diagnosis. So we talked about that. So it is oftentimes, um, being wise and communicating with your client. Supervision also helps a lot. Remember you're not going to step out and be on your own. You have 3000 hours of supervised experience post-graduation. For this reason they will help shape you. So, um, as much as it's important in choosing a program, uh, and choosing internship sites, choosing your supervisor, picking someone that you trust and that's a good fit for you is a great one when you when you graduate. Okay. Other questions? Yeah. Just wondering what process is it normally appropriate have recommended to present the diagnosis in, say, a client like. Yeah. We'll definitely talk more about like what's the process. When does that fit. Um we'll talk about uh, uh, when to withhold a diagnosis, when not to withhold the diagnosis because there sometimes as, uh, you guys already take them on ethics or you're doing it now, but during day you'll learn when it's like there may be times we're responsible for providing a diagnosis and an accurate diagnosis, but there's times when it may be harmful or not beneficial to the client. So we withhold a diagnosis. Right. And so it is when or how it depends. So we'll we'll talk more about that. Yeah I was just going to mention that um Mike. In various times when I'm trying to figure out, like what's going on physically, I go to a doctor or a nurse or something like that, and they're presenting me the best information they have as well. And I guess like a learning curve or a frustrating point for me with discovering that while they have all this training, they're not going to know exactly what's going on there in that case. And it's kind of up to me to take the information they provided. Yeah, see what I do. So I think that's helped me to think about, okay, like being professional learning are what we need to learn. But you know, like a doctor they're going to get it wrong. They're going to say like go with test. And yeah. What do you think that this reminds me of? Um, yeah. You'll learn to like my brain. Not automatically as TV movies, oftentimes, uh, Toy Story first and then Pixar and then other. So I'm very, uh, metaphoric driven or like, make connections. And it's like even to the point where I don't even understand my own brain. It's just quick. And I think a house in every you know, how often in that show now don't practice like how but the idea of like, oh, it's this just go with it. And then like, oh, it's wrong. And how many times they get it wrong. Now that's a dramatized, uh, unethical approach to medicine that oftentimes. Is for entertainment value, but the idea of medical doctors and others, it is an educated guess. It's a hypothesis and it's working. And so keep in mind as you present this, it's a working science based on a snapshot based on the information and if that needs to change. Do your due diligence document and explain the change. That makes sense. But that's why we need to be careful systematic in the process the first time. And that's what we're doing here. Building that muscle memory so that when you engage in the process of diagnosing, um, you do well. Other questions such. Everyone's sufficiently, uh, nervous and excited all at the same time. Interesting diagnostic fear and excitement present to. Similarly, it's the cognitive understanding of the difference that's here. So we'll hold on to that for later okay. All right, so if we were to, uh, define mental disorders according to, uh, the DSM, uh, and others. So wigfield, as cited in your text by uh, Castonguay outlines, is the inability for internal microorganisms to perform their natural function. The condition causes harm based, uh, judgment of culture in a subjective distress. So ultimately, in this definition, it's when things on the inside just don't work, right. And because women are not working right, it creates harm based on cultural judgment and subjective distress. Because in some cases, what we will find is someone's experience may be controllable culture. Therefore it's not disordered. However, oftentimes in a different culture, that experience can be considered disordered. So in some ways it's the it's also the definition of what is typical, what is not typical. And we'll talk about this probably a couple of times. I don't prefer the term normal, especially around this topic because what's normal? Yeah. What's normal for me? What's the normative experience? My baseline of an experience is just different than yours, but a typical that we're to look at the average in this room. There's probably a continuum that will go. This is kind of the range that is most likely. It's typical. The EPA defines it a little bit differently. And it's a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance. Will define clinically significant disturbances in cognition, emotion regulation, and behavior. Now recognize it's not just capitalized. It's also behavioral. It's also in um thought and emotions multifaceted. And then what we've learned there's also um biology in play. Um interact with that. It's a dysfunction in psychological, biological or developmental processes. Again, whether it's the way we think and feel, the our biology or even in the process of development, and it causes us to stress or disability and social occupational areas. One of the things that we'll find as we look at the diagnostic criteria is that oftentimes you can have disturbance, but it needs to be clinically significant. It needs to surpass a threshold. And and we need to pay attention to is it in one domain of life for children experiencing, uh, severe anxiety? Is it only at school or does that anxiety happen at home? Does that anxiety happen only when mom and dad are present or when they leave or fill in the blank? So one of the things we have to do is pay attention to is it more than one area. And oftentimes it needs to be clinically significant, not just in one domain specific sense. And while each disorder has criteria that will tell. So one of the things to pay attention to here, as we talked about, is, um. It's important for us to note as diagnostician is that we need to be aware of culture, because if something is permissible in culture, for example, when we talk about maybe the idea of, um, hearing voices, and when we talk about, uh, psychotic related disorders because of premia, in some context that is considered typical or even sacred, it's important. Or even you look at different faith traditions. Some might understand the concept of I heard the voice of God say. If that's not their context, that could be perceived as disordered, whereas in that culture it's considered normative. So one of the our, our um, lens needs to be if it's okay in culture, it's not necessarily disorder. Anger. So let's talk about our friend, the DSM. The DSM is actually a categorical classification system. You know, there are other, um. Uh, processes. There are other methods of, uh, classifying this information that's categorical. What that means is that we are moving things from, uh, kind of, uh, an understanding of the experience in a more ambiguous sense to we are putting them in clusters of information and putting them into distinct categories. So, um. One of the benefits of, uh, having a classification system. Uh, according to planning career melon is that it creates the definition of concepts. It creates boundaries and creates common nomenclature. Who can speak the same language? So, for example, if I'm working with a client who is experiencing, um, some meditation disorder and they're experiencing, um, I can then write language that then when they go see their, their healthcare provider, we have shared language. That person is I kind of used the example earlier where someone may, uh, be seeing a therapist but have to change therapist because of insurance, and therefore they request the notes to come over. Now that therapist and you have a shared language, there's a shared understanding. The other thing that it does is it gives us the ability to engage in understanding experience, to be able to not only classify it and define it, but also research and then research what works for treatment. So it gives us the ability to identify and to inform, but also to research. So those are some of the benefits. What do you think some of the challenges of using a diagnostic system that's categorical. What what maybe some challenges like very um overlapping very overlapping. Um what else. Also the changing all of the time that means like, um, delays it sometimes and often the new ones. Any of them. Right. Uh, it's based on current definition. Yeah, I can think contribute. That's. Yes. What else? Yeah, maybe it's not one size fits all. It's not one size fits all. The client's experiences were different. What about if I stand? Um. I'm tired. Are you tired? Yes. Because I'm doing the same thing. We probably have 35 different perspectives. On what? Tired. It's so the definitions are subjective and individual and so on. Can't be us. So when we started to say that this symptom meets this category okay. So what are you finding. What are some other challenges that you can identify? That I could possibly overcome? Apologizing. It doesn't mean it's necessarily mission. Right now we have this, uh, definition. We can see it over and over again. Many. Right. Uh, the overlapping, um, uh, diagnostic criteria, the, um, let me actually read my notes. That would be helpful, because then what happens is I will then go back and read my notes and it'll be what I just told you. Um, so one of the challenges we have is that are these discrete disorders or arbitrary distinctions, they overlap. Depression and anxiety have a lot of things that are actually in common, and there are some that might theorize or actually put the idea that anxiety and depression actually overlap, and they're on a continuum. They're actually very different experiences. Um. If you look at, um. Uh, depression with anxious stress and anxiety, I have, uh, some of the same stuff. But one of the challenges we have is within classifying and creating this entire system that's based on creating these categorical systems when actually the experience of global, um, worry of, uh, uh, issues of eating, sleeping, fill in the blank, they can be more continuum based because we're not categorical type beings. There are things that we can classify and categorize. Um, so what we have is, um, the DSM has actually made efforts to adjust this by moving away from some, uh, disorders being categorical to continuum autism spectrum disorder. Uh, the DSM four TR to uh, to five removed, um, Asperger's, uh, which was, uh, separate classification of autism and now autism spectrum disorder those which includes symptoms related to Asperger's high functioning. And so they've moved it to understand its continuum versus distinct categories. So it's like this okay. This is where I don't know if you know. So we have sleep related issues. You know anxiety. Depression distinct categories. Okay. So now let's talk about some symptoms and try to classify irritable. Like related depression related. Yeah yeah. Anxiety related. Which category does it go into? Okay. So what about blank cells? Uh, can't focus at work. Oh, no. Okay. Uh, no pleasure in things I used to do. Depression. Depression? That's one of the earmarks of depression. But can I also be so anxious? I just can't find myself engaging in activity so I can engage. What about I sleep too little. So they can make sure I stay in depression so that, you know. What about I sleep too much. Oh. That's depression. Depression. Sleep related disorder. Or maybe because I'm so anxious, my body just shuts down and I sleep too much, or I can't sleep because my mind races. Or it could be sleep related disorder. My sleep actually disrupted by, uh, obstructive sleep apnea or my pillow's too soft. So there's one of our tasks then, is to understand that we are developing the skill of trying to categorize. Symptoms that could be in many different categories. And here's here's the deal. Many of these, um. You can actually tease apart and come up with a confident diagnosis and come to the category of it's actually sleep related versus depression. We can get there. But the reality is it's not a perfect system because we're trying to take this experience of symptoms like these. And put them into one bucket. So fortunately, the folks that wrote the DSM, uh, incredibly, uh, detailed forecast experience, uh, expressed some humility. And they acknowledge that we are not a categorical based and this is not a perfect system. But what we have is this is a system that is, um, it's the one we have, but it's also a good system. It's not the only system of the best system. Uh, but it's the best system we have. And I think over time, likely maybe with AI. And let's not go there. It's. All that way, and conversation goes on for hours and we will talk about there is AI diagnostic software. I haven't looked at it. I plan on doing a little bit of research before we get later in that, but it is, uh, it's moving so fast that. But is it reliable? Is it accurate? Who knows? But, um, this is a good system. It is a necessary system. And they are humble enough to acknowledge that. And they are moving towards continuum based, um, continuum based things and then offer the, uh, um, the reflection that we really need to be aware and sharpen our clinical judgment and be humble in our approach and recognizing that there is some flexibility, there's some overlap. So it feels absolutely it feels like we are forcing the category of this is anxiety disorder. But we can also frame it in that based on all of the symptoms, this is a good fit. The symptoms that the clients experiencing fit this category. Therefore, these are the treatments that work best. This is how we monitor the reduction of symptoms that work towards, uh, remission. That works towards health. As you know, the field of counseling follows what's called the wellness model working towards health wellness. But this is a medical model that says diagnostics is very much American Psychiatric Association medical doctors, psychiatrists. And they are going through the medical way. So in some ways that conflict, we feel, is kind of the collision of fields. We are practicing in the wellness model while antagonism through the medical model. And that's okay. You're going to have to pay attention. Um. Any questions? Is anyone thirsty? Yes. Um, in terms of. Doctors seeing if any. I hear that those things really need them to be reliable, but not in terms of the of mental health. Do you feel like you know something that they I cannot catch? I see great photos, but something that you have an attachment to and I think, uh, that's an excellent question. Diagnostically speaking, we may be able to check boxes and categories. Um, but one of the things that is missing is clinical judgment. They're going to bring you into it about it to understand from experience. Now we run the risk. There may be in some ways, and I don't want to follow too far. I may be more accurate in classifying, but if you put in the data it may get correct. But at the same time, I may not be able to understand interpret someone's emotional statements. So when someone talks about being worried, they may be worried in the and think recall part of that. A it's the human element human feeling that's actually about it. Depending on the research, 70 to 90% of their teaching actually comes from our relationship. So if we were to look at them, how are we connecting with someone learning their story about emotions? Eventually I'll make a guess like that. I will be in your clinical practice and likely diagnostics in a way I don't even understand it because it's happening so fast. Uh, but likely you'll be able to capture the client fills out the form it takes of all this is the diagnosis. But here's the thing. And it's the same with, uh, the annual assessments that we have. Who's the clinician who provides the diagnosis? The clinician. I know that in that situation, right. That that's where in this case, I it's not the license that you are. You need to use your good clinical judgment. And so, um, I think you raise an incredibly, um, perfect, timely question that honestly, I don't have a lot of information about where AI is moving in the mental health field. But likely, given the technology that is available for a lot of telehealth, we're going to move to, that's going to be issue. So my recommendation for that is legally, ethically, you need to be aware of what they, what they use, um, how they work. How reliable are they before you just use them so that they can you have to determine, do I want to I just want to add to that is the APA podcast, the last, um, one podcast that told you about that. Psychologists who working with AI, um, they actually talk about everything that's going on now and they can record you so you can listen and it's absolutely amazing what's going on. And, um, um, right now. And what do you say about the rapid decline, like stop loss. Yeah. And so, um, I think even it's beyond the, uh, the scope of this class, my encouragement to be aware of and attention is great stuff ahead. But for this class, uh, how do you know if I is correct? If you use it, you're going to be responsible for it. It's your life. It's ethically you're making. You said yes, that's accurate. So my challenge to you for this class wondering, it's kind of like how when we do in, uh, psychological testing and assessment, uh, you learn how to do everything by hand, even though it's all computer score you administer. Because ultimately, behind the scenes, by doing the process yourself, you understand what it's doing in the actual treatment, the better. And so, uh, great question. I don't have the answers to where nice going. Sounds like there's information coming out. Um, but excellent question. Yeah. Any other questions? How nice of the pharmaceutical companies to say defense about that diagnosis because they sell that product. And go to work. Um, I think we need to avoid the conversation about how the, uh, maybe the, uh, pharmaceutical companies and, uh, the American Psychological or Psychiatric Association and diagnostics and it's that's a swirling mass of it, really. Um, and, uh, probably the answer is yes and no. Um, so we'll leave it there. But it's a great point. I can get to that. I've seen that again. No, I was just saying it's all about money. That's not for us. It's all about being good stewards of our skills. So great, great discussion. But, uh, let's move on. So some of the challenges that are also exist is, uh, the boundary between what is normative or abnormal behavior gets blurred. Uh, there's no clear definitions even in the DSM of what's this is this is right, this is wrong. This is normal. This is abnormal. This is so in a lot of ways, we gather that data and determine what's the clinical significance. How does that impact an individual's life? DSM descriptions of the thresholds are vague. So when they say um and this one frustrates me again and we'll talk about excuse me, uh, what is clinically significant distress. Well, what does that mean when we talk about individuals who were born and raised, maybe in a country that experienced civil war and their whole life was spent in an environment in which, uh, gunfire and explosions and people not coming home was just normative. Versus someone who grew up in the suburbs of Seattle and never saw or heard or, you know, any sort of violence whatsoever. Their threshold of what is not typical is different. So part of that, when you look at the description and the thresholds of what is meets the diagnostic criteria and what doesn't, uh, it's not clear. So that's one of the challenges we have. We also have, um, limited definitions of what social impairment um, is. And so what does it mean? It could actually impact someone's life. To what level? Uh, is it actually disruptive? Is it challenging? Is it annoying? Is it disorder? So what does it mean for us? And as I mentioned, the DSM five is a good classification system. It's research based. Uh, it is, um, something that actually can be, uh, it's used to inform evidence based treatment. So, for example, uh, um, what is a good. Therapeutic modality to treat anxiety. If he has covered any of those yet. Even just a guess. Yeah that's exposure. Exposure therapy presence or, uh, CBT acceptance commitment therapy. Probably even a whole host of others. Maybe motivational interviewing. Motivational interviewing. So all of those are evidence based treatments, but how are they evidence based if we don't have classification, if we don't have research? And so ultimately, although there is these challenges, I offer them to you in order to inform you or cleanse to understand this is not a perfect system, but you know, under understand what are the benefits, what are the challenges? And so you can engage in it with the process of using it. Uh, with good insight, serving sense. And ultimately I would say, um, minus the challenge. I urge you to be confident, lean into the system, lean into the process. Because ultimately, as we talked about, well, what happens if we get it wrong? But if you're not a good diagnostician, according to this model, legally, ethically, that's a whole system of healthcare. And you may be blessed to work in the system. That doesn't require a diagnosis. I worked at a clinic for a little while where, uh, we would do an intake. We had gathered all the information. We formulate a case conceptualization, but we were open. We didn't necessarily offer a diagnosis as. But we understood what they were using. Now, here's the deal with that. Although we didn't necessarily have to. We came to a conclusion of the diagnosis, and we would offer to talk with the client about that, because if we were to offer one, we can, but it's not required. In some settings you may coaching for other aspects or uh, you are in this environment that may not be as, uh, strict, but my encouragement is it's recognizing that good treatment is based on good information. If you don't understand what your client's symptoms are, what they mean, how do you know which, uh, therapy to use? How do you know if your therapy is effective? So even if you work in a very different environment that says. And the clients that I don't need to diagnose, you should operate from the lens of understanding what your client's symptoms you and what how they can be classified. Does that make sense? Yeah. Is. That's good. Best practice. So, uh, with the challenges and adaptive, it is what we have, and it's good. But just like us, it's not perfect. So let's talk a little bit about how to use the DSM. As I mentioned, the DSM is um, it's a reference manual. You should not expect yourself to be able to remember every single diagnostic criteria for every disorder that you face is. Uh, and actually, my encouragement is don't try to memorize it. You'll become familiar. You'll become, uh, you'll kind of layer in as you work with clients who experienced similar symptoms that can be classified as a disorder anxiety, depression, eating, sleeping, sexual dysfunction, whatever it is that you find yourself working with that client population, you'll become very skilled at, um, identifying the nuance and what those symptoms mean. But always remember to refer back to the DSM. Don't necessarily simply rely on, um, just remembering. You also need to know where to find what you're looking for. So my encouragement is that you need to, uh, be familiar with the sections. And if you read the introduction to slash bullet point zero, how many of you read the intro and how to use the manual? If you have it. I just read it again today. Every every year I read it and I learned a couple of new things today. And so I have read it probably ten, 15, 20 times in the last 5 or 6 years. But if you don't know what the manual is, what it's intended to do, and how to use it, how are you going to use it? Because they give you good definitions and understanding, um, what the sections are, what they mean. Um, some of the limitations and how can be definitions that help you to understand how to apply the information. So, um, if we were to look at how many of you have your DSM open up to specific phobia. Page 224. If you were to look, there are a number of sections in the diagnostic criteria. You're going to have specifiers, diagnostic features followed by uh some associated features. The prevalence developmental course risks, uh differential diagnosis. Each disorder has these sections. Now some because it doesn't relate to the disorder. They may not have it, but they're looking at the primary ones and especially those that I have in your syllabus that you need to read diagnostic features. Uh, diagnostic criteria, differential diagnosis, but also paying attention to prevalence, cultural considerations, uh, uh, differences in different populations. So you need to be familiar with each one of the sections and what they mean. The other thing I'm going to encourage you in is to be very thorough and very systematic. And, um, my goal, my aim in this class is to teach you how to go about a process. Now I'm going to, um. This is a process, not the process. It's not the only one. Each clinician might do it different. Some of your other faculty members might have other thoughts and insights. Um, for the purpose of this task, I'm going to teach you a way to engage in gathering data, taking that data, understanding it, putting it through the process of how does that mean or not meet these criteria and formulate a diagnosis. And then from there you develop that muscle memory. And you may not necessarily use all the same skills or all the same process that we do. Uh, like writing it out and gathering the data. But you're going to do that internally. So the other thing is not just be thorough, but systematic, engaged in the process the same every time. Because if you it's much like, uh, if you're an athlete, golf is not my game. Um, I've tried, uh, going to the driving range and it just more so it makes me lose my salvation. And so a lot of money, um, I said from the kit. So, um, but but the idea is like, in order to be a good golfer, you have to have the same mechanics every single time in order to be, uh, a good quarterback, a pitcher, in order to be a good craftsman. There's certain skills, certain techniques that you as a musician. Um, we watched a movie the other day about, um, uh, a pianist and just watching their hands with. It's just mind boggling. It becomes muscle memory, but there's so much technique and practice, and the way you practice becomes permanent. Have you heard? Practice makes perfect. That's a lie. Practice makes permanent. So how do you practice will permanently impact how you play. So this is a way. And as you get into practice and internship you may encounter others. And please don't think that this is the only way I have to do it. Learn clean. But keep in mind the foundational skills are going to be what you're looking for. Um. Any questions? Okay. Another note that I will go back to, as I talked about not relying on your memory as a reference manual. And um, as an illustration, you see these ceiling tiles. Uh, my password a long, long time ago talked about how when he was, uh, a teenager, he got a job helping a contractor, and his job was to hang these ceiling tiles. And so the contractor said. This is this is the template. Use this template. And he said, okay. And he said about half of halfway through he realized, why am I using just the same one template to make all of these? What I can do is I can take 3 or 4 in a row, cut, and then just take the next one and cut and go. And over time what happens is it shifts, the little errors move. And so what happens is you drift away from the original. So one of the things that we need to pay attention to and why we go back to the manual is because our memories, although really good for some, some are maybe approaching really good or some of you will not remember everything perfectly. The other thing that happens is your understanding your perception over time and drift. So your remembering of the diagnostic criteria for um anorexia nervosa may not stay accurate, may not stay true, but you begin to use your own understanding to cut your template and over time, interests. So my recommendation is always go back to the manual, even if you think you're sure, you know, over time you may just you kind of see if that's accurate, but especially early on you want to develop that that memory. Trust yourself. Be confident, but be humble in acknowledging your own humanity. And always go back to the standard, to the templates that make sense. Okay. Okay, so another thing to pay attention to, and it's important to understand that the DSM is a manual, but you are the clinician. Now we'll talk a lot about in this class we'll talk a little bit about. But then also you have assessment this summer. Um. I may or may not teach that class I have last couple of years, but that that can shift. But the process of assessment your years worksheets. There's data that you gather. Those are not the diagnosis. There's something called the DSM five um, crosscutting tool. And you actually print it out. You can either fill it out or you can ask the questions and fill it out, and it will give you all of the information and kind of lean towards the diagnosis. So. But diagnosing is not a checkbox. You don't just check the box and it's a diagnosis. You are the clinician. You use that checklist as a point and a data point, along with a good history of good, uh uh, clinical interview, your physical observations, the information the client gives you, and then you make a judgment. Does this meet criteria? So keep in mind that this is just the one of the tools that we use to be able to categorize or classify mental health disorder. And the other thing is, um, as we look at the DSM, recognizing, especially if we were to look at the diagnostic features or the diagnostic criteria around, uh, depression, for example, low mood. What is low mood? Um, definitions are not exhaustive, but representative. So in some ways, there's even some insight that we have to read into that the client's experience actually meets this criteria. That's clinical judgment insight based on our understanding of the client's experience pushed through the lens of this. And does it make you close enough to actually need that computer? And of course, using the DSM, keeping in mind that experiencing symptoms can and always are individual, uh, clients experience with any symptom, and their experience of it may be similar to unique to them. With the question, um, we potentially think about some kind of diagnosis. Could we invite, um, a family or somebody just actually to confirm I solve that? Yes, because we know that is that time for diagnosis. And also that place is only in the one setting or another setting. And that clients sometimes focus on the amount of sunlight. And we just we need to, um, be sure that we are doing right. Is it possible to do right? And if this is in the practice, you must be looking at the next slide. So the answer is yes. We can get reports from others and in some ways compare and actually depending on the nature. So for example, say you're working with a child who is experiencing, uh, some sort of distress and the parents reported at home. You can actually find out what's going on in school. Unfortunately, teachers now, um, I don't know, probably haven't had too much of you. Have you had the one ethics class at all yet? No, no. Not yet. Okay. So what? I can ask the question. What do you need in order to actually be able to talk to parents or talk to the teacher? You're going to need a release of information. Now, that's a child client. The parent needs to give consent, but you also need a set. Client needs to to agree. Or at least you need to let the client know even if it's your child. Client could practice. But ultimately you need the legal document that says the client says you can ask this person or share information to me or my spouse or my roommate, my partner and my boss, whoever they are, whoever you're asking. So yes, you can. And depending on the case and the condition, you may or may not do that. So it kind of depends on, uh, especially dealing with child client who maybe is dealing with separation anxiety. And you can have reports from home, but we also need reports from school and maybe do observations and understand what's going on. Uh, but maybe it's a client's report and they're experiencing anxiety. Maybe you're the information you gather from, um, different forms, intake questions, observations. You're like, yeah, it actually mentioned diagnostic criteria. You don't necessarily need to talk to someone else about it. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. So you can but recognize that there are legal ethical steps you have to take to get released. Yeah. I was just going to say it last year, and kind of I did that for a friend. Um, I think I would give them the checklist thing that you mentioned. Uh, she just like, sent me a postcard and was like, hey, can you read previous and like, my. Yeah, my therapist asked me if I would ask some of my friends, um, to look through this and verify, like whether they observed these things or not. Many of them then get around with they information, and if they don't, yeah, they can decline. And they're like, no, um, share that with anyone. You're like, okay. Yeah. They just shared it to them. Yeah. And then you just document that the client agreed to share. That's the other question, I think. But I always mention it because, uh, you need to protect yourself, uh, legally. Uh, right. So ultimately, remember that you it's multiple sources of information and oftentimes not just one source. If you only have one source, you're likely not doing diligence to understand, uh, the client's true condition. And so one of the things we'll do in this class is we will talk about, um, uh, a lot of the different areas of information where you gather. And, uh, we'll focus on a couple, including the clinical interview. So if we're to talk about clinical significance and how it's determined, clinical significance is a term that the DSM. And if you read the intro and how to use the manual, that's kind of a, um, almost not a generic, but a term that they have included to be able to kind of account for some of the just the fact that things aren't clear or there's a lot of subjectivity or it gives us the ability to determine who doesn't meet the threshold. And so clinical, this, uh, significance is going to be determined by subjective reports, what the client says they're going to report. And so one of the things we do is we ask a bunch of questions about, uh, their experience related to that symptom. How often do you feel distress? What do you worry about? What's the content of the thoughts? What do you notice that most? When does it not have it? Uh, is there ever a time where, um, those thoughts change or. It's like we ask a bunch of questions? Uh, does it bother you at work as a part of you when you're alone? Is it at home? Is it just when you're driving? It's like all of these different contexts will help us understand, uh, how it's impacting them. The other thing is we have clinical observation. Um, and we'll talk quite a bit more about how do you engage in understanding, um. What you see and what the client says. We're looking for congruence. Do they match for example. And that is just the worst thing I've ever encountered in my entire life. Therapeutically, you're like, well, that's a little bit different. They're smiling, they're chuckling, but they're saying it's the worst thing. So when they're saying, yeah, all right, I'm just always keyed up. I worry all the time. You're not seeing that right. So our clinical judgment and our observation helps us understand the impact. The other thing is we can understand again what's the perceived how do we perceive the client's, um, expression of symptoms and what's going on? Our observation is one of the skills and tools that we use, uh, much like in therapy. And this process actually informs I pay it helps us pay attention to, um, what we see in session to be able to call out in groups or pay attention to it. And we've already talked about family and friends. Um, so some of the things that we have is symptoms may be significant, but not have the logical, um, meaning that they don't meet diagnostic criteria there. Well, the threshold of, uh, duration, intensity, frequency that we're going to talk a lot about those keep note. Uh, because ultimately what we're doing is uh, someone may be, uh, has been experiencing low mood, but it's not for more than two weeks. Maybe they have been experiencing, um, a lot of anxiety, worry and flashbacks after an accident, but yet it doesn't meet criteria that for the high or the intensity or frequency in order to get a maybe a huge stress. So one of our things is we need to pay attention to, um, what are the symptoms? And if they're not pathological. What does any. So you go through this entire process and you tell your client if you don't meet diagnostic criteria for disorder, um, what do you do? Does that mean you don't need treatment? Diagnosis does not mean the. Diagnosis informs treatment. Diagnosis understands the severity intensity of their experience, but it doesn't. We have plenty of clients that may, uh, need help, but may not meet that threshold of a specific swimmer. Now, we'll talk a little bit of, um, in just a minute about, uh, different sections of diagnostic criteria that give us the ability to provide a diagnosis. Uh, for example, may not be a major depressive disorder, but they're definitely experiencing depressive symptoms, and it's impacting their life, but it's not yet major depressive disorder okay. So this gets into understanding, um, the, uh, criteria of features and specifiers. These are different categories. And then on the DSM, the criteria are the guidelines that would require clinical judgment to apply and understand. If you overlook these are going to be inside the DSM. It's the boxes that are the and that is going to be the diagnostic criteria. Now here's the important thing to realize within that box. That's what actually needs to be met in order to be classified as a disorder. And each one of those sections has like for example, criterion eight needs that that criterion needs to be met criteria, obedience to that criteria, seeing criteria need in order for that diagnosis to be um, applied. So one of the things that we need to do is understand is their frequency is their intensity is their duration, is their, uh, that description of how much, how long when, uh, the severity of that the symptoms occur in order to do that. And many of them do. So when you look at the diagnostic criteria, keep in mind is like that's what you actually need to pay attention to. The diagnostic features really is a narrative description of the criteria and the symptoms. Um, it's kind of, uh, not necessarily the story of, but kind of a verbal description of what it might look like. Keeping in mind that those descriptions are, um, representative, not exhaustive, but specific. Okay. Next one is subtypes and specifier. Um. ADHD is a great example of ADHD. You can specify whether it is exclusive categories. Is it inattentive? Is it hyperactive? Is it combined? So there's distinct categories that when you say it's weather. So the, uh subtypes are um, mutually exclusive categories. It will actually, um, give us a very specific, um, pathway versus uh, these testifiers are if so, for example, the specifier for depression is mild moderate severe. So we specify if and that's it versus um is it a specific subtype. It splits it off into two separate categories or maybe even three separate categories. So um, it's mutually exclusive or by description. Now here's the wonderful thing about specifiers that helps us get to the specifics. We're always driving towards specificity. Um, a word of caution as you look at specifiers, and I see this a lot in your own diagnostic sessions on page, but in how long we've been doing this skill, um, is that oftentimes we will have five specifiers that don't exist for that disorder. Mild moderate sphere's a common one. The severity of of, uh, specifier is one that oftentimes gets include gets included in a disorder that doesn't exist. We only offer specifiers that are included for that disorder according to the DSM. So you can't just say, wow, they're dealing with, uh, severe and uh, total mania will definitely not have that that specifier. Does that make sense? So always keep in mind that you need to be aware of if there is a specifier. You can apply it to. But if there isn't one, don't apply one that doesn't exist. Okay. And we'll work through that more, more often. Um, as we go through. So with that, it's 9:00 and it's this time. It's what I call the great gloss over. The great gloss over occurs typically around 9:00. It's not a hard, fast rule, but I will admit my words get harder. And actually, I'm surprised I haven't had that moment just yet. But I, um, I recognize that 90% of the time. And as much as I try, I cannot overtake what dinner was an hour ago. Uh, the body's just going. The circadian rhythms are saying it's time to shut down. So typically it's at this time I would shift. And historically I have. This is when we move into diagnostic practice. If you are moving um, other cohorts have given me feedback that because it's so late, you're tired, they don't benefit as much from that exercise because I'm tired. So we may flip flop. And in some sessions we may break in the middle and then come back direction or keep it, uh uh, spicy and not sure we might break it might actually move on. And I recognize this is the time where, uh, everyone. I know because my program was yesterday. And I experienced that. Would that take about a 5 to 7 minute break? Wander I not even after. So if you say I'll come back in about five minutes. I know, I know. What? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I could. Say. I'm all right. I mean, I'm like. Oh. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. And I think. Yeah yeah. Oh yeah yeah yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah I wish I. Had them. I know, I know. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if I. You know I also like. Oh, yeah. Uh. I like the audience. Yeah I. Like. I was. Like. Oh, yeah. You're right. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah. You were just how. Confident are you that I know, I. Know. Right I know, I know, right I love the people I like. I like how you. Know. I know, I know I feel like you guys pressure. That's. Right. Yeah. I. Know, I know, I know when. I know, I know, I. Know I. Know I. Know. I know, I know. I and I know. I. I. I know like we know. I'm not like I thought. Maybe like. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Um. Well. Anyway. Yeah. All right. So many of the about the actual different types of diagnoses. So the principal diagnosis is oftentimes going to be what we identify as. Um, there's a reason for treatment in the outpatient setting. The, uh, the, uh, principal diagnosis is going to be what brings the client in, in the inpatient setting, oftentimes maybe someone has been either self-admitted or, um, admitted because, uh, this is beyond their control. Yes. Okay. Uh, so let's, uh, let's stay focused here. Um, so within the outpatient setting, it's going to be up to find out why they. That's why the clinicians say that. Good. Okay. And then when we get it up to the process of diagnostic for the general hospital, we have some kind of difficult to determine what what is actually the primary issue. So when we get into a listing diagnostic, we can actually get comorbid disorder. So one of the things we get into is one is actually that for the purposes of general practice like consulting. I tell you what the reason for the is what they said. And then likely that's going to lead where you focus your diagnostic interview and so on. Uh, but ultimately sometimes. Not every time. Probably more than you would imagine. A client may come and report. This is why they're coming to see you. And probably six sessions or sometimes sometimes more. And they go, actually, okay, so here's what's really going on. So what we do is again, what our is our diagnosis inaccurate or based on what they provide. So what we do is when we're looking at where do we put the diagnosis. And we'll probably talk more about this when we get into more. Since tax is uh, when we make our notes, what's the primary diagnosis which goes first, which what's going on. So ultimately, just keep in mind, uh, for the purposes related to the DSM, the it's the reason they're coming. This is the primary. That's kind of what we needed to provide the primary diagnosis. The provisional diagnosis is a little bit different in that, um. It is when four criteria is not necessarily met. Almost there, but not quite. So for example, if you have someone that has been experiencing a significant low mood and meets all the criteria for, uh, possibly a major depressive disorder, but it's only 12 days, not 14 days, so you can give a provisional diagnosis of major depressive disorder and then say, based on the fact that they don't meet the duration of the, um, symptoms yet, but it's likely that it will happen. So in some ways, the provisional is you are making the judgment that this is a temporary diagnosis. So you're fairly confident that it's heading in that direction. Or if you just don't have enough data to actually confirm, you have a strong suspicion that it is, uh, a disorder. But, uh, you need more data. For example, someone comes in and maybe they are so anxious that you don't get through a lot of the intake interview. If you don't get through the symptoms and you can't go through the criteria and say it's actually this anxiety disorder, but you're like, wow, it's provisional, that it's likely going to be this disorder, but I need to gather more data. So either it's just one of the criteria is not met fully, but you anticipate it or you just haven't needed more data to confirm. Does that make sense? So that's provisional. Um, the other thing, for example I have here diagnostic criteria has symptoms is not yet met. Uh, for example, acute stress disorder and PTSD are very similar diagnostic criteria. But the duration of time that those symptoms have to be met. So acute stress disorder with PTSD, a professional if they're close to that perhaps the six months. And you could actually then later what happens when they pass that threshold of time. The provisional drops off and that becomes a plus stress disorder. And the acute stress disorder would be removed because it's gone past that heat stress disorder. So that's provisional. Specified an unspecified. Now this is information you don't need. But it's good history. And the previous versions of the DSM they have not otherwise specified in OS. And so we would say anxiety unless we don't know what it is. But it's anxiety. And it became such a catch um, a catch all that they revised it to be specified or unspecified. And so what happens is if a client doesn't meet full criteria for major depressive disorder, for example, you can actually provide a specified or unspecified depressive disorder diagnosis. If they meet criteria, they're depressed and they but they don't be poor. Criteria for persistent depression disorder or premenstrual, um, dysphoric disorder or the other depressive disorders, but they experience depression. This is our ability to provide a diagnosis that doesn't meet the criteria of the identified diagnosis, again, because it's not a perfect classification system. Not every experience is the same, but we know that that person may be experiencing something related to that particular disorder. But it's, uh, but it's either it doesn't meet that threshold and time duration intensity in order to be classified as a disordered. So all we do is we give specified or unspecified. So anyone read and know what the difference is? What's the difference between specified and unspecified? Just that I thought I'd ask. Here's what is specified is as a clinician, I have the right to specify why they don't meet criteria. And if I have a good understanding of, like, uh, experienced depressive disorder. But the symptoms don't meet the threshold of major depressive disorder. Therefore specified disorder unspecified. I don't have the information, or I just choose not to specify why they don't meet criteria. It's best practice to specify if we can, but if we can't specify, it's just like we don't have enough information. Um, or we'd gather all the information we have. They don't meet the threshold, but I can't really identify kind of be there. Say why or why not? Do they meet criteria that make sense? So it really is. It gives us the ability to classify a mental health disorder, um, without meeting one of the one that's identified in the text gives us the ability to. It is a billable code. It is a mental health disorder, but it gives us that latitude. If we're not sure and it's not quite there, we don't have to push it all the way to meet criteria. Does that make sense? Yeah, but it's adjustment disorder. Would that be like a rule or is that. I mean, it could be an adjustment disorder is provisional. But that's where you're going to look and understand what are the criteria. I think if your client meet that criteria likely especially with attachment disorder, if you're leaning into that, you probably have enough data. If it's experiencing the stress related to significant change or challenging like that, you would think of that. And also you bring up an interesting connection. So not only was thinking in a was a catch all, adjustment was a catch all because you're like, well, are you experiencing the stress related to. And we can classify them with adjustment disorder. This gives us the ability to be adjusted to sort of actually what it is and classify these other disorders as specified or, or the ability to be a little bit more accurate. Okay. Does that answer your question? Any other questions? So this is my approach. This is my limbs. This is how I go about approaching the process of using the DSM. Actually I posted this on discovery. I will own and tell you this is my process. Other people may approach it differently. Uh, but this is a good process for engaging in taking the data you've gathered, looking at the DSM, and kind of walking through it in a systematic way. So the first thing I do is what is the presenting issue? What is the client telling me? And so in a good diagnostic interview with the intake forms they report symptoms. And then I begin to look at what could be the cluster, what could be the category, what could be the bucket. That those diagnostic criteria or those symptoms fit into, for example, someone comes in and they are looking at and we looked at all of these symptoms and it's worry at work or I can't focus at work or I'm irritable. What could that be? So I begin to look at the constellation of symptoms, begin to put them in to order, and then I start to go which category that fit into? Then what I do is I look at the diagnostic features, not the criteria. I read features because then that's a little bit less black and white. It gives me a little more details, a little bit more narrative. And I ask myself, does that sound like the experience my client is having? Is it close enough? Uh, yeah, actually it is. Okay, so then I pop up to the diagnostic criteria, and then I start walking through criterion A, criterion B, criterion C, and then I make sure if. They meet diagnostic criteria in full. Is ultimately if at any point, if they don't meet one of the criteria. You move on. It's not that disorder. Doesn't mean it doesn't fit in that full, broad category and still be experiencing depression, for example. But it's not persistent depression disorder or major depressive disorder. So if any four criteria. Yes. Well, that's you're not done yet. If any go to differential diagnosis and then you start going hmm. Okay. Now that I've looked at they do me criteria. And could it be better explained by something else. And usually one of the later criteria in every disorder is it's not better described or defined by another disorder, by substance use, by fill in the blank. And so that's the process of differential. You're going to compare what else could it be. And as I read through the best starting point is to go to the diagnostic criteria section of the DSM. And you start reading what they say. That is how we rule in or rule out that disorder. Why is it depressive disorder and not bipolar disorder? You know, say did they experience a hypomanic or a maximum. Well, no. Okay. Well that more about bipolar. Well what about another disorder or another. Now we don't necessarily have to do that for every single disorder in the DSM. But what we need to do is make sure that we're ruling out things that make sense. And if it works. Then we've landed on the right. If not, here's the deal. If it gets to you and you're actually on a major depressive disorder. Could be something related to sleep too. So let me go look at sleep. So now I do the same process for that category. So I've kind of ruled in maybe it could be a depressive disorder but it could be something else. So I go to that section and I start working through the process. Diagnostic features diagnostic criteria. Criteria. And then when you feel like you've exhausted everything, that kind of makes sense based on the information you have, you've reached your diagnosis. Does that make sense? So that's where again, being systematic, thorough some of this, you'll get to the point where you can kind of run through in your head. And as we talk about the process of clinical interviewing, we can actually rule in some of these even with our clinical interview or hold them out. For example, we might ask, okay, so. Kind of feeling like sensing, like it could be a depressive disorder. So we ask, have you ever experienced a time where you felt your mood was elevated, had a lot of energy, couldn't sleep more? Goal directed? No. No manic episode. No hypomanic episode. Bipolar ruled out. Right? So by the time we developed this understanding of the constellation of what it could be, what could be related, and we gather that data makes sense. And so by walking through this process, you can make sure you don't miss something. And again, if you as you engage in it and you look at actually I like reading the diagnostic criteria first and then go into the features. It's not a hard festival, but this is a nice, systematic way to kind of make sense to me to be able to get that good narrative. So the diagnostic criteria for doing a well through differential diagnosis. Any questions? Yeah. This is the second line. Uh, so we're having this interview for diagnosis because it gave us a um I want to say this is more clinician. Clinician. We are mental health gamblers, which we up also other um, interviews. ID like to take the information from the clients when we need to do exactly the the diagnosis. I just try to put everything together. So oftentimes in the initial interview, which is of course inspection, that's when this happens in session one sometimes. And we'll talk more about this sometimes that's a 50 minute session. Sometimes it's a 90 minute session. I worked in a in a clinic where it was three sessions. So it really is the understanding of the intake process that you have and how much time based on your setting. Um, so ultimately, it's possible that you may have to do an entire diagnostic interview and come to a point where you have a working, um, diagnosis within one session. Now that's where a professional comes in handy. Where specified um, specified uh is a good thing to remember. Uh, the last setting that I was working in 15 minutes, and I needed the diagnosis the first session in order to bill insurance as required. So I had to come up with a working diagnosis within one session. It's a challenge, and doesn't mean that it has to be the permanent diagnosis, but the the skill of this class is to be able to gather all of that data and come up, and you can't, uh, and sometimes, depending on the client's expression of symptoms, you can probably even get there quicker. Uh, but at least 50 minutes, 90 minutes is kind of a typical window of what you could be. But that's where we'll talk about what are other sources of data that we could then bring in and understand. We don't necessarily go through the diagnostic process with the client in an hour, but we gather the data through the intake forms and the interview, and then we come up with the diagnosis based on that. Um, sorry for the confusion. Um, okay. I'm doing this at ten sessions of the therapy. That's we need it, right? Yeah. Yes. And, um, I didn't do any here in 30 interviews with it. That means it's not all of the time we need to take the diagnosis. I thought that if a client come into me and I see that they need to take intake interview because there's something going on here and it could be diagnosis done monthly from DSA does I'm going to take this intake interview, but other time. It. You don't need to do it. That's what I thought. Yeah, it's in some ways likely. They're forming. They're working around, but not necessarily having a structured clinical interview as a part. They're gathering history and data as they go and private practice again if there's not bound by it clinics, guidelines, you have some flexibility. But ultimately that's where. And the other class doctor care and you're looking at what are the legal and ethical responsibilities around diagnosing. But I would say best practice is to work through the lens of understanding pathology, because that informs treatment and treatment outcome and assessment of treatment outcome. So likely in the private practice, there's a little bit of flexibility of how and when you do it. But many of you will be at internship. That's not private practice. And likely sometimes you have someone where, uh, some internships I've heard, uh, not necessarily in this program, but in their entire role for their first clinical placement was just doing intakes. They gather all the data, and then they hand that information to the licensed clinician that they're working with, and they formulate the diagnosis. And then the next semester, they then work on other aspects of them, interpreting and making them so others, you jump right in and say, gather your data. What's your working hypothesis? And there's supervision. They help train you and how to to make that happen. Does that make sense? Yes. Makes sense. That means we, um. That is that's our job. I'm the person we take. We take intake, we take all the gathering, all the information, and they're, uh, he is, uh. Or she's at the. No. Um, have the criteria for diagnosis. We do and and work with that. If not, not continue to do interventions and other type of that kind of business. Right, right. We'll talk a little bit more about how and when we do the intake interview. This model really is understanding that we need to gather that data and my my understanding, my opinion, and then looking at kind of standard practices in order to do treatment, you need that data in a working hypothesis or can do treatment. So we frontload that and go on. But we'll we'll talk more. It's a great question. Yeah. Oh um, history and theory right. I because I was trying to think we were like practically. Yeah. And you offer everything, you know, like, do you have to tell the client the diagnosis in that hour. No. Yes. No. Uh, I mean, it becomes a small thing about how the data you're helping with something related to the same issue. Um, yeah. Maybe we're sharing all this information through and maybe come up with the working hypothesis and the possible diagnosis. So that's, uh, what we call the, um, billable hours, right? We go and we work, and we gather that data. We first push it to the lens of the diagnostic process and come up with the diagnosis. And then depending on the clinic, how do you report that when you report that, but likely the next session or maybe next session or two, you would work through the client and understanding this is your working hypothesis of a diagnosis. Yeah. Again there's some latitude there depending on your practice. And that's where leaning into your supervisor about how does it work, where we are just going to help you. But this lens is diagnostic interview. Uh, and then moving forward. So that's just in order to get through the process of learning how we're going to just lean in for the first session. Let's go. Yeah. Any other questions? Yeah. Um, as far as I'm concerned, like if you do that, if you manage to get to diagnose somebody, you just think it's just a disorder. In the future, if you have a diagnosis for like bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder, is there like an 80% threshold that like insurance, like, oh, you just said it. Was that like a guy like his big brother watching? Yeah. And it's always costly. And that's where we need to be diligent people. But oftentimes like you guys please give a working diagnosis. And that's where we're going to do the good job of having good reporting what we need to report. Um, but likely and you know, you may add or change your diagnosis, but if, uh, if you're diligent, likely that'll be less frequent then I think you're probably worried about. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. So yes, you can change it. And I'm sure if you changed it every time, it might send red flags somewhere like the insurance is like, uh, we're going to look for fraud or, you know, but the insurance is not the licensing tort. Those are two different entities. So in some ways reporting to them is a little different. But um. More information as you go forward in that. Supervisor will also be able to help you with that too. Yeah, great. Great question. When know how how often is too often a change the diagnosis. What's the red flag be below the threshold. There's no clear answer on that. But just know you can. And your goal is to be as accurate as possible. So you have to do as least frequently as possible. Other questions. Okay. So a couple of things to add more before we get into this. We're getting a copy. All right. So when we're looking at a diagnosis we need to remember that it provides clinical details. It gives a sense of what's the expected outcome. But also it informs treatment. It's also going to be complex multifaceted individual cultural bound. Don't stress out. We'll get there. But just know that it's it's not necessarily always just your core as you feel like it could be. Um, the other thing we need to pay attention to is that there are more than one diagnosis is possible, and that's where we get into activity and ultimately our primary diagnosis. Uh, if we were to list them in the order according to the DSM course and have some other opinions, it's going to be the focus of treatment. So, for example, if they're coming in and they have a substance related disorder, but they're also experiencing major depression, we don't know which comes first. So what we need to do is, uh, then we're going to list them of what's the primary focus of treatment. So what are we focusing on first basically. What's the primary issue. So in some ways you can't really get to the substance or the depressive disorder without kind of working on substance related issues first. So are we going to list substance related disorders as has the primary. So make sense. So according to the DSM the other may be that, um, uh, Morrison might say that it's related to what the client brings. And this is my, my focus. So that's the diagnosis first. Uh, depending on the setting, they may have some other guidelines. But here, um, we're going to list them primary focus. And then less than a quarter of clinical importance, like what are you going to focus on first second, third. Uh, that can change based on what happens. Okay. Makes sense. Okay. Uh, the last thing on this slide I want to talk about is an important aspect that sometimes I think society and culture has gotten better about this concept is that we use person centered rather than disorder or in the medical field, disease centered language. And what I mean, I was, uh, working at a clinic, uh, for a while, and the language was my autistic client versus my client who experiences autism. And so one of the things that will help us avoid that pathological lens over pathologizing, uh, is really to remember that. And I think I probably said it, but these are people who are experiencing challenges, so keep the person first. My client with depression versus my depression. Or my depression client is another one I heard. So keeping in mind, even as we, um. Catching, I tend to be pretty good about it. Sometimes it comes. Uh, just keep in mind that develop that skill. Because as you're working with your client, they don't want to be seen as a disorder, but they may want to know what they're experiencing and have definition and, uh, something to hold on to. To say it makes sense. I'm experiencing this. You can also help them if you use that language person centered rather than disorder center, it may help them uncouple themselves. This is not who I am. And sometimes you may even say you ever noticed that. I don't say that you're my. Then you're hearing anxiety, but I talk. We talk about the symptoms you're experiencing, so it may be helpful. The language you use can help them frame who they are versus what they experience. Makes sense okay. All right. So we've talked a little bit about this but I actually collect all of this information. We'll talk more about each one of these pieces. But keep in mind that uh there's given it's so multifaceted, given it so challenging, given there's so much data, there's multiple points of information that we can gather. It's not just what the client tells you. In the first session, we may, um, be able to engage in the process of using different, uh, surveys, intakes, questionnaires, uh, uh, previous medical records, subjective reports from other people when it's appropriate and it could clinical interview and your observations or your judgment. So keep in mind we'll talk about each one of those pieces or different pieces. And you will likely encounter. And um, even if you go to the medical doctor and they come and they fill out all the forms, right? You don't necessarily talk with your doctor about all of the forms, but you fill them out. And some of those we may even use, like the, um, the anxiety inventories, depression inventories, as they're screening for, uh, mental health issues, even as you go into the medical doctor, those are some of those things that we put into our packet that might inform the questions we ask in an interview, but we may not ever even ask about all of the questions that they they have. So we'll talk about the intake process and the forms, the process of using them. But keep in mind, it's not just one source that might help ease the tension around how do I get 50 minutes? How do I get to. All right. Tell you what. It's Friday. Been in the last three times this week. I'm going to call an audible. Would you be comfortable? With starting with depressive disorders next time rather than covering them now, we'll start fresh and then we'll we'll use that as a launching pad into working with the vignettes. Three. So I have that sound that okay, so here's the deal. Here's the way I work and I won't give you much. Perhaps that's all this talk until 9:00. We were doing. Uh, any change that I make, this is your this is your class syllabus. Changes to syllabus. Other than catching my errors. Fine. Uh, if for some reason I make an adjustment, I will bring it to you. I don't make adjustments unless it benefits you. Same thing is here. If you're like. No, actually, we want to keep going. Wait. I'll go until midnight if you want me. Actually, I don't have that much material. But the reality is, just now I'm checking in. If everyone says, yeah, let's go, let's have billable hours. Actually, technically, yes, I guess I value your investment. I value, um, the time you put in and this is your time. But on the other side, I recognize that screen glass over third time in a week, and I think there might be benefit just to pick up again on Tuesday some good, very important stuff you need to understand. And when you're hired, you just actually, you know, right. Right now we're getting into good cognitive and, and, uh, neuro theory here. Maybe there might be next class. Okay, so I'll be here if you have any questions. Uh, feel free to stop. And. No. Now, that's a wonderful beginning. Thank you for.