All right, so, uh, a word about Panopto. I am not necessarily notorious, but early on, I was for either forgetting to start it or forgetting to pause it during breaks or beginning to restart it after break. So you'll probably hear me announce that simply because it's it's for your benefit, reminding you, hey, we're recording class. It's also for mine to remind me I did turn it on. And if I don't feel free to go, um, can we turn that on? Happy to, uh. To oblige. Um, I'm going to pass around blank sheets of paper. Please write your name legibly. First name, last name. And this is how I will take attendance for, uh, for the semester. In person? Um, legal number, preferred name. Uh, what? It would be in discovery. So that way I can actually, uh, connected. So I hope you get all wrapped in this one for this. Actually, sometimes when you want, when a. Well, I do know some have communicated with me around, uh, being. And I'm asking what you think today. Uh, and that's not the way I typically like to start classes. I think. You guys. I hate to interrupt and, uh, avoid that. So typically, what I will do is I will walk in and I'll raise my hand. And then if you see me, raise your hand, stop talking and raise your hand. And believe it or not, it works as well. And know there are a lot of you. And there's one of me, and, uh, my brothers and my mother may tell you I can get loud, but I don't necessarily like to shout. So if you see me here, raise your hand. It'll go all the way through. It avoids me also, uh, going back to my days and, um, maybe before and after school care. One, two, three. Eyes on me. Yeah, yeah. Okay. So, uh, just that's the way we like to do that. And before we begin, if you don't mind, I'm going to open it in the semester for work, for the word of prayer. Okay. Now we're just thankful for the opportunity to come and learn. I thank you that these students are sacrificing even a third night this week in this classroom. I pray that you would strengthen them, encourage them, and help them stay focused. Uh, increase their rest even tomorrow if possible. Uh, and in the semester, give us the ability to grapple with concepts and ideas that are challenging, difficult, uh, carry a lot of weight and ultimately help us to learn more as we, uh, progressed through the semester. In Jesus name, Amen. All right. So, um. I would like to start this, um, particular semester by checking in. Yeah. It started, uh, when I was program director, uh, many, many years ago. But I was like, just checking in. How's it going? I just went through your first semester. Starting the second semester? What's going well? What's challenging? What's missing? For anyone else? Um, I think for the first semester in 82, I didn't really count credit cards. But getting back into, like, the rhythms. Um, after working, you know, for an amount of time before that. So, uh, it was hard. Yeah, it was a lot of work. I know you guys had a good night, but. Yeah, I mean, really, like, who were you out at, uh, by information versus revelation. Yeah, exactly. But, um, I feel like I have gotten increasingly more excited about the program has progressed, um, like, I really love it. And, like, you guys are here in a direction that I feel more, more confident. Someone that was very not confident and didn't beginning well, uh, to normal starting grad school was always like, oh my goodness, there's never a good time to fit in in life. Uh, it's always more than you think it is. And by the time you look back, I'll do that, even manage that. So. Yes. And by the way, all of you can do it. I know I said during orientation, but we believe in you. And in the middle of the semester, particularly getting into the next semester, remind yourself they said I could do it. I need to say I could do it. Let's do anything else. Um, let's break up. Yeah, it's been a while since I've been in the program. It's been a year, but, um, it's going pretty good. I really enjoyed this program. I really enjoyed, yeah. I feel like it's going to end up being one of the, uh, one of the top programs in the country, probably for psychology and. Well, appreciate that. And we believe it too. Yeah. I was just gonna say I really appreciate that. All of the assignments last semester. So Herman and Martin, I feel like I was learning something that was very applicable. I feel like I did any work that was just before you were we. We say that. That you're this much? Better. Yeah. Um, I research a lot of universities in a lot of area, and it's always kind of fighting the dark, right? When we actually pull the trigger into the program. And I just want to really happy. Happy. Like the experience that I give the professors and the the cohort and everyone. So I'm just like like literally like almost every day I tell someone like that, I'm really happy that I told this program interviewer herself, and I never really went to a Christian school. So this has been like, you've been, like, more special for me to, like, open a classroom for your. I never really experienced that, so to speak. Me. That is a unique aspect of the program. I'd like to share it in orientation, but it is actually. One of the things and I would love to hear from everyone, but again, we probably got more information tonight than I could probably possibly get through. Um, I say that one more time. I promise, just to hope. Uh uh, but with that, um, I just encourage you. And one of the things that happens both, uh, for the program, but for me is, Dean, when things are going challenging is usually when we hear about them. And it's usually at least two semesters ago filled with, like, stuff that I experienced as challenge. I encourage you, the program is very open to feedback, much like we ask you to be open to feedback as clinicians. Program is open to feedback. If something's not working and not necessarily to your preference, we're going to push against. And so we actually give your take some things. You're not we minute that doesn't fit. Yeah. But we have to. That's what you sign up for. But the other piece of that is oftentimes the program doesn't have anything to go on if something's going well, much like uh, we tried. And in the feedback that we give you as developing clinicians, hey, you're doing this very well. And here's something you to work. Keep in mind that that feedback with those folks like couple of ways to do that directly. Email to professor to program director to Emily. Um, and there's also a program feedback lead on discovery. So I think things are going well. If you have a question, uh, concern, feel free to voice it. Uh, feedback is an important part of your development. It's also an ongoing development for us as a program at university. Yes. Let's just say about the feedback, um, the the last days of the, uh, previous semester, I, I was shocked about that. We need to do evaluation for the professors, and I don't connect to this country. Oh, my God. Evaluation for the professors is like, no way. And yeah, in America, come on. We just we are going after some kind of that way. That was the one of the shocks for me for the many years that I've got the educational background and everything, but it's that was difficult for me to evaluate professors because it's my core and, uh, and authority figures and everything. It was tough because you want to be honest, I still you don't know how this work. Um, because, um, I will be, say, the collectivist country. You don't trust the authority that way because it's will be back here. So we. And that's why a lot of, um, for example, if we go into the counseling and a lot of Russians, for example, they don't trust the therapist because again, and they know this is something will be going against them. Yes. Yeah. Well, with those, uh, those course evaluations are confidential. There's no way, unless you write your name in the box, that we know who they come from, even to the point. And, uh, I would hope not in this case, but if there's too few responses in the class, it doesn't release, um, feedback because it's too easy to identify when there's just one person. The other thing about that, and I'll say this again, that during the last class when I asked you to fill out course valuations for me, believe it or not, we read those. I read those, uh, as professor, but also as Dean. I read all of them for all of the faculty every semester, uh, because it's an important part of our development as professionals. But it's. Also used for our court faculty for things like tenure promotion. It's all included in that process. So please don't just go, oh, it's too late in the semester. I don't want to think about it. It's an important piece of feedback. And, uh, actually, faculty are required to get, uh, 70 to 80% minimum response rate from a class. So helping professors out, that also helps them continue to grow and get feedback. And again, both positive and constructive. Uh, comments are are great. Thanks for the feedback. All right. So let's talk about a couple of things as we move forward. Anyone who had experienced syllabus shock. Yes. You're there. Good. Uh, let's just normalize that and continue to go. Uh, I will pause and note for those that are online, I apologize in advance. I wonder when I teach, I tried to be up here alone. Uh, I can't do it. There's another practical reason. Uh, I actually have, uh, hearing challenges in particularly in my right ear. Uh, and so sometimes from way back in the room, I can't hear the ordered response. So I will come closer to you, but also helps me just feel connected to you. So if I'm up here and you're out there, I just feels too hard. So I apologize in advance if I have to ask you to repeat the question, just bear with me. It's, uh. It's me. It's up here. Um, so let's talk about the syllabus and talk about the requirements of the course. I. Is everyone able to see that? I do apologize again for, uh, shutting down discovery last night. If you noticed, when it shut down, if you had a chance to. It was just about empty. Now everything in discovery is up to date. It's full. If you do happen to find an error in discovery, I am not beyond missing or putting in, uh, date in error or the due date. Uh, because as I update all the assignments from year to year, sometimes that, uh, you click the wrong button and it says it's due on Monday instead of Tuesday. Feel free to just reach out, send me an email. I'll correct it. No problem. Okay. As you see, our class dates here, uh, today is the only Friday class, and you all said Amen. At least for this class. Um, a little bit of history may be to, uh, make tonight feel not so bad. Uh, previously it was, um, Tuesday, Thursday and every other Friday. Saturday from last Friday, 6 to 10. Saturday, 9 to 4, twice a month. So we worked really hard to every once in a while on Friday. Uh, with that, I understand it's been a long week, and, uh, we'll make sure we try to, uh, just, uh, keep you from engaged and not to, uh, to burnout. And does everyone have that required text? Do you have a chance to get them? Anyone have a challenge with us? Okay. Uh, a couple of notes about the DSM five. Um, make sure that you. If you bought a version other than what would be an official version if you bought it through an alternate website to save money. Just be aware. Make sure that you have the right ISBN number. There have been instances where they have had the DSM, uh, even the five TR printed in other countries. Page numbers aren't quite right. Even some of the information is incorrect. So if you have a question if you want to compare, mine would be available during a break. You can just kind of make sure you have the right version. Um, and I've also had the question can we use the desk reference? Yes. In your practice for the class we need the full DSM. Second question is can I use the electronic version? Yes. It gets a little bit challenging, especially for the exam that we have at the end of the semester to not have a printed version. So I would recommend for a whole host of reasons. Uh, but having a physical copy is not a bad thing. Um, the electronic copy can be convenient. Um, but as you see in this, uh, version, I have tabs and the index that just fell out. I don't get it. Um, there's a, uh, a lot of things that you can do to kind of familiarize yourself. That's a lot harder in the diagnostic process. If you're flipping between sleep and depressive disorders. And on the electronic version, you're scrolling between each one versus here you can actually kind of flip back and forth. So there are some practical reasons. Uh, but I understand the electronic version is a little more cost effective. So maybe convenient for reading or other things. But if you can get the get the printed version question, what is the desk version? The desk reference version? It's a it's almost like a condensed, uh, not full version, but it gives kind of, uh, some of the key elements that you can kind of refer to. Okay. Yeah, yeah. Um, again, for the class, just the full version is for like a general question around that because, um, how often is it up to you? And so if we like this copy. Yeah, I. Know. Uh, actually. So the way that typically works is that, like, this edition of the DSM came out for 2022. Um, and it is a text revision, which means that they went through the DSM five, which came out in 2013, some say 2014, depending on the the year it was printed. And uh, the DSM four TR, which would be the text revision of the fourth one, uh, came out I believe in like 2000. Uh, maybe 2002. So it's about every ten ish years, uh, that they do a full revision. And then oftentimes at the midpoint there are text revisions and there are materials that you might be able to bridge the gap between the text revision and, uh, the DSM. Um, or like in this case the five verses is six. Um, but I would say it's not something you have to buy yet only. Uh, I will lament. I was keen on the DSM for TR and writers that graduated the DSM. Uh, I, you know, yes, I had to relearn. And I'm not everything, but it is a difference. That's pretty significant difference between 5 and 4. Yeah. Other questions. All right. Now this text classifier, you'll notice, um, a lot of the information. Maybe similar to the DSM, but what I like about this is it takes the diagnostic criteria and information and puts it more in tangible, understandable language. So in some ways read this, understand and use that as a reference. Now read it for the for the class. But, uh, don't feel like you have to read after the every page of the DSM. Um, if you do like, uh, I do highlight specific disorders. Uh, oftentimes it follows this text because it's going to be disorders that you will commonly most likely see in everyday practice, not necessarily getting into some of the more, uh, specific or, uh, less typical disorders, things that are a little bit more rare. So ultimately, and we'll talk a little bit more about this tonight. Uh, this is a good place to start. And then before, uh, we get into the exam, uh, you're definitely going to want to, uh, use this when you kind of look at your, uh, writing your vignettes, being familiar with the different sections. We'll talk about them tonight. So just now, I don't expect you to read every single page of this, and nor do I expect you to memorize every single page of this and halfway through the semester. I guarantee you, someone's going to say I can't keep up with all the reading, and I will remind you it's okay. Read this and then read the assigned to sections. And does that make sense? And if you're just really curious, please don't avoid reading it. It's incredibly insightful and, uh, interesting and challenging. Uh, but it's it's a reference manual, not necessarily something that you will, uh, just read to, uh, consume. Does that make sense? Okay. And then the Morrison text, which I did not bring with me, uh, will be kind of, uh, getting into the skill that we have through walking through the diagnostic process. Course description here, keeping in mind that everything you do pushes through that lens of what you have access to, uh, to, to meet. So if you look here, all of the assignments that we do have the intended purpose of meeting the outcomes that we say we promise you're going to be able to do. Let's talk a little bit, um, about academic honesty. And, um, I won't go too far into this, but, uh, particularly with the vignettes, you might be tempted to use an electronic assistant. They are writing a vignette about the diagnostic criteria for depressive disorders. Now, here's my strategy, and we'll talk more about the vignettes as we come. Um, the strategy here is this is for you to develop the layers of understanding of the diagnostic criteria. And the vignettes are designed it's actually a reverse engineered process. If you can tell the story of what it might look like for someone experiencing a disorder, you might be able to then recognize that when your client tells you their story. So it's not just get it up. It's actually a really significant part of the developmental process for you to look at the diagnostic criteria that's in the DSM. Reverse engineer and reverse engineer that into a story that then you can relate. So you're actually learning it on like 2 or 3 levels just by doing that process. The other thing is I expect that you are putting in the work, but more importantly, your client is expecting you to have done the work. And if you're using AI, particularly in this class and in the program in total, other than maybe, uh, appropriately, hey, what might be a topic or, you know, use it to search and help you find a resource. But, uh, you are cutting yourself short. Your future client started to use, um, AI to help you do those assignments. Ultimately, you won't be able to do it on the final. And as we'll get into the syllabus, if you don't pass the final, you don't pass the class. We'll talk a little more about that. Now that panic has ensued with me showing what that is. All right. So, um. All of the policies procedures here are pretty straightforward. Late policy I do accept late work. However, you do see there's a penalty. Uh, some points is better than zero points. If you miss an assignment. Please talk to me about getting it in. I will say with me and many professors, if you are proactive and communicate in advance, it goes much better for you than just missing and looking after. However, I recognize, um, myself, um, going through school and three children. When I first started, they were three, five and six. I was in school for seven years straight. So by the time I was done, they were almost done with elementary school and into high school. Um, I recognize there's a lot of life that happened. This program is incredibly rigorous and intense and has a lot of things to do. But part of this is juggling, but also developing professional communication. So if you need to miss an assignment, uh, don't just miss it. Communicate with me and I'll work with you. But, you see, there are some, uh, points, uh, related to missing points related to, um, like, work. Any questions about that? Yeah. Uh, was also missing. Or is that, um, it says assignments admittedly equalized by 20%, but then also that late work may or may not be accepted. Um, like, I have like, oh, a certain percentage has taken off lately, like you just submitted late, um, for this one. So there's no guarantee that will be accepted. And then if it will be accepted. Yes, that's the general policy. And I tend to just, uh, if you if you work with me, I work with you. Unless it's literally you're like, I just didn't do it. Like, well, then I won't accept it. And there is really you work with me, I work with you. So, uh, but it will be up to 20%. Um, and most of the time, um, especially with the vignettes, we use those in class the night their due, uh, so that if you don't do the assignment before that day, you come to class, you're actually missing a big chunk of of what we're going to do in class that day. So just I do accept it. Um, but if there is, um, if there is significant reasons for, uh, medical, medical, emergency use, wellness, those type of things. I'm a me. And we'll do our best to make sure you have what you need, uh, when you come to class. Does that make sense? Okay. Oh, great. So let's talk about the final exam. The the process for this course. We will end up working it through, uh, being able to identify, um, and categorize mental health disorders, walk through a process called differential diagnosis, um, and be able to walk through the process. Uh, what we call, um, steps of differential diagnosis completion all the way to being able to, uh, not just identify the diagnosis but support the diagnosis. And so the final exam is actually I will give you a vignette. You will then be able to use your DSM, walk through the fitting it and go through the DSM. And there's a process step and are required. You will need to state the accurate diagnosis state. The diagnostic criteria, support that diagnostic criteria with evidence of the hand, and walk through the specific, uh, the steps of the emerging diagnosis. Now, this entire class pushes towards that exam and, uh, teaches you the process of good interviewing skills. But even the interviewing skills to prepare, you'd be able to look at the vignette and come up with the diagnosis. Now, I recognize that one of the challenges with the vignette, you'll hear me say this again, is that it's that you can't ask clarifying questions, is a client gives you an information you don't understand, or it could be a little confusing. In life, you ask a follow up question, you press towards higher specificity at the very end. You can't do that. So there is a process by which we, um, you'll be able to come up with your best diagnosis. And, um, as I mentioned, if you don't pass the vignette, technically it's one of the key assessments in the program. So if you don't pass up, you have you don't have to pass because you haven't shown competency and ability that nobody knows, but because it is such an important thing. Now this is where you need to come back with me. You said yes, it's going to be, um, uh, the key assessment because it's so important if you don't pass the first time. Will offer you an incomplete. Hi, class. We will meet together. We will walk through kind of what was missing. Maybe if it's a gap in your understanding in the vignette, oftentimes, much like a consultation, you walk out of supervision and you go to your supervisor or walk out a session with your supervisor. I'll walk you through the vignette, because it may be that there was a static piece of the vignette that have you answer video. Ask your question. You would have had to. I walked through that process. If the skill isn't there, I give you the opportunity to retake the exam one time. And if that doesn't happen, then what happens is then you would have to retake the class. But I've never really engaged in that process to where people weren't able to get there. And this is not about you, um, just demonstrating that you can pass an exam. This is an important part of this skill. So everything you do is really pushed towards you being able to have an entry level understanding of all of the pieces of diagnosis or diagnosing so that you can actually go through that process as you get into practicum and it's going to be refined. You know, I said entry level, not mastery, right. Because this is a process. This is a skill that you refined over the years. Any questions about that? If you do have them, feel free to reach out. Okay. So let's talk about the case vignette. So you see that there are five. And the way that these will work is you will um, provide a written vignette based on the topics of, uh, that are covered in the reading for that week. Now let me reiterate the reading for that week up to now. For example, this week we're talking about depressive disorders. And then next week there will be more disorders. So you could actually write a vignette about depressive disorders or disorders. In the following class we have depressive disorders post disorders in the second class and so on. So you see you can over time you'll be able to write about any one of those are fairly um. Please do not select something from something in future because your classmates have not had a chance maybe to read that. So, for example, if we haven't covered sleep disorders, don't write a vignette about sleep disorders. Um, because what we're going to do with these is not only are you developing your understanding of the diagnostic criteria in the process of, um, what it might look like, then what we'll do is we spend a portion of class, every class from this one following, walk you through the process of role playing in the diagnostic process. And I'll start with just kind of reading them, talking through them, identifying the different, um, diagnostic criteria that are met all the way through the next week, learned the process of clinical interviewing. And you will begin to role play the clinical interviewing process and the information you share, uh, with the vignette will become less. And you'll have to allow your classmates to ask you questions so you role play. So again, it's very important you do the work. Um, as you write the vignette, you want that you don't necessarily need to write like the entire life story of a client, but you need to think about the client deep enough to be able to role play that client. Does that make sense? So, for example, you would need to, um, especially as we get progressive, um, uh, complexity, you would need to be able to say, um, be able to identify, you know, I'm just feeling tired. The student playing the therapist would say, okay, so tell me a little bit more about what's up with, like, I just can't sleep. Uh, is it that you can't fall asleep? Are you waking up in the middle of the night? You're waking up from the cold. How long are you awake? Oh, it feels like hours. But really, it's probably 45 minutes every night. Just like that. So again, you need to be able to have at least a working understanding of the client, and then just kind of make it up as you go. Does that make sense? So I uh, these are like a paragraph to one page. Max, if you're writing more than that. Yes. God bless you. You're doing too much work. But you as you writing, you need to be able to think about what would this look like? Who is this client and have a working knowledge of the disorder that you selected, so that then you give your classmates a chance to ask questions? And Goldman, it's, uh, we're not looking at means we're not looking at tones. We're not imposters, not even Grammy's. Um, but it really is the opportunity that you have done your work in understanding the diagnosis so that your classmate can work through these. I guarantee you on the other side, you're hoping your classmate has done their due diligence so that you can sharpen your skill of interviewing. Makes sense okay, yes I sorry. Yeah. Uh, so that's paragraph or page double spaced. Uh, yeah. Double spaced okay. And so I have on discovery uh, vignette guidelines and a sample vignette. So if you see here that's just one page and that includes the instructions. So the vignettes actually probably only about a half a page. And so um, in that you're going to want to include and I'll walk a little bit more closely through it because the first one is due next class. It should include information that will lead your classmates to the intended mental health disorder. So for example, if you're going to discuss anxiety disorders, you need to include something related to the key feature of that disorder. Um, you need to choose which disorders have been covered in class. You do not choose ones that have not yet been covered, or at least covered in that reading for that week. You should not simply write out the diagnostic criteria. Narrative client experiences last two weeks of low mood. Client has gained more than 50 pounds. So we start heading into the diagnostic criteria of depression. No. Tell the story. Does that make sense? Uh, think about how you would allude to the experience of symptoms without necessarily saying, um, the client has been anxious or worried for the past month. Instead, the mind has been racing or feels like nothing at work is going well. So that way is keen. Well, what's going on there? Uh, because the client's not going to come in. Well, rarely will they come in and walk you through the DSM. Uh, if they do, we'll talk a little bit more about this. As a class goes on. You might want to be concerned. Um, there might be malingering. There might be, uh, just they have an incredibly rich, long history with their mental health diagnoses, and they've done their homework, and they know what's going on. And you just happen to be therapist number seven that because their job changed insurance, they can't see there. It's like so you see what I'm saying. So it's not necessarily a bad thing that they know their their diagnostic criteria. That is also something we don't just trust their experience. So tell me a little bit more about your low mood the last two weeks. Okay. Um. This. Uh, to start, the vignette should be clear, and details that lead to the diagnosis should be very specific about this. You know, think about almost a 1 to 1 to the diagnostic criteria. And then as it goes on, as your understanding of the the process of differential diagnosis and the process of understanding criteria, it can be more vague, it can be more complex. We can have more than one disorder represented. So again think it's going to start simple and move towards complex. So that make sense okay. Uh the written vignette does not need to be exhaustive. It can be clear concise description of the key elements. Um, but you will need to be able to fill in the blanks. Like I said, in the role play, uh, for your diagnosis, for your diagnosis, be sure they include the DSM. Uh, it's actually ICD number, uh, that's located in the DSM. I will talk about the parts of that as we go through time. Ultimately, you can take this and bring it like a computer or tablet to class, or you can print it if you do print it, uh, take off the, the diagnosis just in case you take your hands, your clients, uh, to your, um, to your classmates. So ultimately, when you post this on discovery, you will want to make sure you include the diagnosis that you're working from, okay? Because that will show me what I'm looking for. Now, I want to provide you a little bit of feedback about training, because I imagine if everyone, especially this week, everyone's writing about depressive disorders, and I then go in and grading all of your your vignettes around depressive disorders. And I give each one of these, have a feedback about the ultimate work. And what I'm going to do is make sure that the first one that you the first two, that you're actually on track for meeting what that vignette is intended to do. Then by the time we get there, if you're on track in your vignette, I see it leads to the diagnosis and you're using, um, creative story and it makes sense. That's probably the feedback you're going to get it. Yep. Great. Um, diagnosis was covered in this week's Creating Good story. And I can see how it questions your classmates. So just know I'm reading every single one. And I'm looking for. Yeah I was a therapist with this. Put me in the direction of the diagnosis you selected. And likely if you do that, you get four points. If it's you're talking about, everything is about worry and anxiety related in your depressive disorder listed. That's what I'm going to provide you some feedback put you in the right direction. And what does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Ultimately, um, uh, I have gotten a lot of feedback. I've been doing this particular exercise for many years, and, uh, students tend to like this piece. So if you look at here like I'm not a creative writer, I'm not an actor. Hang in there. Get involved in the process. It really does help conceptualize, um, the very different disorders that you'll encounter. So as you see here, uh, this is what would be included in this. In here you have your sample vignette and then you have your diagnosis, but the proper number listed. Does that make sense. So let's talk a little bit about, you know, see if I can blow this up just a little bit. So let's talk about the diagnosis and we'll, we'll uh reiterate this. So for the proper diagnosis, there's actually no technical correct way to format a diagnosis. And in fact, many of the notes recording software that, uh, um, clinics are moving to, which is cloud based, it's HIPAA compliant. But oftentimes you would put in this number, it'll put out the field and you'll select a specifier. So it's not necessarily that you're writing out a diagnosis for the purpose of this class though. I'm looking for all of these pieces to be included, because it shows me that you're aware of what the pieces are and what they mean. Okay, so it's that the ICD number, which is, uh, the number that actually corresponds and that harmonizes with the ICD 11. So if you look in the DSM and let's look at just autism spectrum disorder and autism spectrum disorder, then you have this little f number up here. That's the the diagnostic number. This is the number actually that will be put in likely if you're billing insurance. This is the code that would be used to that to identify that code is related to this disorder. Now keeping in mind and we'll talk about there's different components such as major depressive disorder moderate. That is actually that last number that one is includes. That means moderate. So you need to be sure that if they're specifiers and again we'll talk more. But that number is not just um a number for major depressive disorder. That's for the specific specifier for including a different subtype which we'll talk more about. So ultimately three pieces that need the number the name of the disorder comma. And then these are specifiers. So a comma specifier specifies as many as are appropriate to the diagnosis okay. So in that order number name comma specifier subtype. So that's why I'm looking for you to identify your diagnosis. Recognizing that you may never have to do that again elsewhere. But you'll be thankful to understand that each one of those pieces mean something. Okay. Any questions? Yes, sir. For the sake of the vignette, say we were partners for this exercise. Would you be directly roleplaying as we said? So more than asking or like, would you be more or less making. Yeah. So so I wrote this vignette and I was that role playing Ingrid. I would, uh, at the very beginning, I would just read this and then there's going to be in small groups, not pairs, maybe sometimes pairs, but usually for three. Uh, rarely for if there's a number. Um, and then what will happen is you'll take turns. And so next week, the vignette you bring, you'll read it. So Ingrid was a 20, uh, married, 25 year old Hispanic female. Comes in to see if you read it, and then you'll talk. The other two will kind of talk through and ask questions, and you'll be able to. Then I work with them and identify the diagnostic criteria. And then later, as we get into the process of clinical interviewing, it would be more so I take on the role of Ingrid. Then it would start with, hi, I'm Ingrid, a 25 year old married female. Okay, well, here's what the therapist came into that's kind of tired. And you would you could use your vignette and kind of walk through and tell the story and answer the questions of the fashion house. Does that make sense? Yep. Great. Clear as mud. Okay. Moderate. What's that? Moderate. I just didn't understand. Sorry. I mean, what you said is a clear. I said moderate moderate moderate. Very good to moderate. Yeah. That's good. Um, and then for this glasses, you've got the word uh, it depends on, uh, this word will be moderate. Right now I need to ask because there's not necessarily a controversy, but the it depends I want to say started in my, in this class like four years ago, to the point that the students actually created stickers and, uh, had them on the computer, the water bottle. And. It depends. And so, um, I don't know if it's going around if like maybe doctor eared, I mean everyone. So I'll say who started it. It depends. But yes, it depends. Uh, you know, we'll get that a lot in this much. So thank you. And it was me. Uh, okay. And that's all Panopto. And I'll show it to doctor. Okay. Uh uh. All right. Uh, I think actually, let's walk through. You got me all distracted. I got to go back to the syllabus. Um, the clinical interview video. Let's talk a little bit about this and just know this is not the only time I'll introduce these, um, these requirements. So we'll talk about the final exam probably a few more times before we get that. You'll be well prepared. Clinical interview video. We'll talk more about it. But just to give you an idea of what it is, as we get later in the semester, we will walk through the process of teaching you the skill of. Uh, clinical interviewing, which is different than the process of therapy. It's intentional. It's a little bit more assertive. And so we'll walk through the process of developing that skill. And then I ask you to, um, partner with someone, and that's your choice. I don't partnering up with partners. You select your own partner. If it happens to be an odd number, then someone out of the kindness of your heart will play it twice. You don't have to be a therapist twice, but someone may have a client first, but you will use any of the clients that you've already created, and then you role play that client for your classmate therapist, and you record a ten minute video. And when I say ten minutes, it's ten minutes. I'm not looking for an, uh, an open working face and a close. I'm looking for a diagnostic interview. So literally is like I said, it's, uh, my name is, um, Ingrid, and I am 25 year old Hispanic female who go set timers on ten minutes, you know, stop the video. It doesn't have to be the clean call. It needs to be a diagnostic, um, diagnostic interview. And believe it or not, I can tell very clearly and even probably less than ten. Ask if you're actually in the process of interviewing for the process of diagnostic interview. And so, uh, you're not you don't need to achieve a diagnosis in that ten minutes. It would be impossible, even if someone in your office is fluidly psychotic and has is delusional and experiencing all these things, you don't know if that is medication that's actually symptomatic of. So there's no way you could provide a diagnosis unless it's like a blood test for opioid intoxication, right? It is impossible. So it's just more so about me seeing that you have the skilled diagnostic interview and how many how long that ten minutes. Ten minutes. So what happens at ten minutes? Just turn it off. And I say that because imagine I'm I'm incredibly faithful, dedicated. If you gave me a 15 minute video, I would watch people. Now all of you give me five minutes extra. How much more time is that? More. So this is a selfish thing. It's just. No, it's only ten minutes. It's ten minutes. But I can tell you, um, I will be able to tell you if you are using, um, good diagnostic interviewing skills, open ended questions, closing questions. You're driving to a specificity. You're able to grab a hold of something and, uh, know when to let go and follow another, another topic. Does that make sense? So I don't mean an hour of that, although we'll talk about the diagnostic interview and how long it should take. I will be ten minutes for this to say again. And why am I saying that? Because ten minutes is ten minutes. All right. Uh, grading scale. Uh, here's the points. Total points for the class. Each one of the class sessions is highlighted here. Uh, you will note, uh, there is a typo for vignette four is not due twice. Uh, I apologize about that, but it is due on the day of the class session, so ignore the one on February. Okay? If you have to get it done early and post it. Good for you. You're a week ahead, but it's the second one. I'll see you. I noticed that today that I didn't have a chance to go and delete it and repost the syllabus. Any questions about the syllabus or the assignment so far? Yes. Um, clarify. It looks like on the list here. The first vignette is due on the 27th, but um, the yeah, that's a good thing. Um, so stick to the one here. Uh, it's what happens sometimes when I just miss it, so I'll correct that. So just now, the first vignette, uh, both on discovery and, uh, the block. It's due next time. Yes. Yeah. And then on discovery. So it says the first one is due at noon on Tuesday or 1139, and then the second one is 22 hours instead of one. Okay. And here's the things. Do a good beginning class. Um, and what I'll do is I'll, I'll go through what they have. Um, but, uh, I leave it open until midnight because, um, I recognize you may have had, uh, computer issues. You couldn't connect to the internet if you had the time for you to come here at the beginning. Um, uh, before class and united before class, I would say let's, uh, I just want to have well done before class. And the reason why needs to be done for class is because people engage in using it. So it's due. At that time. Participants, however, accepted not until um after class. Um. That was also the second one. If you go into discovery benefits you says it's also you on the 13th if you really you know, it was really interesting. And, uh, I'm not going to blame discovering that we don't want to do on the same. So. Okay. Um, and if there was a challenge in the one actually did not exist in the list of classes, I could recreate it. But then I went into the Green Book and it's listed. And so there is a mystery. Finished one. Thousand is that today that I used I will double check all of the events. Okay. They are all events. One through five are due on the next consecutive days. We have class I think. So, uh, and then I will just make sure all of my apologies. Yeah, I think my head is, uh. And she. Thank you for pointing that out, I appreciate it, thank you. Um, okay. Yes. Uh, it is. Regarding the content, uh, I think that the chapters for the reading, um, for next weeks, it will be the generalized anxiety depression. Um, and then you mentioned that in general, it's like whatever we read previously or it's upcoming stuff. Yeah. So for example, for vignette one, you'll be able to cover generalized anxiety, um, depression and also anything listed here. Uh, so we're just going to stay here. So it'll be generalized anxiety depression okay. And then here by the time we get to here we're going to have obsessive compulsive disorders, uh, feeding um, uh, history present you know, worry about that. Uh, but anything else that we've happened so obsessive compulsive anxiety, depression. So that make sense. Yeah. Okay. And so again read this and then, uh, I would encourage you to read that section in the DSM. And actually as I prepare for classes, I often do the same thing. I'll read this text. And then I always look back to the DSM. And so let's talk about reading the DSM real quick. And then we'll break apart some of the pieces. My attention is not even that you detail in read every um, section of the of the DSM again. So if we got ADHD there's going to be a variety of information. Now what you're going to want to do is pay attention to some key pieces there, and then probably skim through and pay attention to, uh, the other sections. Uh, there's cultural considerations, there's gender considerations. There's um, uh, social there's a whole lot of other information in there that is important for you to understand around conceptualizing your client. However, for the purpose of the class, likely there's going to be some sections you're going to focus on. This fact features, the diagnostic criteria, the differential diagnosis sections. And then you're just going to kind of skim through the rest to see if it makes sense. Because ultimately, again, some of these sections uh, and in your in your spare time, if you can't sleep when you get home to substance use disorders, you realize how long that section is and how somewhat repetitive much of the information that we might actually need to think of read, memorized every aspect of it. You can go back to, okay, there's going to be some key pieces that we work, but that you want to pay more attention to. That's not saying the other sections aren't valuable. I'm not saying don't read them. But again, for the purposes of this class and other time that you have, be aware of what the other sections, same kind of what they would refer to. And then if it's important for you when writing your vignette, pay a little more attention to that section that you're writing. And uh, for example, maybe, um, a certain one of your clients comes from a certain culture that's more highly represented or the diagnostic, um, uh, symptoms present differently for that culture. You're going to want to pay a little bit more attention to that section. Makes sense. So so just add on here. You can use that in the DSM on your um, so look at the diagnostic criteria, diagnostic features in differential diagnosis. And you add the cultural section to that. Um, again quite important. Yes. And I would definitely you want to pay attention to the minimum deductible. Right. Again, because if you read every section it's, it's I recognize um. This is not the only class you have and the volume of reading and other things, as well as other articles and other things that you're doing. Uh, I don't want to burden you with, again, reading this hundreds of hundreds of pages, but don't discount the importance of that information in the process of developing. My understanding. So as a clinician, definitely if I had a client and then I'm working with that, I need to understand a little bit more about the presentation. I would take the time and read more thoroughly every section that applies to what I'm working. So maybe we'll read more. There will be more vignette when we get specific on that diagnosis. Exactly, exactly. Okay. Yeah. Good questions. Any others? Okay. All right. Let's talk a little bit about this class in the learning community, uh, that we have. Um, this is kind of a unique class in that many of you have background, uh, experiences, uh, related to this topic. Uh, either through your own personal journey, through family journey, uh, friends, but also society, culture, media, all, um, the topic of these mental health disorders and kind of being ubiquitous everywhere we look. Uh, there's information about, uh, what's going on. You look at even, uh, television show and all the characters may be experiencing different aspects of mental health disorders. Um, all of those things kind of shape our understanding. But, um, so when we come into this space in this morning and there's a couple of things that I'd like to make sure that we pay attention to is that, yes, I am the professor of this course, and you are a part of a certain community. And what you have to say, what questions you have, the insight. I can, um, this is not about disclosing, um, your mental health diagnoses. Uh, well, in my experience of my diagnosis. And so if you are open to share that, that's up to you. On the other side, um, you have insight and understanding with all of this in a way that you can purchase. So if I ask, is this as like, uh, very discussion based to see if it's a blend of Socratic and didactic and each but I also ask questions. There's a discussion there. And I would much rather, uh, just get kind of lost on a rabbit trail that I have to solve, and I will. That's a great question beyond the scope of this class. Hang on to that and pull this out. But ultimately, if we were just here to talk about this topic for four hours at a time, it would be kind of mind numbing. So my ask is that participant engage? It's an incredibly critical part because ultimately, I guarantee you, if you have a question, likely a classmate has a similar question. If you have a thought, they might answer all your questions. Um, uh, question for me. I admit I have more experience in many aspects of this than you do, but I don't have all of these. I don't know if you all know, and I guarantee better times. And actually, we'll get to the one for each word of student said something to me and I said, you know what? I never thought of it that way. And so ultimately, I invite you to come to class prepared, have the having that habit, in your opinion, but also come with your questions be offered. Insight. Uh, I offer this. I will also be willing here. Please be open. I try to be gentle. Um, uh, maybe that's not quite right. I'd much rather have you speculate or guess or wonder and let's figure it out. Does that make sense? Um, the other pieces we're going to be discussing challenging topics, and that's not necessarily just the subject matter itself, but what they mean, even the concept of diagnosing itself. We'll have a conversation that that's a heavy thing. Some have some have really strong feelings. Like we should not put labels on people's experience, and they are fundamentally opposed to the concept of diversity. Here we are required to teach you and show, and you are required to prove competency in the process of diagnosing in order to meet the requirements of the class program and be a licensed counselor. Even if you work in this in a setting where diagnosing is not important, this is still an essential skill set that's expected by the discipline. The other thing it's challenging is all of us have been touched by, uh, mental health, um, both mental wellness and mental illness at different points in our life. We all experienced different challenges, whether it through ourselves, family members, neighbors, friends, uh, society, culture, uh, there's a lot of things going on that we see in the media and understanding that not everyone are healthy, balanced and adjusted. So when we talk about them, recognize that there is, uh, some weight, some heaviness, some challenge and disagreement. But this is, uh, as we talked about in organization, this is a place where we leave agenda, uh, preference, uh, opinion, uh, at the door. But we come in with curiosity and wondering and openness and exploring, uh, and I recognize. Sometimes we're going to talk about things that are uncomfortable. The other thing is some of the language that we put in here. So especially when we get into talking about sexual disorders and the need for us as therapists to develop language that is comfortable, confident, we're talking about like sexual experience. Um, so it's going to be challenging and other times can be exciting and interesting. All right. I can't believe I'm on like slide three and it's already seven. It's going to be a long night. Late night. Right? Yeah. Okay. So, um, what I'd like you to do is just take a moment and reflect on these things. Uh, your views, your values, your, um, regarding mental health, psychopathology. Uh, things like how do you define psychopathology or mental illness? What causes it? How do I view those experiences and mental disorders? How does the dominant culture, or maybe the culture from which you come from, how do they view and how that might be different? So let's take a moment kind of reflect on these things. And then in just a minute, turn in your table groups, uh, pictures of 3 or 4. And then just kind of a conversation about it. Answer those questions. So just about a minute. Think about it, reflect on it, and then we'll all move forward. But. You're going to break up into two groups, 3 or 4. And have a conversation and not affect things in. Your. Life. Right. So somehow. I. Heard you. Say. I said I think. Yeah. I understand. Yeah. I really think that was. Lovely. Yeah. Well, I think yeah. Yeah. Yeah, fine. Yeah. I hear you say. That. I'm sorry, I just didn't. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Like I was looking for some interest in some to make yourself larger than they are. Great questions. And I was like yeah. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Ready to dance I know, I know I. Was like yeah. But I've never been to the diamond that. I can actually. See because I think that I mean. I think I really I have I, there is a lack of something, you know, I never, I, you know, lack of something out of attachment style. Yeah. Yeah. So we're gonna do something. Simple like. Hi, this is where. I can get some furniture. There we go. Yeah. I mean, that's a that's. Oh yeah. Mhm. Yes. Yeah. Uh I will go on and add uh yeah I know, I. Know. But our spiritual. And I think when you say you're finding the icons well first enough to I don't know. As a, as a Christian. Yeah. They are beyond. That uh and also to a positive. That's. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's exactly what you're talking about I wouldn't work I am not saying that in a sense. I think it's really. It's more there in the physical realm. Oh. Really, I don't know. I like, could be a spiritual. And just like. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Like somehow, you know, I don't know, I think I don't. Even. Know it was about the people. Like you. And the people that I see. And when you say that or. Because I. Know what you mean? Yeah. I'm not quite sure I have. You know, I know that I'm not from other people, so I like, I know a lot of films and. So on. But it may not be here for. You. Yeah. Uh. Similar problem. And then you. Have to like you have to somehow. Yeah. You know that I like, I think I like. It sometimes. So I'll buy you that experience. For tonight. Explain the disorder. Yeah, I. Mean, I think. About two more minutes to go. And you. Know what? I'm getting out of here. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, I. Guess so. I don't. Understand why. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, I. Just got into these complex. Yeah, yeah. And then they have got to. Take their time. And so, um. That's what. I feel like, um. And. Um. All right, so let's, uh, let's bring it back together. Who would be willing to share? Maybe. What, uh, what do you think? I can, you know, you can, um, we just kind of talked about the first few questions about, uh, causes mental illness. Uh, we talked about an overabundance of something. A lack of something, talking about stress or, um, attachment styles growing up as children. Um, and then that was that was kind of old and generic, of course. Okay. Yeah, yeah. So there's a lot of different cultures having experimental stress free life to me, but also biological. And so what else? Oh, I was um, just sharing my, um, counselor shared with me because I was talking to other people and family and relationships and just like, even becoming counselor. How do you know what to say? Advice for anyone? Good advice, bad advice. And she very simply said, it's whatever moves you towards better health is a good way to go. And if the choices you're making or the things you're doing and the environment is leading you to worse health, whether that's mental, physical, spiritual, and that's not a great direction to go or promote. And I just think it answered, like all the questions for me about what causes things and what do you and other things that. You think you're getting better? Um, and I just that was a really simplistic thing, but it kind of answered all of them for me. And I just keep that in mind in some ways. Just got to understand yourself, your experience, and moving towards what makes your experience more positive. What? Are you talking about? Um, we were talking about, um, how do I do those experiences where they're just like, how do you know about these orders and that, um, it's like anything. It's like, if you haven't come in contact with someone that has never experienced someone can have a conversation with someone you like, just feels a little like, okay, what's that going to feel like? Like, you know, a little bit like nervousness, you know, where it's like more things that we like with our friends or family. It's like anxiety or depression. It's like you're around those more and so, you know, more comfortable, like, you know, a little bit with them. So a little bit of certainty around encountering danger or anything. Yeah. Anyone else agree? Yeah. So we were discussing, um, what I mean, it's like it's a big spectrum, and I think you should be able to. Read between. And, uh, we're also discussing why that is and why, uh, after all this, uh, subject of this field, uh, knowledge of driving fatalities into the numbers, uh, I maturely or unprofessionally. And every time you that or it happens to be this good. But when there is no evidence available in person, it's not complete. And there's a big part a person to I think they have been that's a professional. I'm very defensive and definitely, uh, within the family members and sometimes serve as to help them. Uh, maybe from an allegory perspective, middle child, uh, but also when it breaks down, you know. Um, we spent a lot of time talking about the contents of other testimony, like spirituality versus the profession that we do. I believe that we believe God can do miracles. We can feel less than our professions. Thank you so much for in that aspect. So I guess that's what we're trying to show them the difference between the two. Yeah. In some ways there's so many variables there and what the spirit actually. And so even without getting into the operational definition, which is an important part of what we're going to do here, because when someone says I experienced the symptom, what do they mean by that? And so I understand okay. So if that symptoms goes away or what if we have something a little bit more prominent that is uh, according to the industry, um, is what I can hear you. Amen. And so how does that impact? Yeah, maybe through faith perspectives that that, you know, what it's like. This can be very complex. So one of these is like if, um, if um, I was just going to say we also talked a lot about the findings and all this. And one thing that we talked about is how the illness that we all miss is more so the spectrum where there's no completely healthy person, there's no one person over there. Um, and when you come into play, it feels more so because the person is using rather than as a definition of who they are. Great. Uh, he said that because by definition, that experience is defined. And so as we get into this topic, one of the things that this discussion really is geared towards. It's just one thing that should be informed by our values conflict, or maybe our understanding of, uh, our own faith perspective or what is our culture sin. And sometimes we may not even be aware of what does our culture say? Uh, in culture, is that something we just forgot to wear? So one of the things that, um, that we're challenged with or tasked with in this class is, um, it starts with knowing what I think. What do I value? How do I define what is my experience? And that can be broken down into more global mental health principles. This is a continual issue. Uh, this is world, uh, you know, someone that has this threshold, uh, this disorder is considered, um, a mental health disorder. It's not. All of those things are defined by our experiences, our understanding, our knowledge, uh, our values, our beliefs. So one of the things that we need to do, as with all the therapy, it starts with being self-aware. Who am I? What am I think? What is my own experience? Because ultimately, this will get into the understanding and definition of mental health disorders is complicated, and that any one person's experience will be the same. So we may walk in through our own lives. Uh, perceive something that is different than what the client perceives. So not that we should avoid, because this whole process is teaching you to be discerning, ask your questions, conceptualize, get good data, and make a good decision. Now we also have a lot of it depends on science. So with that, I just I just encourage you, as we engage in the process of reading about talking about, uh, writing about different mental health disorders, different classification processes, really begin to explore who you are, what are your values, your beliefs, your understandings of what this means. Where it comes from is ultimately much like, uh, if we were to take, um, uh, in the performing arts, you have whites and then old school, they were jowls, colored jowls. Now they're just color so that if you, you know, like, that's just not, uh, it doesn't have the perception of color bring you out of people and everything that shaded blue or your experience is like that gel. It shapes everything that you see in this topic. Three it's not a bad thing. It's not a longtum, but it's something you need to be aware of because that's going to shape how you see your clients. Because and we'll, um, that's we'll move on to this next topic and then we'll break for dinner. So here are some things that we need to pay attention to. Um. As we get into that, our values are understanding and shapes, but it's also that, um, it can be interesting, exciting, challenging, upsetting. But I guarantee you this class will change how you see the world for the next many months. You will see a diagnosis. Yeah, that is inevitable. You're going to go, oh my God. My dog passed this, uh, this last semester. Uh, we had her for 14 years. Um, but I often joked, if you. I don't want to know how I'm doing on the inside. Just look at my dog. So, yes. Dog or cat of. Uh, that's a tangent, but only two things. Uh, we'll watch TV shows. Your interactions with your neighbors first at the grocery store, your loved one, your spouse, your partner, your kids because you're beginning to get new information. You're beginning to understand concepts and theory ideas. And as I forget who mentioned it, it says everyone experiences something related to these in some capacity. Most of them not everyone experiences not just here at home, but at the same time, the underlying distress related to that disorder falls into that. Everyone experiences those things. But ultimately, when it comes down to it, I'm going to challenge you and remind you to resist apologizing for yourself. And others. Uh, it's like this. The saying is only a fool has insults for a physician. Don't diagnose or something. If you understand yourself, request through that. But at the same time don't diagnose. Your, um, your family, your friends. And then the other thing is, recognize that as we all talk about all of this is on a continual resist over pathologize that everything can be a disorder. Now, as we get into the concepts and ideas, recognizing that the concept of, uh, maybe a symptom that needs to reach a threshold before it's considered a disorder, and disorder means what is not important, it's disruptive, and it usually happens in many aspects of life. So if you are yourself or someone else in your life experience and or my experience of something that is somewhat disruptive doesn't actually meet that threshold of disorder, so that somebody to make you uncomfortable. But that's the terminology for working. So resist over pathologizing recognizing, um, that it can mean, um, their experience may not be to the extent that it classifies as a disorder and not everything. Uh, and we'll talk more about that. But have you ever been in an experience where you heard someone use psychological or mental health, a term that you know is out of context? I had to wait in my Starbucks for 20 minutes, I told times. No, that's not what I'm here. Or someone says, I'm so depressed. Are they depressed or are they sad? So one of the challenges that we have is that some of these words, these labels, this concept, have permeated into culture. Our task is to kind of be the stewards of that. And as your client comes in and talks about me and I am just, uh, schizophrenic. I think you are strange because you may or may not have insight enough to actually identify that, um, what they're talking about, they just seem overwhelmed. Their mind is racing. They're out of control. It's like. So again, our task is to understand what these titles, these definitions will and in some ways, not that we have to go be the champion in that first someone all it's not actually you know. Because you stood in line and then that's a little bit glib. It's a little bit funny that it happens or you heard, I'm sure you've heard people say things like that. And so our task here is to separate from what culture calls it and understand what and at least according to this classification system, what it means. And then lastly, be sensitive to the experience of others and yourself. Again, recognizing that as we talk about these things, everyone's experience with these topics is individual, it's unique. And maybe if I experience anxiety, it may be difference in how you experience time and intensity and severity and how pervasive that is. The content of my worry thoughts. At what point of the day? How does it impact me? All those things are different, but also we might maybe even and I apologize, even this in the context of in the illustration of someone who experiences PTSD and someone just quickly says, oh, I said in my start ups enough that they have an impact. And as we even talk about the concepts of mental health, until this, if someone is going to be aware how how we are that intention. So again, shy away from it. Right from it. I think, uh, we're kind of stepping into understanding the weight and the reality of these are real terms that can be, uh, incredibly impactful in people's lives. Any questions? Anyone hungry? You want to take a break? You know, until you, uh, let's go ahead and come back at, uh, 5 to 8 on these clocks here. And just as I promised, I'm pausing. Panopto. Uh, please, uh, remind me, if you don't see me turn it on. Feel free to remind me to turn it back.