Okay. Um. So this is available for you. You don't have to worry about seeing all of the now, but a little better. But overall, you're going to see, um, you know, overall, there's no, uh, and that is intentionally and by design, I think obviously last night there's no required going back to the final because I want to see how you're thinking about conceptualizing, uh, the diagnostic process. You can use narrative or bullets, but whatever you do, I'm going to remind you, be thorough. Uh, show me your thinking. Uh, here's a sample description of the client. Please do not write out the entire vignette. That's not a good use of your time. Um, but make sure that you do give me, uh, again, things that you're paying attention to that are relevant age. Uh, maybe, uh, other demographic factors. Single, uh, employed. Uh, maybe, um, uh, ethnic or racial, uh, things that would be cultural aspects that would be important to note for the diagnostic process. And then here you have description of symptoms. Uh, and here you're going to make a clear connection between symptoms and diagnostic criteria. Your differential diagnosis section. This is where all six steps of differential diagnosis will be included. And then finally the treatment plan. And recall that the treatment plan is not an exhaustive treatment plan. But just be aware of what, um, some good evidence based treatments would be for more general things that you'll see in typical everyday practice. Okay. Um, likely. I'll just throw them out there. Okay. Remember therapy, CBT, um, uh, DVT others are going to be common. Uh, but just be aware of how they're like, why they would be used for various disorders. So what you would use and a clear statement as to the rationale. Right. Okay. Any questions about this. All right. Thank you. Okay. So in this spirit, what I would. Of the, um, in a clinical interview practice, uh, I would like to see if maybe we would have one intrepid explorer that would say I would be willing to give a demonstration of an interview. To the clash. And then someone better be willing to be a client. Anyone? Anyone. You'll be client or therapist. Oh, I thought that I only have options to be. Happy with you. So you're willing to be a client? Anyone willing to be a therapist? Let me pause and say this. The opportunity to get eyes, observation, and feedback is terrifying and incredibly beneficial. How many of you have watched a video of yourself doing counseling before? And anyone notice just you're like, oh my goodness, what was I thinking? Absolutely. Mine is uh huh, uh um, and if you watch online, fast forward, it gets really fun. So just know that we we all embrace the opportunity to just be ourselves. So could be willing to be a therapist and role play. Yes. Okay. And would you be a client? Okay. So here's what we're going to do. Very much. This gives a live and people experience of what it could be like for your video. Okay. Remember there's always a method to the madness, not just madness. All right. So come on. And what I would like for you to do as a therapist, just ask the question of you as a client and can provide name, age and the general reasons why. And. Just role play. One of your clients. Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah. Yes. Okay. And you can speak to that. Thank you. So if you have one in mind, feel free to role playing. But it doesn't have to be perfect. Okay. And then so for you what you're going to do is just get that brief introduction and then we'll write in. I'll let you go for a little while. And then if you're open, I'll provide some feedback. So, you know, so we can tell I got to get in the seat. You know what I've done? I think I think this will make other people feel better about themselves and make me feel great on it. All right. So with that, we will let you know. Okay. Hi. I'm Terry. Terry is not for the interview. Not with us today. Okay. Oh. Um. My wife, she, uh, kept complaining about my husband. She was, like, a counselor to. Some of you guys concerning, uh, some things. Your attorney? Yes. Uh, is it just your wife or anybody else? Uh, I think just my wife. I do have experience living with other people. Uh, since I graduated. Um, how long ago was that? Uh, we have been married for, like, six months. And then did the start of a start recently that, uh, she started. Yeah. She started. Over six months ago. Yes. Yeah. And what is it that she seems to be sad about? Um. Well, uh, I have had, um, keep things very organized. For example, I like to organize my calls in terms of their design and their color in certain orders. So I like to cook by myself in the if she, uh, ask to join together because, uh, I really want to follow the recipe myself and have learned what she, um, how it helps me that it will change the flavor or the taste, um, that you make. She has everything. You know, like I said, I, I just, uh, rejected. I'm not going to do that during the weekend, because during the week that we are, I repeat, like all cyber, uh, other costume things. Just the weekend. Um, and then tell me a little bit about the organizing. Uh, uh, I just enjoy, uh, organize everything in my home in Singapore. And you sometimes feel like I'm so complete about how things work. Um, you know, so it's something you maybe spend a lot of time doing? Yeah. Yeah. How about how much you take. Uh huh. That's a good question. Uh, like, once I have time to work, I also have to work by myself on my laptop. So what does that look like in a day? When do you go to lunch? Um, often I go back home. I think then you probably wouldn't normally say. And during the weekends, it might be because you have more time during the week and you're not as busy. Yes, sometimes I also. And after she was kind of wondering whether I did it was like, uh, maybe I could have changed. I feel that there is some resistance. And then what? Um, how would you feel if you were able to work in a relationship? I feel frustrated because whenever I saw other people stop in certain order, I just wanted to read or I thought, that's so messy, and I, I, I, you know, um. And easier for him and then, you know, so you feel more comfortable or organized or. Yeah. You value your organization. You. Yeah. Um, is there anything that maybe you're afraid will happen? Uh, you don't recognize things? That's a good question. Maybe it is there, but I didn't. Well, I don't know you, so just positive emotions around the organizing for you, but then just complaints from your wife. Um, I don't know, because I feel my parents and how they call me, too. I could have happened hours after I started to play with others. All I want is, uh, like, the way that I like to. Maybe, um, I'm enjoying the, uh. I do spend a lot of time doing, um. Yeah. Do you feel like it takes away from, um, anything in your life at work or in your relationships? For you, yes. For example, it has conflicts with family. But it sounds like she has problem with this. Yes, because other people who maybe don't have that experience. Um, and then is it just like, uh, organizing around your home in the kitchen and then. And me. I also like to go home. I hear it's it's. A bad question. Come on. Right. A bad habit. Sometimes you complain about it, but I just let you come on my side and like, I really. It's like something brings you stress. I don't know. You said that. Something that she complains about. Well, it's just a separate thing. Yeah, I try not to do that. But it's just something that you release. Yes. That's all right. Oh. Okay. And now for you with me. Okay. Okay. Um, so I'll start with you. How how did you experience her questions? How was it like to answer her question? I feel like, uh, she asked good questions. She was actually, uh. Trying to understand instead of keep asking questions without any pause. Um, you know, I feel like we have we are doing some work, but. Are you okay? Do you feel like the questions got, uh, the information that would be helpful to get to the information that you wanted to share? Yeah. Okay. Uh, she asked a quick question that, uh, I didn't know what you're. Talking about, like, uh, how to think more about. Right? Um, yeah. You got to, like the Peter Piper when something bad happened and you did it, and you're like, oh, that's a good question. Think of it that way. Yes. Okay. And so for for you what if you notice, um, I notice like that versus thinking like, okay, I'm going to try to see if this means the average area for obsessive compulsive disorder. But then, um, I wasn't seeing anything like sentimentalize. And so as I was, like, trying to build rapport and continuing a conversation, I was also like, okay, how do I get to the bottom of like, if there's an intrusive thoughts happening around anything or not? Um, seemed like it was causing distress and like interference with relationships, but not like across all the things. Like I had a lot of questions. And so you kind of landed like exploring obsessive compulsive disorder and, um, personality and personality. So you're trying to distinguish between the two. Yeah. And then with the hair pulling human, I was like, okay, I should have asked maybe something before she randomly had to bring it up. But, uh, within that make you think that maybe this is supposed to be Marcy, but then I'm not seeing the same thoughts. Mhm. So I don't know. Yeah. And so overall, um, I thought your, the pace of your questions was good. You had some nice open questions. Gave her a chance to respond and then get you asked some good closed questions. Asked for specifics too. Um so overall I thought your approach was good and I could see kind of what you're thinking about. So it's a nice blend of kind of asking an open question and leaning towards specifics and, uh, like they I would say, don't be afraid to even be a little bit more direct with some of the specific questions to rule out, uh, some of the things you're thinking. Um, but overall, I thought your approach was was pretty good. Um, any thoughts from from the group? What did you notice? What did you see that went, uh, well, yes. We couldn't here. It was like equal opportunities. There were others like that. It, uh. So you couldn't hear, but, uh. So what? What did you notice? I loved your questions about, uh, frequency. Intensity, how it's affecting, um, in relationships. Like, I think you did a really good job of trying to clarify what the impact was. Um, and I think that that really helped to kind of suss out. Sure. Yeah. So for you, let me ask you this. What was your rationale for? Because it was you were kind of getting to those things. Um, but is there, um, kind of what was your thinking about the questions you ask? Um, well, I'm going to try to like. Oh, God, I like that. Um. Kind of. Well, first of all, with what his wife in general is like, um, um. Just like I suspect I should follow up on anything like any other things. Well, I should in general anyway. Um, I was keeping, like, diagnostic criteria on, um, and then just trying to see what, like, a daily life looks like a dysfunction and like how I was kind of keeping the peace of mind, but was just trying to. So that's one last question. Is there any question, as the client, you would say, this is the question I wish she would have asked me for intrusive thoughts. Uh, I don't know whether we explored that before. Um. So my intrusive thoughts. I wasn't direct. Yeah. I like to ask that question here is because we don't often ask that question of our clients. Right. You're like, sure. What question do you wish I had asked you about? At the same time, here we have the opportunity to okay, so as you're thinking about yourself as a client, you're like, man, you would have asked me this question. That would have given me the ability to answer it this way. So in our whole place today, um, what say thank you very much. I think I'm in the wrong place today. What I would like for you to do is really step into that role of the diagnostic interviewer. Um, and because one, that assignment is coming up. But to really should be at this point, that's the way you're approaching keeping in mind a couple of things we want to get into. Uh, multiple domains. Don't feel like you need to get stuck on just the diagnostic criteria. Feel free to ask a couple of questions about about history. And remember, as I told you to create, you say yes. You don't necessarily have to write out the entire history, but you should have the ability to kind of role play a little bit of your client. Uh, if you get stuck, it's okay. Break character, give a minute and then answer the question and move on. That's okay. Um, but, uh, be willing to practice the idea of following diagnostic criteria bouncing out to another domain. Okay, because that's what I'm looking for. Um, in the clinical interview. But really, that skill of being able to follow something enough recognizing you always come back if you need more information, bounce out to another topic. So practice that skill. Um, the other thing is take a moment between and ask a couple of questions. Hey, how was how was my how were my questions for you, the observer? Kind of give some feedback. Uh, how could I phrase things differently to get a better or more direct response to what the what you were thinking of the client? Because that will help you shape your question asking. Okay, so before we break into groups, I want to just pause and say who has questions about this process? Um, anything else, uh, related to this? Yes. How can we like. I recently had a practice with my friend, but often times because of the counseling pills we practice, we just fall into that tendency of making it inside of you. So what are some ways you suggest society? Because it's complicated. So that's why I would practice this, to be able to acknowledge you yourself. So let me ask. Well, I'll say that maybe you have to be a server. Feel free to acknowledge it feels like you're going into therapy. Some help feel that the, uh, there is a role play is going into counseling. Let me just interrupt to help with, like, feels like you're going to counseling. And here's the deal for you as a therapist, you have to ask yourself, why am I asking? Why am I asking this question to even explore for therapeutic insight that there might be times just a brief question. Helps build rapport. Helps in context. If your client is distressed. Remember we can pause the clinical review of the real life application. The purpose of this class for developing this skill on the other side. So what's my why you. Can go to get more information. You go to a short version or you think it there. So that's kind of where your mind goes to be paying attention. Uh great question. Any other questions? All right. Seeing none. Um, I don't think there's another group in the building tonight. Just be aware if you work down the other side. But I encourage you maybe spread out a little bit, be able to get a little bit of focus groups of three and then one group of four to groups of four for me. That should be great. Practice taking time. Client. Therapist. Observer. Yeah. Can we use the vignette? Yeah. So from anything you've written from today in the past. Okay. All right. Ready? Go for it. Okay. I love. It.