Oh. And then I did it and I it and I you. Know I. Like it. All right. Uh. If anyone needs to sign in, if you missed it the first time, they'll be here. Make sure you do. All right. Um, so before we jump into, uh, talking about, uh, different diagnoses and checking if we have any questions to that. Yes. Okay. So. So. Maybe more. Um, I think, uh, social anxiety and working through personal relationships and. The social and reflecting the personality of the. Other question. All right. So as we dig in, one of the things that I wanted to do is, uh, quickly take a look at, uh, the section of the DSM we talked about kind of diving into, uh, the sections. Um, each category has its own, um, unique things, but there's features for each section. So if you want to follow along to open up two major depressive disorders, page 183. There's a couple things I just want to highlight as we look at the diagnostic criteria, uh, and the uh associated features and uh, diagnostic features. So one of the things to keep in mind is that in this section of the kind of the highlighted, it's usually in the different color here. It's kind of, uh, I don't know what uh, I don't know what color that would be. Um, uh, the diagnostic criteria. But if you look at number, uh, or letter A. What's the first thing it says? Five, five, five or more. One of the things I want to highlight is oftentimes early in the diagnostic process, sort of developing the skill of a diagnostic process. We get in the habit of looking for that key feature. Someone has major depressive disorder because and maybe they have depressed mood most days. Nearly every day is indicator subjective report of a major depressive disorder. But what we realize here is that in order to even meet criterion eight, we need five or more of those listed just in criteria. So keeping in mind as we read the diagnostic criteria, they're going to specify what it is that we should actually be looking for. So if you're looking through the diagnostic criteria and your client only has four. Do they meet the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder? The answer is no. Does that mean that maybe they don't have a depressive disorder? That's not the case. They may have another specified, unspecified, uh, experience. But here you need to make sure that you're looking not just for the key feature of the disorder, but you're making sure that you understand. Does your client meet enough of those criteria? The other thing we keep in mind, oftentimes, uh, with criteria a like this, there's going to be specifiers. There's going to be sometimes mild moderate to severe. We'll actually create. Um, in order to meet that it'll be the number of symptoms met and criteria. So for example one up to three mild 3 or 4 of seven moderate and then more than seven severe. So that's the distinction. But they will describe sometimes the severity based on the number of criteria met. So one of the things that we need to pay attention to for example here we wouldn't just walk through Oak Climb at 5 p.m. at threshold. I'm done. What if they need more? What if they meet all nine? That might inform something else related to the diagnosis. Makes sense. You ask a question. Yeah. So let's just, like, say like a client needs or we that we do to have an unspecified diagnosis. Or would that be marketing or like I guess I don't need it. Yeah. So there uh, you might need to use your clinical judgment, like maybe, uh, you don't have enough information if you're strongly feeling likely they do that. Maybe it's a professional diagnosis, but if you're pretty thorough and you don't necessarily, um, believe that they would eventually need that diagnosis, at least, um, relatively soon, that you might do as, uh, specified or, um, specified, depending on the case. Any other questions about that? Yes. What is, uh, the difference between a subthreshold level and unspecified diagnosis? Uh, I'm sorry I missed the first threshold as a threshold level. Yeah. So, like, uh, once the threshold of a specified or unspecified. So that really just based on, again, your judgment based on the information you have. You can choose to specify or not specify. And again, good practice for you to specify. You can to help clarify or either others who might be working with the client or um, yeah. Just to keep a good that you can't specify or choose not to. That's fine. But really that threshold of providing that diagnosis is really do they meet. Um, and actually if you look at the criteria for unspecified specified. On page 210, this category applies to presentations with symptoms, characteristics of depressive disorder that causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, other areas of functioning uh, predominantly, but do not meet full criteria for any of these other depressive disorders. So here you're looking at is it clinically significant in more than many areas of life. But they don't meet the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder or persistent depressive disorder or the other ones that are listed. So in some ways this is recognizing that there is not just, um, 4 or 5 clear depressive disorders that people can experience depression. Um, it's much more of a continuum. Does that make sense? Yeah. And so any time again, much like if you are going to land on a specified or unspecified disorder, I would go here. Much like you go through the process, you would read diagnostic feature. Yes, I'm experiencing depression, but they don't meet all criteria. Do they meet specified or unspecified? I go to that section and we make sure. Do they or do they not? Does that make sense. And then it's going to be your clinical judgment to determine if they meet that threshold. Okay. Yeah. All right. Uh, next you're going to see your symptoms. Uh, criterion B, C, D and e. And now each disorder may have a different number of, um criteria. But our goal here is to make sure that a client meets all of the criteria listed in for that disorder. For example, just for the sake, um. If you go over just a couple of disorders to the exploration disorder, which is Skeffington, you see that sections much shorter, but there's still, um, a group of criteria listed. So it's quite good to meet all of that criteria in order to actually tamper with that disorder. But the detail in a major depressive disorder is much longer. There's still some g h, but it really is up to you to determine and walk through each step. But you'll notice that there is a theme. For many of them, where they all say the symptoms cause clinically significant distress. B or C episode is not attributed to the psychological effects of substance abuse. And oftentimes they're going to be for another mental health disorder. So here what we're going to do is it's kind of built in that I should consider other disorders to meet those criteria. I should say is this the best fit. Does that make sense? Okay. Next if you turn the page you're going to see the coding. Coding procedures for making to order include mild moderate severe with psychotic features partial remission. And you're going to see either single episode or recurrent episode. And you notice that there are different numbers for each one of those. So you can have a mild, um, major depressive episode single at 32 zero. Or if it's more than one episode, you're going to do at 33 zero. So here it shows the importance of asking good questions. It's not just are you currently experiencing depressive symptoms? Have you experienced this before? What did those look like. And so it gives you the ability to understand maybe it's recurrent issues with the past. For severe it's only mild or vice versa. However in order to get a good understanding of what those, um, specifiers mean, if you go to the end of the section of um depressive disorders on page 212, actually starting on, uh, 210, here's what is going to give you the operational definitions of what the specifier should be, what is mild, what is moderate or severe, what is with mixed features, melancholic features. So here, if you suspect that there is a specifier, make sure you're again area familiarization. Understand? Uh, do the specifiers have definitions. And then you need to make sure that your client meets the criteria for that specifier. So one of the things here is going back to one of the comments I made at the beginning of class. You don't have specifiers that are not included, but you need to be aware that there are specifiers. Are there criteria for those specifiers? That makes sense. Any questions about that? Okay. So if we go back to major depressive disorder, uh, you'll see in next section diagnostic features associated terms. This is something that we didn't, um, I haven't dug into too much, but oftentimes it's going to be here. That gives you a little bit more nuance of understanding kind of things that might be related to you or things you might see in addition to that primary feature, something. So my, uh, although my recommendation for this course is be, you know, look at the, uh, diagnostic features, diagnostic criteria, differential diagnosis, the associated features clinically is also going to be very important for you to potentially to. Prevalent development. Of course, this is another one to pay attention to because oftentimes they will uh, describe, uh is there a threshold, for example, we do not diagnose schizophrenia until at least age 18. However, there might be cases where there might be exceptions to that. Or when does it often start? Oftentimes a window for those that experience, uh, schizophrenia are going to be between 18 and 25. It's the primary way that there's early onset and there's also late onset. However, the window typically closes right around 25, 28 years since. So in some ways, understanding how it all, how it looks when it starts age of onset, uh, is there an upper limit that when things pass this age, we won't see it anymore? Um, and then, uh, looking at control related features, differential diagnosis, as we've talked about, uh, just as you engage, make sure that, um, you push past, uh, push past the it's a lot of information. Make sure as you dig in, as you even look at the diagnosis for the vignette you're writing, that's a great opportunity to become familiar with all of the different aspects and nuances. And as a note, uh, I had a question before the break and it just reminded me, um, for the vignette, my encouragement is, uh, just to reiterate, after, uh, this week, if you've written kind of like, here's the story and it kind of tells, uh, criterion 80 through 84, major depressive disorder five as we get into the weeks, remember, make them a little bit more vague. Make them, uh, and as it will go, as your understanding of the diagnostic interview process increases, the volume of information you provide decreases that way, as we're in the beginning, we're looking at here's the story. Can we identify the pieces that are related to diagnostic criteria and developing that, uh, and kind of what we're looking for. And then over time, we'll be able to then understand how to pick apart a little bit more of the nuance and use good questions to actually get to that information. That makes sense. So for now, think detailed is okay. Move to vague and complicated as we move forward. Any questions about that? Okay. All right. So let's talk about depressive disorders. And for uh depressive disorders typically are related to a sad experience. Overall low mood uh reports of heritability and cognitive changes here. One of the things that we see with, uh, uh, this classification is that there has been the addition of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, which is, um, really looking at, uh, moving away from overdiagnosis of bipolar disorder. If you read the rationale, uh, in the DSM, one of the things that was happening is diagnosis stations were looking at the persistent irritability and then the episodic outbursts of mood and kind of seeing it as a manic experience, therefore style over diagnosing bipolar in childhood. So this is an answer to that. But one of the things we need to keep in mind and diagnostically as we look at, um, uh, mood disorders in children's depressive disorders, is that bipolar disorder is still possible, but we need to be able to tease apart the difference. And one of the key features there is going to be is it episodic or is it persistent? Bipolar is can be episodic by nature. Uh, and we'll talk a little bit more about, um. Disruptive dysregulation disorder. The other thing to keep in mind here is that it, uh, also differs from what would be considered normal therapy for sadness or mood changes. You know, I had someone a number of years ago asked me, is there such a thing as, like, situational depression? And in some ways, yes. But what do we do with that? How do we classify that? So that's where we would understand that someone just lost their job and their spouse got diagnosed with cancer, and they're potentially looking at, um, experiencing, uh, um, a move into with their in-laws because they can't afford to live. And there's just this low mood now, is that adjustment or is that depression or is that both? And so what we need to do is understand, is that experience in that situation of depression doesn't meet that threshold of a mood disorder on its own. So you sense. Seeing had not yet okay. But overall what we need to do is understand. Is it just different from is it just what would be considered? Uh, it would be reasonable and understandable to have a sense of sadness, irritability, low mood, um, loss of pleasure and interest in things based on situation and what would be kind of typical, or does it kind of get to that outer limit and the threshold of severe and, uh, severity, intensity, duration and frequency that helps us understand that actually be some, uh, depressive disorder? So if we were to look at disruptive mood dysregulation disorder again, it's going to be see onset before the age of ten. It's going to be persistent and frequent irritability and aggression. And this is not just a moody child. This is um, going to be temper outbursts, chronic irritability. And there's going to be aggression that's really much more appropriate in the situation we call. So think of um, again when we're looking at providing a diagnosis, is this something that even on the outer limit of what would be considered a child, that is um. Just has a grumpy disposition versus a child that is outburst angry. Destruction of property. Um. Uh, hitting. And so it kind of pushes into that, that continuum. The other thing that we need to do here is we need to be very careful and rule out developmental disorders, particularly because this is, uh, evident in childhood onset before age of ten. Is there something else, like a neurocognitive disorder or something else that might be limiting development or understanding or engagement socially that we need to be aware of, that would be a better fit. For example, these behaviors might be very consistent with someone who experiences autism spectrum disorder. But, uh, so we might see similar behavior, cause or the underlying factors might be different. So we need to rule out the presence of the other word. Does that make sense? Civil disorder um, does not typically shift the bipolar, but it's going to shift to depression and anxiety. And again, looking at that onset of or that move away of the industry of, um, looking at this as an alternative to childhood bipolar. What we're going to see is it used to believe that childhood bipolar leads to adult bipolar. But here what we're seeing is disruptive regulation disorder. If someone, uh, comes with a history of, uh, you might want to assess for, uh, anxiety, depressive disorders, that's the more logical pathway. Any questions about destructive speculations or just a firefight? Um, so you had an adult come in, and the first time you made the assessment that when they were young, they might have disrupted the new regulation, and now they're they're they're depressed. That would you diagnose them with both or just, you know, kind of in essence, you wouldn't diagnose because that would be likely. Again, there might be other, um, dysregulation disorders that would be likely. Uh, this is going to be more towards childhood. Yeah. But you might might be important to understand the case conceptualization and treatment if there's a history of both anxiety or depression and, uh, just, uh, mood disorder in childhood that might understand understanding, uh, the problem or the, um, the course and their overall experience and formulate case conceptualization, treatment. Uh, keep in mind that not everyone should have depression and anxiety as adults experience this in childhood. But if that's a logical pathway. So understanding, um, their experience over their lifetime is helpful just for situation. Good question and a good way of thinking. Because ultimately we need to know that because there are some disorders. As I mentioned, some disorders need to be identified in childhood in order to have a therapist. And okay. All right. Let's talk about major depressive disorder. This is going to be more likely. Um, we will see or talk about often. It's one that is kind of more understood within our community and culture and society. Um, it's going to be loss of interest in almost all activities or almost all activity and low mood. Now let's talk about lots of interest. There's lots of interest. Me and I just don't quite enjoy woodworking or, uh, photography or fill in the blank as much as I used to. This is going to be almost. Think of it is like there it goes from being interested to know I don't have the energy. I can't find the strength. I have no desire. There's no draw, there's no pleasure. It's, um, anhedonia, just loss of interest or pleasure. And so when we start looking at working with the client, what might that look like? What might be a phrase a client might say that might lead you to investigate if there's a loss in interest or pleasure in activities, what might they say? Yeah. I don't feel like it. I don't feel like it. I still feel very bored and bored. Or just know myself to do something. Yeah, but it doesn't make sense. Yeah. Why bother? Yeah. So what do you find yourself? You know, I can relate to normal day. That don't do much. Well, tell me about that. You just don't want to. It's almost like their their drive to engage in life. This is needed to the point where it's significant simply in order to meet this now. And there's different levels of, uh, people can get bored, people get disengaged. How these things change. But this is, um. Yeah, like complete loss. I mean, the other thing that we see as disturbances in sleep, appetite and psychomotor activity. Now sleep interestingly, is going to be either too much or too little. They either find themselves having, uh, hypersomnia when they're sleeping. Uh, now here's where we need to be careful. What is a normal, typical night of sleep? It depends. It depends. There are both short sleepers and long sleepers, and probably mid-range sleepers. Some people biologically five hours a night. They're good to go. Other people nine. Ten hours would be typical for them. So for them, what has been the change? So we're looking at, um, not only as they say, I'm sleeping too much. Well, they're sleeping too much meat and even too much for them. The other thing to keep in mind is that there are phases in development where sleeping changes. When I say that, what population, what age range comes in the mind when you say that sleep just changes in adolescence? Hypersomnia, which could be just the definition of, uh, or even insomnia. Uh, I know someone. They are almost completely there, almost like, uh, when a baby reverse cycles and they sleep during the day and up at night. This individual adolescent sleep cycle has just turned upside down. Go to sleep at 5 a.m. and sleep all day. But that's the way their body is currently working. So when we define sleep issues, we need to understand what is kind of the typical norm for people. And by norm of using that word, like the normative distribution of people following that continuum, but also what's typical for the client. Well, what was your sleep like before? How has it changed? What are you noticing is different about your sleep? But I'm having trouble falling asleep. Having trouble falling asleep? How long does it take you? 45 minutes. What did that look like before? So again, we're looking at. Is there significant change in their sleep? Yeah, I think that does this tells us could it be related to major depressive issues but also builds us the information we need to understand. Is there a sleep another sleep issue that we need to evaluate? The most common is going to be, uh, waking up and not being able to fall asleep. Is that some kind of a sleep cycle disruption? That's going to be very common. Uh, but that's about the only way not to make changes again. Oftentimes, people may, uh, begin to shift towards comfort eating or gaining weight based on they just eat more than they typically used to, or they find that they have a loss of appetite. So we're looking here as for what would be considered kind of, uh, a non-typical amount of weight gain or weight loss within a distinct period of time. That's usually about 5% of their body weight has shifted or changed. But then, uh, and they get criteria for how long that is. And then psychomotor activity. Uh, one of the things we look for in this is one of the wonderful things about, uh, depressive anxiety disorders. There could be even, uh, an increase in agitated state, agitated depression, or they just, you know, they just can't really sit still. There's a sense of, uh, restlessness. And it can also be to the other side of being object and not moving. These are things that we might, um, be able to say if we're not asking someone else their observation, but they would say, how would other people describe, um, your presence feeling, uh, sitting on the couch, my mouth is just stop chattering, stop moving. Or they actually checked something because they wasn't sure. If they weren't sure I was breathing or awake, if I just, you know, they subdued state of motion. So if you can't get an outside report, then it's appropriate. That would be good. Or if not, how would someone else close to you describe? As a side note, this is not necessarily for free. Uh, asking what other people might say also helps us gain insight. How are they aware of themselves, their experience, and how others would perceive them? Great question. Yes, but could it be like a spectrum for someone to like? Could they have? Could they be like agitated and like moving around and then like the next day this low, like, is it one or the other or can it be. No, but it would be considered here would be their typical. And when they're restless, they're here. And then when they're not, they're down here. They're not within their typical range. And so that may ebb and flow. But yeah it's not an either or what they might experience. But typically I would say likely someone will lean in one direction or the other. But over the course of their experience with the depressive episode, uh, you know, again, they really just depends on the individual. My experience, I would say it's possible. Okay. Other key features. And these are ones really to pay attention to. Uh, because this is where you might pick up on the thread of these reports in the client's narrative, but feelings of guilt and hopelessness, uh, and not always, um, clearly out of a suicidal ideation. But what you will do when someone is depressed, they may not come in and just say, I'm sad. But as you listen to their story, you'll hear underlying themes of hopelessness and guilt, um, self deprivation, image, self-image as low, uh, just worthless. They may not say that, but are their the language they use help you understand their conceptualization of self is that they feel worthless. So as you think about what that could look like, you're looking for feelings of guilt, hopelessness. And then also we'll talk specifically around addressing suicidal ideation. Uh, also fatigue, decreased energy concentration issues, which, as we highlighted last class, could be related to a number of things. But again, by the time you begin to build this constellation of symptoms, these cluster of symptoms together, um, these will be common things that you're going to assess for keeping in mind also that there are descriptions of, uh, what these might look like severity in order to meet that threshold of major depressive disorder. And you are going to then, um, later in your clinical judgment about clinical significance, incredibly significant distress. Any questions? Okay. Now, persistent depressive disorder um, is kind of think of and this is common. It used to be um, I mean my mind is going blank. Um. This time year. What was the previous term? He some for kids and for TR. Uh, but persistent depressive disorder in some cases. Uh, if I were to kind of look at the concept of era from Winnie the Pooh era had a consistent load. Well, nobody likes everything's going to go bad anyway. Now, that's a little bit of a characterization, but kind of conceptualized that mood of it's a persistent low mood for more than two years. Now within there, if you see, um, there may be a major depressive episode that occurs within that period of two years, but it doesn't necessarily mean that a full major depressive episode needs to be present for two years. It can. But what we're looking at a major depressive episode coming. And then those typically resolve. If you look at clinically, even within, uh, six weeks, oftentimes major depressive episodes will begin to resolve. This is persistent for two years. So if a client has been experiencing long with some period, it's been distinct with, uh, major depressive experience and sometimes. Not for, let's just say, four months. Do they qualify for persistent depressive disorder? 24 months. Two years. And if you look within those two years, there are not two months without symptoms. So there may be period within of two months where they feel better. But within that two years, the majority of that time has been in that flow state with some being possible and major depressive episode. Makes sense. Okay. Yeah. So in that scenario, they would need to have, uh, major depressive diagnosis before for up to two years if they were seeking, if they had treatment. Uh, not necessarily major depressive episode, but they're going to have to have depressed more days than not for two years. Okay. And it's like, uh, all day, more days than not two years, uh, with only a minimum of two months where they would say, actually, you know, between, um, well, for example, uh, around here, July and August, I actually felt okay. Sun was out for, you know, summer and then. But is there seasonal, uh, impact. But overall, for those two years, there was an overall sense of depression, not necessarily major depression, but that could be overly. And if that is there, you can still, um, provide a diagnosis of persistent disorder. Depressive disorder with major depressive episodes or major depressive episodes don't have to exist, but it's still a persistent depression. Does that clarify? Yeah. Okay. Uh, here and then there would be thought that you could have in these two years. Later, it had to happen to more. So. Well, this happens across the region. So again, if they if there's more than a two month period, regardless of circumstance, uh, where they have experience depression, it's not persistent. That may restart the clock. And then two years later from the start of onset of symptoms again. Like by sitting in front of you except or about 12 months, I was in this really bad space and that I won the lottery and I felt great and all these changes. But then about three months ago, I started to, um, but there was that period of now that I'm doing that nine months where I was happy. Well, they don't they don't qualify as a disorder. But, you know, you can have clinical judgment. And of you still would ask, how long has this put other seasons of your life for each of this, right. How long did that. But what if you know, this is that you might say professional history? It's likely that experienced major depressive but based on the current criteria know does that help us that question. Um, just to clarify the time frame for a major depressive disorder. So it can only occur for two weeks like that for at least two weeks. And then you'll see the criteria for how long on the other one. Oh, okay. And likely two years as it passes two years becomes first. So in some ways I kind of think of these as stepwise. You can have major depressive disorder that's episodic. It comes and goes and you can have major depressive disorder that can stay for long periods of time. In the past two years. It becomes persistent depressive disorder with major depression. Or if someone never has major depression. But there are that that your mode of just kind of always low mood and they meet that threshold of two years. Um, they, they can get persistent depressive disorder. Other questions? Yes. Yeah. How do they do that. And then they do that again and. Again. It's only 12 months. But it's not what I want because I think. Again I would look at maybe there there's also both the called cycle time disorder and rapid cycling. Um that's a little bit different. But they might have, um, you know, different things that you should be aware within another classification that they wouldn't be experience, uh, typical mood at the moment. Typical mood problem. And again, if they're meet threshold for a major depressive disorder community like rapid episodic we can't major depression is that of. All right. Next you're going to have, uh, premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Uh, these are mood changes, anxiety entailed in their ability that are beyond the typical experience. Now, this is related. And this is one, uh, that oftentimes, um, and current understanding of, uh, sexual identity. I would encourage you to read, uh, what the DSM talks about, how they delineate between, um, gender and also sex. But this one here would be biologically female, and it would be dependent because it is specific to an experience that only biological female, uh, individuals would experience. Um, so here, low mood and changes in anxiety that are beyond the typical experience. So again, think of excessive and severe that have clinically significant distress. And the experience would start um before that uh uh uh period starts premenstrual phase and then subside within a week following the start of menses. So ultimately, what you're, uh, experiencing is someone that has, uh, uh, kind of a periodic experience with dysphoric mood related to overlapping with their monthly periods. So something that we would want to understand is if someone, um, reports kind of having almost, um, Marissa, to your point, of kind of rapid cycling and that this is biologically female individual, we might want to ask, have you ever noticed that this might follow your monthly menstrual cycle? That may be a question that would help us delineate between this and something else. Does that make sense? Because treatment options might be different. And the keyword here is clinically significant distress likely if someone here is not just going to experience something where it's maybe a little more than typical, it's going to impact different, uh, experiences. And like missing work, their experience is significant. Uh, that report of the impact on their own life would be more than just it's hard. And it seems harder that maybe, um, my family or my friends or my colleagues. Does that make sense? You can. No anxiety disorder. Um, well, let's actually pause. Any questions about, um, depressive disorders. Okay. Let me just my and we'll likely come back to this, but it's it's it's on my mind as we look at, um. Specifically asking questions around premenstrual dysmorphic disorder. There are sometimes discomfort around, especially if you're a male therapist asking a female client about their experience with their periods. It could be a little uncomfortable. Let me just encourage you. We're going to lean into the uncomfortable as we ask questions that no one else would be willing to ask in a typical setting. And so as you look at and this highlights maybe the first of, um, maybe challenging topics, whether that be, uh, related to this experience, sexual experience, uh, trauma history, sexual abuse history, um, military history. Fill in the blank. There's going to be things that we're going to ask about. So as we, um, hit these topics and something, if you experience your own as, uh, with, uh, in my, you know, human sexuality relationships course it was suds. Have you ever heard that term subjective, subjective units of discomfort? What is your son's level? How uncomfortable are you in addressing this topic? So, uh, as we engage in this, regardless of what topic it is, I just know this could be one that would be more common to be uncomfortable. Uh, keep in mind, what about. That's making me uncomfortable? Am I afraid of, uh, the person rejecting me or feeling like I'm being too intrusive? Or. And at the same time, I will say, if you feel awkward about it, they will feel awkward about it. If you don't feel awkward about it, they won't feel awkward about it sometimes. Um, that's a process of learning how to engage in asking those questions. That one was a tangent for free. Sometimes things just happen like that. All right, let's talk about anxiety disorders. And then we'll transition to, um vignettes. So anxiety disorders are going to be kind of walking in this, um, this tension between a fear state or an anxiety state and all of the anxiety disorders, that's going to be the cluster. So if we were to look at depressive disorders being, well, mood, hopelessness, sadness, that's that domain here. We're going to look at fear and anxiety or worry. So and so. The difference is fear is imminent risk. If you're walking in a, uh, in the forest and you hear a growl. Imminent risk. That's fear. Now, if you are not in the forest, but you're thinking about being in the forest. And what if I heard a growl that would be worry or anxiety. That's going to be future oriented. So in some ways, the relationship with the anxiety or the worry is kind of the distinguishing factor between different, um, uh, disorders and, uh, different experiences. Okay. So that makes sense. So disorders are differentiated by type of situation and fear. So here it gets into if we're going to some classify anxiety disorders it's what is the topic or what is the key feature of the worry. Whether it be separation anxiety, specific phobias, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, or generalized anxiety disorder. Um. So what we're going to see in this category, we do need to pay attention, uh, to things that are different from what would be developmentally appropriate. So, for example, it would be developmentally appropriate for children of various ages to have concerns and worries that would be kind of more common. But we would expect as frontal lobes develop, as their experience develops, as their understanding of the world develops. Those fears and worry would shift when they don't shift. That's when we begin to have challenges. The other thing that we're looking here is we're going to look for the key phrases are persistent and excessive. And here it's going to be your test to determine if persistent and excessive exists. So separation anxiety oftentimes is um seen in childhood. And this can be distressed about uh separation from an attachment thing here. Now does that attachment figure have to be biological mom or dad. No that could be older sibling. It could be an uncle. It could be a good friend. It could be a whole host of things. Whoever that child is considered attached to, they could have issues with being, um, separated from. So in children, it's going to be common. You're going to see worry about harm to you as a caregiver. It's not always just self like something's going to happen to me as they're dropped off at school or, um, mom or dad or caregiver goes out. That's something. There's an excessive and persistent worry that something bad is going to happen to their caregiver. But it's also that can be harm to self. Uh, you're going to get lost. Something bad is going to happen. Someone's going to kidnap me because then again, that's going to create the separation. So if I'm not with my safe adult or my caregiver or my attachment is something bad is going to happen to them or to me. And adults, you're going to see that, um, present a little bit differently. Uh, there's going to be kind of a persistent and excessive fear with traveling alone. Nightmares. And there's going to be worry about their family. Or interestingly enough, even home. Home can be an attachment. And so in, uh, as adulthood and because typically you're going to see this onset in preschool and it will resolve with age, but if it doesn't resolve in a persistent to adulthood, it could even be, um, uh, related to my, my attachment figure as my home, because that's where it stake. So people will worry I can't leave something happened to the house or if there's a fire, but if there's an earthquake, what if someone breaks it? So they begin that persistent, um, uh, you know, typical worry leveled out at their home. Now, this is a little bit different than because, uh, sometimes you look at people who maybe stay home. We think of core phobia, the core phobia, as a little bit different. That is a fear of being out in expansive, uh, places, being in situations where there's no escape. So oftentimes public modes of transportation, uh, airplanes, busses, uh, being in lines at concerts or being in wide open spaces like a park or parking lot where something is going to happen and they cannot escape that. So therefore, at home, the fear drives up to stay home. And with the door phobia likely there's an attachment figure and safe person that that's who they travel with. So again differentiating a little bit both can be resulting in a need to stay home. But what's the drive. What's the focus of that. Worry is going to help you differentiate if it's a separation anxiety issue or is it agoraphobia? Um, couple other things to keep in mind is that there's increased risk or even, um, someone that may experience separation anxiety, that is, uh, for lack of a better term, in remission. You don't see it as common, but when there's life, stress or trauma, you can see it come back. So one of the questions we would ask is not only is there a recent history of live stress or trauma, but talk to me about what was it like in school when your childhood, did you ever experience what you would be considered separation anxiety? Or even ask them about what what their typical day was like was, or challenges that they experienced? Because then you might be able to understand this, this current which might be related to or or phobia or trauma, or is it lifelong? Does that make sense? Okay. Again, persistent and excessive. It's not someone who just as a little worried about their family or, um, uh, maybe a little more than typical, but it's going to be persistent. Excessive sexual orientation and child separation anxiety in a young age to the mom or dad and, uh, and after that, constantly and after, uh, something that's gone, but other people become, uh, parents and becoming depression anxiety for the, for these children. Um, it's a correlation in that from my. Yeah. So in some ways in children that experience um separation anxiety with children better results. But then do they become maybe more obsessive that parents maybe helicopter parents from kind of that's a cultural term that we would say people who hover and uninvolved and don't let their children, you know, kind of venture out. Um, likely there will be a correlation. It's not necessarily like that saying, uh, definite. But the other thing you're going to look, there's also maybe from that theoretical orientation where you look at, uh, attachment theory and understanding could do obscure or, or, um, other types of attachment that might conform because separation anxiety might then inform how they're currently attached as an adult. Yeah, but if there's a CBA like that, we come into the stress. Because if the kids grow up and the parent is also worried about losing your child and becoming distressed. Yeah. Uh, I mean, possible. Uh, I would, um, if a child, if a parent is overly concerned and obsessive about their children, I would definitely understand. Try to understand. Is there separation anxiety issues that may be informing how they're attached to their children? Um, yeah. Thank you. Yeah. Again. Now, what we're getting into is case formulation and understanding how pathology might intersect with, uh, uh, presentation, case formulation, understanding the client's whole experience. And pre question, um, selective mutism is, uh, failure to speak in a specific social situation. Now here what we're not looking at is the child is not unable to speak. Uh, they may speak in certain contexts completely fine without hesitation. It's not related to speech challenges. It's beyond typical shyness. It's not related to lack of knowledge or like in the classroom setting. I just don't know what's going on. It's about language barrier. It is literally specific circumstances. The child, uh, chooses or selects not to speak. Um, and here, uh, they use other non-verbal forms of communication, but it interferes with work, school and other social engagement. So you're going to see that it's going to impact their life. It's not it's not like, uh, the first month of school, the child is just kind of quiet and shy, doesn't say much. And then over time they become, uh, kind of engaged. Uh, but it is, uh, it's going to be specific and, um, significant. So child will be completely verbal, even articulate at home and then just not speak in other circumstances for you and vice versa. Child doesn't speak at home but will speak at school or in other social engagements. Um might be tell if they don't speak at home. What's the dynamic? Uncomfortable, right? Um and experience for at least one month and it's not related again to lack of knowledge or another communication disorder. So as we're looking at this, we would need to understand and evaluate that last line pretty pretty clearly. Understand is there something else? Developmental delay. Language delay that would account for the mutism. Specific phobia. Um, what would be a specific phobia that you might be aware of? So. The answer is yes. All of them Titan spiders. What else do they like? Heights. Elevators, elevators, public speaking. The reality is, anything that could be a fear stimulus. Anything. Uh, I am aware of someone. Even the word velvet or the touch of velvet. Oh, yeah. Looking at velvet creates a phobic response. Uh, ladybugs. Other people. Ladybugs. No problem. We have spiders. Some people, no problem. Other people. And this isn't like. Like me and spiders. We we have an understanding. Um, if you're in my house. You're no longer with us. We're outside. I'll leave you alone. But I look at them. How ironic. I'll tell you a story. So in just a second. But ultimately, this goes beyond kind of a. I don't like them. They give me the creeps and is, like, into a full on panic response. Okay, we'll talk more about the criteria. But a little side note, we have found a, um we have determined it's a, it's a variety of daddy longlegs spider. He's made up in the corner of our bathroom in our home since I think August. And now it's it's gotten to the point where, uh, we're trying to be better about if they're in the house and they don't look dangerous. Hey, they're part of the ecosystem. Like, let's let them live. Um, I'm about 80% there. Some of them, they're just like, you creeped me out. You gotta go. Um, but this one, uh, we've even named. His name is Dexter. But he's been there months and months and months. And so we check, and, you know, you kind of give a little bit of, like, uh, wind and he moves. I have no idea how Dexter is still alive at this point. It's more of a curiosity, like, how long is he actually going to make it? Um, but he's up there and he's been there for months, so I'm growing. Um, I mean, spiders are getting a little bit better. Um, that's just for fun. Okay, so here's what we're going to do. It's going to be a little bit mark fear or anxiety. So fear is like imminent. Like the perception of a snake. Spider? Uh, that may have imminent risk. There could be true fear there. Or even anxiety related to symptoms. Remember? Um, future oriented versus imminent risk. Uh, differ from normal fears as I talked. You can have a fear or something, but able to kind of engage and push past it. And it's out of proportion with what would be an expected fear response. And the response every time this stimulus is there. Therefore, I don't have a phobia of spiders. I have a fear of spiders, but I'm able to and I'm kind of moving through that. Right. So every time I see or hear or engage in a thought around a fear stimulus to create that response. And so someone is again, cultural definition of phobia is a little bit different. Some people have fear and significant fear anxiety, but they don't reach that full state of phobic response. Um, and sometimes, uh, well, they must take action to avoid. So, for example, uh, walk out of the room because they know they're going to encounter that fear stimulus. They will do anything they can to move around or avoid. Um, and this could be either obvious or subtle efforts. And here you're going to see the reaction can be, um, there's a range of reactions up to even a full panic experience, or they break sweats or they get really uncomfortable. Uh, in different ways that that reaction happens in some way every time. So something to keep in mind is how do you evaluate and uh, for this is if someone talks about, I just can't go to work and just try and find out what it is, as their route includes all bridges and so they find a way to muscle through, but they can't get to work. And it's becoming a barrier. But it's not work. It's actually the fear of bridges that's creating the distress. So again, you might hear it's a report of some other disruption, but they may not automatically disclose because even the mention of it might create a fear response. Okay. So keep in mind it could be anything. It doesn't have to be rational. Oftentimes people will tell you, I know it's not rational, but I. I can't say that word. Um, I can't think about that. I can't hear and see a picture of it. So again, they may see it as irrational or we may or society culture may think it's not reasonable or it's not a common fear. Doesn't matter. It can still be a appropriate response. Social anxiety is um. Fear and worry about being judged and evaluated by others. Now, okay, so, um, let's separation this fear. What? What's that fear and anxiety related to separation? What's that? Without the attachment. Attachment? Okay. Phobias. You know. Subject. Subject. Some subject item stimulus. Social is fear and anxiety related to people from people in some sort of that people as in far I see people and now there's a phobic response to people but the social interaction. So here, keeping in mind each one of those has a classification of the focus or the concentration of thought around a certain type of fear. And in this one it can be fear in social situations of being judged and evaluated. That's going to be the key feature. Now, if someone has fear of being hurt or uh, they have trauma history and therefore certain people are unsafe, that's not going to be a social anxiety related issue. This is for example, um, they they break out into almost a, um, a worry state, increased blood, um, blood flow, they sweat, pupils dilate. The heart races every time they go to the cashier, because that cashier is going to think that I can't use the machine, or that I'm not going to know what I'm talking about or fill in the blank. So it's in that social situation, there's fearful worry about being judged and evaluated by others children. They have to include the fear related to judgment by their peers. It's not just adults, because then we have another issue going on. If it's adults and children their own age or around their own age, then we can look at a social anxiety issue. Um. But overall, there's this fear of being humiliated, embarrassed, rejected in fear that others will see that they are uncomfortable. Uh, they avoid fear situations, uh, such as? Um, I've encountered people that do not eat around other people for fear of being judged about what they wear, how they eat, or maybe the sound that they will make. Not eating disorder. It's the social aspect of eating or drinking or engaging, um, in an even conversation that keeps them from, um, engaging. And they almost always are going to engage and worry about. Fear is going to varying degree and duration and going to be out of proportion, which is then what is typical. For example, you may know, much like teenagers go through this different awkward phase like we talked about sleep. It's also socially there's either go from being kind of, uh, uh, maybe a typical child to being really boisterous and out there, or they just kind of go into a shell and they're afraid it's beyond that. What being considered typical. And we're going to typically see it come on in adolescence. Now, uh, you guys have already got human growth in development, right last semester. What happens in adolescence besides everything, right? Uh, but there's this, uh, increased egocentric view of the world. And so in some ways, what we're going to see is this experience may typically be a part of what we see in adolescence. But does it go beyond what would be considered to be there? Are they just afraid of what other people are going to think? And the reality is like, uh, uh, adolescents feel something on their shirt on the way to school and everyone's going to notice the spot on lecture. And the reality is that their age and their group likely maybe won't notice because they're too worried that you're noticing what's wrong with what they're wearing. Now, there's a whole other dynamic that yes, people do worry and notice there's reason for their worry. But this experience, much more intense and well beyond, uh, typical. It's going to be more intense. Uh, like the experience with, uh, social anxiety is going to be much more intense. But in adulthood, we'll see it maybe not as intense, but in a broader scope. In some ways, it generalizes to more areas of life. Um, as adults. Two more and then we will transition. Panic disorder. A sudden panic attacks. Now this is a little bit different. Uh, if you notice in the DSM there's panic attack specifier and then there's panic disorder. Panic disorder. The simplest way to identify it is someone that experiences a panic attack. But then there's an intense, ongoing fear of reoccurring panic attacks. It's panic around panic and panic attacks can happen related to many or any all mental health disorders. Depression, panic attack. Specifier eating disorder. Panic attacks. Vessel obsessive compulsive disorder. Panic attacks. Specifier panic can be involved in a lot of things, but here, panic attack or panic disorder is a fear of having more panic. So the easiest way to to classify that is and this is one, uh, that I see oftentimes gets mentioned. It's panic panic disorder with a panic attack specifier. No. Panic attack is a key element of panic disorder. But then the added layer of fear related to other panic attacks makes sense okay. So here we're going to have to unpack onset. Click on set. It's after 9:00. Words are growing much more complicated. So uh, repeated insulting panic attacks which are quick uh, onset. And there's fear of having more, uh, panic attacks. But what you're going to look for is avoidant behaviors. Uh, they're going to do things to make sure that other people don't see them have a panic attack or threatening to, uh, uh, again, if they're socially isolating. Is it separation or, uh, separation anxiety? Is it, uh, social anxiety or are they afraid of other people seeing them have a panic attack? The other thing here is that they're going to be, um. Uh, there's four year round related health concerns here that others will notice the symptom. And this is one of the key features that they will fear losing control. So they may not say, I'm just going to lose control. I'm afraid I'm in control. They might say things that allude to the fact that they're worried that they're just not going to be able to, uh, hold it together in the middle of the morning and have a panic attack. I'm going to lose that, to lose control. Isn't that sort of like, uh, rage and hurt, uh, somebody or things or other things, but to lose control in the sense of, uh, likely, uh, other people. Are they're just going to run down the street, uh, lose control. There are specifiers of expected and unexpected things out here. It's going to make sense to the client that you'll be able to identify. When I get in this situation, I'm going to have, I know I'm going to have a panic, and they kind of know that that situation can happen and they expect others. They can just be in a normal, typical day or in any moment, just have a panic attack. And so likely there are other micro triggers that we can identify to help clinically kind of separate or slow down their understanding of a panic attack so that they can, you know, mitigate the symptoms, but it's still unknown. It could happen. I'm in the car. Um, I wake up now, there's nocturnal panic attacks, and it's a little different when you they wake up in the middle of a panic attack versus shortly after waking up and being aware there's a specifier around nocturnal panic attacks that's a little different than just like I woke up in the morning, and within the first 3 or 4 minutes, I had a panic attack versus I woke up in a state of panic. Does that make sense? Um. And that's where you're going to use your good clinical assessment to understand and evaluate is a client, um, is expected or not expected. And overall, keeping in mind that the intensity and frequency, even for an individual, can vary greatly. There is no specifier mild moderate, severe. But at the same time the client may have symptoms like go from and they kind of just feel short of breath and really anxious. That goes beyond normal or a full blown panic attack at this kind of range. Um, they're not going to see typical onset is in early 20s, but not it's not exclusive. Children can have, uh, panic disorder as well. Last one. Generalized anxiety. So if we have separation, which is fear of somehow your caregiver and you have specific phobias, fear of specific events, um, um, and then, uh, panic disorder, fear of panic. Here we're going to have general and. Well, what would you assume that means if I have generalized anxiety disorder that like more than one the other, uh, anxiety. Yeah, right. The fear is to be multiple, right? Versus this kind of this, uh, specific category of fear. This is a generalized worry. Now, here, it's going to be excessive worry about everyday life experience. How am I going to pay the bills? Am I going to get fired? How my children, uh, going to make it through college if my car is going to break down every day? Type of concerns but excessive? Uh, they have different difficulty controlling worry. So in some ways almost kind of think of it as, uh, it gets almost to the point of where you can always talk about obsessive worrying about these things, that difficulty focusing. It's pervasive in this long and duration. It's kind of like this. It could go from almost even to a state of panic to just a slow burn, um, consistent, consistently and anywhere in between. But it's always kind of present, uh, almost like persistent depressive disorder is persistent mood. This is kind of an ongoing experience with worrying about just kind of general things in life, but it will ebb and flow and kind of change over time. Um. Any questions about anxiety related disorders? Yeah, I know, I know. What various videos that experience for six months. Right. So what if someone is experiencing it for like 3 or 4 months? Then it's like the truth of a lot. Would they then like, would you then not have any diagnosis but like what would be the process for that? Is it just like you kind of let them keep dealing with the in for like months? No. In some ways I the way I would look at that is is it likely they're going to meet criteria for generalized anxiety disorder like that. The trajectory I'm pretty confident provisional generalized anxiety disorder provisional. But I might also say, uh, that's a provisional diagnosis. But they also have an unspecified anxiety. Uh, other things I do disorder because it's evident that they have an anxiety disorder. And confidence can lead there, but I can't prove it yet. So I might use that as a, like a provisional. And as soon as it pass that threshold of duration, then the other one might go away and this becomes their primary diagnosis. Does that make sense? Yeah. So ultimately I would approach treatment the same because it's anxiety related disorder. But I would want to continue to monitor if symptoms meet that threshold of generalized anxiety. Or does it stay in that category of specified unspecified other. Does that make sense? Okay. All right. So can you tell me what is the symptoms? Wax and wane. I know that it's like it kind of comes and goes and might intensify. And it kind of comes and that's that's a colloquialism that's actually in the DSM that will wax and wane. But that's, uh, a little bit of an older thing, but that's what it means. African wax. So try to wait for it, actually. Uh, thank you for sharing it. Because that brings up an important point. As we talked about, even, uh, court realism related to diagnosing our clients may not understand how we describe that. We may not understand how our clients are expressing their symptom experience. So key phrase is, so when you say wax and wane, what do you mean by that? Because then what's going to happen is you're going to understand what they mean. Because also wax may be something a little bit different based on even, uh, cultural differences within, um, the same and macro culture. And so that makes sense. Yeah. So thank you for that. Um. All right. Everyone, I want to talk a little bit about the vignette and learning to listen. And then what we'll do is we'll take, uh, a five minute and I'll give you instructions. You'll take about a five minute break and go into your groups and start practicing your vignettes. Okay. So this is an exercise of learning to listen differently. So as we go into the vignette, practice keeping in mind that, uh, the statement I've kind of given you is that practice makes permanent. How you practice this exercise is actually going to dictate how you engage in this exercise and in the clinical setting. So as I release you think of a couple of things one. Stay engaged. It's after 9:00. I know it's late and that's why I love it. Maybe earlier in some of the other class sessions. But stay engaged. Really practice the process. But as you do so, remember that this is going to be a different mode of thinking I want you to engage with and with curiosity. Begin to listen for those nuances, those threads that, well, that could be related to a symptom in one of the disorders we've been reading about. It's almost like you're learning to, uh, listen for different things than we might in in a typical everyday life. Now, the benefit of this, this helps your clinical skills in your therapy later. Because as clients say things, you're now also listening for, um, pathological, symptomatic, symptomatic language. Right. Um, but so you're looking for those things that could be related. And I say could be because they may not be related, but you're listening for hopelessness, the theme of hopelessness. You're listening for that threat of sleep. I'm tired. I just can't focus, I can't concentrate, I seem to just feel like I just zone out at work. Um, those all could be related to sleep disorder, depressive disorders related to sleep challenges. So we're listening for those things that could be. And then you're listening for the themes. Is there things that are coming up that then begin to help usher into these themes? These are related constellation of symptoms, but also are there is there a thread of conversation that the client brings that I need to pay attention to? It may not be they mentioned being homeless one time, but if I start piecing together these three or 4 or 5 comments that they've made, I'm seeing that there's a underlying theme of hopelessness. The other piece is, um. Don't assume. Clarify if, uh, like we talked about earlier, when someone, uh, says something, we can assume that their experience is similar to mine or someone I know. Therefore, I'm going to classify their disorder as this, clarify, understand their language. And then finally, um, this one's a little bit hard. Listen for what's not said. Clients sometimes will talk around their pathology. They may not want to talk about a specific phobia because it actually creates distress, even think about it. They may not talk about, um. Uh, traumatic events because it's traumatic. They, uh, post-traumatic stress. They, we live the experience, so they talk about it. Uh, so our job is to, in some ways listen for what they're not talking about that could be related to their experience. Um. It's like this. Anyone? Um. He didn't know how to drive a manual transmission or drummer by chance. Okay, drummers, raise your hand. Manual transmission. Okay. Manual transmission. Um. Uh uh, as of, uh, once a drummer. Uh, in my mind, I still am not practicing. Uh, what happens is we begin to develop, uh, like, use one hand. And then the other hand's not so bad. And then all of a sudden we have a foot. And things start to get really shady. And then all of a sudden, you have the fourth limb and your body just goes. That's this process. It's like driving a manual transmission. You get in and you're like everything you need to do to focus on just getting it in gear. And when is that friction point on the clutch? Can I catch it? And I'm on a hill and everything. It's just all focused on. And then pretty soon you're driving around, you have your cup of coffee and maybe a snack, and you're downshifting while turning gears and talking on the wireless phone. Right. It's like it becomes natural. So one of the things I'm going to offer to you is you're learning the skills of therapy. The process of diagnostic, diagnostic, interview and thinking this way is like learning a completely different skill set, either driving, um, a manual transmission or something even related to those types of things. So if it feels clunky, if you miss it, if it feels like it, just your brain doesn't quite go there, hang in there. You're going to get there. Okay, so here's what you're going to do with the vignettes. You're going to break up in groups of three, maybe four at this point. For the first class I'm not going to assign groups. We might do random assignment later. I'll just give you opportunity to hear from each other from different people. Um, but you'll take turns. One person Ranger vignette, your role playing the client, the other to have your DSM ready. And at this point, all you're going to do is the client's going to read their vignette, and then the two others are going to look at okay, so what did we hear. What's related to symptoms. Does that symptom meet criteria. And then begin to ask questions if you need. Well how long did that occur. Did they say it was two weeks. No I don't think it. How long did that last. And then the client will then fill in the gaps. Okay. So and then walk through kind of confirm talk about the vignette switch. Next person becomes the client. The other two become the diagnostician. Okay. So it's not a matter of like amount of time per se. But think about seven ten minutes per at the most because after your 3 to 4 minute break, get up, stretch, use the restroom, whatever you, um, you're going to want to get in and, uh, dig in a couple of points. Remember, there's a class on the other side. Uh, you can use any of the other classrooms, the common spaces, the library, the conference room. But if you're on the other side of the building, be mindful. Be quiet. Um, to avoid disrupting the other class and then come back here at, uh, ten until ten. Okay. We can recommend people that are working together. Figured out that you can work together for this. All right. Ready? Go. I'll stay here. You can't stay here. But some people, if you have to go ahead. Two of. The three guys. I'll try to do a little. Yeah.