So generally, how did that go? Feels better than the last one. Last in the last five minutes? Worse for me. Feel harder. Um, something to, uh, to keep in mind as we're going through this process. Remember that this is a great, um. It's a work to figure out. How do you bring in questions if you feel like you're getting lost? That's okay. If you feel like you don't know what your question to ask you. That's right. Where you. So what I would recommend you do if you feel like you don't know where else to go. Always keep in mind that you have many domains in the clinical interview that you're going to cover. But as you look at, um, looking at the concept of looking for specific diagnosis, again, as you're looking at, well, it could be a whole host of other things like sleep related depressive related disorders. Start thinking about the diagnostic criteria and think about when did it start. How long is it lasted? Um, what is the experience? How often? When is there a time frame? Is it part of the day that we're looking at, um, eating related issues? And they talked about, uh, consuming? It just feels like I just sometimes I sit down and I eat too much. How much? How often? How many days a week. Again, you can't go wrong with gathering data about the specifics of the experience. If you feel like you've kind of tapped out on that, great bounce back out and start asking about another topic. Now, it's a little bit generic here, because we're working with the vignette that you're working for a specific diagnosis, but if you were to generalize that to the clinical interview, you don't feel like you got to get in and ask everything and anything about just that diagnosis bounce back out. If you get stuck and say. So talk to me about your family growing up. You have any siblings? Okay. How many relationships? Like, now you're beginning to understand. Is there other things going on? You'll get to something about the diagnosis if you explore these other areas, too. Okay. Um, any questions about what you experienced in the process? Um, with the diagnosis, clarifying questions. Yes we would. Like. Do you definitely have ideas on how or would you agree with Emily on. I just I think this is like the best idea. Let me go back to it. Like for the future. Likely in the in the intake. I would not have my idea about. I might bring the DSM in if I was talking about the diagnosis. So they understand what I'm saying. And so here's what I'm thinking. Right. And I'm feeling like you meet, um, criteria for what would be called generalized anxiety disorder. Have you heard of that? Okay. So here's what I'm thinking. And here's what it means. You actually for that one um, don't necessarily do that all the time. But if it felt important to the client, they want to know if you want to talk about your diagnosis and understand how I got there. Yes, absolutely. I think or I don't care. Just I just want to start working on why I'm here. Probably more common, right. Um, so yeah, I wouldn't have it out, but what? That's where you need to be familiar with kind of the key features of each domain. And recognize if you ask about frequency, duration, intensity, uh, onset, um, those types of questions, you'll be able to answer a lot about the diagnostic, um, uh, categories for those disorders. Okay. And keep in mind, you can always give a provisional diagnosis or other specified unspecified diagnosis, which you talk about as you gather more data. You might say I'm unclear if they mean major depressive disorder, but they're definitely dealing with depressive symptoms. So they meet criteria for this disorder. And I'm going to rule out a rule out major depressive disorder in the next session. Yeah I think you would. You could you might actually. Um, you can kind of have a conceptualization of how you approach treatment with that client without a full back, no sense. However, you would likely understand generally the type of distress or experience that is getting to that extent. So yeah, like you probably if they say yeah. Right, right. So in some ways you can operate without a diagnosis, but it's really helpful to look at the client through a diagnostic lens to inform treatment whether or not you have to put a diagnosis on, on the file right now, working in private practice or the setting doesn't require a diagnosis. A good practice is going to be that you have a good diagnostic understanding your current conceptualization of the treatment, which we'll talk about. Yeah. If there ever be a time where you get the treatment for that. Tell me a little bit more about that. Like. I'm not well versed in all the different types of things that is there. Whether it is typically used to tell you you're not sure about a diagnosis in order to help inform intake, you're like, hey, let's practice this one technique that is part of that, and then get help for that. Uh, I mean, generally, I think if you look at a person centered approach and you build rapport and, um, those types of interventions, but likely you're not going to offer an intervention unless the client comes in and maybe they're so significantly distressed they can't calm down enough for you to do anything, then. Yeah, you would. What would make for your clinical judgment? What skill? What interventions that I use help to escalate this client to get them into a position where we can engage in them. Right. So I think, yes and no, you wouldn't go full on in the full therapeutic mode because you don't know where you're heading. But if there's a reason to use an intervention to get to what information you need, does that help? Yes. For example, if I if I say you have a diagnosis at the end of that interview, probably not the end of the interview. But in your personal life, in many settings, like leaving it to help another, having a working diagnosis. Um, because I take the village insurance. Okay. Uh, depending on the insurance value, you would want to understand if they give you one session, really two sessions to maintain a professional working diagnosis. Okay, for the first session or in private practice, do you not feel the first session until you've had 2 or 3 sessions? Come up with the diagnosis and then get it back? Okay. That's all information you need to work out with the process and practice from a diagnostic or from the for the purpose of. This classic kind of conceptualization. I would definitely gather as much as you can to inform your treatment in the first session whether or not you can recruit good working actors. We'll talk today about some of the steps of differential diagnosis that might inform how you can have, um, kind of what's the lowest threshold of disorder. And if you can reach that threshold, you may be able to confirm to others that you get more data. Does that make sense? Yes. Okay. Yes. I do. But first, uh, first as like, um, you know, the specifics of like, you know, what is health insurance doesn't have a link to it, but then it was about overlap. Um, like, is there a medical condition or is this like schizophrenia? And then the questions get a little bit more random. Uh, and I'm wondering if, um, we should be transparent about our process. Um, well, in some ways, yes. You want to be transparent about the process in your disclosure statements, right. For like I mentioned in the clinical interview. We can ask you a lot of questions. And it may seem like, again, like an interrogation or, uh, and I may ask questions that may fit or not fit your experience, but in some ways, it just helps me understand, um, what you're experiencing and can hone in because, for example, you may ask, is there ever a time where you feel disconnected or don't share reality with others? No. Okay, well, I need to ask that question to rule in or rule out, right? So you may, depending on your own personal style, provide a little bit more disclosure around and might ask you some questions that seem kind of really random or doesn't apply to you. Just hang in there as part of the process as I'm gathering as much information as I can like. Does that help? Yeah, yeah. All right, let's, uh, let's move on. Okay. So let's talk about the process of differential diagnosis, because actually what you have been doing is the process of differential diagnosis, at least a portion of it. So when I talk about the process of differential you are differentiating between disorders. Right. Uh again I mentioned House uh you can watch the TV show houses, that whole team where they're looking at the whiteboard and doing the differential. It could be that's not could be that. And then you usually have some really means no comment about something. Um, and then you got something graphical that he calls it. That's not practice per head. Um, so the idea of here's what we're doing is we're gathering as much information. To be able to differentiate and rule them, or rule out different, uh, possible just orders. Okay. Um. So what I'm going to offer you is, was, uh, by the author, by the name of first, who is one of the people that, um, actually helped, uh, develop the process of differential diagnosis for the DSM. Uh, and so, and actually, if I recall, maybe even one of the authors of the DSM. Um, but what this is, is it's six steps that they recommend that you walk through. Uh, to be able to come up with this, uh, a proper diagnosis. Now, here, what we're going to be is systematic and step by step. Now, I want to caution you that from the six steps of differential diagnosis are not sequential. They can happen in any sequence based on. You don't necessarily have to answer the questions in order based on the differential diagnosis steps of differential diagnosis, but you should include all six steps in your process. Does that make sense? So in essence don't feel like this dictates oh I have to ask you about step one and step two. It's great to conceptualize your intake interview like that, but your client may have different ideas about how that first session is going to go and the information they provide. You may bounce around to different things just to get to that information. But ultimately, the goal here is to include all six steps and use that as a lens to inform the information you collect. Okay. So in essence, what we're doing is two symptoms, right. Criteria are the symptoms what you think they are. Are they a result of medication for some other physical issue. And then we move on to Q they need security for a specific disorder. So if we look at six steps, um, in the first couple likely would be early in your process. Step one is you're going to rule out either malingering or factitious disorder. Who would take a stab guess at what malingering means? Yes, faking. Faking something. But you're faking something. Why? Yeah. Or insurance for insurance. Right. So the idea of malingering is that they is a falsification of symptoms for some sort of gain, whether that be, hey, I'm going to falsify the symptoms because I need a diagnosis so I can get paid medical leave from work, or I can get, um, insurance or I can get a disability or fill in the blank. There is some motivation outside of experiencing the symptoms of falsification for some ulterior motives. Yeah, Shakespeare said before the practice. Um, actually, yes. Uh, when I was in, uh, in the assessment setting, someone was uh, uh, um, basically. And I don't want to steal thunder from the assessment class, but there's, uh, assessments that you can give that actually can detect malingering. Um, but ultimately, uh, in clinical practice, not as much, but an assessment because there's, um, my the people I examined weren't actually the clients, the lawyers or the clients. And this was the exam. It's a completely different thing. But we took it the assessment to talk about that. But, uh, in clinical practice, not as much. But there is, um, yeah, it should always be a question in the back of your mind, is there? So tell me about what's going on in your life. Is, uh, is there anything big happening, any sort of, uh, issues with, um, medication or medical experience? Uh, hospital stay, insurance, divorce? You may not ask them. Are you here? Are you lying to me? But you need to know if there's things that potentially could cause them to lie. Okay. Yeah. Um, a client exaggerating symptoms, um, to get an official diagnosis that fall into this category. Um, yeah. So one of the things that we need to do is, uh, understand that there's going to be benefit for, for gain, uh, for them to exaggerate, to make sure that they meet criteria for a diagnosis. So we can ask a lot of questions regarding, um, things going on in their life that might help us rule out malingering. Uh, we'll talk a little bit more about ruling, um, just a second. But factitious disorder is a little bit different. It's actually a classification. It's a mental health disorder in which they are faking symptoms, but it's not for any purpose, okay? It is literally they lie, mimic or create symptoms. And there's no obvious, um, personal gain. It's just in some ways that their disorder is they feel compelled to falsify. We have a fictitious disorder. It's going to be related to that person. Um, in some ways they can the high. But, um, for now, it's okay, I don't think. I just wonder in others, but, uh, in some ways they could be leaning into that type of thing, uh, versus someone they may be, uh, falsifying the disorder for another reason versus believing that they're sick. Right. They may be related, but this is very specific criteria. So let's talk a little bit more about what those are. So if we were to look at, um, methods of determining malingering, what we're going to look at is there's actually methods for malingering, uh, that exist, like I mentioned in the assessment world. Um, there's a test called the test of malingering measure one. Um, and, uh, even in the MMPI and the intelligence scales, uh, the MMPI actually includes the malingering scale based on how you answer the questions. That personality test is sensitive enough to tell someone is malingering. But even things like, um, the digit span test in the weeks, the Wechsler Intelligence Scale, uh, someone who is wanting to maybe falsify their memory challenges related to traumatic brain injury or getting into, uh, insurance claim they may actually, uh, totally try to miss intentionally how many numbers they can remember in their digit span. But there's a certain threshold where unless they have severe cognitive impairment, they're not going to perform that low. So you can actually use that as a measurement. But in clinical practice that's a little bit hard. So what we need to do is really rely on our clinical interview and our own judgment. Um, so in the medical psychological history of self-report questionnaires and assessment, even in the intake form. Uh, you consider how these symptoms meet the presentation. So one of the things we can look at is when the client comes in and they give you line by line diagnostic criteria for that are disorder. That could be a red flag. However if that blue line has been in treatment they're maybe 45. And they've been in treatment for this issue since they were 12. They might have a really good understanding of that disorder and can walk line by line through the diagnostic criteria because they've been involved in it. So again, based on the medical history, mental health history, if there's not a history of the present illness, but yet they come in and they say, this is my experience and it's almost too polished. That could could be a red flag to pay attention to. Okay. Let me see what else we have here. So one of the things we can do is ask questions. How long have they have experience? Uh, what have they used in the past experience? Describe, um, your experience. What is the position? Say what they tell you. We can begin to look for inconsistencies in their story. Because someone with experience, there's going to be a thread of consistency in how they report that experience. Again, so in some ways where maybe we need to rule this out, but part of that ruling out is this we need to pay attention to what our client is saying and maybe what they're not saying. And when we put it together, does it feel like it's genuine and authentic? The other thing we can do is look at, um, the client's presentation. If they say, you know, I'm just so anxious, I'm up all the time, but yet they're sitting back in their chair and they're just kind of chill when they talk about their work. There's not it's not a thread of conversation about because if someone is experiencing anxiety and worry that gets that's in the front. That's what they talk about. That's when it's going to come forward and how they represent other aspects of their life. So tell me about your family history. Oh, well, you know, my wife is always telling me I just need to relax. Consistent versus everything's fine. There's actually nothing going on. Right. So you can begin to look at the diagnostic interview and begin to look for, um, that thread of conversation that that might support the diagnosis. Okay. Any questions about that? Yes. But do you think somebody's lying. Mhm. Good question. And that would be one of the. It depends. Because one of the things about what we might do is I might approach it. Well okay. So um, as I'm asking you questions, some things just don't seem like they're lining up for me. So could you tell me a little bit more about what brings you in here today? And so and then, you know, in some ways there might be a point depending on the client. Uh, if you come in, it's like it's like you're you're pushing towards a specific diagnosis. Tell me about what else is going in your client. Or maybe I wouldn't say that, but I'd ask about, uh, legal issues, uh, marital issues. If there's, uh, any sort of tension that is going on in their life. So, um, you might directly, uh, address it or, again, you might need a little bit more time to figure out if they're truly malingering. Um, for me, it goes into that we need to expect our client is telling us the truth and totally suspect that they're not at the same time. Right? And so, uh, it might depend on how how that goes, but you may then choose to confront it directly or just wait and see where it goes. And, uh, if it's if it's inconclusive that you can't draw diagnosis or you might give a provisional diagnosis, but it's unclear if the client's being, um, honest. And so you need more time to mull that and pull that out. And. All right. So if we were to look at, um, differential diagnosis for factitious disorder, we also need to look at the concept of conversion disorder, borderline somatic symptom disorder, which all have, uh, like symptom based disorders. Um. Excuse me. Um, and the difference here when we're looking at, um, is they're deceptive reports of symptoms. So if you look at borderline harmful behavior and factitious disorders about deception rather than attention seeking. So if someone is looking at falsifying their symptoms and they're leaning towards maybe a borderline personality disorder, it's all about getting attention. It's all about, uh, uh, help seeking is about being seen, being heard, being noticed versus factitious disorder. It's almost the deception itself is what it's about. Does that make sense? So how do you tease that out? That's going to depend. And again asking some good questions. Um. For somatic related issues. There's no evidence of false claims. It's just the person is experiencing genuine experiences. So when you look at somatic symptom disorder, for example, they truly believe they're experiencing their symptoms, even even related to pain. They are having those symptoms. But there may be no medical costs for those symptoms. So there's a true belief that they're experiencing that pain, that symptom. Whereas in factitious disorder that's not there. Their motive. Does that make sense. So in some ways they're just looking at are they trying to deceive for the fact of deceiving or seek attention, or do they truly believe that they have these disorders? So when you look at affective disorder, they're going to take action to falsify, fake, intentionally injure themselves or others and present as a sick self or injured. And they will take effort to make it look real. And this can actually get into what used to be called, um, Munchausen by proxy, the nightmare, factitious disorder setting, even fake, uh, symptoms for someone else. So now that we've ruled out, are they here? And it's true. Most likely answer is going to be yes. Step number two we need to rule out substance related causes. Now if we really get substance related causes, most if not all mental health disorders symptoms can actually be described by either substance use, intoxication or withdrawal. So one of the things that we need to do is we need to look and screen for is there substances involved in this person's life. And if so, how could that actually be shading their experience with symptoms. So one of the challenges that we're going to have is do are people always honest about what they think? And the first session, are they going to admit to you? For example. Uh, client is 15 years old and their their one because their parents are saying that they're experiencing challenges. And, um, are they going to maybe disclose to you that they're smoking weed? They may not. Okay. So one of the challenges we have is they may be resistant or are those that experience significant substance use always the most reliable and being able to tell you about their history? There may be gaps. There may be challenges. Their life, um, and their experience with substances may actually cloud, um, their judgment. So, um, if we look at the substance related issues, missing it is one of the biggest causes of misdiagnosis. So in your screening questionnaire, in your intake form just have asked, you know, do you take um, talk about substance use. How often do you, uh, consume alcohol cigarets. Is there recreational drugs? If so, how often? How much? What's the, uh the quantity. Um, and the difference between someone drinking a glass of red wine a couple days a week versus a bottle of wine a night bottle and a half of wine is like. So you can begin to see that that you might be looking at, um, the volume and frequency, duration, intensity of use is going to inform your outcome. I'm going to right five. Wait. What's that? Yeah, it's the way people do this thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, again. Uh uh, I don't know, off the top of my head, but could, uh, possible, uh, use or withdraw from things, actually create things like anxiety, depression. And so when you look at symptoms like depression, anxiety, cognitive delay, delusions, aggression, memory loss, sexual dysfunction, impulsive behavior, all of these could be related to either being on a substance, coming off of a substance or, um, uh, being intoxicated. The other factor is that they can either change mask or disguise the presentation of other symptoms. So one of the questions we ask is if there is, um. Substance use. What do you think would be a good question to determine? Again, if you look at almost all of the disorders, there's one of one of the classifications in the disorder is substance related depression, anxiety. Uh uh, psychosis. They're all there in there. So what question might you ask to be able to determine, uh, which came first? One question comes to mind. It's substance related or is it not substance related? Yeah. What age are you. At what age did you start using it? Well, in the second half of that question me that Mr. What's that? Family history. Family history? That's a good one. What about when did you first experience symptoms? So if you have date time when they first started using and when you have information of when symptoms started. Because one of the challenges we have is many, um substance use disorders are comorbid with other disorders. But oftentimes it's a coping mechanism. But we need to be able to pull out substances, Mr. Cox. So by simply asking when did the symptoms start and when did you start using this substance? Knowing those two pieces of information gives us the ability to rule in a rule out substance related costs. So what we need to do is screen for all different types of substances. Uh, recreational medication. The one that often gets missed is environmental. Uh, there was, um, big, um, actually more related to physical issues that. Have you seen the advertisements for lawyers asking about, uh, have you worked around asbestos? And they're asking about mesothelioma. And the idea is like, okay, so they based on environment now have this condition. So one of the things we need to do is understand is there something environmental substance, uh, someone works with around lead based paint or if they work around, uh, different chemicals or in an environment that is known to have different chemicals. Um, we need to be able to know, um, because it's not just the substances they may take themselves, but their prior mental impact is something that often gets missed. The other challenge in order to rule in or rule out absence, is actually required to be able to rule out if medication or substances is a cause. But the challenge is, is abstinence isn't always possible. So sometimes in the process of diagnosis, you may need to actually engage in substance use treatment first before you can actually get a clear full diagnostic picture. So one of the other things that we need to do is, is um. The client may in fact experience two independent disorders, and therefore we need to provide the diagnosis and diagnosis accordingly. They could have a substance use disorder and another disorder. So again the process here is that we want to do is we need to screen for it. We need to confirm if the substance use came first or symptoms came first. And then we need to understand, uh, better experience with and understanding the implications of, um, the significance or the impact of their, uh, substance use. In order to understand, is that the reason for diagnosis and. The other thing is we need to consider, much like I said, sometimes that are like, uh, bipolar disorder, uh, schizophrenic related disorders, uh, depressive disorders all have high co-morbidity with substance use disorder. Uh, you self-medication is a really big factor. Yeah. Step one was what are the lingering factors in sort of step two? Substances now. Step three. Medical related causes. Again, if you look at all of the diagnostic criteria, they're going to ask you to rule out substances and then rule out medical related causes. This can be important but difficult to ascertain. So let me ask you this now. And sometimes in this in our cohorts, we actually do have medical doctors who are recurring. It's, uh, but how many of you you don't need to raise your hand are medical doctors and would be able to rule in or rule out medical causes or mental health symptoms. I know I can't. So one of the things we have is this is where we need to know our boundaries and stay in our lane. So the way that we ask this question is, um, asking around medical history. When was the last time you saw your primary care doctor? What did they say? They run any tests? Did those tests produce any results? Uh, would it be okay if I contacted your medical provider and got information about those results? Yeah. Okay. Would you sign this release of information that I can get those results right? So, uh, but here, what we need to do is not necessarily understand that we're going to diagnose somebody, cause we just need to be aware of that medical cause and how it could impact our, um, diagnosis. For example, what might be a medical cause for someone feeling, um, tired, low motivation, uh, sleeping many hours out of the day and just, um, gaining weight. At that time I was hypothyroid. So if I have business reports, uh, those symptoms, could they be depressed? Yes. And we need to ask, have you seen your primary care doctor? Have they, uh, run any blood tests? Uh, regarding any anything that would have been related to this? Cause now I will say oftentimes, um, not oftentimes, sometimes clients will be referred to you by their medical doctor because they're experiencing low motivation, weekend lethargy, and the doctor around the thyroid and other blood test. And those came back negative. So they're dealing with something else. If not, you might recommend you can't prescribe, but you can recommend. You might consider going to your medical doctor just so we can rule out if there's anything physical going on, uh, that might be contributing to your symptoms. Okay, so big picture. Uh, just be aware of the interaction of the two. Um. Mental health and, uh, medical crises that may seem. So yes, I want to apply for the medical part of the human out. What if you work in in a population that doesn't have access to your primary care doctors? How do you live with that? Uh, again, that's where maybe you say it's leaning towards this, but medical, uh, medical evaluation would confirm if there's medical causes or it's unclear if medical causes are related. But client does meet diagnostic criteria for depressive disorder. So recommend, uh, if possible. And then at least that way you're you're acknowledging that could be a possibility. Yeah. There's actually another hand. Okay. Uh, so the other thing we can do is we could ask about, uh, which came first, which like substances, which came first, the medication or the psychiatric experience. And then we need to evaluate for atypical expression of symptoms. So for example, we need to be aware of the general expression of mental health conditions. And if there are different in that we may want to see if there's a medical cost. For example, if you look at different, uh, traumatic brain injury, neurological functions, uh, even the interaction and interplay of, uh, different, uh, blood related issues, uh, kidney function, liver function and heart function, all of those can have impact on things like mood and, um, uh, energy level and everything. So it's more so being aware of and then asking the question, doing your due diligence. And if the client can't get medical sort of act, um, medical treatment or um, how this you can make that recommendation, right. So if you were to ask questions related to those types of disorders, or how would you differentiate what question comes from right for you? A poverty history. What's that? Family history. Family history? Yep. What else? The two obvious state medical history? Or have you been treated for this before? Absolutely. It doesn't matter. Questions one of education. You take medication. Do you take the medication that's prescribed. And that may not be substance use related. It may be overusing right. Self-medicating. They're using their medications outside of the way it's prescribed. But it may be you. No I don't like the way it makes me feel. So I only take it periodically. Now you guys have the second one yet, right? So one of the things that we have is oftentimes medications operate in what they would call a therapeutic window. Um, uh, for example, psychotropic medications are a lot this way. You have to build up to the point where it gets into that window where it's actually effective. And so if the client's not taking it as prescribed, they never may actually get the medical benefit because the the volume of medication in their bloodstream does not actually get into that therapeutic window, or they may not take it regularly enough. So it falls in and out, falls in and out, falls in and out. And oftentimes that itself, um, like one of the primary reasons why they tell you not to start, uh, something like anti-depressants and then stop cold turkey is because the impact on the body is significant. So if they're entering and exiting that therapeutic window of medication, that may be causing problems. So again, you don't necessarily have to have an understanding of all medications and their interactions. And you know what happens if they stop taking or if they don't take enough of it or they take it regularly. But you need to be aware that maybe those medications have that implication. So that's where knowing where you can get good information about medications, having a good resource guide, having a reliable source online, you can look it up, uh, anyone really good at spelling medications. So what you can do is ask the client if they'd be willing to bring a list of their prescriptions, or even if they're taking a lot of medications. Would you be willing to bring the medications with you so I can get the names of them? Or you take your best guess and you go and then if you're not sure, don't say, well, I think it's that confirm. Right. Because the difference between something, um, and the medications have such unique names, not their generic or brand names, but the medication name itself, uh, they can be very, very similar, but very two different classifications of medication. So. Confirm. Yeah. Um, a couple is the doctor. How's he, uh, because he has a surgery. That means he was a substance use. Yes. He become. I mean, do you think it's a good diagnosis to him? That will be substance use if they're addicted to the medication. Yeah, the doctor also. It'll help. Yeah. Oh, yeah. He was definitely addicted to, uh, to the to, uh, it was like it, like, you know, that means he has the diagnosis substance use. Yeah, yeah. Um. Okay, so step one was. What? We're going to do this a couple more times every last session, so get ready. Why? Because you need to be able to hit all six on your final exam, and you can't have them written down. Okay, so I need to know all six of different steps at different times. Uh, so step one is going to step two. So step three. Okay. Okay. Now let's look at step four. Okay. Step four in here going to determine the primary disorder. Good news. This is what we've been doing all class so far is this is the step we've been working on. Because in some ways this is kind of our wheelhouse. This is where or maybe not everyone is going to be a substitute counselor to be able to work in that world, that everyone's a medical doctor, but we're all going to be able to work through this process. So here what we're doing is we're looking at determining primary disorder. Now when I say primary we can have secondary and others right. Those would be listed here. But what we're looking here is which category fits best. Does the client meet for diagnostic criteria. And as we talked about with um PTSD earlier, the idea of there's a true age. But do they meet every single criteria? Not necessarily. Uh. Every individual sub criteria, but each grade through education and these, uh, walking all the way through and making sure they meet full diagnostic criteria. And then from there we're going to proceed to differential diagnosis for that disorder. Now keep in mind, um, uh, first has this is called the steps of differential diagnosis. Um, the first name is Martin. Um by first. And it's all process of differential diagnosis. Uh, includes decision trees and tables and even your DSM have some some of those built in. But here what we're going to do is okay so this is where I landed. This is definitely post-traumatic stress disorder. That's the primary disorder they've met for criteria. Okay. So step four is what we've been working on. Step five is okay. Now that I have a primary disorder, I'm going to take a step back. I'm going to ask myself. Could this be. Now open up. Let's look at. Major depressive disorder or. See bipolar disorder or any of them. It's going to get to. This is not better explained by another mental health disorder. So in this in the criteria we're going to walk through this step. Could it be adjustment. Doesn't meet that threshold. Now um, we're having a conversation. This is what I was going to mention. So one of the things that we can do is we can have a lens of when we work through the steps of differential diagnosis, I encourage you, don't leap for the major disorder first. Now we need to evaluate this is a depressive disorder that four meets criteria okay. But we can also look at almost like what is the the lowest threshold of disorder kind of working from that process. They're definitely meeting the criteria for a depressive related disorder otherwise known as specified or unspecified. And then we can kind of bounce up. Do they meet full criteria for major depressive disorder or persistent depression or one of the other disorders. So in some ways this is our our spot check. Is there something else going on that this is actually can be attributed to? Adjustment disorder specified or unspecified other. So in some ways we're going to say that for do they mean criteria. Could it be something else. Does that make sense. Okay. So step one that kind of step two. Step three. Right in step four. Now step five. Could it be adjustment for specified or unspecified other. So here we're going to look for those life stressors those other things loss change work relationships other things that are going on that make us believe it could be something else. Or is it below that threshold of clinical significance that under another specified or unspecified disorder is warranted? Now step six. This is where when we're all said and done, we are going to ask ourselves a question how does this experience pass the threshold of disorder or not disorder? So this is where we're going to look at, um, does it meet the clinical significance that actually justifies a disorder. So everyone can experience symptoms the most mental health issues on the continuum. But there's a past that threshold of, um, intensity us. Is it pervasive? Does it interrupt multiple areas of life or, and is that disruption in life significant enough? Right. So if you look at the diagnostic criteria, it's somewhere usually in the mid to end it's going to say it causes clinically significant distress in work relationships occupations other areas. Right. So in some ways this is where we're going to explore that criteria is does this meet. Is it significant enough. Now we talked about clinical significance in the life of the likely. It could be very much um, just the fact that they're there to see. Is that clinically significant enough? Is there enough distress that they come talk to a perfect stranger? Tell them all about their life and their experience. Is that considered clinically significant enough? Quite possibly. But that's where you as a clinician is going to pause and say, okay, it's this person's experience on the continuum significant enough for me to say it's disordered. Does that make sense? And if it is disordered, is it reaching that threshold of, uh. It's it's anxious but is anxious that enough domains and pervasive severe enough to be generalized anxiety disorder or is it just anxiety other specified. Okay. And so that's it. So you see where this process is a little bit fluid. But each step needs to happen. So what questions do you have about the steps of differential diagnosis. No questions. I was that clear? The first topic, you know. Yes. What safeguards are in place? You do make like this. What do you want? Safeguards. What? They can't. Yeah. Uh. Good documentation. Uh, this is where, again, as I'm looking at pushing through. If you look at the exam and even, uh, step four, if you're going to look at the client's experience, what they report to you, you're going to make a clear connection with that report to the diagnostics area. And in my my personal approach to notes in the the first note is five reports. Here's their report. Now when I look at my diagnostic criteria the clients report this the. So this is right here. This is how I'm justifying rationalizing supporting my diagnosis. So from there it really is um, the safeguard of, you know, you know, your process, you follow your process and you make your best clinical judgment. And that doesn't mean you'll get it right every time. And the other thing you can do is look at if I'm not sure if there are other specified or unspecified or provisional, if that makes more sense before I provide a full diagnosis. So in some ways, by having that, um, that approach of saying minimal threshold, right. Do they need criteria? Yes. It's significant. Yeah. Okay. Here's my rationale. Justification. Does that help other than that uh, malpractice insurance because um, so I would say, uh, trust yourself, don't worry about getting it right or wrong. But if you know the process, follow your process, you know, and you can stand behind it. Does that answer your question? Um, yeah. So is there room for like, the last step, you know, kind of have counselors to like. Apply their own perspective, like philosophy on diagnosis in this area. Talk to me a little bit more about your philosophy or that approach. What do you mean by that? Like being more conservative about giving out a diagnosis and just believing that, you know, like thinking that that's more helpful for people or the other way? Yeah. And in some ways, you're probably going to have to wrestle through what is your approach and what is your philosophy and then wrestle through what is that setting require? Okay. Um, do they require a diagnosis? And you might have a, um, a moral, ethical supervisor about providing a diagnosis. Personally, I'm not opposed to working diagnostically and understanding required sentences and how they meet known disorders. But if I could personally avoid putting, you know, this is this disorder. Sure. But at the same time, I might talk with the client about you're experiencing something very similar to what I would call like anxiety related disorders. So this is what it is, and this is how we're approaching our work together. Because without it, if I don't understand the client's dealing with anxiety, how am I going to treat them right? So, uh, but how uh, I don't think that answer your question until it's after 9:00. For me to know how you know, the method imagines putting the various plans. Um, I feel like it makes sense. Um, so in that sense, this does give you room. But at the same time, you need to know kind of what's the law, what's the what's the process? And can you not give a diagnosis? That that, you know, kind of what how are you operating from there? Ethically, we're required to be able to provide a diagnosis, but maybe there's there's reasons why we may withhold talking about that diagnosis or disclosing that diagnosis. But it is there's some room we need to kind of have that to wrestle through that. Does that make sense? Yeah. Okay. Other questions. Yeah. If you're working in a setting that doesn't require a diagnosis, but your point of you're still looking at it, this person is clearly experiencing symptoms for the disease whatever treatment. Because evidence. How do you how do you document that without diagnosing. Yeah that'd be great question in that setting that supervisor okay. Uh, because they may have you're going to say operating problems that are going to have a clear rationale or what would they do with that? Um, again, my personal recommendation is to work through that diagnostic lens. And, uh, but for me. I might, uh, I might describe the client's experiences and know that it's possible they make many criteria for an anxiety disorder based on these types of symptoms. But I might still provide that rationale, because that's going to justify my treatment. Because if I never if I ever had to stand for, uh, the licensing board, um, or even just for my own personal integrity, I need to go. This is why I'm treating this client, and this is how I know they get better. So therefore, because ethically, I need to be able to work with the lens that's helping the client. And when they reach a point where there is no longer needed, that we have to continue therapy if we don't understand what we're working on. So for me, I would likely document that into my notes and then be able to track progress related to symptom reduction. Um, I mean, they call it negative experiences or symptoms or, you know, in order to justify hate, this is clients report of, uh, negative thoughts reduced. Okay. So what is that related to? Okay. Um, that's personally I would hang on to that lens because that's what the industry says, but, um, that's for sure. And that's my understanding that this, um, reminder what we're on. The other side of classification disorder where they meet criteria, uh, significant disturbance in that domain. Also perfection declaration otherwise. And then specified simply, as you said, defining why the client doesn't criteria for number, uh, intensity and frequency. Whatever you say. Unspecified. You don't disclose what you have, whether or not you do or do not. Good practice like in 32 years. That's fine. Company premium should they can refer to someone else as to why. Um, but if you don't or maybe you don't have enough information, you know. Okay, great. Okay. Let's talk about. So when we are putting all of this process together. Okay. So we've talked about intake paperwork. We talked about clinical interviewing. Now we're talking about all the steps of differential diagnosis okay. So how do they all fit together. So as I was thinking about it earlier today, I thought about the steps of differential diagnosis really inform our what and why. They're helping us understand all of these steps or understanding, uh, the what I what is the clients experiencing? What's going on behind the scenes? It's answering our why poor treatment. Right. So we're able to give the why we're providing the diagnosis. But then when we look at the clinical interview and the other take intake process, that's our how how are we going to gather this data. Okay. So when we put it all together we're using the steps of differential diagnosis are more like the lens in which we view the process. We need to make sure that we're including all of these pieces to confirm or rule out a mental health disorder. And then the clinical interview and all of the other pieces. We have to answer those questions. Does that make sense? So again, the why we have talked about the, uh, the diagnostic criteria, the steps of differential diagnosis, but then also the clinical interview. You start putting those pieces together that informs the how you're going to get that initial information from your client. Okay. Does that make sense? Do you have any questions about that? Yes. I'm just wondering if you have had staff, um, work with you. So I made the backward steps of the passage. Yes. Yes. Okay. Yeah. So, being a Christian councilman. Okay. So with that, um, it's a question of like, um, can we have, like, is there a step up in kind of a corporate perspective at you? Absolutely. So as part of the intake process. Um, so it's a little bit of conflict, right? We could identify ourselves as a Christian counselor. Uh, and disclose this is the lens in which I operate. But when I do my intake, one of the things we need to understand. And we'll talk more about cultural considerations. Which faith is a piece of that. Uh, and coming up on that question. But what happens is we can ask the client if faith and spirituality is important to them. And if so, how what does that mean? And then that will also inform, um, the process of of exploring, even if some diagnoses might be ruled out based on their faith practice or their experience, like, uh, for example, um, the practice of uh, uh, alternate states, uh, almost like delusions, hallucinations. Some might see that some cultures, some face practices. I see that as someone is, uh, having a spiritual experience. And so it would be normative in their culture and their faith experience to have, uh, we hear the voice of God. Uh, and it was an auditory. And so might you consider that an auditory? Others might consider, um, hearing from what might be in the sense that that answers your question. Um, so with that, uh, part of the intake process can include an evaluation of faith and spirituality. And we actually, uh, that might be two classes. For now. We'll talk about faith and spirituality the next time or the time after. Uh, but we'll talk about, uh, even do it, um, like a spiritual, uh, assessment. And to understand actually that that's where I get too much. Um, but ultimately we'll talk about faith and culture and a Christian perspective of diagnosing and how we incorporate that. Yeah. So how does this fit in with someone who's just come in and, like, they might be getting a divorce? Um, so because I think a lot of people come to counselors for relational issues, and it seems this is based on the medical model at home that we're supposed to work from a wellness model. Yep. So how how is that just because it's a totally different class or, you know, medical issues? So I will look at, um, and we'll talk about the case conceptualization. Uh, one of the next, uh, we have four left. So probably next time at the time after. Well, um, concept of case conceptualization. And where does diagnosis fit into the overall picture? It's the why and the brief answer now, just to hopefully satisfy that curiosity is the reason why we need to know more about everything is because what's going on with the relationship and why should causing distress? Because it's not just about for us. Um, I talked about the clinical interview and the concept conceptualization. Most of this class focuses on the diagnostic process through this medical model, this categorical system. But for good treatment, the clinical interview is much more broad and helps us understand who is the client and many aspects of who they are going to inform treatment which diagnosing is only one piece of that. Does that make sense? We will address that. Yeah. So yeah. And again it it's it just gets the whole picture. Okay. Um because then it's not hey we're not just treating the symptom. We're treating the person. And so we need to understand the person. Yeah. Okay. Any other questions? All right. So what I'd like to do is we'll start with the exercise that I have. Next time we're going to break into groups we're going to use I have vignettes provided. So you this will not be your vignettes, but I will provide you a vignette. And you as table groups, you know, 3 or 4 will walk through this process of identifying the symptoms, walking through the diagnostic criteria and going through the process of the final exam. So that way we can make sure that you have all of the pieces you need to. Okay. So like the next time what I'll do is I'll start give you a refresher of the requirements of the final exam. You'll get the vignette and we'll actually work through the process. So that way you can feel comfortable. If there's feels like there's gaps, you can fill them. You can ask questions, make sure you have an understanding of all of the pieces okay. Makes sense. So with that you have a wonderful evening because we didn't get our lunch break. Up schedule.