Fun and excitement, but just know. Who you are. So, uh, let's kind of get into it tonight. Let's review. Because as we go into this exercise, uh, we're going to look at the steps of differential diagnosis. So what are the steps of differential diagnosis. Step number one lingering, lingering and consequences that. There you go. Step two. Steps. Step three. You make a step forward for this primary diagnosis. Determine step five that are explained by uh or and it starts with an A. And then it could be explained by better explain by simply just adjustment. That's why you specified. And then step six is. Is it the sword in? Is that the Jordan? Yeah. Like it doesn't cross that threshold. That boundary of this is actually that this border here. So going back a few times to who establishes if it's clinically significant enough to be disordered. So who determines that. What's that that you do you as a clinician. Right. And so in some ways you can say I. So as we look at these, uh, how are the steps of differential diagnosis used? And how do we make application of them in the tenacity? Of the player underwater? Well, they are not necessarily in order, but you should cover all of them in your process of anything. Right? So ultimately this is the steps of differential are not necessarily the sequence of what you do, but it should inform your clinical interview and your entire intake process. Can you answer all of these questions? By the time you're done, we would apply for the first or maybe second time. Can I roll up earlier? Uh, is it substance related? Medical related? What are the primary symptoms? First of all, I don't know if I evaluated your life. And I say, is it possibly related to something significant change in life adjustment disorder, or could it be specified unspecified if it doesn't in category four and step four, does it not meet major depressive disorder? But is it depressive and experienced appropriately unspecified. That's part of it. And then finally we're going to go okay. So all of this together doesn't meet all criteria. Does it get enough to say this is a disorder experience. So ultimately keep in mind that as we go into the final exam, you will need to know all six of the steps. Again, you don't have to do them in order, but literally represent. Um, and as we go into this in here, I'll give a couple more instructions. But keep in mind, um, especially with the static vignette, I'm not expecting you to make up something, for example, but mention nothing about it multiple times. Therefore, for the purposes of that example, I would encourage you to say although nothing mentioned the medical. Therefore I for this and this only you can assume that it's not medical because the vignette stated. However, I encourage you to consider. However, I would ask the question a lot of other medical courses whether this show me that there are any questions about the steps of differential diagnosis. Yes. And so for step five, you remember this correctly. But you say that my notes, they could be anything else. But you mentioned an adjustment disorder judgment disorder or specify an unspecified other. And in some ways step five and six really are that check in balance. Um, could I consider other things? And if you look at the diagnostic criteria, usually in the, uh, in the DSM, one of the later, um, diagnostic criteria like, uh, pay through, uh, equally likely to be associated with it's not related to substance or medical college or can't you better attribute it to another mental health disorder? So in some ways, if you're going through the path, then it kind of builds in the criteria building these steps. But you ask yourself these questions like that's a good framework for you to be able to make sure you're asking, um, could it be something else? Am I sure? Did I go through my entire differential correctly? Um, and then keeping in mind that I mentioned last time that what we would like to do is maybe approach it from the least intrusive threshold first and then build up to the more significant diagnoses, because ultimately you don't want to judge you as we talk about personality disorders tonight, because that's such a significant diagnosis that requires probably even psychiatric evaluation testing, uh, you know, in your, uh, your clinical interview. Uh, but it's also they're not as, uh, prevalent. You're not going to see them as often. So we don't jump to the most severe first, even if there's, um, for example, narcissistic tendencies. So what we want to do is kind of look at attachment and other related issues as a criteria for the disorder for kids with multiple disorders. And so any questions about that. All right. What are the key features of PTSD. You get intrusive thoughts intrusive thoughts related to the traumatic experience. To a traumatic experience. Does it have to be actual life threatening? No no no. However, it's perceived. It's perceived to be life threatening. Or hearing of family members. Friends. Uh, observing something else. They themselves may not have in danger, but they see something else happened to someone else. How can that be through television? Yeah, but, um, we can also look at issues related to, uh, security problems related to working with individuals. Um, I know that the for the first responders just being exposed to ongoing, um, uh, traumatic experiences stuff. All right. So how is acute stress disorder differ from PTSD? Um, what's a time and what's the time for acute stress? Six months of permanent. Uh, 11211 month. And then after one month or one month and one day. Would you automatically diagnose or. Would you confirm that they have post-traumatic stress disorder by walking through. So keep in mind that they have acute stress and they're maybe a week, 2 or 3 weeks in. Because oftentimes the something that would come into your head. Just this morning I had this traumatic experience possibly. But likely they're going to have to live with it and, you know, wrestle with it. I just need help. At some point in that month when they come to see you. Um, so with that, you can look at will they need for criteria for PTSD if the time is allowed, but if they actually continue to suffer and how would you know? What would you do? If you have to stress and you look, they would meet criteria for, uh, PTSD. How would you know that? Would you say professional like like, yeah. And so when you do an acute stress disorder, if they meet criteria and if you look at personality stress and you look at the symptoms and they would need it in a week, seven, eight, ten days, you can say if it gets you provisional, if they pass this date then if you want to become professional. Great. Okay. Any questions? All right. So let's talk about this case real quick. So you've been, uh, working with a male client. He's 22 years old, and his primary focus of therapy has been adjusting to living on his own after college. He arrived to the session uncharacteristically ten minutes late, and he appears agitated. His speech is pressured, and what he is saying does not make sense. When he asked when you. When asked what caused him to be so agitated, he responds in a loud voice, they did this to me. They're out to get me. You've got to help me. You're the only one I trust. He sits down and then seems to calm down enough to continue the session. McKinney continues to speak quickly, uh, but more coherently. And he tells you he was out with friends last night to celebrate with his friends. Uh, his friend's birthday. During the outing, he began to feel unsettled, anxious. And these feelings have increased throughout the night and into the morning. He reports and reports feeling panicked all day and feels like he's being followed based on his clients presentation. Think about it. What would be your initial diagnosis? What information would you need to confirm that you left the diagnosis? And, uh, what are the possible legacy of the accident? What's up to put it out there. What do you see? It's definitely. It's, uh, someone else. Um, um, on his picture, they they will meet. Who? Or if someone else, it could be his. Her. It would be a person of interest to someone else, to the investigators have a very real person. What else? Uh, that's about substance use. Substance use? Okay. And what question would you ask to, you know, about substance use? Um, have you used any sort of addictive substances or products as the several others have experienced? So like, yeah, I was out last night with my friends and, you know, we were at a bar celebrating his birthday. I had a drink, but nothing more than I usually do with just a beer. Okay. What have you done here? You only experience this for three. No, I've never said that. What do you mean? I've never met people who have never been out to get me. Yeah. Um. I guess with that, like. Have you noticed or you haven't noticed any? Anyone before? Where did you notice them? No. Just, uh, last night we were there, and then all of a sudden, I just really felt like somebody followed you, and they were, uh. There's no reason. You know? Any other medication? Yeah. I would to add that if you feel as before. Oh, you mean now or many years in an effort went into, like anybody in your family? No, I don't know. I guess you it's just like I was out last night and I was there and all of a sudden I just felt like, you know, these guys were watching me. And then. And then over the course of the entire event, I just. Yeah. How did you find? Out. Not my friends. They all got wasted. I don't know what they're thinking, but I, um. Were you, um, in contact with your father all night long? Yeah. And then did you have any faith in me? So. Uh, that's all I could say. Probably, like, typical six hours that. I can figure a day before, you know, get ready. I would love it. I would, but I don't think that it was like I was telling you who was calling you. I really don't know. Maybe this is it. Guys, um, and I have been looking at me a lot, and I just have a feeling that they're tracking you down and they're going to get you. All right, so with that, what do you think? I'd like to. Add on that. What's that? Sometimes I think you know what? Your job. As a job? Yeah. In environmental school, I work. I have way to. You. Okay. Yeah. The cool thing. So ultimately, here's where we're landing. And hearing that be a possible, like a brief second. And a few. And I know we haven't covered psychotic disorders in total yet, so we won't know. But if anyone knows, typically what's the window for the onset of psychosis? One of the things you can do about 18 to 25. How old is this guy? Uh, yeah. But, um, and you're all on the right track. The rolling up substance medical. What's going on in the day? Where do you work? You're looking at the seven fundamental factors. And so, um, I wrote this opinion, uh, quite a few years ago with brief psychotic, um, episodes month. Um, but one of my students said, okay, but what if it's true? What if there is someone out to get it? So again, we can sometimes look through the lens of pathology. And so one of the questions you might ask and consider is I was out at the bar with an event. Was there a competition. And they were there and they were looking at me and then I left. But I know that. What do you believe there? And he was saying that, uh, you said that you don't think you should go home, that you're not opening statements like start to ask questions because in some way we need to fact check reality. And we need to also maybe assume that his reality is not shared. So what we um and again, I usually I throw this one in here because we're going to go through the process. But keep in mind that as we talked with clients, especially the observers, we're going to talk about personality disorders, um, psychotic disorders that sometimes we need to look for things that they could be true or that could not be true. Any questions about this or the process? Yeah. When you think about a psychologist or something, what I see here. You have to tell me you're the only one I do know, which is very interesting questions because usually with us psychologists, something they don't trust anybody in that is in a head that possibly at the same time you look at, um, look at the rapport. How long have you been seeing him? Yeah. But you just, you know, that you have you had a long enough relationship to where that person who you've been helping out with, you may actually be the one that you trust. And you know, the family, you know, they're he's adjusting to life. And maybe in that you feel like that is the one that is just so particular that you may be that person think your client trusts. So but in this case, I wrote a little brief psychotic episode, um, in mind. But keeping in mind as we go through the steps that you guys did, well, we didn't, um, rule out factitious. Hopefully at this point, given people have come multiple times because you've already kind of moved up the stairs. Um, you look at substances, you look at environmental substances, you look at, um, possible, um, poisoning, drug related. Even if it's not intentional, that's not medical causation. Um, so one thing that we didn't do is start further down. A lot of the stuff that said, like, so as you look in front of you, there are two vignettes and I apologize. Um, I think the copier, I missed one over here, so I apologize. You only have one, but the second one. So what we're going to do is in your table groups, uh, of maybe 4 or 5, you're going to break up into two groups and you're going to read this vignette and there's two of them. So if you get done with one, move on to the other. But what I want you to do is think about the steps of differential diagnosis as you read them, what are you thinking? And then walk through the process of the steps that are. More substantive. How do I identify the quantity based on the description. So then could it be adjustment for other or another disorder. And then um what's the boundary of a disorder. Right. So I think we're going to talk through identify symptoms, walk through the steps of differential diagnosis. And then I'm going to uh discuss about oh. I'm. Going to find out what we mean. Yeah. So that's where I think they're missing this one. Which one? Okay. This is where I think, you know, it's just this. Um, yeah. You know, like I. Okay, great. What are we doing? Yeah, that's very generous. Uh, sure.