The clinical interview, uh, assignment, because that is coming up. So checking in to do our 25th. Right. Okay. Does everyone have a good. You didn't do this. I heard I heard some some laughing, but people's, uh. You. Know. With you. All right. So, um, the question. Do you have a partner raise your hand if you do not have a partner. Okay, so look around to find a perfect. I recommend you start this sooner rather than later. Yeah. Okay. Keeping in mind it is ten minutes only. You can set a timer. It doesn't have to be a nice, clean, open working end of your session. Remember that expression. So if you're on camera and you're like okay. And then you set the timer, set it down and go, I'm not going to set up on the quality of the video unless I can't hear you, right. I think you to see those people in. Um, from there, no diagnosis is needed. But you need to show me that you're asking diagnostic interview questions, not hairpin questions, so you can even start, uh, like I have demonstrated here. So name and age of the client. Okay, great that you just started. So I'll bring her in today and the open question and then move on. And what I'm looking for again is the doctors to be able to, uh, ask, should open and close questions, be able to follow information with a good specific questions that get to that, uh, level of information. Then from there, bounce back up and switch topics. Right? So it doesn't need to be a thorough clinical interview. I'm looking for the skill of interview. Yeah. Just to clarify, um, is that. Okay. Yep. So each person has ten minutes. So I'll say that you as the clinician own your video. You are responsible for your role as a clinician. If you are the client show up prepared to be able to role play your client. Be familiar. You can use any of the videos you've written so far, but be able to kind of be in here. Don't rely on the written word yet. Be able to just kind of role. So it takes a little bit of preparation. But uh, in that, um, in that video, the responsibilities on the clinician, that the client. Yeah. Um, so you know, that you. So, yeah, that's what I'm looking for. Can you do it? Yeah. Yeah. Uh, yeah. I need it for you. You don't need to achieve a diagnosis because I know, but. Yeah. Uh, can we use a different like. Or do you want to thank you, like, so you can, uh, you can record it, and then you can have your phone and, um. Make sure it's stable, and that when I play through, I don't see the keyboard right here. Um, but, uh, if you if it's a challenge to actually be in the same space at the same time to you can talk to you, um, to record that video or, um, there's also, uh, you know, trying to remember the name of it. I think it's, um. It's a video software that you can't you it's not a clean version. Um, but if you want to open that, it's a replica of OneDrive, which is a great, uh. Um, and then ultimately, um. But I think I covered all of that. Any questions about that for the play? Yeah. And they need to start at the beginning, like you said. Why did you come here or what did he like I do like 15 minutes, uh, basically to start from the beginning. Yeah. Just cut it off because ultimately that's going to show me that you're able to actually, you know, ask a good open question. Yeah. Yes. So that, um, kind of like a closure or is it okay to abruptly. Abruptly go off. And usually there is a struggle even when you're. Oh my God. Yeah. So again, this isn't like if you're doing for, um, maybe your counseling skills class or you need to see it's a little bit more of a, uh, opening thing as a working face and closing of the session. It's not that I just need a good ten minute chunk of healing to differentiate between interviewing. And if you feel yourself sliding into therapeutic mode, just stop. Ask a different question and go, all right. Um, it's going to show me that you recognize that you slide in. All right. Um, I think that's all we have for that. So I'm going to go ahead and pause this.