Process. What did you notice about working through the process? Yeah. I that is the one of the important things. You lost 30 pounds over the 18 month insomnia. And, um, and for you, for us to have the sadness and be going to positive depressive episodes. Okay, so you're heading towards the depression. Yeah. And I saw another example. Oh, um, we noticed, um, kind of like the process of elimination and few we of A, B and C of that major depressive disorder. And talking about process of elimination. What do you mean by that? Uh, well, we, we read through, um, like, oh, this is depressing. Yes. Does she have thoughts of death? No. So as we eliminate that and we kept moving forward and identified some of the symptoms, and then, um, and then later found out all that, uh, what the problem is. And so she's oftentimes we can hear walking through the diagnostic criteria and going one by one and, um. Yeah. Is it fair? Is it not? Is it there? Is it not? Yeah. So we actually wanted to start with, like, medical condition. Um. Yeah. Um, for the purposes of the video. Did you notice anything about the medical history of this episode? She recorded it out. So for the purposes of the exam, she reported generally good health. We'll update. But for you, in a clinical practice, you might talk about generally good health, those that make up any sort of medical event. Have what would that a normal if we diagnose. Right. So um for the purposes we can generally in good health. Uh, okay. What uh what other about the process. What? You know. Yeah. I don't know how to let you agree with everything yet. That's a good question. So Emily got malingering. Um, in some ways, um, opposite of when you interpret scripture, just so you know, the scripture of silence. But here you don't if it doesn't say that they're involved with the law in the lawsuit, and it's like, if it says it, it's that if it doesn't happen in a lot of ways. So I would recommend that if it's not there, might and like address what questions that you ask to confirm that. So yeah, seeing you're thinking, uh, if it's not there, if you simply state, um, you know, evidence of monumental practices disorder reported, couldn't find anybody else in whatever way or if it is that you would be listed. Yeah. You also want. To have like you have to thank you for that. Thank you Jason. Yeah. That was. Consistent with previous behaviors. Um. So we can't it out based on the story. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. I mean, she's, uh. She's the she's the African-American. And, uh, when we go in about the mental status simulation, she. This is saying that she had a difficult time making eye contact with a white, middle aged therapist, which is. We don't know about this because, uh, the what is actually white people we don't know about the husband, the white, the, you know, the could be, uh, the relational problems that we just always that teachers are picking up on. Could there be other factors related to that behavior that's based on a human who therapist how to control the culture? Mhm. Um, different, uh, different aspects. Yeah. Um, let me ask this. Has you worked with each other? What did you notice? Did you guys all approach it the same. Did you notice the same thing. Was it beneficial to hear what your classmates, you know, what about it was beneficial? What stood out to you? Yeah, it was right. Next to the more I looked for details. But yeah, I know this. I think you're looking to like. Okay, so it kind of helped you realize you're looking at each other a big picture. Okay. Was there any challenge working with others as you engaged in the project? Only the spacing could be challenged. When is everybody, for example, going all the same way? And your, uh, each with and more than three people go in that day, you kind of like okay. So I think it's a little bit of consensus or voting someone off the island. Yeah. Right. And because of this reason. Because basically everybody wants the same reason. So as we go into the process of diagnosis, one of the challenges we have is that you may do that in isolation initially, but as you've described the case of notice, there are a lot of benefits. Uh, they help you catch the nuance. They told you, look at the big picture. They, uh, maybe cut things I didn't, uh, and maybe that was consensus building. That's the only negative. So if you look at this process, remember, especially early on, seek consultation, seek supervision. Because ultimately people are going to see what you don't see. And then let me ask, now that you've seen what your classmates see, is that how you know that you see things differently? So yeah. So even in this process, I would encourage you to remember. Oh that's right. Uh, they helped me see this blind spot in my process. I was looking too much in the future, or I wasn't paying attention enough to the details, or I got stuck on one thing. Did anyone look at the process? You know, it's this. And then just like, uh, like the one household said, they would have worked on that. Yeah. That's okay. So for. Example, have I confirmed this diagnosis. And to check that as a safety as the check for my own, um, tendency to be in the one hand in this case, it's like, oh, it's going to be adjustment disorder or it will help me like. I said, yeah, checks and balances, you know. Step five and six. Could it be anything else, am I sure. And and then, uh, since I actually have the level of distress in for a diagnosis and we can say yes to those, uh, uh, yes to the last one, you know, you've done your checking out. So in some ways, people, uh, just shepherd in the blood, but the who? I, you know, all of it. It's a wonderful community. One is about to be cautious. You always want to confirm that. It actually. Is that so? Any questions about the process? Yes. If you can just clarify the I don't think and I don't know why you might like that. And so you have, you know, the threshold. If you're looking at the diagnostic criteria often, it's hard to say that because you go to occupational or other people to give you less or it doesn't mean that it's all things you have to ask yourself. For example, in this case and in and I'm guessing everyone would despair if anyone would be okay. Yeah. Okay. Um, the team is working. This is a homeowner in the house in his own neighborhood, and, uh, she ended up missing. I think it's. Yeah. Okay, so missing responsibilities. And I often said, uh. And I'll say this, um, for the rest of my life. So my history and my wife worked at home. She didn't, uh, not not work. She worked at home, uh, working with her son. So missing responsibilities. What about other areas that, again, have social. Impact? It's the quality of life. Yeah. Okay. So then you start to begin to say if it's a significant distress visit in more than one area of life. Because ultimately there are some things you need to get better. Not that, um, they got fired from their job because. Is that enough? Oh, geez. But if you're looking at, uh, they've been a little more active. He has, um, the different, uh, valuations of work that I did. I was a coworker. Okay. And that is concerning. But then if you add to that missing responsibilities at home and, um, dealing with impacting your social life, there is nothing that you can handle. Yes. The other thing is oftentimes and we talked about one of the starting point to is coming to see you a stranger and disclosing in their most challenging moments, representative of critical infrastructure. And, um, that's a good starting point. And you look at what, uh, Constellation of Experience does, it does not support it, as you can say, in a reasonable setting in my judgment. Yeah. Okay. Thank you for clarification. When it says, um, she did not put suicidal ideation, you only say that she noticed that, but then ignored the feelings of just wanting to give up and being better off dead. Um, and then one of the, um, psychosis criteria was recurrent thoughts of death, not despair. Suicidal ideation with a specific point without a specific plan to kill him. So they said she denied, denied or she denied killing. Okay. But she also then in the next breath admitted that just wanted to give up would be kind of dead. Right. So in some way you're also looking for inconsistencies in your story? No, no, no, I would never do that. But then she acknowledged. So that made me think, actually, you want me to go? Yes. Um, but some of that made that statement more the, um, occurrence of the death of suicidal ideation. Another for you. So let me ask you this. How would you know if she acknowledged that? Yeah. You know, I had the thought that I just be better off dead. How would you know if that's true? We could, I guess. Exactly. So if you're not sure, you say. Well, she's she's acknowledged it, but I could even look at intensity. Frequency to mention and be able to clarify because I guess it's unknown versus many people will have the thought of just life is so hard anyway. So you hear I was of a major depressive disorder. You're looking at kind of a recurrence of death or easier or an elimination of say, okay, so again, uh, is it significant enough to pay attention to that threshold, maybe. Was it a question for you to confront and and for the purposes of the exam, I would say yes, because it's evident. And you can't ask the follow up what statement question that you can say. Oh, yeah. All right. Um, if you want to look at this, this, um, you. Know, I don't have them. Yeah. Me too. I was hoping you guys could tell me. Uh, no. Look at this one. All right. So here is the discussion from the casebook. So it's major depressive disorder. Moderate with melancholic features is the official diagnosis. So I heard a lot of good questions. I heard pointing out criteria based on what I heard. You guys landed in the depressive disorder equivalent. Raise your hand if you did. Okay. Did anyone land on the specifier of moderate? Good. And what about melancholic features? Good. Excellent. About. For the purposes of the exam, if you got, um, major depressive disorder. And the specifiers were close. Or maybe you missed melancholic features, likely you'd be okay, because it's a pretty specific. But what I want is you to work towards that show. Or if it's unclear, specify it or talk to me about it, write about it. Okay, so let's read the discussion real quick. Mrs. Smith presents with 8 to 10 months of persistent, depressed mood and only a poor sleep. Diminished appetite with weight loss. Um, yeah, I in I don't know how to pronounce that word. Uh, energy and thoughts. It's big words. Our hearts and thoughts of death. She usually meets the requirements for the five of the nine symptoms of criteria for major depressive disorder. There is no evidence that the symptoms are caused by substance or other medical condition. She is distressed and dysfunctional to an extent that warrants clinical attention. She therefore meets criteria for DSM five major depressive disorder. In addition, Mrs. Smith has classic melancholic features. She reports loss of pleasure in almost all activities, describes distinct quality of depressed mood, characterized by, uh, profound despondency or despair, is regularly worst in the morning and has had significant weight loss and feelings of excessive guilt. Mrs. Smith's irritability is prominent. Ability may be more readily endorsed than sadness, especially by African-Americans, among whom psychiatric stigma is high. A complaint of irritability can be, uh, part of mania or hypomania, but Mrs. Smith lacks other symptoms of mania. So again, one of the things that if you're going to go through a differential diagnosis of this case, uh, for the final year, again, you're going to look at what did you pull out and why. You know anytime there's depressive disorder you need to rule out, uh, bipolar by looking at manic or hypomanic experiences. Important depressive uh, specifier is whether the MD is a single episode or recurrent. It's not clear whether Mrs. Smith has had major depression after her parents divorce when she was a child. To clarify, the clinician should explore further along those, um, those long ago symptoms. It is interesting that she referred to the school counselor at the time because of irritability and fights with classmates, noting that depression in children oftentimes comes out as agitation, irritability, or even, um, anger or knowledge of her parents divorce might help the teachers recognize that she was, um, in a depression, but it would not have been unusual for her to have been labeled as impulsive or disruptive rather than depressive as a young child. More information about the in an intervening course is also needed to determine whether Mrs. Smith has sufficiently persistent, sad mood two years or more to consider, um, the diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder. And it does go on. But ultimately, you see now as, uh, the person who wrote this diagnosis, ah, actually reported the actual case that's been identified, uh, you see how they went through and marked, but, um, the professor or, uh, how that played back. So let's, uh, let's kind of wrap this up as we look at the process of the final exam, one of the things that you're going to want to do is think about how do I approach this case, not just in the stuff that I just remembered that you want to report? The symptom is note, which is so symptom of depressed mood most of the day of more than two weeks to the day that you want to label criterion A is met by the symptom. Now, you may not do that in your clinical notes later, but best practice should be done because, as um, I mentioned, going step by step through the, the different, uh, the diagnostic criteria, it's going to show that you're able to that. And that's what I'm looking for in the exam. Can you say the symptom criteria. The symptom seems be. But I did want to clarify that. I said yes, that is correct. But it takes of time. So we're going to have you have that. Yes. Okay. Thank you I'm ready already. And the exact. Yeah. So yes. Um, I would advise that people and um, have a paper come here or any questions about this process. You betcha. Yes. Now the code is. Ready? To go into the future. I'm working on that one. Right? Yes. Right. You look. Great. This is where I already have proof that I needed a sample of what I'm interested in. I don't want to get a sample. I want to see other people. And ultimately, if you vote or you. Step one, here's what it is that you hear. But it is separate. And then you kind of wrap that all up and get your point. If you go and you give me an to be here for all of the requirements of the present. I will also give you a copy of the bill, but not for the exam, because I think it's not about, um, hey, remember what should be included in there, but I want to see your thinking, make you think well, about this process. So it's not a surprise. It's not. You have everything you need, but I need to see how you do. It at the time of writing. I don't have time to get to thinking. You can help each other with that. If I give a perception of what? It'll be one day. Um. And the case will be, uh. I'd like to be there. That would seem like a little thing that I won't say I will be awarded for that particular team, but there will be plenty. Of that are there? And people like this will be provided for. You will roll out bipolar disorder likely to appear in or hypermedia. I will try to turn it off for the future. Thank you. All right. Tell you what. If, um, let's. Let me get through the description of eating disorders, and then we'll take a break, and then we'll come back. Okay. All right, so, uh, we. Eating disorders was on the list last time, and I just want to make sure that we actually, uh, talked a little bit about that. Now, um, there are a lot of issues related to eating, um, and so you need to be sure that your, uh, when you look at eating, it's not just age related. Uh, it's not medical related. It's not physical. Like, does the child actually have challenges with swallowing? Um, but ultimately what we're looking for is that these are truly eating related issues. The other thing that complicates this is that are some pervasive developmental disorders that also then relate to, uh, potential eating challenges, such as, as we look at here, pica and avoiding restrictive intake food disorder. Uh, those could also be related to things like autism spectrum disorder or other developmental challenges. So keeping in mind that these could be symptoms related to something bigger. Okay. But for now, what we're going to do is we're going to look at the general information related to each one of these disorder. Now pica is related to eating non nutritious foods. And um, this is not necessarily in um some ways I've heard of, you know, the stereotypical child eating paste or chalk or other things as a child. Um, it goes beyond that to kind of almost um, kind of being driven to eating non nutritious foods. Has anyone ever seen or watch an episode of My Strange Addiction oftentimes are related to maybe pica or other things. But um, so we're looking at is a non nutritious non-food items from pottery. Um, I have seen uh documented related to pica and uh, forgetting which, uh, African country it was in, but um, it was highly prominent in women, but it had to do it was and it was related to vitamin deficiency. So, uh, for the higher than typical or expected concentration of women eating things like clay and pottery, um, that is almost related to, uh, like a nutrient deficiency, uh, in that specific case. But it was still pica, but it may be related to another medical cause. So rumination disorder is regurgitating and lead chewing already swallowed food. And this is going to be evident in a couple of different ways. Oftentimes it's um more evident in infants and toddlers. Um, but. You'll see. It's kind of like, uh, almost the cough or. And they continue to chew that's already been swallowed. Avoid it, and restrictive food intake, which I know to some of our opinions just last time were related to that. And this is not eating or restricting types of food. And I want to make sure, um, what we see here is it's usually onset in infancy and childhood is more common. And it can express an irritability at feeding time or even in sleepiness overall. So, uh, although we may not always treat infants, um, we may have a client who has an infant and we may be able to, um, uh, we may excuse me him a little bit more about that. Um, this is not necessarily picky eating. Um, it gets into almost a sense of, uh, lack of interest in food rather than simply just, uh, just being a picky eater. Some will actually even express their complete with avoidant or just, um, food is disinterested, uh, although they're hungry and it's just not appealing. It can be a sense of um, test or um, displeasure. Um, and also can limit itself to you. Um, I've heard of some feeding only white color or lamb or certain colors textures, uh, often avoided. And so again, this can be highly comorbid. But there's other such interplay. So you might actually see that as a barrier for some of you that that does not. Yeah. Yeah. So for me I like to do like we think oh we want to. Like is that, uh, anything like drinking sugary beverages. So let's take a look at some of the not eating them in the heat. But they don't eat them. They're explicit about what's going on. Is it to the old age religion, or is it much more pervasive that you see one of these, like you talked about earlier before, impact is often considered to be more pervasive, an impact on, you know, all of their you eat me. Yeah. Okay. So how often have you said thank you? Thank you. Um, this is what I'm referring, you know. This is a horrible statement. But, um, I think that people before, uh, other, other people tend to put out. A lot. Of this is indicative. Of a wide. Swath of society with a lot of. But he did make all the. And often we also get people to come up. With. Other questions. Okay. All right. So next we're probably going to get into ones that are a little bit more common as these ones. Sarah and Michael you're going to see maybe more in childhood or a little bit less common, but probably see anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Um, a little bit more prominently in um, in kind of like everyday practice. You may not necessarily see them initially, uh, but you may get a referral. And I would recommend that if you are interested in working with people who experienced disordered eating, um, they get specialized training. Uh, for example, one of our um, faculty members here, Doctor Kim Lampson, has been working with um, individuals with disordered eating for decades and actually wrote one of the, um, the first treatment manuals for eating disorders early on in the late 70s, early 80s. Um, and now she's actually working. She just wrote a book on, um, working in couples therapy with individuals where one experiences disordered eating. And, um, so, but, uh, if you look, it's a very specialized treatment area, and so and you may be one you need to be familiar enough maybe to recognize and as we just talked about, make a referral. Um, but this is one of those areas that you want specialized training. Absolutely important if you're interested. I'd even say, um, reach out to me and I can connect you with Doctor Lampson, who can connect you with someone who might be able to get you connected by hitting a recovery center locally here in Bellevue. Okay. So anorexia nervosa is restriction of food. And if you look, the name is a it's a little bit of a misnomer. It's not necessarily like a lack of interest or desire or lack of hunger, but it's actually a restriction of food intake. And one of the key features is significant weight loss. Um, but there is also the key feature of being here, uh, fearful of gaining weight and fearful of body image. So when you start to see those two together, um, because we can have restrictive food disorder, but it lacks the component of I need someone who maybe is, uh, considered extremely underweight and it's almost skin and bones, and they can pull on their flesh and say, I'm just so. I'm so chunky. I'm so fat. There's a perception of their body image that differs than restrictive food disordered. So psychologically experiencing, uh, include depression, insomnia, anxiety, distractibility, obsessive thinking and behavior. And what we see with, um, anorexia nervosa is highly comorbid with this Timea depression, social phobia. Um, a general anxiety disorder and OCD. And actually, in some cases, some considered disordered eating in this nature kind of, uh, akin or adjacent to obsessive compulsive disorder and just related to food. Um, social and interpersonal problems exist outside of anorexia nervosa that are considered needed. Um, and so when you look at one of the major treatments is actually family therapy related to eating disorders. So here again what we're going to look at is significant underweight. But a partner with the fear of gaming. And there's also restrictive subtype in a pinch or sometimes. You know, the next one is pulling in of us. Okay, that's a French purge. But here what we see a significant underweight with fear of gaining weight for having severe body competition. So let's look at bulimia nervosa. And it's eating more than typical amount of food in a short period of time. And this this in just hey I had a little too much dinner. This is like someone might, um, usually in private, um, and they resist eating in the presence of others, but they will go and eat, uh, for example, three bags of chips, four sandwiches, drink, uh, a six pack of soda, along with a package of cookies is significantly more than what would be considered a typical portion size. Okay. Um, and this is the inability to control eating. Uh, and it's usually foods that are outside of what they usually otherwise avoid. So they may, in public and around other people, appear to have normal eating habits. And then outside of that, they have this binge where it's excessive and typical, uh, in a short period of time. So you're looking at what I described within maybe an hour or two hour period of time. Um, but there's also this concept of compensatory behaviors. Now, oftentimes the most common one is vomiting. Uh, so they bench and then perch to vomiting. But there's also laxatives and um, uh, maybe exercise, but it's going to be excessive or unhealthy, um, compensating behavior. And individuals here again you see in anorexia nervosa you may have big subtypes and they're going to be below average weight. Filling in the most. That typically will be right around to, uh, so you may it's a little bit harder to, um, identify, uh, visually. Um, you need to raise your hand, but how many of you have seen someone that you suspect may be experiencing disordered eating with restricting or excessive, uh, just really thin, uh, beyond, um, uh, outside of maybe a cancer diagnosis or others, you're going to see someone that you're like, wow, that just it's almost startling. Um, when you see someone, uh, in the later stages. Um, so ultimately, you believe it reverses that binge eating, um, purging, vomiting, laxatives to compensate a whole bunch of sick. And then, um, that took a whole week. Go ahead. So for, uh, for a reaction or loss, uh, what we consider, um, uh, I'm considering the line as far as, like, a medical reason for that, for the, um, uh, diagnosis being like, uh, weight loss pills or like, um, was that stuff like that, would that be factored in as, like a medical reason for the diagnosis or that just be like that number, like someone's taking, um, or send back or others or rephrase that a little, think. Well, I'm just considering like, because one of the things we go through is just medical for, for the reasons. And I guess actually that wouldn't be a cause of correction. Mhm. Right. But maybe you're asking the uh a related question. I think you're on the right track as, as you look at someone and they may be significantly underweight. Is there another medical cost for them. And that's where we need to not assume that someone who, uh, maybe appears very thin, that it's anorexia nervosa, they mean cancer diagnosis or uh, uh, underperforming thyroid or other problem medically that is related. Uh, but we should also include anorexia nervosa as a possibility. Yeah. And for that there you go. With the diagnosis and. That should be noted for substance. To well, likely the substance use would be related to those. Uh, first is the substance that would be overcome by the substance. Yeah. You may, um, maybe not. Or if you look at the diagnostic criteria, it's not to say like, uh, for example, anxiety related to the substance, someone to, uh, even, uh, taking too much testing versus that, you might see it as, um, as a symptom of the inversion of, uh, versus the other. Yeah. Great question. Great thing. Um, under that, the other one, uh, that's related to bullying in nervosa is binge eating, and you're going to have the bingeing, but there's no compensatory behaviors. And oftentimes these individuals may experience an above average, um. But not necessarily that everyone who has, uh, a higher BMI or who is overweight, according to medical definitions does not mean that they have a binge eating disorder in your body that, um, we can be related to a whole host of other medical of the behavior of that. So someone could be overweight without any disorder. But then you just have to be like, okay, 710. Yeah. And if I remember correctly, like to articulate, uh oh. Yeah, yeah. Oh, that's, uh, you bingeing. It's not something that they do even around their family. Uh, primarily as even, um, in the presence of others, especially those that observe, uh, but also you, they may be typically around other people, but then intervention happens, right? Yeah. Uh, with the, the presentation of for the present day, um, I. Love her. And that is a behavior of the TV because the weight, the TV and social social impact very present with everything. That's why she's up to the disability. And, um, you know, there was a lot of that. She's explaining on the video that the substituting for someone the equivalent of not long enough, they're going to do all of this. In some ways. Have you ever heard some of the chatter? Either way, the feeling and I think these are some ways of looking at the cause might have one treatment might be different that understand it. Does that make sense? Exactly the same as you would have to then unpack and figure out why. Great questions. All right. So let's go ahead and stop here for a break. Um, come back at 815. All. All right. Make sure you some. Else. But.