My satellite under my collar. Right? Yeah. I mean, I don't mind if you like my money. Okay. Thank you very much. All right, well. Welcome back. Um, the next segment, I want to talk a little bit about kind of the art of asking questions, which, um, I know many of you likely come from backgrounds where you've asked questions, you know, how to ask questions, but at the same time, let we work on this concept of exploring, uh, for pathology or case conceptualization. Developing a good foundation of asking questions is an important skill. And these questions may be a little bit different than the types of questions you may ask later in therapy. So maybe a little more pointed or and so in some ways, uh, just acknowledging that we're going to maybe cover things, you know, but at the same time, let it build that foundation of, um, maybe conceptualizing. How do you approach this process of clinical interviewing and the types of questions that you ask? Okay. So one of the things that I like to point to is recognizing, as I put Perlier, sometimes it could feel like interrogation because you're asking a lot of questions, a lot of difficult questions, following up with questions, maybe probing deeper into things that people maybe have never had someone probe that deeply into that topic for them. And maybe they've been in therapy a bunch of times. And, uh, again, there may be seeing you, as I mentioned, the first question, switching, um, uh, switching medical insurances or employers. And so they have to see a different therapist. And so like, okay, I've answered this question so many times. Right. So um, some ways I encourage you to be direct, but also be gentle. So as you ask your questions, think about, uh, your posture, your tone, all of those good skills that we talked about, uh, but at the same time, recognizing that you need to be direct, you need to get to, to get to. So the other piece to keep in mind is, um, ask about what you want to know. If you have a question. Ask the question. If you want to know about an experience, ask about the experience. And so sometimes, um, we may feel like probing may be uncomfortable. Okay. But, uh, in some ways you need to answer your the question always. Why am I asking this question? And you'll notice on the next page we'll talk about asking what questions you can ask yourself. Why question. Uh, why am I asking what's the purpose for me asking this question? What am I wanting to know? And then make sure you're asking about what you want to know. Sometimes we can leave it back and we're not getting to the information. Or we have to. One thing in this process, we don't assume because again, we might. We have previously talked about the idea of we have our lens, we have our backgrounds, we have our history, we have our experience. And what happens is we can put on that lens and let it color, um, shape, shape, the the answer the client gives us and say, oh, that's what they mean. So we don't assume that we want to ask about what we know or what we want to know about. So the other one is, uh, avoid questions that leave vague questions that leave the client guessing sometimes. Um. And just general conversation. If you ever ask somebody something that kind of give you one of these, like, um, not sure or they ask, answer your question in a way that you're like, that's not at all what I was intending. Right. So giving them this process, again, we're being very specific. So sometimes our questions, we may think we know what we're asking of the client. May we intentionally, uh, be intentional about shaping the questions that you are avoiding. What can be considered big questions because there's going to be room for misunderstanding anyway? The other one, and I am famous for this one, asking more than one question at a time. It's like, but our mind is going so fast. And as we're in the middle of asking that question, another question that's related comes to us. So we ask, bring back asphalt. So tell me about your sleep. Do you wake up in the morning? Um, it's like whatever it is, like we ask boom, boom. So get in the habit of asking one question. And then hold that other question as a quick drop to the next right. So because, um, sometimes, um, uh, my brain works faster than my mouth. And especially as we get closer to my clock, you're all like, yes. And so but the idea here is you have to practice that that skill. Ask one question, be direct and have the other one hold on to it. And if you do end up asking too, don't worry about it. Just maybe give space. You're like, okay, well hold on, let me rephrase that. Start here. Right. Own it. Just be uncomfortable. Uh, we have of. I don't know if you know that, like, 80% of our time in counseling is just holding space for the things that no one else wants. Space for shooting. We step into that space and asking questions is one of those. Um. I think we just learned. Don't step on the keyboard. Um, the other thing I'd like to encourage you about. It may seem intuitive, but you start with open questions, and everyone know the difference between open and closed. Like an open question leads to be answered in a variety of ways. Closed question is yes or no or limited answer. Right. So let me ask you this. What in this process of clinical interviewing, what and what do you think the rationale is for asking an open question first? Why would we start there? Yeah. Let the client share whatever answer comes to mind that I'm more specific after that. Right. Because it gives them space to answer what comes to mind. The other thing is to build a report. What's that report? It builds rapport. Yes. And by the way, they may answer like five of your other questions because you gave them space. So sometimes it can be an efficient way to gather information, but also sometimes they share things you wouldn't have thought of asking. You're like, oh, well, let me follow up with that. That wasn't even on my list. But that seems important that you follow that. Okay. So open questions and then, um, and it seems, uh. It may seem logical that it's always easy to differentiate in the moment between open and closed questions, but I would encourage you to really practice the art of asking good, open ended questions. Uh, start with uh. So you mentioned you're feeling sad. Tell me about that. Or would you tell me that sometimes you can't build rapport. You invite them. Would they be willing to, uh, phrasing questions gently but open gives them an opportunity to respond. And then from there. Be patient. Give them space. The other side of that, or sometimes you don't have a lot of time, so be willing to interrupt. Has anyone ever been taught the skill of interrupting yet? Maybe if we have time, we'll get them. Um, but the idea is open question. And then when you then you follow up with guiding towards specificity, you're looking for hear the client's answer, and then you go in and now you're asking questions around, especially from the diagnostic process. If you look at the DSM and you look at the criteria duration, how long has this been going on? Frequency. How often does it happen? Intensity. How is that impacting your life? So we ask very specific pointed questions to get to what we know is going to be answering the diagnostic criteria. Those aren't maybe the only questions we ask. But for the purposes of this exercise, looking at the diagnostic process we're asking about. So tell me about your experience with working. Can they go go, go now. Then we can start to go okay. What's the focus of that worry? I need to answer that question to be able to differentiate which anxiety disorder we may be considering. So I need to ask, um, and even rule out. Right? We're not just confirming or ruling out the other ones. So we might ask a question. Okay, so it sounds like you're worrying about a lot of things just that occur in everyday life. Does that so right. Okay. So is there ever a time where you worry about, um, leaving your home? Is there anything that you would say that you would be, uh, have a full response to or experience a phobia? No. Rule out. Rule out. Now, I don't have to worry about exploring those in a different way. So by asking two questions specifically about their worry, I view the world in a ruled out other disorders that I need to consider. Right? Because I have to said they're not even related, but they are. I can follow up and ask more specific questions. Yeah. Um, do you, um, ever intentionally kind of like mask like like in the examples of phobia question if I asked the client like the the ages about like any type of something that causes phobia to me, I was kind of be very obvious that, um, that comes with asking if I have a phobia disorder. Uh, so do you intentionally try to mask what you're looking for, or is it okay if the client catches on? Uh, I think really not mask, but avoid jargon. Or sometimes diagnostic language can be misunderstood about context. Uh, because you can. You have an understanding of what phobia is. But society, culture, the client may have a different understanding. So again that's really looking at how do you see that and gauging. Um, again maybe asking an indirect question or a differently worded question to avoid bias or you know, yeah. So you're going to work around sometimes you may ask a question differently than have you ever experienced because a friend. Yeah, that might terrify a client to think, what if I don't know. What is that? And so versus like, um, so have you ever had a time where you maybe felt you were disconnected with, uh, the reality of or. Sorry. Again, depending on, uh, you would look at the symptoms you're wanting to perform a good, gentle but direct question or that. Okay. Good question. Um. Yeah. So I can't, um, reiterate enough. Open track the details and then go in for specifics. But for the purposes of the diagnostic support, the type of experience, severity, frequency, duration, where when how how often? How many? Well, when does it happen? Like sleep. There's different things about what happens in sleep that we need to pay attention to. That actually, too much is too much. Then just a standard short sleeper or long sleep burden. Or are we getting into something that goes beyond what is typical sleep experience? So that's where we need to get to the specifics. Keeping in mind that as you grow familiar with the diagnostic criteria, you'll be able to ask those questions to help you. One question in this process rule in and rule out a number of different disorders. Simply, we're asking one good, clear, specific question that says, yeah, if you can rule out bipolar disorder by asking about depression and then asking about a manic experience day to night, a manic, experienced bipolar is now off the table if they have a manic experience. We ask about, um, depressive experience also. Right. And so they say, um, you know, I've never had a depressive experience. Then you have to understand, can you you can still diagnose bipolar with simply with a manic experience. So I'll talk about that or in a different question. Yes. Question. Yeah okay. Yeah. We'll get there. Again. You would be able to know it's like um, anytime you address depression, you need to address and ask about a manic, experienced, potentially hypomanic experienced while out bipolar. Um, and same thing with the other um, it would help differentiate maybe bipolar one or bipolar two. And so. So far. Any questions about questions? Okay. So the other, uh, the other thing we need to pay attention to is use the client's language when shaping your question. If, um. And avoid jargon. So have you ever. Um, there's actually, uh, I'll change direction of, as you say. Have you ever worked with, um, maybe a medical professional or maybe someone within a certain field and, uh, maybe even your electrician or your auto mechanic, and they use language. You're like, I don't understand the words that are coming out of your mouth. Uh, for example, one of my previous professors told a story about his supervisor, who was a psychiatrist, described the client as becoming lachrymose. Oh, the client started crying. So as we ask questions, we know language. And again, that the diagnostic, uh, system gives us common language in terms and understanding. But we may. And we go to your point, uh, Hannah, about we may not ask questions specifically. We may avoid language to avoid triggering or misrepresenting. So we need to avoid jargon. But if the client type comes in and says, um, I've been feeling and I just been feeling blue, we may not then turn around and say, how long have you been experiencing depressive symptoms? We would say, tell me about feeling blue. Uh, when did you first started noticing? You felt all right. So again and then you might ask, what do you mean by blue? Now we have a good operational definition. We have a shared language. Now we're using the term that they feel comfortable with. Um, now later we might define more clinically, officially what that language might mean. It seems like you're experiencing maybe something more of a persistent depression. Um, and so when you say blue, it could be this is what this means, right? So we can provide that education later. But we want to use their language. There are limits to that, and we'll talk about that as we go. Now this is one of my favorites. Avoid asking why questions without asking you. Or get to the why without asking why. So, uh, what makes. Why do you think? It's like, uh, what would be the reason why we don't ask my question? Yeah. Um, it there's something about it that can put people on the defensive. I do thank you for your time. You. I think that's wonderful. But. Yeah. Um. Yeah, that's what comes to mind. It can be defensive. Yeah. You're like, uh. So this happens to you, like, why? What? What do you mean? Yeah. Yeah. Um, I have even more questions at this time. I don't know why they came to you for help. Right, right. I don't know. So. So why do you think this happened? So that's why. Um. So what's that? But isn't this. Isn't it like, uh, the clients these days do their own research first, and then coming to the, um, uh, therapist or the doctors, whatever. They themselves, uh, like the internet or everywhere else or, uh, only available. So in that case, uh, shooting the, um, therapist or the expert sitting there shouldn't show his expertise in terms of judging. And that would be, uh, in terms of some cultures. And it would be a point where they would say, oh, this person knows his ABC. Well, let me go there. Yeah. Right. Again, it depends. It's right in using that language they have so that they have a sophisticated understanding. Now again that doesn't mean that like for me, if I were talking with the client, um, pretty early on, I would explore their experience with blue, but I would make sense of psychoeducation or use phrasing that helps me now connect when they say play with this is what we're meeting. So we're able to skillfully do that. But again, we can't assume that every client has a sophisticated understanding of the psychopathology. I don't know the terminology, but what we can do is ask good questions that lead us to an understanding and then to ensure, uh, understand. So when you say blue, what do you mean by that? Well, I feel depressed. Okay. So if you're here. Right. And there's a reason why I think the internet is go away. Um, but it is we have we deal with clients who explore and get a lot of good information and maybe a lot of misinformation and a lot of bad information. Um, so the other thing, if you ever asked a child why and they say because. Yeah, right. So the reality is defensive. Uh, they don't know why. It's just because that's just the way it is. I mean, the idea here is how can we get to the why without asking why? So what about what do you think? When, um. How often? Or you can understand the why by asking questions around the. Why. Does that make sense? Yeah. Sorry. Um. Quick, quick quick. Funny story. I'm very quick. We had a counseling techniques last semester and, uh, documented who said the why you can't use it. And we, the, um, the undergrad student, and, uh, we we do that, and they ask, why did not? I can't ask you why. And we started to laughing and I said, oh my God, what can I say? So what do you think I can ask you? And if there was in the video after that point, I can ask why. Yeah. And it's actually very difficult not to ask why. Oh I know. You saw me up here. I was like, oh, so how do I get that right? Yeah. I mean, you can also kind of, um, make the playing field is like othering or like there's only a fraction of this before. And so it's kind of expecting them to have the answer instead of being like, okay. Yeah. Like that's a common thing that I see with like, you know, like making them feel less other um, ask asking why. Right. So to avoid them feeling like single or isolated or there is only ones um, a couple of tips. So what about that is a great way to get to the why. So what about that's important to you versus why is it important to you? Uh, when this happens I get angry. What am I doing? Versus why are you angry? That's a great, um, initial, uh, avoid the like. Well, here's the other side. Remember I said you can ask yourself why. And why is that? Because I can know my wine. I can explore it. But when I'm asking a client, I will say, don't get tripped up. And I'll say, in this class, if you ask why, it's not that you're not gonna get, you're not going to get some points deducted. You might get an eyebrow raise, but you won't get points deducted. Um, but really it is it's developing that skill because it's a good skill to him. I find that I use it in life everywhere. Um, because when you're working with people, if you can get to their why and explore their experience without asking them why. The other thing is you're getting to know them in a different way. Um, and without putting up the expert defenses is probably one of the biggest ones. That one we're going to avoid. Um, negative. Um, yeah. You don't experience suicidal thoughts, do you? We don't want to ask questions in the negative. The others we don't, uh, we want to avoid leading questions. So when you have that thought, it makes you feel worried, right? So when you have that thought, what do you experience? What emotions do you notice? What about that makes you feel better? Right. So we don't lead. When we stay to question and then follow. Now there are times we may need to. It may feel like leading by asking direct questions about a symptom. But this is where we resist the urge to ask a question and just follow a path to what we think it is. Because if we ask leading questions, we think we know where we're going. It's um, kind of like, um, oh, I can't think of a good analogy, but, um, it's like the dog knows where the bone is and you're off leash and you're just like, it's going to take you where you want to go. We can't be that direct if we need to go. We need to explore and avoid the bias. So avoiding leading questions avoids us. Um. It's a couple things happen, you know, maybe even there's a cultural consideration to pay attention to it. Sometimes you and to your point, um, they're going to evaluate and see you as the expert. And if you're leading questions and you're asking the question and leading them that way, that must be true. Or just based on power differential. They may not disagree with you. They may answer, uh, in a way that they believe is accurate to what you're wanting to to answer. So, uh, it also helps us avoid leaving the client where we think they should go. And also it gives them room to answer questions, uh, without, um, engaging in that power differential. Does that make sense? Okay. So we'll talk more about cultural considerations, um, in one of our class sessions. Quick question. Yeah. So, uh, do those questions that we the all the right questions, just like how you just said, do you have any suicidal thoughts? Do you? So is there any way that, uh, the clinical interview bill can bring the thoughts of suicide and those who have not made their mind yet? Uh, and it's I mean, the reality is, uh, could it possibly make a concrete in life? You know, there's someone that thought that by asking the question and that's one of the biggest fears we have, is what if they didn't think of that as an option? And know I ask them that now they know it's an option. Um, in some ways, the risk of asking the question and leading to a point to that, um, is probably, um, that risk is not as important as the risk of that. You're a greater risk of not not if someone's had suicidal thoughts when they're in a place of suicide. That's become something that's kind of like asking the question. Yeah, great. Great question. And I would say that's a common, uh, a common fear. And, um, I think we just need to move. We, we need to kind of work with ourselves to move past that fear. We can run past the question without fear of leading up to it. Um, and again, how do you ask that question? Have you ever had thoughts of that in your life like, wow, that must be really hard. You think about taking your life, right? It's like we got scared, right? So I think, uh, to your point, we can be mindful of that, but it's not something that should keep us from asking questions. Okay, great. Yes. Or just to follow up on that, uh, suicide training videos we have. I don't know what study they're referring to, but they were saying, oh, and we've heard the studies show that bringing it up doesn't cause somebody to act on that. Um, yeah. So there's that, like. So, yeah. You feel like you have a logical conclusion. Is it possible? Conceivably, yes and no. Like, generally, like I said, if someone if someone's experiencing suicidal ideation or is in a state, likely it's something that's crossed their mind. So that fear shouldn't be something that keeps us from answering the question. Yeah, great. Thank you for putting and thank you for your question. Um, the other thing I'd like to point out, and this is where your good therapeutic skills come in handy in the diagnostic or clinical interviewing process. Pay attention and explore emotions. Because oftentimes when people talk about feeling sad or feeling angry or feeling discontent or they're frustrated, those types of things are related to an underlying symptom or cause. So we can use those as kind of anchor points. Things to listen to. Oftentimes, uh, in the early diagnostic interview process, I find, uh, it's like because we're not doing therapy, we feel like we need to avoid the emotion words. The reality is pay attention to that conclusion. I follow that, uh, because ultimately, uh, it does two things. One, you may get to content in the interview. You might not otherwise be engaged understanding about their underlying experience, because I'm just so angry all the time. But angry? Yes. Primary emotion. How do you get to the underlying emotion? Maybe it really is. The anger is just I'm so anxious all the time. I'm just irritable. Nothing's working out. I'm worried I can't relax. So that comes out as pain. So we follow that to be able to understand diagnostically what's going on. Any questions. Yeah. So, um, so just to confirm, is it okay to ask about suicide and substance use in a closed and in question? Um, so that's the that's the beginning. It doesn't necessarily go right. So in some ways I would that's where you would directly ask things like that's a yes or no question. And then they're like, yeah, actually I have. Can I ask you? Tell me more about. So then engage. Okay. So in some ways generally open first and close later in some specific instances with the big questions you ask me. Um, uh, same thing. Like, have you ever experienced anything that you might consider sexual abuse? Yes or no. It's like so that's and then follow up later. But generally, um, the other thing you can start with, uh, tell me about your sexual history open. And then in that you might land on the closed ended question. Does that make sense? All right, so, uh, a couple of things have come to mind before we dig into, uh, practice and, um, then talking about. Yeah, we can do it. Um, talking about, uh, obsessive compulsive disorders. One of the things I like to, to talk about is. Okay, so I'm about ready to engage in the process of asking a lot of questions about very important information I need to remember. Do I take notes? Do I not take notes? And so let me ask, uh, quick show of hands and that clinical interview. How many of you feel like taking notes would be important? How many of you feel notes might get in the way? Yeah, both of you are correct. Everybody every both are correct. But the reality is, um, uh, I'll share my my perspective. Others may have different. Um. I never take notes in session except the intake, because there's so much information that I need to remember. Okay, so you said you're taking some medications. What are those and how many milligrams and how often are you taking those? How long have you been on? Am I going to remember that when I write my intake notes? No, but at the same time, let me, um, let me just kind of get into the concept of one of the challenges I personally see. But, um, with good, uh, rapport building how notes get in the way. Okay, so let's say I'm in an intake session and I'm talking to the client. Right. And I have my list of questions. And so it gets in the way. So one of the things I encourage you is keep in mind. Is this? This isn't, uh, this isn't that the devil we can use in the. It doesn't get in the way proper, but we need to be mindful of ourself in the same way. Our posture, our face, uh, our tone of voice. We mirror. What are we going to do with this? To avoid it getting in the way during the entire process? So one of the things that keep in mind is being very mindful of where where do I keep it? And then as I write, can the client see what I'm writing? What am I writing on a notepad? And sometimes the kind like I'll even address it. So in this process I use a notepad. Most of the time, you see, I don't use one because I want to be fully here with you. But this, you know, there's so much information I want to make sure I remember correctly. And if you ever have any questions about whether what I'm writing down, um, make sure you okay, because if not, and you're writing, what do they write? Yeah. And all of a sudden you're like, oh, it's like, again, body language. You're like, what did I just say? That set them off. Now they get distracted. They're challenging your record. So again, keeping in mind that this is a tool. But sometimes tools can get in the way. So we have to be skilled in using the tool in the right way. So oftentimes what I do is I keep it low. And if I'm uh writing and then if the client says we're in kind of that open, uh, session or of like free speech, I'll put it down. Now I'm completely present. Um, and then when they get back to, you know, you said something really important. I want to make sure you remember exactly what you said. So can you tell me more about that? So, again, keeping in mind how we use this is incredibly important. So I don't, uh, want those who don't like taking notes to feel like, oh, I have to take notes. But let me challenge you. There's so much information that the intake in particular and very specific information age of onset, frequency, duration, intensity, family history, medications, uh, dates that there's just no way you're going to remember it all. And so you need to put it down the other track. I'll tell you as we talk about we need to have a good domain, uh, good list of domains that we need to ask about. All right. Across the top two domains that I know I need to remember to ask you about. That way I don't lose track. So, for example, family, sex, history, education, work history, vacations, whatever domains I land on and put them at the top. So that way, at a glance, I'm like, I know where I'm going. Um, the other thing that is one of the challenges in this, in this skill as we ask questions, is how long do I stay connected with the topic I'm exploring? When do I know when to bounce out? And again, this is where your clinical judgment and like absolute canned answer is it depends, right? Because ultimately you need to follow the answer until you feel like you have the information you need. And then the other skill here is to be able to transition between topics skillfully. Yeah. Also, if the topics are part of the client, when they come back to it, they will they will. Um, the other thing is, sometimes with a good open question, a client may tell you everything you need to know about 3 or 4 domains. You're like, great. So I check those off as I make notes worth it together. Or I might circle it because they mention family history or something, but there's something that I need to remember, so I'll go back to it. Yeah, sorry. Can we use that record that holds the record? The audio recorder? Not without clients. Cassette? No. Yes. You have and I wouldn't rely on that. Um, many settings, um, outside of clinical training where you do are required to record sessions, um, as a part of your clinical training, it's not really standard practice. Oh, you. Yeah. Um, there might be settings, uh, forensic settings, for example, where that might be part of the process, but likely, uh, there's challenges to having audio recording, so, you know. Yeah. So my initial response is likely not. Yeah. And it wouldn't be good practice for good rapport building unless you're trying to do a little self-disclosure. But it's what I call the unsolved disclosure. Right. Yeah. Right. And then your clinical experience, that's part of them coming to see you. That's part that's known. That's just part of it. But just in general practice, like the audio on video recording is not going to be a part of that once you're out of the clinical training phase of your experience. Um, so let's talk a little bit about how do I know when to transition to a new topic. And, uh, so if I ask a nice open question and I get some good details, I might come back and ask specifics, gives you the frequency duration, and then how do I transfer? Okay. Well, great. Um. Thank you. Shane. Next, I'd like to talk about this. So tell me about your educational experience. Just you just need to be able to be direct and know your domains. Um, you know, it's a little bit of. Okay, so, yes, you're thinking clinically. How much do I know about this topic? Don't feel like you have to be perfect, but be prepared with the ability to transition. So as we talk about the the clinical interview video, that's one of the things I'm looking for. It's going to ask you to open close open questions. Closed questions can be followed uh, down to and knowing that now you have some information and you have the skill to bounce up to the next domain. And does that domain make sense in the concept of a clinical interview? It could be completely unrelated. We can jump from, uh, family history to work history to sexual experiences. And again, think about is there a logical flow that I might build relationship with some more benign everyday topics and move to more personal as we get to know each other in the interview? Maybe. Um, so that's you developing the clinical interview flow in a way that is congruent with you, but ultimately there's not a right or wrong answer of how do we go where? Um, and it may be based on what the client says. Hey, you know, you mentioned something. I'd like to know a little bit more about. Can you go directly for that? And it's not related to the topic you are just talking about. So part of it is that's where your clinical judgment and your ability to discern where you need to go. Um, and don't be afraid just to even go. You know, actually, if we can revisit this topic, uh, I do have another question that I like to ask and follow up. Um, that's where you just need to be confident in the process. Uh. Any questions? Yes. So I have a question about. Like is that. Essentially like is out and you're supposed to just like jump into a new or is it more like a as you account session. Right. And you see what I see. Then you just like after many sessions of like in every first one. Yeah. In Morris's model, it really does follow the concept that this is the initial interview. But first and uh, and depending on the setting, it may be even your second. Right. Uh, like I mentioned, uh, the clinic I worked at, we were going to do a form of consent, and then you would hear the client story, and then the next session actually was this type of interview. And so, uh, and a little bit it depends on the setting. But ultimately, early in the work with someone, you're going to want to have a good, thorough understanding of who they are and their life experiences as much as you can within, you know, relatively short period of time so that you can have a good understanding of the formulation of their experience that will inform treatment. And then you have a diagnostic understanding. So you can't necessarily get five sessions and and just start working at diagnostic diagnostics because what have you been working on. Now there may be times where you are working with a client that maybe is so acutely depressed that they can't engage in a full interview. So you may piece that together and take a little more time, but generally, you're still going to need to gather some of that information to be able to understand the best way to approach treatment. So, um, having a good working understanding, uh, this is the initial or at least one of the first early two sessions. It's kind of a good concept to have that answer your question. Yeah. And like and we should be afraid to do that every time. Yeah. Um, again, unless you work in a client in a clinic where they do the intake interview for you. But I would still be. The reality is, this is usually early, but we can go back into this mode at any time, because, remember, the client may disclose that this is why they're here six, eight, ten sessions later and disclose something else. That may be the more primary reason why that we need to understand. So you shift from therapeutic mode to clinical interviewing as needed, first session for you session, and anywhere in between you can get, you know, you move into the skill. So I guess let's just say the client starts talking about a new symptom while they've never been depressed, but they're seeming to start to experience depression. So tell me a little bit about what's going on with that. Today. We shift and we we go into this process at any time. Does that make sense? Yeah okay. Other questions. Yeah. What what are the headings that you like to have for. Good question, Pat. And yes, it does to me, but I really, uh, look at the down here. Uh. Do you. You know what that slide, I think got deleted from there too. Okay. Uh, domains to explore. Um, so basically the areas that I usually look at or chief complaint, the history, uh, uh, current elements. Uh, again, because that's why they're saying they're built for. This is why they're there. Exploit suicide and then personal, uh, relevant, uh, history, family of origin, the history of history of sexual abuse, trauma that are sexual history. Because even though if there's not trauma, uh, you'd be surprised at how even when you're not working with relationship counseling, that distress around relationships and sexual experiences can come into the therapeutic work education experience. Uh, not necessarily achievement. Like, what grade did you finish? What your highest degree earned? Tell me about your experience as a student. Uh, what would you tell me about it? What did you find? Easy. Um, and then part of that is grades. Uh, so those are some of them. But again, depending on what information you covered in your intake packet might dictate some of these, but I would definitely include history, uh, of the, the current illness suicide assessment and then exploring their family of origin, their history, their growing up current relationship experiences. Um, because all of those are definitely related. I guess here's the other thing. If you're looking at diagnostic criteria, oftentimes what are um, what does this have to cause clinically significant distress and social, occupational or interpersonal, uh, domains. So if we don't ask about some of those things, we won't know if there is impact or how their present symptoms are impacting, uh, the diagnostic criteria. Make sense? Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Quick question. Yeah. You. We're not doing suicide assessment. Like, if, uh, presenting concern is seemingly less related to that every time a client comes in. And, for example, I have someone come in and there's a, uh, someone that I worked with that I could there was no diagnosis. I couldn't find one. Uh, really, just almost like, think of, um, from a wellness model or coaching model. There's really kind of want to help looking at, um, how do I improve myself? Uh, self-awareness, the skills. It's like. But even in that, uh, interview. So have you ever had thoughts of killing yourself, taking your life? No, thanks. Move on. Uh, it's never a question that I don't put into the intake, because ultimately, someone may be really good at putting on a mask. And again, you may, um, you may be the only person willing to ask that question. The other thing is, it establishes in their mind that you're willing to ask any question. So, um, um, so that's your question. Yeah. So again, I don't always follow up every session depending on the case. But in the initial early onset, I always ask the question and I usually frame it in some way. Um, so this is a question I ask of everyone so they don't feel like I'm seeing something in them that is making me concerned. I reassure them, this is everybody. And then I ask the couple of questions. And oftentimes most of the time, no or yeah, you know, for a while I was really feeling low and I and thoughts are like, it's just not, you know, it's just too hard. I wish I just wouldn't wake up in the morning. Uh, so when did that, uh, when did you first notice that? How long has it been since you felt that way? Oh, that was like five years ago. Um, is that occurring now? No. Okay. Well, you start to feel that way. Please. Um, please let me know something that I think it's important I want to make sure we follow with if we need to bring again something that has. They've had past history of ideation but not present. Um, and so maybe understanding was that during a time, uh, tell me about your experience with mood at that time, were you feeling depressed? Was what was going on? You're like, you can explore to understand there's triggers. When you do look at what's that like about them, the possible pattern. Pattern. Right. So we're looking to, uh, ask good questions to understand a pattern. Yeah. Um, one of the things I want to acknowledge and I'll use myself as an example. Um, by asking questions like this, you can establish a pattern for therapy. You establish the pattern that the therapist asked the question. The client answers the question, then the therapist. That's some other question. Um, I got into this experience with the client, and, uh, at one point, and, uh, it was so hard to get out of that pattern, I, like I did all the good things. I brought it into the moment. I said, hey, so you I noticed that it seems like we've entered this pattern where I ask a question and you answer, which is great, but it feels like you're not. You're not. Engaging or not openly. So let's, you know, let's talk about that and explore that, all of that. But just know that you may have to work on again, this is work providing good context early. This is a different process. And therapy gives you the ability to know. And now say, now we're entering into this different working phase and you establish a new pattern. So just recognize that recognize this can establish a pattern, uh, for clients that they wait for you to ask a question. Then they answer. So that's the other thing. Open questions and just wait. Have you guys talked about the intervention of silence a little bit? Yeah. Okay. It's a great tool as a warning or maybe an encouragement. Don't ever have a clock in your office that takes I guess this intervention of silence becomes much harder when you're. Speaking from experience, you don't have that question. I was wondering, how did you get to that point? If you realize you have reached where the client has picked up on this pattern of silence question, answer, question answer. How do you get out of that? Again, that's where you just bring it in. When you talk about I have noticed this as a pattern. And typically in the therapeutic process we have times where I ask questions, you answer. But really the most fruitful thing is we have much more open, open dialog. And really this is your time. And um, you know, you work with them to figure out what's that barrier. So I notice you only respond when I ask you a question. I'm wondering, is it because you don't know what to say, or are you afraid? Or it's like, again, you explore that and use that as a good, uh, grist for the therapeutic will that I see the other hand? No. Okay. Uh, time time, time time. Okay. A ticking clock. It's not a ticking clock, you know? Um, I think we're going to, uh, not do this practice. We can do it next time. Uh, it was new, and I added it, which, obviously, I hate that it took too much time, but ultimately, I would encourage you to do this. Um, and we may we may revisit this because it's a good skill to have, and it may be good to actually practice tonight and then engage in, uh, uh, having some feedback around what would you like to ask the questions, but you must then have some kind of practice based on that. So, um, it's not off the table. So you're not off the hook yet? Um, we can, uh. Oh, I'll put a pause on it, but I'm. I'm willing to engage in the process of giving a demonstration. Uh, maybe how I would approach. And it's not the only way. It's not the best way. It's my way. Uh, which is an example of how to do clinical interview. If someone would be willing to learn by their client that they brought tonight. Uh, we'll just do a little bit of meeting, kind of engaging in the process of asking questions so you can see, uh, kind of what it might look like when you go into the practice. An answer to that. So it would anyone be willing to be a volunteer? Okay. I'm not leaving there. So, uh, the only thing before we start, uh, name and age. Marina with the 747. Okay, well, we're going to thank you so much for coming in today. I know we just finished up all of the the paperwork, but I just want to take a moment to ask, what brings you here today? It was my first time, but I came for the counseling. Um, and, uh, actually, uh, a lot of thoughts before I, um, decided to come because it's, um, I think it's my fault. This, uh, seems about my age. It's a little bit silly. Um, and, um. And I don't want that help things that way that I like, um, exaggerate the problem, you know? So what would you say is the problem you're feeling might be exaggerated? Uh, I miss my kids. You miss your kids? You tell me a little bit more about missing your kids. I just moved recently, and, uh, from, um, my country. How long ago? Uh, just one year. One year. And, uh. And it was it was exciting. Everything is good and. Well, I'm a teacher, and, um. But I can't stop thinking about it. Um. Damn. I can't stop thinking I can't sleep. So when you say can't stop thinking about them. But what does that look like on a normal day? Um, like in the morning, I always check my phone and I will check if I miss some messages or call from my kids. And, uh, after that, you know, if I have an I think I need to go to social media to check what they post. And, um, and if, um, I don't have answers that I'm trying to find another way and, um, maybe just to check, like he said. So he said that happens every morning. Yeah. And does it happen at other times a day or just in the morning? Um, if I'm busy. Um, comments I not mentioned about that. Betty. If I have a time to think about, constantly think about what we're doing. And, uh, if they have people right with them. So when you say you're you're thinking about them, are there certain thoughts that come or what are the thoughts look like? Um, um, the mostly about everything. Okay. Like, um, sometimes I think if something happened and that's why I need to check if, uh, for example, they going to, um, um, what time to go to sleep and then I'll come back in the right time. I worry that they don't come back, so it's maybe something bad, but. Yeah. And so when you have thoughts that something bad might have happened to them, um, what does that like for you? What do you experience? Um. If something bad happens or not. Just that thought. What is it like the thought comes to you? Uh, something bad might have happened. What do you notice in your unconscious actions? Or just, um, they just. I feel like I can't I can't read that feels. I can't bring anything else. Um, you know, that has been closed, is not going out, and I constantly open the phone if I feel about them. And so you mentioned in the pictures. Tell me a little bit about your sleep. Uh, I can wake up in the morning a few times, so maybe I feel. I am. I do not usually wake up, but. So you go to bed about what time generally generally is 1139 11 and wake up anywhere between five and. Yeah, sometimes it's up to 2 or 3 because they have to come through in my piece and timing, which I have to, um, chat. Um, so maybe waking up in the middle of the night. Yeah, that that means not to me is, uh, you know, when you're waking up, the check is that are you waking up on your own or what causes you to wake up? I think, is my body just to, um, have the bathroom to wake up? I mean, I live in the country. The time that means that I need to check the weather and meal times. Okay. Thank you. Oh. So a little bit different. Okay, so for you, uh, what did you notice about, uh, the questions? Um. I noticed that you are actually going somewhere right now because I know. Uh, yeah. Um, that is, uh. You confuse me many times. You can also. Yeah, I know, so, um, that was a lot of questions. Uh, open the question to see the symptoms and whether going to diagnosis some kind of stuff. And also, uh, you check in the, um. Yeah, you can actually who you can go to. Um. Right it is. Or on my dad's wannamake is something else and that I know I'm all I think um, I think I think about myself unmuted. We will talk. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. The question was that you confuse me a couple of questions. So, uh. Right, so about what about that was confused. Recognizing that you just were, like, English may not be your first language, is it, uh, was the question that I was asking, or was it, uh, culture or. I guess I tell you why. Because I wanted to follow my immediate, uh. But it will be becoming a little bit personal. Okay. Okay. But. Okay. Yeah. Great. Well, thank you for that. And. I'll put it out to the group. Um, what did you notice? Yeah. Um, the clarifying question had a lot of clarifying questions. You what type of variable that you did. And after a couple of, um. So what did you notice about me interrupting her? Um. I mean, it wasn't rude or anything. It was just sort of direct. Trying to get back to what you wanted to know. Yeah, yeah. Because ultimately, um. And I'll give you my. Why? Because there was a moment it was something that I'm like, okay, I don't want to lose that. I need to follow that. Just at least get a clarifying. Is that something I need to know about? Okay, okay. Wait. How long? Okay, great. And then you get them on. So again, you can interrupt. Don't feel like you have to wait for the perfect pause. Uh, the other thing is you're going to have clients that will either be they'll give you you give them a nice open question, and they give you a one word answer. Others like you give you give them a closed ended question and they give you like 20 minutes of. And so interrupting is a skill. So, uh, yeah. Thank you for for noticing. But did the interrupting seem disruptive? Okay, good. Okay. Uh. What else? What else? I notice the pendulum, uh, movement, I would say, for example, is that you couldn't sleep. You you could as if you left it there. But after a while, you came back and you died. Mhm. Right. I didn't follow it right away but I used that as a transition point. She brought up well you know sleep in this. Oh like okay. So we're going to need to understand the impact of this on sleep. Yeah. Great. Uh any questions. Um you can show how directive you are, because on one hand, if the client wants to talk more about one thing like, okay, I need to get details on these other things in this initial session, right. I need to be able to direct that interview. So I need to be able to I interrupted, but I did not disrupt. And again, sometimes it can be disruptive and I apologize. It was confusing. Um, but the reality is when when we get to that point, interrupting is an important skill. And, um, not for free, but, um, will interrupt and pause. So interrupting. So if you it's a skill that you need to have. And one of the things you have to keep in mind is there's good mirror neurons. And in general conversation, people will pick up on interrupting clues in your body language, in your facial expression. Uh, for example, um, client is in the middle of telling you about this major breakthrough that they just had. And they're going, they're going, they're going. And you it's like it's an important moment. You want to grab a hold and you're like, this is something you've been working on. I will even like. Did you hold on? Did you just hear what you what you just said? You said you were able to confront your boss. Have you ever been able to repent for the intervention purpose you promised? Uh, in this case, it's little things like facial expression. You raise your eyebrows, you inhale. They. They are knowing they will pick up on that subtle clue. The other thing I've been in conversations, uh, not necessarily in, uh, clinical, uh, work in, but, um, in other contexts where, uh, I was noticing the other person didn't pick up on any of those clues. Uh, the leaning forward, the inhaling, the the interrupting they just ignored. And so, again, maybe even diagnostic understanding is there social interactions? Is there cognitive functioning? Is there other things going on where they may not have, um, a shared reality or reciprocity or relationship or other things? So keeping in mind that, um, even even leaning forward slightly and now I tried to be mindful, what was my posture like, uh, during the interview. Slightly. Slightly. Yeah, right. I'm not like in the space, but helium felt here. Like we're so far away. Um, but the reality is you don't want to be. Maybe not in the first session. Now, later. If the client's feeling really distressed and anxious, I might sit back. But in the interview I was a little bit forward. At least I my plate trying to be, um, in hand still, but still gesturing. Not robotic, just being natural, but at the same time present. So, um, anything you would have done differently and it's okay to say that I'm, I'm open because you see things. You hear things. Uh, maybe you heard something else you would have followed. What would you have done differently? Well, I was just going to say I was really uncomfortable with interrupting, um, with my wife. And we both had drinks, and I would pull my ring up like I was going to drink, and then he paused to drink. Yeah. I. Um, yeah. Sometimes you have to kind to get the word in edgewise, but I might, even if I have a client that is a supervisor and we do have them, uh, and they're hard to interrupt. I might address that if it becomes something that keeps us from doing good work. So, you know, I noticed that there are times where, um, when you're talking, I have a hard time, um, engaging. What's going on for you? Uh, what is that about? Not. Why. Right. Um. And then understanding. Okay, so part of this process is, again, psychoeducation part of this process is us being able to engage in things. So there are times where, uh, there might be something I feel it's important to know or to ask a question. So what would be the best way for me to let you know that? Uh, um, you know, I'm going to interrupt you. You might raise your hand or shift the coffee or, or other things. So you may have to work on how do you even have that conversation or how do you work on therapy? Um, with the client. Yeah, but I feel so, um, so gentle like that. I feel it and not, like, interrogated, that's all. It's more like a therapeutic. I just feel this warm. Okay. And it was very comfortable. Okay. Okay. So, uh, with that, who we are in the space can soften the interrogation feelings. So thank you for sharing that. That's good. Um, yeah. Um, I'm just gonna share that, like, the purpose sometimes. Like, if I come to you and I ramble and recommend a lot of things time uh, to can't that she goes to say like, open your mouth and take a deep breath and I like. Yeah. And then she goes on to say something, you know, like it's her way of, like, also interrupting, but also like, just call me, you know, and sometimes it's, uh, that that's a great one. Or I'll say that just feels like a a what does that feel like a lot to you? Yeah. How would it be if we just took a deep breath or, um, if it feels like you're talking fast, does it feel like you're talking fast? Yeah. Well, how would we if we took a deep breath and just kind of slow down? Um. Or do you feel that way a lot? Yeah. So how's it? How is that for you? It makes me feel anxious all the time. Well, so. Well, how would it be if we just talked a little slower? Oh, how would that feel? Can we practice that? Let's practice that. And then, um. It feels like you're talking a little fast. Oh, yeah, I know again it's a, it's anything and everything you can do to build that relationship. And even in this process, um, asking those questions, the pace of my questions, the tone of my questions, the willingness to interrupt is all part of it. But if you noticed, uh, the transition I went from, uh, the anxious, uh, experience checking behaviors, which I was not yet done asking about that. But at the same time, for the purposes of time, I wanted to show transition. So I picked something that she had already expressed was a challenge. So I can understand. And they're related, but they're completely different, too. So it's, uh, it's just grab it and go. Um, the other thing is pay attention to those things that you want to grab a hold of, but make that judgment and can happen quick. Much like driving that stick shift or learning to drum. You make a decision, hold on to that, follow this. And usually there's no wrong answer. So it's just your clinical judgment what you follow. But make sure you understand your why am I following that? Where is it leading me? What am I asking this question to understand? And that is where you're going to learn how to think about those questions, um, as you ask them and be able to stay engaged, uh, all those good things. Okay. So for being get practice, what I'd like to do, um, just give a brief description and then, um, you can get obsessive compulsive. It, uh. Okay. Um, um. I'm thinking, um, let's, um, let's go ahead and take like, uh, 3 or 4 minute break five. Um, and then we'll get obsessive compulsive disorders for about ten minutes. Again, this is anytime I cover information about disorders. Should just be refreshing. You should have already read. It's just kind of make sure it's clear questions bring it to the forefront as then likely you're going to see those in the diagnostic practice method to the madness. We talked about anxiety disorders in the beginning. We talked about obsessive compulsive disorders. It's all fresh for when you go to your practice. All right five minutes. Come on back. Here.