You know, I felt like, you know, I was like, I don't know, I feel it just is like, oh, yeah, you better want to, like, not. Thank you. Well, thank you so very much for, uh, demonstrating behaviorism works. And obviously, um, appreciate you guys, uh, engaging in that. I know this might be a little weird, but it definitely helps me. I will say that I, um, hate to interrupt the good chatter. I guess that's one of the huge blessings of being in the cohort and people being together. And it's the relationships, maybe a little bit of, um, collaborating, maybe a little bit of co grumbling, maybe not yet. Um, at the end of the semester. Yes. Um, but just no, I, uh I respect your guys's time. If you notice, I will always, uh, do my best. I will start on time and on time and might be even just a hair early because, uh, you guys give a lot, uh, in those in the four hours you're here, I don't want to hold you over. And so, um, with that, uh, the dinner break I forgot to mention last time, try to return right? Right on time. Or at least just a little bit early, because we're going to. I'm going to start on time. Um, unless there's some sort of odd situation or, uh, I get lost on the way over to the lunchroom or something. No, it hasn't happened. Um, with that tonight, we're going to do a little bit of review. Uh, I'm going to reiterate a couple of the important aspects. Um, um, providing a diagnosis that we talked about last time. Good. Um, learning theory shows repetition equals good recall. And so my goal here is not to just bore you and state it again, but revisit it and then make sure we have a good conversation about it and answer any questions that you have. And then we will, um, talk about depressive disorders, anxiety disorders. And we will have a break. And then we'll also take time towards the end of the evening to walk through your vignettes. So we'll make sure you have a good understanding of of what all of that looks like. Okay. So to start, any questions from last time before I jump into my review okay. That's it. It's either we did really well last time we got it or we just don't remember what we don't comprehend. So let's jump in okay. So so let's talk a little bit about why is it important that we talked a little bit last time about, um, our own bias, our own perspective, our own, uh, experiences? Why is it important for us to pay attention to those things when we talk about this topic of psychopathology and diagnosis? Yeah, because the companies that passed the percent, the client and the it's all going to continuously [INAUDIBLE] affect guy's life. Yeah. So it'll probably is to misdiagnosis. Okay. Okay. What else? What about knowing ourselves, being self-aware, our bias. Understanding where our positions of technology come from? Yeah. Oh. Um, well, part of it maybe we are experienced something or we know something of it, but it's not exactly what the person and experience. We need to find out more about their perspective. Right. So it might be similar. So, uh, if we can expand on that, either yourself or someone else, have some thoughts. Why would it be important to understand if we have a similar but different experience? Why is it important to understand that? Well, yeah. Um, differences across cultures might be different across cultures and languages. Our experiences may be understood. Yeah. What else could you. What could you possibly assume? That it's the same, like the same intensity or same level. And it might actually be sound similar, but different for the other person. So it could be similar but different. And so we assume, oh, that is what it is because it was my experience. Or you see something and then you assume it's their experience as well. Yeah. Okay. So who would be brave enough to recall what is the definition of a mental health disorder. I. Think. It could even be, uh, an a, uh, just the gist of it for the proximate definition of. What are we talking about? Yeah. I know that cliche. Right. So inability to function properly and, well, um, and experiencing subjective distress and experiencing subjective distress. Correct. Now, there was a couple of different domains that that include. What were some of those domains? Yeah. Social. Social. Work. What's that work? Work? Yeah. So it can disrupt and distress and social impairment. Work impairment? Uh, what kind of dysfunction or challenge, uh, what types of, uh, experiences are they all just emotional, or are they what are some of the aspects of, uh, when things aren't working? What's not working? What? Uh, like physical, cognitive, lexical, cognitive, emotional. So keeping in mind that the process that we're looking at is it's kind of multifaceted. It is culturally defined, but it is also when things just aren't working right. And it's biological, uh, neurological, psychological processes that just don't, uh, work in the same way that is now we use the term that is normal or typical. Typical. And why is that? For the long term, I guess. What is normal, right? My normal is different than the normal norm. Uh, like in statistics, we talk about the norm because then you're looking at a group of people. And this is kind of a normative average. That's not what we're talking about. We're talking about a typical experience. But everyone's experience can vary. Okay. So what is the DSM? And how and why do we use it? In doorstop foundations. What's that? Scripture foundation Scripture for clinicians for some. Definitely, yes. Helps to categorize the source of experience. So it categorizes one of the things here. We have a categorical system right. Yes. Provides common language. Provides common language. And why is common language important? To make up for that, to understand the college, to understand what is understand right and right as that's the consistency of care, that consistency of care and all of those things. So understanding can be help in our therapeutic understanding and treatment decisions, but also it informs research which then informs treatment. But overall it gives us the ability to categorize typical or in this case non typical experience into things that we can understand. And I know it's it's a powerful word but legal or identifying so that then we can understand how to treat and then understand how treatment is going. And based on that research just the DSM applied to all countries, cultures around the world, or is it just unstable? Uh, in some ways it could potentially, but that's where uh, and we will talk a lot more about it is culturally bound largely in Western. Uh, there are some disorders that are seen globally and some demographically uniquely Western. For example, identification of eating disorders is very Western centric. A lot of other countries may not experience that or in the same way. So it is uh, there are sections in the DSM to talk about cultural considerations. And then there's also section which we'll talk more about when we talk about cultural things. There's a whole cluster of murders or um, uh, non-typical experiences that are culturally bound, that are identified that we may need to be aware of when we're working with people from other cultures. All right. What's the principal diagnosis? Yeah, it's the one that's the main one. The one that often the client comes to see you for. Right? That's kind of the reason for treatment. Um, and what is a professional diagnosis? And when we use it, um, what is the criteria of that occasion on that classification. Right. So the criteria and that doesn't meet but do we give a provisional diagnosis if it doesn't meet in total, or if we at the moment when we, uh, observing it. Right. So it's just maybe just not yet. And the example of that is with, uh, major, major depressive disorder, which we'll talk more about the criteria when it's been 12 days, not 14 days. So they've experienced symptoms, life and reward. You have really strong confidence that there is that that diagnosis will be met with the provisional. Uh, the other thing is we can give a provisional diagnosis. Um, that criteria has not been yet met. Or if we are, uh, based on clinical interview and presentation, and we're suspecting strongly that the diagnosis is there, we just haven't had a chance to gather the information. So the diagnosis permit. Um, no, we can change diagnosis in some ways. It's a working diagnosis. And always the challenge is maybe within that pile, that diagnosis always is there. But that's not always applied. So that's why we do our due diligence to make sure we're there on systematic accurate. There's a couple others not listed here that we talked about. We talked about specified and unspecified other anyone we call what those are specified. Guess that's. Guess. Is that where you choose to disclose? Why they don't fit into that specific category. Right. So in the case again we're talking about depressive disorders. Clients definitely experiencing depressive symptoms. But don't mean that's not the criteria for a specific disorder listed. But we know what criteria are not meant be specified unspecified. It's just often that they meet um criteria. Or we have identified that they, uh, are experiencing another depressive disorder, but we just don't specify. Now, who determines whether or not we specify? We don't use it as a clinicians, and likely best practice would be if you have specified specified. If you're not sure or there's reason not to specify, you can make that choice. Assign someone to comment. Uh, your files will go unchecked like we specified. You have some clinical judgment there, but good practice would be if you know. Why doesn't he say why doesn't fit. Okay. All right. Any questions? Yes. Here. Why this is this applies to this. That's why it's important for us. It's just actually protection. So I see something going on. Ethically wrongful. It's not necessarily in some ways it's protective in that it gives the most information we have. So for example, you may pass that case on to another clinician. And you can then they would understand why you didn't give another diagnosis. It just gives more information. And in some ways, um, and we won't talk too much about this. But in the state of Washington, you can actually a client can choose to have only the minimal notes required for, uh, continuity of treatment, which would be kind of like they came to see you and in general, a description of the client, they can choose not to have detailed notes. Now, what's the challenge of that is if they go to see someone else, there's not a record that can inform good treatment. Right. But for something that's important to them. So recognize how and why we keep good notes. Um specified versus unspecified could be a part of that. It just helps um, in some ways. Good details, good description. Thorough. Again not required. You can choose not to uh, but uh, in some ways for yourself. Just kind of hold. Why would I not specify if I can? And if there's reason you can leave it unspecified, or if you don't know, you just say it's unclear if the client will meet those other criteria, but they definitely have depressive disorder. Okay. So how often I usually unspecified. Is this a frequent we we read process pretty frequently. Um, you know, in some ways, um, I think it could be like the same from the type of clients you're working with. Alcohol. Uh, if you're working in a high, uh, like, uh, a population number quite a bit. Maybe working within community with the help of, uh, working with homeless, where you have just enough to gather that data. You might have enough to be able to specify an unspecified diagnosis. Whereas if you see someone for quite a long time, they might be able to eventually be involved in my diagnosis. So in some ways, to prevent, you know, specified, unspecified, give us a little bit of latitude to identify challenges that a client's working with. Provide a diagnosis which informs treatment, makes it helpful and which is an important consideration. But, uh, over time, with more information, you can always refine. So it's unspecified, and then later you're able to move that to a full diagnosis based on the information you, uh, you gathered over time, you can make that change. Yeah, yeah. So again, I would say, um, I don't have a percentage of number, but it it can happen more frequently than you would imagine or I, I never actually get to specify based on population. You're working in a clinic that works with maybe those experiencing, uh, disorder. Yeah. So you always kind of have a clear, uh, maybe the threshold and call it. Right. So insurance only coverage like a diagnosis when an unspecified diagnosis is be considered. And I guess because medically significant distress related to this cluster of, um, symptoms, depression, anxiety, um, genetic stress, whatever it has. But we don't have the specifics to say it's XP or stress or major depressive disorder. So in some ways, it gives us the ability to have a little more latitude, uh, to identify for treatment. Yeah. And then what you would want to do, especially as you're taking into, uh, practicum, internship, post-graduation supervised experience. And it's kind of, uh, again, worked with those that are in the field regularly. And how do you manage that? What do you think? So, I mean, I just spoke with, uh, one of our other faculty members who, uh, that in practice, private practice for a long time, and then working in a clinic where they have quite a long time to come to a diagnosis, so they would have a working diagnosis but wouldn't provide official diagnosis three until 3 to 4 sessions. And so, again, if you have that luxury, that opportunity to gather that data, you may have fewer, uh, unspecified specified diagnoses. And does that make sense that that person is like, you have 15 minutes and you're like, well, it's not quite there, but I'm guessing. And then in your good clinical notes, you could say client experiences depressive symptoms. It's not clear if they have a meaningful criteria for major depressive disorder. But at this time definitely experiencing, uh, low mood, um, um, lethargic type. You can clarify what they're experiencing that gives rationale for your diagnosis. And then if you know why they don't meet duration, frequency, intensity, um, you can say you can specify why does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Other question I do behind the pillar. I got a move to. Any other. Okay. So again, I offer this as a little bit of a refresh and then make sure we understand, um, that this is a an approach, my approach. Uh, I offer it to you as a good systematic approach, if you recall. But it was after the great gloss over we talked about this. And, uh, so I want to make sure we to revisit because, uh, again, if we build that nice schema of approach and we're able to engage in this work systematically in an organized fashion. And so what we're going to do is actually review our case notes. We're going to say what is the presenting issue. And then we're going to begin to look at you. Remember we have the pictures, the different categories of mental health disorders based on the client's presenting description of their symptoms, based on their clinical interview, based on what they report in their, um, in their intake forms. We will be able to then say, what category of mental health disorder should I consider? Then I recommend you go to the Diagnostic Features section. Does it fit? Yes it fits. Go through the diagnostic criteria. Remembering that all criteria need to be met in order to issue a diagnosis. And then if it doesn't stop there, then if they do meet four criteria, we still go to a differential diagnosis. This is an important thing that gets missed sometimes because we get to the point where we're like, oh, definitely generalized anxiety disorder. I'm done. They met criteria. Yay! We did it! We articulate how they, um, how they need criteria. It's all there. But if we don't then bounce out to say, ask ourselves, what else could it be? And actually, one of the diagnostic of mental health disorder is cannot be attributed to something else. Substance related medical related another disorder. And the wonderful thing is they kind of give you that good starting point, uh, such as, uh, psychotic disorders because of prenatal related disorders and substance abuse or other issues. So then you go and repeat the process until it makes sense. Now here's the other track. Once I get to a diagnosis, we suck. Very difficult. The other side is we get so caught up with what else could it be that we never planned on a diagnosis? So in some ways, if your client does not exhibit symptoms or describe anything in the case related to a disorder in the DSM. Do you have to worry about it? Do you have to evaluate it? No, it wouldn't be expected that you're going to do it differential for every single, uh, diagnosis. The other thing is that we'll talk about when we do our clinical interviews. You may be able to rule out something right away in your clinical interview with one. Good question. Yeah. Do you, uh, do you take, uh, substances? No. Recreational or, uh, prescription? Nothing. Okay. Do we have to worry about substance or substance related disorders? Nope. We just did find reports. Now, I will say, sometimes clients wait a while to let you know that they're not taking any recreational drugs until six sessions. And they go, oh, well, I do smell smoke marijuana. But they didn't trust you enough to disclose because that may be illegal, that there may be cultural, um, societal, that there may be personal shame or they just don't trust you how you're going to manage that information. So again, keeping in mind that what we have is that snapshot and then we can always add to. Any questions about kind of the approach to the DSM make sense. A couple of other thoughts about providing a diagnosis. Now, as we engage in this process of looking at a diagnosis, we've already talked about cultural expectations, um, cultural definitions. And that's one that we will land on over. Over and over and over again. Because it's so important. Because at the same time we're talking about kind of like macro culture, uh, whether that be in regions of the country, different countries, um, different religious groups, different experiences, or even down micro culture, your your home life, growing up, your neighborhood, those types of things. So even though, um, those things may not necessarily, uh, be known and understood globally, our task is to understand is there features that inform the diagnosis can don't get stuck on. I have to know everything about the client in order to provide a good diagnosis. But we should always keep in mind and wonder and approach it with curiosity. The other thing that we need to pay attention to as we get into a diagnosis is that we are looking at both what is the current snapshot? But also we're responsible for kind of understanding the history of. Uh, has the client experienced this before? So as we look at depressive disorders, for example. If we look at the different classifications of depressive disorders, there is reoccurred. There is most current episode in bipolar disorder. So we need to understand not just what's going on in your life right now, but what's the history, and is there a history of other things that might inform even this current activities? For example, we can't identify, you know, antisocial personality disorder without a contact disorder in childhood. So you may see it and go, oh my goodness, all the key symptoms are there. But if you don't ask about and understand the history of of mental health issues, you may not be able to accurately identify that diagnosis makes sense. Okay. The other thing to keep in mind, and it is important to understand that, um, we look at things from, uh, the biopsychosocial model and I would actually, um, include for case formulation, but also for diagnosis, uh, biopsychosocial spiritual model because ultimately, um, they will talk, uh, there's one whole class section kind of designated to that aspect of culture, uh, because for a long time, uh, the mental health field really didn't pay attention to, um, spirituality and faith as an important aspect of, uh, who we are. But when you look at, uh, who humans are and, um, things like, uh, when you get into culture and how intertwined things like, uh, faith community can be, uh, very protective factors or some risk factors in some situations. But we need to include that, uh, spiritual component because not only is it someone's understanding, uh, maybe they ascribe to whether it be an organized religion, Christianity, maybe, uh, another section of that, um, specifically Catholicism, Judaism or even Muslim or fill in the blank, whatever. They're organized. Um, um, faith experience is those things might inform. How they understand and perceive the world. Versus even what their larger culture does. So it's important for us to include that as an aspect. Of our diagnostic approach. Um, also, the etymology of mental disorders is not always straightforward. And, uh, the concept of nature versus nurture. So I'll throw out the question is mental health issues biological nature or is it environmental nurture? What do you think? Uh. It depends. Right. And, uh, it is again, in some cases there are some aspects of, uh, etiology course that is largely biological. And therefore things like, uh, for example, um, uh, just a genetic predisposition or even looking at experience with, uh, developmental delay, um, other challenges be biological than biological complexity, that however, what we see is there may be even those experiences, but their experience with mental health jobs might then be mitigated or influenced by their microscope. So they look at things like maybe that are there's a genetic predisposition or related cause for their experience, but the severity or treatment outcome for other things need to be considered based on their environment. Makes sense. Um. And I'm going to say this, uh, again and again, remember, this process is not simply checking boxes for symptoms. Uh, I hope and, uh, we will build in an entire class action dedicated to this formulation, because ultimately, this is only a piece of understanding the client's overall experience with their, you know, with their symptoms. And, uh, the diagnosis is just a piece, but we focus on it, the process of diagnosing, uh, because one industry expects for you to be able to diagnose, because the husband can contract. If you look at our standards, you expect to be able to use a classification system for identifying mental health disorders. So we focus on this skill. But I want to overlay and, uh, the concept is that it's only really one piece of understanding the diagnosis. Does that does that help clarify any questions about that. Okay. And the person centered approach. Remember, your client is not in disorder. We don't identify them as my disordered client. We don't focus on, um, only their experience. Now, this can get really challenging, uh, especially as you're learning the process of diagnosing because. Uh, what we're doing is we are then identifying a mental health challenge so that then we can create goals and treatment outcome measure treatment outcome. So in some ways we have to focus on that disorder, but we can't get consumed with it. And so that I think starts even with, uh, just our, the language we use and uh, even how we conceptualize clients. Um, I guess I have a question. The likely aspect of it. Um, so we are allowed to diagnose, like, patients as complex as life as possible. Yeah. Well, you you're expected to be able to provide that definition from the DSM. Okay. Yeah. Now, there might be disorders and and there might be disorders that you are not qualified to assess for. For example, uh, autism spectrum disorder require psychological testing and assessment, which masters level counselors are not qualified to administer and, uh, psychological test necessary. Even, uh, ADHD likely has assessments that you may not be qualified. Now some of those emphasis on the assessment class. But we'll talk a little bit about that because it's a piece of that of diagnostics. There are going to be some of those disorders that you will refer, um, testing. But ultimately how would you know that they need testing if you're not able to maybe recognize that, that the cluster of symptoms is strong enough, that you suspect that you need to look at the whole that interval, that out, that makes sense. So you may not be able to provide the diagnosis officially, but you may be the first one as you're working with, uh, maybe an adolescent client who has never, um, uh, always struggled in school and tripped over electrical cords. That's just me walking backwards. Um, they may have always struggled in the school, always had a challenge, always kind of been labeled as the problem child. But you may be the first one in their lives that goes. Well. I wonder if there's a diagnosis that may help us understand your experience. ADHD, maybe. Uh, and so we can refer out for testing, and then we would be the one to understand this is to cluster who we would report, um, that in our, um, referral to the psychologist or psych psychiatrist maybe. Yeah. Yeah. So we actually just experienced that process, uh, for our son last semester. Yeah. And we actually, our counselor was the one kind of over to us and said, I think you should pursue this. He was trained in those assessments, but he couldn't administer them. For educational practices. And what's interesting is in Washington state, you get assessed for medical purposes and then you separately get access for educational. Um, and so we've gone through the process on the medical side of things, and then we'll actually go through all of those again, um, through this system, um, to get like an individualized education plan. So, um, yeah, complicated process. I appreciate that here. But, uh, so initially attachment, there was a counselor. Yeah. You know, this is something I think would be helpful to consider. Would you be willing to move forward? You. Yeah. So again, even though you may not be qualified to assess or diagnose, you may be the first to spot and be able to advocate for your client for testing or encourage them for testing. And, uh, that answer your question. Okay. Other questions. Yeah. Why is it so great? This is right. And land is reporting, um, healthier is harder to get. And we definitely talk more about that would to the program. Yeah. So they are falsifying or lying about their symptoms for personal need for that be sure and get that information. Get a diagnosis for um. Uh, some sort of, uh, work more like, um, uh, couple of other things. And so we'll definitely talk more about that. But as part of the steps of differential diagnosis that we have to figure that out. So one of the challenges we have you brought up a great point we'll talk more about over the course of the class is who reports the central. The client. Are they being honest by looking at you? So someone that is experiencing, uh, substance related challenges or maybe has a history of bipolar or, uh, maybe psychosis? Are they the best and most accurate? Um, in their recall? What if they don't have a shared seeing, shared reality and they're having maybe a delusional experience? How do we understand how accurate their report is? So part of it is we almost have to have this great blind trust of the client and the 100% skeptical nature at the same time, and we have to trust that, that they're going to give us the right, accurate information to the best of their knowledge. And we have to go. That doesn't pass, uh, the field test. It doesn't feel right. It doesn't seem to to about the other information. They might not be honest or they may not have accurate information. Excuse me. Um, so the other thing is, when you're working with child clients, gathering that data, that information. So, uh, again, I think it is that the process of holding the client's best and expecting the best of them and trusting them and really digging in and trusting yourself to be able to go, hey, it doesn't seem correct. That's where your clinical judgment experience, um, client comes in and says, hey, Lester, we talked about last time their symptoms down the list of criteria for the DSM. You know, as much as I wish it didn't happen, you can, especially now with AI, you can say, tell me how to get diagnosed with this disorder. You know, spit out a nice little paragraph on here's what you would say if you were diagnosed with this disorder. Wow. Okay, so what are you going to do with it? You have to trust yourself. Trust your process. Trust all of the other documentation. And then your judgment as you sit across from that person. How does that feel? What do you see? What do you know? What do you understand? And then just do your best. And ultimately, if it comes back and the client is found to be malingering, but you've done your due diligence and you've done everything you can. You can stand justified in your decision based on your good clinical training. That does mean in some ways, um. Um. For lack of a better term. Do right and then you'll be okay. Does that make sense? Yes. Um. Behold. Okay. Now comes the funny conversation. It's diagnose or not technically, but I invite you to do is take a couple of minutes. Um, first, just take a second to reflect on whether we diagnose. When do we not provide a diagnosis? What are the moral ethical considerations? Think about should we diagnose? Should we not diagnose what are maybe reasons why we should we shouldn't think about that for just a second. Turn to your table groups and kind of have a conversation about that. Okay. So. I'm going to, uh. Remind. You that. I think is something you really want to talk. About. And people are interested in a lot. More. And, um, I feel like if you're working. For me as, like. Right. Now. So beneficial because I. I have heard it's really helpful. And I. Really? Like that. But what if. I got very. Badly where I was, I was. Wrong. I yeah, I did. Yeah. Okay. All. Right. Um. Oh my gosh. You. Got that right. Yeah. I have to go online. I said that, you know, can be, uh. Yeah. I'm not sure. You're right. I think it's. Fine. I. Feel like. I. Have. Oh, I might do whatever you want. I think. I have whatever I have, and. Then they also have. To offer advice. On how I would like. That. I don't know. I have someone on my back. So you. Know we're inviting you. Now. We're facing. You right now. And? I mean, like in my life, I don't know if I was really cool. I know that was, like, really? Really cool. I was in high school. So, yeah, I wanted to go to my car because I thought, how would I go? I. Mean, I don't know, what do you remember? Now? I was like, I love you. I. Want you to know that before that. Wow. So what happened? I mean, I remember with it. I don't know what happened. Oh, forget about it. Right? Like. How many times I knew what it was. I wonder. If you're ever right. You're right. That's what you're right. Yeah, I know, I know. And always. By the way. But if you. Wanted to act like you know what? I'm. Saying. Yeah. You know. What? I mean, like, you know, I don't really. Want to help? I mean, like my other pieces in that when they're working with us. Yeah, but I don't know that they're. Like. Oh, I see somebody. I saw it, and I'm like. Right. So be willing to share. Um, what did your group talk about? Yeah, I felt like a part of it. And the answer to that is that I think in some cultures even. On this kind of like the very lockdown part. And they're wondering, like, is it ethical to have the diagnosis to look like. And you think that like it would really, really. But do you think that they have it? Would you be able to elaborate? It's a good question. How would you define the. Yeah, great question is when does, uh when do we have exclusive that we have to challenge them to like their own culture and culture? Um, society. Culture, maybe they come from, uh, maybe military background or, uh, maybe a specific, uh, religious group that has a distinctive perspective, uh, that maybe even contrary to mental health that you have for their experience. So is it legal or ethical to not provide diagnosis? And the answer is. You don't say it. No, I don't think it's hard. And the reality is there's no guidelines that basically say we are required to provide an accurate diagnosis, and there are cases in which we would be able to ethically withhold the diagnosis is beneficial. But in some ways, through the eyes of kind of the law and the industry is like that again. So we are kind of following the medical model of the diagnosis informs treatment so that the diagnosis, how do we know about treatment outcomes. And so in some ways that's where it gets gray. And us clinicians will have to look at what is the law saying, what is the ethical guidelines. And is there enough for me to withhold the diagnosis. And so what what's my rationale. Because ultimately, then again, I always want to give this illustration. But if you have a licensing board says why did you not provide a diagnosis and you have a clear understanding ethically you are within your boundaries, your limits, or you know, how do you manage that process? That's where you need to do good due diligence and know what are your rights and responsibilities as a counselor, legally and ethically, and then also what's predicted. And it's I know you'll talk a lot about that, Doctor Kerrigan law and ethics question is how do you wrestle through those? And even what do you do when the law and the ethics don't match. And so that's where you understanding what the ethical guidelines are. And you'll be able to make an informed decision. So the answer is really is it depends. And how do you maybe work with the client to understand. Is there a point at which you can just work, or how do you work with them and communicate with them via the lens that you're operating through in order to help them find out this is ultimate if you don't communicate with them? Here's what the challenge identified. Here's what we're working on. How do you how do you manage treatment. So I get a little bit. It depends. But there is some guidelines. But I'd recommend you know them before you make that. This is the example of clay. This is what we have experienced, like some kind of divisions. Um, and. Providing a diagnosis like potentially makes him quit treatment. The thing is that there's the same model. In some ways, yes. In essence, uh, we we work through the lens of having a working diagnosis and operating from that lens. Uh, that's kind of the whole model that we follow. If for some reason there is, uh, a need to deviate from that model or withhold that diagnosis for the good of the client. What's your why? And so if you know your why and you know you're within the scope of, of the limits of that, uh, ethical and legal guidelines. The other thing is there's same thing with breaching confidentiality of disclosing a diagnosis based on, uh, maybe someone's intent to harm or legal activity or subpoena. Um, and so you would need to, um, again, kind of have a big picture of an understanding of why, um, and then understand the limits of that, because that in that is specific. But again, we can go if someone delusional or it's a cultural thing or if they're just set in such a fragile state, diagnosis might make them, um, just kind of deemed, um, uh, decompensated and have challenges. And so how do we have room to go? Well, maybe we don't need to let them know that this heavy diagnosis just yet or when do I do that? And so there's room for that. But again, likely you're going to want to work through that of knowing how you see the client and their experience from a diagnostic perspective, and pair that with your theoretical orientation and then work through outcomes for treatments that make sense. Yeah. Okay. Here in the back here. Well, I'm curious when you're thinking about that. And you may not be, uh, disclosing a diagnosis, are you are we writing down like a bunch of notes on this? Or when we've written down notes, it's already become, like, concrete, you know what I mean? Like, so it's like, well, I'm not there yet, but I'm talking about it, or I'm saying that I'm, uh, I'm thinking this way, but I don't want to say that to them that we didn't say that. So it's the difference. You have not provided the diagnosis or you're withholding it, that you're not informing the client, that keep in mind that clients have rights at any time to request to see their notes. So just side you always want to write those notes from the land so that your clients can see that that will they ever look at them? Remember when anyone else ever seen them maybe to say possibly. And so again, if you are working through that, then maybe it's, uh, my working understanding of the client's symptoms, which may be criteria for x, y need to sort of therefore, you know, this is where we're conceptualizing the client. Um, you know, it's not in a state or it doesn't want to know a diagnosis of thing to documentation. You have both said why the client doesn't want the diagnosis or but you're also then justifying how you're providing treatment. So again documentation might get a little bit um specific. But that's where you've been thinking through. How am I balancing that and communicating that in a way that's honest and true. Um, and represents me and the client both. Well, does that make sense? Yeah. Sometimes clients take a long time to rectify and come here, and then we'll go back. Um, I was just thinking about the perspectives of the immigrants, for example, when they're coming in the, uh, middle age, for example, with a kids and, uh, they already, uh, deal with the, uh, symptoms. Yeah. Which is we can if we don't health as a clinician, we actually can kind of make the diagnosis because this that everything has to say about the present, um, uh, disorders and everything. But the first, the questions about how did you do it? How do you do every day with this? Can you, can you actually live with this? It's affected you. And of course, it's a lot of immigrants that yeah, I don't vote here for this. I can continue. And, uh, yes, I think we need to be very, uh, aware of that. We don't need to diagnose if if this does not affect anything. Um, just disrupt the client life. For example, you can sleep affects the children, affected some of the work experience, for example. And, um, uh, that's what I mean. There's so many, uh, people coming to this country in this particular age have the diagnosis like that initially, but we're not diagnose them because they live life. One of the things that you, you highlighted there is, um, open up to just about any of them. Uh, and I won't say all because I don't want to make that error. But most of, if not almost all of the disorders will have the, the criteria, um, results in clinically significant distress. So if the client's not distressed, does it cause is it doesn't meet the criteria for a diagnosis? That's a heavy question because maybe they are not yet in a place to recognize the distress that it causes. I'm not saying that that's the case with your example. Or maybe like we talked about someone coming from a culture in a in a country where civil war was common and there's just a lot of violence and more throughout their entire childhood, their threshold of what is distressful is different than someone that grew up in the Washington. So again, what is what is created clinically significant to stress. And we can even talk about uh, even things like sexual disorders where if there's a sexual experience that doesn't, uh, bother the client. Is it disorder? That's a question we have to be able to answer because we we just, uh, we determine what is clinically and if like, as in this example. Uh, but at the same time, we can look at practically how are those symptoms may be impacting the utility of their lives by behaving in a way of a fairly disruptive anyway. And maybe that's still an area of focus. Because remember, you don't need a diagnosis to justify treatment. So and so. One of the things that we talked about specifically with other considerations was the diagnosis of schizophrenia. So for example, I think it was a college class report. One of the things that we discussed is that generally a diagnosis doesn't specify that information, but it seems there. So just being aware of the amount of stigma attached to certain diagnoses and how that can influence future change. Yeah. I mean, there are there are some that are chronic problem that we recognize. Okay. So we have a responsibility to carry. Out that diagnosis on the. Other hand. More time and a place to apply to. And I. Am very optimistic that especially in terms of some of. The yeah it could be harmful if they're not yet aware of the implications. Yeah, yeah. That is correct. That ties into that example. Maybe they're just not familiar with the understand the impact or gravity of. What we would call insight. Maybe the diagnosis that uh, but therefore important insight as a as a specifier. So they're not yet aware of information that can be helpful. Mental. All right. Checking in. Questions? Comments? How do we do it? Yes, I want to. I just like you saying that. Yeah. Great question. What do you look like? Just. And you was like when you're working diagnostically with a couple or a man who's and it comes down to you and I won't go too much into about a couple cuz they identified like he impacted the client, that there might be a diagnosis or might not be a diagnosis. Uh, one of the things that we have, um, are zero is that there are uh, uh, factors that kind of influence inform or interact with people who are societal, cultural, um, uh, things like, uh, distressing, the whole, uh, job loss, uh, homelessness, uh, other conflicts that we can then use that are not diagnoses, that we talk a little bit more about them. But maybe there's people that talk about family or, uh, but as part of the diagnosis, I think that's where, depending on the setting, you're working with a family of six. And then there's a lot of disruption going on in the family. But the second question is, are there diagnoses that we hear that are causing even more disruption, uh, distracting disruption. So I know that would come to my system which within articulate how you address. And you may, uh, might be a couple setting. I won't go to parties. You're going to have their traveling. Um. I would always meet with the couples as a couple and then have one session each individually, so I can assess if there are challenges related to, um, I think the digital psychopathology, domestic violence and other considerations that wouldn't be safe to disclose within a couple. Um, and then that informs also, uh, because, uh, it takes two. We have to make a call for what's going on that is maybe, um, potentially be creating conflict so that that answer your question. In some ways, it's complicated because there's likely a possibility of providing the diagnosis depending on the setting and how you move about that process. Yeah. Um, okay. How would you approach a situation where a client likely has, uh, disorder, like functional stress, but they, uh, want to change? For example, I would say, yeah, that has OCD, but they're scared of, like, changing their behaviors. Um, so that is that a place where you could possibly with mold, um, the diagnosis and work with your level of readiness, that would potentially. But at the same time, likely if you're working towards, uh, like, uh, symptom reduction, that there's likely diagnosis, but that gets into even like the ethical treatment of the client is not making progress or refuses to engage. What's our ethical responsibility to, um, you know, work up to a point and then maybe discontinue what we heard, uh, based on some working, uh, at the same time, there's a lot of room. Uh, likely people who experience excessive compulsive tendencies or symptoms may not want to change. It's completely distressing to think about, you know, I have to do this or and we'll talk more about obsessive compulsive disorders, but that's part of the treatment. So that's where it goes from the second technology diagnosis side to treatment. So how do we work someone through the process of being resistant. But likely you're going to have to work from a diagnostic. What does that make sense. Yeah one more than one of us. So if you're working in therapy with the client, you're also getting the design right. Then you defer to their diagnosis. Um, that's that's a that's a great question. And in some ways, um. Possibly like if you refer it out for diagnostic testing or they come to you, uh, they come with the diagnosis, do you trust the diagnosis of someone else? This is a great questions. I'll put it in the box. Do you trust a psychologist? Is that correct? Psychiatrist. Medical doctors diagnosed or certified. You take it at face value. That's what it is. What's that? No. Trust but verify. Yeah. There you go. Trust but verify. Because again there there may be. Those symptoms were present three months ago when they were assessed. But our job is to do our due diligence and do so. Yes. And like, if it's a direct referral, they just went in for, uh, psychiatric testing and were diagnosed with a mental health disorder. You may want to review the notes, understand the diagnosis, and see if you're seeing the same thing. Because we did have a responsibility then to if it's not accurate or we're seeing there could be error that we deal with every single month that can be filled or something. Could you try to link. And so in order to consult that psychiatrist, you're going to need a piece of information. So basically if you're working with them and this is where there are many medical models where you're working within the referral network of a hospital, they get referred by using their school counselor to psychiatry. The psychiatrist referred to you for counseling. So now you have this release of information group that has the ability to consult around the client experience. It's actually a wonderful model if you been to a medical doctor and others. Um, because then you're working with abortion, but you then also have the ability to say, hey, this is not looking right. You seeing the same thing as you. So, uh, but that gets more to the, you know, collaborative treatment model. Um, complicates things, but it's also good, right? So that is your question. Okay, let's move on. Okay, so, uh, reminding us as we get into the concept of writing a diagnosis, recognizing that we're going to list the principal diagnosis first. And this is what is either an outpatient identified as this is what the client said they came in for. Um, but we can also make the time, uh, or the decision to list the most significant one first. We kind of it's, uh, a little bit interchangeable. Uh, remember to consider all subtypes and specifiers and, uh, that is going to hide that, you know, but. I think I just stop sharing. Don't touch my. All right, that's fine. There we go. Okay. Um, so this is where, uh, we need to consider all subtypes and specifiers, and we remember and I say this again because, uh, repetition equals because recall do not give specifiers that do not exist for that disorder in the DSM. It's one of those, uh, again, it's one of the, uh, errors that I see often in, uh, new diagnostic. The other. Um, I also said, let's look at Zika. So, uh, if you have your DSM, you can go to the front and it gives you a good representation of that on the right section here. That's right. There we go. Even look at page. Um, well it's important. To. Note here that if you look at uh, for example, in the front in the entry, it gives a description of Zika, including economic problems, problems related to social and environmental problems related to or with the legal system. And then it gives subsections of, uh, of those, um, those challenges. And then that's a zip code. Now, if you were to look at this diagnosis here after the 2.0 major depressive disorder specifiers file, if there is also economic hardship or job loss or family tension or other, uh, abusive relationships or fill in the blank, the zip code would go at the end, because then what that does is not necessarily provide a diagnosis, but it provides specificity to the diagnosis or for the case conceptualization. So keeping in mind, though, that ZIP codes alone are not a diagnosis. If someone is experiencing, uh, for example. They lose their job and there's some economic distress. Likely there could be an adjustment disorder, but if they don't meet classification for an adjustment disorder, you cannot diagnose or provide a diagnosis of 0 to 1. Now, you can use those as descriptions to help inform good clinical judgment, good case conceptualization. Uh, but they are there to help us, um, look at those five psychosocial factors that may inform or influence our understanding of the client's experience. Does that make sense? And they're also listed. They're going to be listed on the back of the data set. So for the purposes of this class, just remember that I'm looking for a properly formatted diagnosis in this model. The DSM ICD codes the name of the disorder and then comma specifier comma specifier specifier. As many as apply and are appropriate to the case. But if you do, for example, provide uh in your diagnosis of your for your vignette. And it's clearly that diagnosis does not include specifiers. And the specifiers you include are not clearly at least alluded to in your vignette. And that's what I'll provide. Um. Any questions about writing a diagnosis? Yeah. Um, you can only have one type specifier only exists, one that only exists. But, um, if that exists on that list. Yeah. So, uh, if you can only provide the ones that are listed there, there may be a more comprehensive list, uh, in the back or even if you were to look at the ICD, you may have others, but for the purposes of the DSM, the ones that are included, you wouldn't make up a zip code, for example, but you might be able to find, uh, one that's general enough that matches your client's experiences and, um, to include them. Remember, these are not exhaustive definitions. These are representative definitions. So likely if there's economic hardship, there's going to be a zip code that may be that may be a good thing. And yeah, because they're not traditionally required they're not required for diagnosis. This again, and in some ways it adds, uh, clarity and adds detail, but they're not required for tax purposes. And uh, I will uh, and for the purposes of the final zip code is not required. Now, if you happen to throw one in there. Great. Um, and as long as it's accurate, you know, if you're going to, if you're going to swing at it, if it's all right, it's like, uh, but at the same time it's not required. Yeah. Great. Great point. Other question. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about the vignettes sort of some of shopping for darknet screen. Right. Um, how did you go running the vignette first trick in about that process. What did you notice? What went well? Was it easy? Was part of the expected? Yeah, I changed that not a thousand times. I was actually crazy because it's. Everything was so overload, and I put everything because I knew that was right. And after that went to that or something. To something like this. Thank you. No, that's not right. No. And then come back to no check. And it's a freak me out. I'm sorry that this is actually this is very difficult to. I, um, I think it's like a case conceptualization and everything will be much easier for me because there's so many questions and so much to put. But when you do, vignette is like. You know that is the question. If you ask the question, now will be like going back. It is not that kind of like a secret that you know that it was something and that is difficult, right? Right. On the other side of that, in some ways, yeah, not that of my intention is to make it hard. But at the same time, that process of reflecting on, well, there could be so many different things if it's that secret diagnosis. But at the same time your client comes in and it's their secret diagnosis. So what is it going to look like? What is it going to feel like? What might they say? What might they allude to? Uh, and so yeah, in some ways I, I kind of expect it to be a little more challenging, especially with the first one. Yeah. And also, you can ask the questions, I mean, if you ask specific questions about that diagnosis, but if this is currently, let's say that means that that's the right, as I say. And out of that depressive disorder and anxiety disorder is a very similar thing. That means if you're going to that question that go for they not that diagnosis and that is difficult is well, on the flip side of that, that's kind of the the aim of that as we meet tonight, you should have kind of gone through the process of asking yourself, what question might someone ask to understand this kind of symptom? So when I say, uh, claim reports being tired all the time, well, what does that look like? And so in some ways, you have to kind of create a little bit of the backstory enough to be able to answer those questions to, um, help the, uh, your, your fellow student kind of go through the decision tree. And so and so thank you for sharing that. It was challenging and yes, others. I don't want to jinx. It. I'm crazy crossing fingers, but I thought it was, um I someone I know who has is where I chose. And this is it to be more obvious by representing, uh, and adjusted real life example. Yes. Okay. So and it it's hard probably 64. We've got to be 32 and uh, hopefully uh, will be. Uh, uh, other thoughts, but I think some way of like, let me read the DSM and actually I felt like I would be trying hard to get from here. Okay. Yeah. So in there, if they have really about themselves and that they have to ask. Yes. And especially the first one and yes, I can, uh, ease your mind about this. This is not something I created, like, significantly hard because it was ten points that you don't do that. That's going to impact your grade. But potentially, um, you know, if other things don't work, it can put you into a non profit. You have to do that again even though each always have. If you look at the point of it, it's a significant portion of the brain when you put them together. But my grading of them really is my hope is that you wrestle through the hard, you rascal, through the help. Well, this is how I would approach it, but getting to this is another way to conceptualize and build in that, that, uh, layered understanding of what symptoms could look like. So in some ways, uh, embrace the, the, the challenge, um, interesting ways in the process. But my, my grading really is not going to be significant. I guess no one could comprehend, uh, w, you know, point or to take it off if there's challenges like you're talking about depressive disorder, and then, uh, if you give them a PD disorder, but don't talk about it. Yeah, that's going to be challenges. Right. But if it's in the ballpark and here's the lens, if I feel like if I were to be able to read this or have you tell me this story, I would be able to pick up on the little flags, the threads of information that I would ask questions about, and I could see how you're going to find that pathway there, and then just making sure that your diagnosis matches your expectations. Yeah. So wrestle with it, but don't stress about it. And if there's a couple points here or there embrace the journey. All right. Other other thoughts. What about leaving that thing I said? How did that go? The feel? Fun. Disruptive. Challenging. Interesting morning. I am really glad that we talked. Before I actually really get into it. I think if I were to open up about, I would put my head away now. But the way that Last of Us, I felt like I had a roadmap of like what this is supposed to be. And I actually think the accompanying book. Thank you. This was also very helpful to you. Um, and give you some more color. So you actually put it in hard language. Um. You're right. Um, so it's helpful. Anyone find it challenging? What was challenging about it? I just felt really clumsy. Like, I can tell answers are obviously in here. I don't know, I just, I like I even looked up a few times like this one page this morning. Um, but just to help me figure out how to navigate it. So, yeah, that's I think what I'm looking forward to is, like, slowly warms my heart. Right? And for me, it would be expected that you kind of have that experience the first time you pick it up and you're like, this is not like the other textbook where the context or even the schema we have at home, there's a table of contents, and then there's an introduction, and then there's the introductory paragraph that then alludes to what follows. And then there's some examples. And then there's some review questions that it's it's not that what it is intended. It's a manual. So it's going to be clunky. Um, has anyone ever picked up like an auto repair manual for like, the manual? Finance. Have you ever tried to read stereo instructions? That was always like it read like terrible instruction. It doesn't make any sense. But that's that's just to be expected. And that's the purpose is you will begin to become proficient at understanding sections and being able to move between, um, sections. So thank you for sharing because that's that's about my experience. You pick it up here like I don't even know really what to do with this one of the sections mean or why is it structured the way it ends? Now if you anyone follow my encouragement and read the introduction. Yeah, that was helpful. It was helpful because it gives you context as to why the book is laid out, the way it's laid out, it progresses from what they would consider developmentally like, uh, based on developmental and then age related chapter kind of goes to the same. So you're like, um, disruptive, uh, dysregulation disorders, and then it moves on to what might happen later in life. So again, there's, uh, context, but I would expect to be informed. So thank you for sharing that with others here in the chat. Um, I don't like that. Like they have the different sections and they're repetitive because I don't, I don't know, it helps me. It's like, okay, I'm looking for the information, I know where I can find it, and I don't need to read all of it. I'm going to go to that section. I don't need to read this part. I'll be back here and want to know more I can read. So I kind of like that. That part enables me to jump around more like a manual read part to a text where I need to read it. All right, I'll read that. Did anyone follow my advice to read certain sections and skim the rest? And then did you get like 90 events you depressive already disorders and realize why do you think that's a lot, a lot. And so um, so yeah, hang in there. I like I get sections, it's going to be like the prevalence. Well, I don't necessarily uh, it's, I know it's pretty prevalent based on I'm in practice. And actually all the time that experience depression and sounds like may not be as important, but you may visit that sometime. I was going to say that I got to have that, like, really helped me. Um, because it's so daunting. Like, the whole thing was just like, I didn't even want to open it. Then, like, I don't even know where to start. It was very overwhelming. And then I got the tab, so that made me go through it. I just, I can and I got to see. And now I feel like, okay, I can hop anywhere overnight. So if anyone wants a link there from you. I love it and it makes it look pretty to to open and can start putting them off. So one of the things, uh, the illustration that comes to mind, as I mentioned, I'm very metaphor and illustration driven just in my life. If it's not something simple. Uh, in my previous work experience, almost feels like an entire lifetime ago as a property manager and senior apartment complex and independent living, 148 units. And so we have any range from people who were just, uh, just senior citizens, live independent thing to where they become ill and they, uh, you can help support and provide support. But part of that is my job was to help first responders. I was able to help them find apartments if you can access. So about once a year I get the local fire department. I call them up and say, hey, would you like to come do some area familiarization because are unit changes, the personnel changes. So I walk around, let's just go on this show. This is where the electrical work, and in some ways that process helps them understand where things are helped me in some way. And that's the process of doing it. So I encourage you to do some area familiarization, familiarize yourself with what the sections are, what is included in each category, and being able to recall kind of um, and we'll talk about this more as we look at the clinical interview. What's the feature of that category? Move this over. Okay, so we know that action with the move low. Move something different. So we can then look at how what is our clients experiencing that fits that category? Uh, what about eating sleeping substance? Uh uh. Maybe paraphilia disorders. Sexual dysfunction. We can understand what might be included, and then we don't necessarily have to remember everything, but be familiar with the key feature of the disorder. And so I go through my my aim for this classes. And next to all of this is to highlight ones that are in these categories that you most likely will see. But you need to be able to go well. That feels like it's this type of disorder. I'm not familiar with it, but I know it's in this classification. Let me go see if I can find what fits area familiarization. So be familiar with the sections, the domains, but don't feel like you have to know every single attack posture criteria for every single disorder. And I repeat that because now we have the lived experience, the kind of digging and cockiness and figuring out how to use the manual makes sense. Okay. Any other questions? All right. Let's see. Tell you what. Let's pause here and then we'll get into the disorders. Um, after the break and then probably right at the 9:00 great crossover, we'll transition into, um, vignette practice. I think, uh, we're right on track. So go ahead and come back at eight. Uh, you know, seven. Uh, I was just doing a clock. I was, I was wrestling, you know, 30 minutes, 35 to 35. Let's just go. I got to go.