So we talk about obsessive compulsive disorder. There's going to be some key features, um, that, uh, are present, uh, in terms of obsessive related disorders. You not all of them have compulsions. Um, so obsessions are intrusive, unwanted thoughts. And then those thoughts are often perceived as they can be, uh, considered, uh, taboo, vulgar, uh, distressful. But ultimately those thoughts create distress, which leads to behaviors that are aimed towards reducing that distress. And those are compulsions. So when you have those two together and you get obsessive compulsive disorders. Now if you look at the diagnostic criteria, if you can have obsessions without compulsions or compulsions, likely will be, uh, related to obsessions. But, you know, like one or both is the diagnostic criteria. But one of the things to keep in mind is that, um, obsessive compulsive disorders differ from other, uh, even anxiety disorders or, uh, other, um, maybe disorders that could be considered, uh, people are obsessive about them, for example, paraphilia disorders or, uh, other addictions or other things where their thoughts they find, uh, that they have something that's constantly on their mind. Is that the key feature with these are it's distressful and unwanted. And so, uh, let's talk a little bit about them. Uh, they're in control of their personal use. And one of the key features is the prompts have to be resisted. I don't want these. And so I'm going to take action. Uh, or compulsions, rituals to reduce that anxiety. Uh, one of the key features of compulsions is that oftentimes they need to be performed and they need to be performed accurately. Even there is a sense of just right. So I need to wash my hands because I have, uh, obsessions about contamination, germs. But I do have this compulsion I need to wash my hands. But as it has to be done in a certain way, I have to keep it like the time, temperature, water, um, the process and the motion of the hands. And if it's done, it's not quite right. And they go back and do it again. It's something that, uh, it's going to be persistent and obsessive. Now, I'm sure, uh, any, any person may have thoughts that are sometimes intrusive and unwanted, but again, we're looking at this excessive and persistent theme that happens in the DSM. Uh, I just know that it's, um, it's something that causes significant distress when, uh, when it occurs. And while we look at, uh, oftentimes takes a significant amount of time, it's not like, uh, I'm going about my daily life and that the thought is just kind of stuck here. It's I'm spending an excessive amount of my day interrupts my day. I avoid going to work. Not because I don't want to go to work, because I am afraid that if I don't lock the house in the right way, something bad is going to happen. So it's usually related to catastrophic thinking, negative impact. If things that I. The compulsions are complex. Uh, oftentimes people with obsessive compulsive related disorders do have good insight, uh, meaning they are aware that their, um, obsessions are not rational, but it doesn't change their relationship with them. Uh, even though they see them as irrational, it still causes distress, and likely even the irrational nature of them causes more distress. Because why am I this way? This doesn't make any sense. I know washing my hands doesn't stop me from getting sick, but I have to wash my hands. Um, so here, uh, we're going to see OCD, body dysmorphic disorder, hoarding disorder, crypto killer mania, and excoriation. So let's talk a little bit about, um, OCD. Likely you're going to encounter that tonight. Um, uh, and, uh, okay. So, uh, and I'm consuming one or more hours per day spent, uh, engaging in obsession or compulsion and attempts to resist or avoid, and there's no pleasure in it's involuntary versus someone, for example, um, oftentimes one of the areas outside of contamination is sexual experience, and it's considered taboo and it's unwanted versus someone that maybe has, uh, like I mentioned, paraphilia disorders or sexual, uh, focused, um, uh, fantasy that is intrusive, but it's desirable because what if it's pleasurable, OCD it's not pleasurable. Uh, usually you're going. The sea. Washing. Cleaning. Repeated phrase. Thoughts counting. Uh, this can relate to, um, uh, hyper religiosity. And so taking something that would be considered a typical and positive religious practice, saying the rosary, for example, uh, can be taken to an extent that if I don't say the rosary, um, ten times every 15 minutes, something bad's going to happen. It becomes this warning of, uh, something that is not positive. So keeping in mind that what starts maybe as a positive coping becomes negative, in other words. Um. There's no real connection with the actual thought. Sometimes the anxiety, um, that's created. The action is sometimes, um, you know, not always connected. Usually kind of in line with the theme that's going on. Um, what we see is onset usually in adolescence and gradually, um, onset. And then usually sadly, it's chronic people can live with. Um, they can find ways to mediate symptoms. But oftentimes OCD is chronic and it's never totally going to go away completely. A couple of the other ones that you'll see is body dysmorphic disorder. And this goes beyond like body image. It goes to the point where someone sees themselves as, um, going from anywhere from time to time. Other people are noticing and, um, obsessing about it to the point where, um, it can be completely, uh, distressful, um, hideous. Um, and it's usually followed by repeated shaking. Uh, for example, in common is, uh, the size of my nose. My nose is too big, my nose is too small. So they touch the affected area to see. They watch other people. Other people are then, oh, you can blow your nose. It's not as big as mine is. Or your nose is smaller than mine. Uh, you must be thinking my nose is huge. There's constant checking that's going on. Uh, there's also the, um, the, uh, specifier of, um, related to. And now I'm even forgetting the term. Sorry. Uh. Taking the body weight, uh, like, uh, weighing one. So the scale at the point is smoking. Um, it could be that maybe getting into eating disorder, which eating disorder is more related to, like anorexia nervosa, this fear of gaining weight versus almost, uh, perceiving, um, they could be co-morbid, but again, they're a little bit there's a distinction between the two. Um, so they can be related. People with, uh, eating disorder experience can have uh, I think this working disorder, um, and I want to make sure I get it, uh, correct if someone gets their. Body dysmorphic disorder. I'm looking at page 280. Two that the specifier. Uh, 272 with muscle dysphoria. Uh, and so that is where you, the adolescent and the older men, um, have an intense focus on, uh, their physique. My physique is not, uh, big enough. And oftentimes these individuals experience, they are typically sized, meaning their average in, uh, their size and weight, but or even muscular. But their perception is that they are not fit enough. They're not muscular enough. And it becomes to the point where excessive actions, um, uh, taking, uh, even steroids, uh, excessive walking up, even to the point of body damage. Uh, so you're looking at, um, is your client experiencing body dysmorphic disorder, or are they leaning towards just a little bit of an obsessive tendency around fitness when it becomes destructive and becomes, uh, time consuming? And that's, um, their relationship with that is what you want to support. Does that make sense? Okay. All right, two more, uh, three more to go. So hoarding, uh, this is, uh, pretty straightforward. However, um, recognizing that not everyone has excessive accumulation of stuff. Uh, it's usually relationship, um, around things have value, even if they are perceived with no value. They collect things. And there's, uh, the key trait is there's difficulty discarding. And discarding doesn't mean just throwing away. Discarding means even selling, trading, giving away, um, but also throwing away so that there's purpose, even if the purpose isn't commonly understood. I need to say these magazines that are that they have such valuable information in them, I can't let them go. And oftentimes with excessive accumulation, you might find it's not just someone, uh, that has an odd collection of things that's excessive. You might see that more with schizophrenic related disorders for someone ports, but there's no order to it. Oftentimes, um, people who have excessive collections may actually have some things that are of very little common value and some things mixed in that are incredibly valuable. Um, sometimes there is a pattern, uh, we need to be careful that we don't look at, um, private collectors as quarters. It's going to be something that usually, especially with excessive, uh, accumulation, impacts their livelihood and impacts the health and safety of them or others in their living space. Okay. So that's kind of a differentiation trick until the mania is, um, carefully. And this isn't just grooming, it's excessive grooming to the point that creates baldness. And oftentimes there's ritualized behaviors around, uh, the type of hair, the region of the body. Uh, what you do with the hair? Even moving it around in the fingers, uh, investigating it, uh, running it through and finding the texture even with the teeth. Uh, so it's not, um, there are some who might, uh, grow a little more excessively than others, but this goes again beyond that. And, um, hair loss can be hard to evaluate because they may pull from different regions of the body. Uh, but again, it's the relationship that goes beyond what would be considered even aggressive grooming. It goes into, uh, baldness and um, uh, even to the point where they spend hours looking for a particular type of hair texture, color, uh, for him or region of the body. And, uh, similarly, excoriation is skin picking, and this is related to, uh, it could even be, uh, picking up, uh, abnormalities or imperfections in the skin or scabs and moving towards. Uh, this is going to create lesions. So it goes beyond someone that maybe has a tendency to pick scabs to someone that is picking scabs, healthy skin lesions, and maybe even skin infections and so on. So again, excessive. Um, and sometimes it's going to be in regions that are seen, sometimes it's unseen. Um, so they'll pick up imperfections, including things like, uh, maybe, uh, pimples or freckles for miles to the point where it creates, um, wounds in the skin. And they do it to themselves or others, right? They do it for themselves. Uh, yes. Um, it possible to say that, uh, cultural, um, generational trauma, if we just to go, is important in order. For example, in Russia, um, so that union we, we didn't have anything and a lot of elderly people, they started to borrow some of the stuff that is practically impossible to clean, like houses. And, uh, how to differentiate that is actually a disorder that this trauma from the generational I mean, uh, likely that trauma in that generation leads to this nature of the disorder. Again, we would look at maybe not the cause, but are they do they make criteria for it? Yeah. Uh, are, uh. Is can people. Yeah. Uh, potentially. Uh, but again, uh, with tricked out until mania and skin picking both, there's usually resistance. Like there's efforts to stop. But the, um, and then usually that leads to distress and anxiety and even a sense of relief when they do so in some ways, like cutting may be, um, kind of a similar experience, uh, distress and then a relief or a sense, a rush of, um, satisfaction when, uh, Harry's poll or, uh, skin aspect or maybe cutting. So I wouldn't say in itself it is a self-harm behavior. Um, but it might be consistent with some of the attitudes and behaviors similar to, uh, self-harm. Yeah. All right. So with that, uh, for your vignette practice today, what I would like to do is engage in. The process of beginning clinical interviews. Um, and giving them were a little bit behind today. And in the spirit of moving, uh, this exercise a little earlier to help those that are a little more, um, uh, early for the birth, I guess. Um, but, uh, we might move, um, this practice, some of this practice to the beginning of class next time. So if you don't get to yours, please come ready next time. And one question from others. So in groups of three, um, so you have a client, um, a therapist and an observer and then rotate through, but I what I would like to I don't read your vignette in total like I demonstrated past the name and age and then start as the therapist. You start just asking questions to explore observer, pay attention to both, uh, give feedback and see if you can get to the point of, um, of a diagnosis. Take about maybe 7 to 10 minutes each at first, and if it gets a little longer, fine. Uh, but do take time after the brief. What did you notice? Like I did what? What? Well, what type of questions? And how was that for you when I asked this question, did it leave where I thought I was going to leave? Begin. You can. Usually we don't ask clients that, um, in life therapy. When I ask that question, did it get to that answer? Okay, good. But in this case, you can't use that. Okay. Um, I don't think there's anyone else in the building, so feel free. Um, if about half or more of you can disperse, uh, what I would like to do is pick different groups. The last time, um, gives you opportunity to learn from other classmates. Okay. All right. Ready? Um, come back at five. Oh, go for those who are for the help, I.