How much money? Do. I have in my car. I think that's. All right. Well. You can talk a little bit about how much is opinion related to some aspects of culture in that I do have an exercise, although I realized that that's why I did not make it. And so I'll just talk through it and then I'll let you go. Um, so one of the things that we're, uh, giving a look at, much like, um, personality disorders, we talked a little bit about the idea of schizophrenia related disorders. You may have, um, you may have some understanding of perspective of what psychosis can look like. Um, it's kind of common in, uh, the, uh, media or the movies to have different representations of different aspects of schizophrenia. Um, I know actually the local here, uh, encountered someone on a couple of occasions, actually for years. Um, someone lived in the neighborhood. And without talking with them, based on their appearance, uh, behaviors, I would speculate cautiously, uh, that they may have that experience of schizophrenia. Seems likely. Meaning something that you've had touch, uh, a touch your life a different times. Uh, likely. Like in your everyday clinical practice, you may not see someone with, um, schizophrenia or an active schizophrenia. Okay. So one of the things that we're going to need to look at is that there are both positive and negative symptoms related to, uh, schizophrenia. And uh, keeping in mind that negative symptoms aren't that a positive mark? Uh, it's more so conceptualizing much like the DSM and or detection of that. Negative symptoms are subtractions, things that would normally be typical experience. They are less than the typical experience. Positive are going to be the addition, uh, additional experiences beyond a typical experience. Uh, so we're probably more familiar with, um, positive symptoms. And actually here our text highlights that, uh, there's a little bit of a challenge with the DSM is focused on only positive symptoms. It's a little bit biased towards positive symptoms. Um, and actually negative symptoms, uh, are something that we do need to attend to. So we're going to talk about positive steps and looking at delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech and even disorganized or abnormal behavior. So if we're to at delusions, about 75% of those with schizophrenia have delusions. And these can typically take shape, uh, in the form of persecution. Uh, others are going to be out to get me. Um, they could be paranoid delusions which kind of follow through the persecution. Satori. Um, delusions. Um, but they can also be grander. Grandeur. Uh, much like if you think of the idea of, uh, narcissistic, uh, focus, but even a little bit different and leaning towards almost they have this sense that they are for a special purpose, that their life has unique meaning, and then they can get into, um, even some religious context where they believe that they themselves are God or are called by God to do certain things. Uh, we need to keep in mind, as we'll talk about this a little bit later as a culture, but also next week or next session when we talk about, um, faith and spirituality related to diagnosing that, we need to be cautious when we look at religious beliefs, especially and, uh, diagnostic criteria. There's also delusions of control and the belief that others are controlling thoughts. Uh, but also this concept of reference, uh, that there's some messages being sent to me through the newspaper or the online, uh, who gets the newspaper anymore or, um, and, um, TV or streaming broadcasts or even within music that there are special messages that only I can decode and then begins to put things, um, together. Um, these could either be, uh, grounded in a shared reality, although they are beyond what would be typical, or they could actually be bizarre. So, for example, could it be possible that someone has been asked by the CIA to be a decoder? Think of a beautiful mind. Anyone seen that movie? Great movie. A good depiction, not perfect, but a good depiction of someone that experiences, um, uh, schizophrenia. But if you recall, he's breaking codes and feels like he's called by, um, the CIA to encode these messages in order to save the world. Now, is it possible that that could actually happen? It's grounded in a reality that can be shared, but they can also be. Delusions can be bizarre and like, um, an alien spaceship. The alien has replaced all of my internal organs with, uh, alien contact. Or somehow someone changed, uh, my brain with someone else's. Or it's just kind of things that are not in a shared reality. So keeping in mind that the delusions, uh, are, um, strongly held beliefs even can be opposition, um, like proof or evidence for logic? Yes. How would you differentiate somebody between something in the transaction versus like I think a lot more about like conspiracy theories, for example, like how did you come to a friendship between those? I would great question. Because we're living in maybe a time in which the spirits of theories are much stronger than they have in other humans. Now, if you look back at the Cold War or other types of conspiracy theories also. So it's not the first time, but I was living in that season, especially with social media being out there and just, uh, the algorithm feeds the conspiracy theory. Um, so I think one of the things that we would need to look at is reality testing and, uh, how. How strong the [INAUDIBLE] is it to the point where it gets ugly? Like their belief in that truth is so real, they cannot be convinced otherwise. So despite proof for and again not opposing political views, not opposing views of a situation and society conspiracy. Although, um, but it's almost like that the degree by which it actually, uh, is held right. Does that make sense? Because I think I think we need to be cautious, especially as we see quiet. It's harder for us to work in session. And they have a theory about a certain event or a political party or fill in the blank and maybe other as opposed to, ah, it's going to be a lot harder to feel like we have this as a leadership. So you need to check your bias and say, is there? And my thinking is stronger than it really is because it's opposed to mine? Or is it getting to that point that it reaches that delusional perspective? That's right. And it's also looking at, um, is it a theory or is it a rational circumstance? Yeah. But um, but it also be. Assessing the delusions based on functional impairment. Right. If it's a. Real for or religious belief. Uh, yeah. Um, we but the ego is not affected. Kind of like that would be diagnosed as a delusion for what we. Yeah. How much does functional appear in some way? Yes. And. The other thing about this aspect a little bit this. Is how that you get unconscious. Belief in what? I would like to say. That it's still not. Sorted out. So we can't go. We can still follow the Catholic tradition. Say, the closure of the bathrooms. So it gets to the point where it is acceptable. You know, a lot of people. All right. Um. So we have delusions. Can be a little bit hard because, uh, if they're grounded in reality, how far do we push? So one of the things I would do is look at what is the DSM say as what's that threshold maybe doing a little bit of reading around, um, especially the more current research around, uh, diagnosing these types of things in a very different, uh, climate. And I think you ask a really relevant question. Uh, conspiracy theories are those delusional? Potentially. But I think we need to be cautious in saying not all conspiracy theories are delusional. It's maybe that strongly held beliefs that are based on their values, their belief system. Next we have hallucinations. Now, oftentimes, um, when I say hallucinations, uh, I think we get an image of almost visual hallucinations first. But actually auditory, our most common schizophrenia. And those are going to be voices. And it doesn't, uh, voices, uh, could be, um, any gender. They could be voices that, um, can do a couple of things, oftentimes judge or give direction. But sometimes it's an ongoing narrative about the client's life. So imagine if you're having, um, a auditory hallucination and it's a voice always just commenting on everything you're doing. It's an incessant voice that never stops. It's an ongoing narrative of, um, of your life, your decisions, your thoughts that can be distressful. And so keeping in mind that auditory hallucinations can come in different forms. It's not just, um, I heard a voice tell me to do such and such. It can come in different forms. Um, we also need to be conscious that sometimes, uh, within this is like faith communities. And we'll talk more about this next time. I'm always tipping my hand to the next time. Um, and then next time I'm like, but I've already talked about this. Uh, but when we, when we look at, um, auditory hallucinations, we need to be cautious, especially around, uh, within faith communities such as hearing from God or hearing the audible voice of God or, um, valuing the idea that someone could be spiritually led and that could be auditory. So we need to then look at the context of the faith community and say, is this a typical experience within that faith community? Yeah. Um, I don't know if you're saying it. Um, does the conversation, uh, and, uh, how many people is reasonable, but what if. Yeah, yeah. So reds are good, people are clear. So, um, so that. Again, that's where we need to use good clinical judgment. Understand? Is this person's experience in line with their faith community. And so likely we would not automatically lean into that this, uh, this experiences consider this or. Does that make sense? And at the same time, I would personally believe into in someone's experience even within the realm of difficult in their faith community. And for example, um, within hearing the voice of God would be a common phrase and a common experience, especially when you get into maybe more charismatic Pentecostal denomination. That's going to be a more common occurrence. But is that in line with what God told me to? And, um, maybe a common one? Sadly, we don't take this violent action against this other group. That's not something that would be considered, uh, reasonable within the mainstream understanding of that faith. Okay. So again, what is the content and why does it make sense? But it does also have to pass a general reasonable context within general society community. Is that something that is illegal, um, or dangerous for other people that want to draw them that far? So it's not a free pass? Well, I heard from God that we can't we can't judge that auditory hallucinations. Does that make sense to me? Um. The other thing to keep in mind is that they're also visual hallucinations. Now, visual visualizations that I mentioned, uh, Beautiful Mind, uh, in that throughout the, um, uh, the expression of schizophrenia, we see these individuals that are later identified as visual hallucinations. Now, one of the things to keep in mind that oftentimes, like a full person, hallucination is not common. It's more fleeting. Images or shadows are more common. Um, and so maybe, uh, auditory hallucinations of a voice followed by, like this fleeting image or shadowed image. It's all conversation like they display in the movie. That makes sense. But at the same time, kind of represented represents the experience that someone has, where that reality is their reality. We may not see it. We may not know it, but that person's experience to them is as real as your experiences to you. Does that make sense? So one of the things to keep in mind is we can't, um, we don't necessarily approach it by trying to reality check, fact check or convince. Well, that's that's a hallucination to them. As much as this cup is real to me and you can see this cup. They may not see it the same way. And so we need to be mindful of that as we, uh, explore and interact with people. Um, as a side note, those experiencing dementia and other symptoms really are very helpful to approach in the same way as you're dealing with people that have a different experience of shared reality. Um. Because they live maybe in the past that have memories. And, uh, for example, my wife's grandmother experienced, uh, dementia and at one point was grabbing a blanket and like, where are you going? Oh, we're going on a picnic. Who's we? And people would come to visit her every night at about the same time, and she would have conversations. And her experience to her is 100% real, um, different than schizophrenia. But the experience of, uh, hallucinations and delusions can be very similar. The other thing to keep in mind is, uh, one of the other, uh, positive features is going to be disorganized thinking and speech. Now, disorganized thinking is going to be, uh, very much in line with the idea of they're just not in a shared reality. Their understanding of the world, the way the world functions is going to be, um, it's not going to be shared. And with speech, it's really interesting. It could be either, um, kind of just disorganized and it doesn't make sense, but yet it's very fluid. Um, it's going to be almost like it's tangential. And then what they talk about, uh, may almost make sense, but they shift topics and content is just it doesn't it's not in a shared reality, but the way they talk about it is much like I'm talking about it talking right now. Or maybe we're not in a shared reality, but I'm not feeling well. Um, but the reality is what happens is that in speech, you'll notice it's not typical, it's unique. It's not, um, it doesn't make sense. And a good representation of this is actually one in the book. Um, uh, but also the movie The Soloist. Uh, I don't know if you've seen it's, um, the story the movie would be, uh, Robert Downey Junior. Junior plays someone, a journalist who finds, uh, a cellist on the street who suffers from schizophrenia. And at some points, the conversations that that person has where he actually has a really good job kind of representing what would be disorganized, disorganized speech and also gets to the point of things and a lot of things that you encounter, someone that experiences speech challenges or their speeches disorganized. Keep in mind that there may be neurological things. Has anyone ever heard of the concept of aphasia? Right. So you can have Broca's or Warren is aphasia, which has actually an impact on the area of the language area of the brain that actually causes more of these would be what I call word salad, very fluid speech, but it just doesn't make sense for progresses. And this is how I remember word salad. Bernanke's Broca broken speech where speech is hard if it's, uh, not even a stutter, but the words just don't come. And so keeping in mind that the first interaction. If you see disorganized speech, keep in mind it may not necessarily be schizophrenia, it may be some other type of, uh, communication issues that make sense. So, uh, but very much, uh, along those lines, disorganized speech, kind of the warning keys, um, aspect of disorganized speech. But we can also look at, uh, behavior that is, um, not age appropriate, maybe childlike. It's unfocused, not goal directed. Uh, they can also include very much, um, like the individual I referenced earlier would oftentimes wear multiple jackets, carry around bags of things that don't have, um, uh, any sort of shared like, uh, common value trap and just wander. It's almost like a purposeless experience. So disorganized behavior can come in many forms. But oftentimes, um, I think you would likely be able to identify. Oh, I think I would know what that could look like. Um. They can also lead all the way up to being catatonic, which is not responsive to directions, limited or no movement to become rigid. And we kind of reference that, um, in, um, the vignette practice, uh, recognizing that that can even be a little bit on a continuum, someone that just has really low, um, energy, very limited responses, almost. Uh, the word would be kind of in a stupor is the other word where there's just not a lot of connection is really just kind of, um. Limited engagement of the world? No. Why would that be under maybe the historic cations versus the negative? Um, again, it's leaning into it's a positive feature. I don't know why they have it in the positive, but, um, with, uh, catatonia would be the positive feature. If I'm recalling correctly. And if someone is, I'll. I'll double check that another person. Sure. Um. Uh. Uh. The authors highlight that it's also important for us as clinicians to differentiate between clinical and non-clinical presentations. Some symptoms may actually be present, but the person is able to manage their experience and function in life for the most part. So with, uh, schizophrenia, you're going to have, um, kind of a it's kind of a cyclical or rhythmic expression that you're going to have. Uh, but the prodromal phase, you're going to have the active phase of psychosis, and then you're going to have, um, where it reduces and the negative symptoms are common, and then it kind of go into remission. And there can actually be long periods of time in which people who experience, uh, schizophrenia can have almost the typical experience of life, especially with medication. And, uh, they can engage in like other people and they stay kind of in the active and negative phase much longer and cycle through and kind of stay in that expression. So keeping in mind that a couple of different things, one, early onset and negative symptom expression first tend to have a more negative prognosis and a more chronic experience versus a later onset. Um, tends to have more positive features at the onset or it so and prognosis is typically better. And then oftentimes earlier onset, if I believe correctly, that women with earlier onset fare better than men occurring onset. So at what age? Um, let me ask you this. At what age is a typical onset of schizophrenia? Uh, early 20s and early 20s. So early onset with an 18 typical onset, 20 to 25. Does that mean someone 35th May experience late onset schizophrenia? They can't. It's just going to be less likely. And the most common. Type 35. That's when you get the opportunity to really make one of these common. And um, yeah, it's an inherited. Uh, there is uh, some genetic component oftentimes um, from probably later also have been known to be related to. That there is uh, uh, first degree relatives, I believe, have stronger, um, stronger chance than those further out. Um, so if you have, uh, first degree relatives with that, you're at more risk. It doesn't mean it's guaranteed. Great question. Other questions about schizophrenia. Yeah. Can the delusions and presentations, are they always kind of negative or ominous, or can they kind of be like positive or control and just like, uh, they could be all sorts. So positive thinking of, uh, uh, delusions of grandeur and delusions of almost like, uh, uh, oftentimes doom and gloom, positive stress. Right. The idea of, uh, someone who is in a chronic sense of thinking that the world is going to end the end times are here, and there's delusional beliefs around that. That's a negative versus someone that maybe has delusions of, uh, reference, delusions of, uh, grandiosity. You might have, like, I have this higher meaning, um, call to some might be very positive, elevated experience. Um, keep in mind that manic episodes can result in psychosis, but you need to differentiate between what's a manic episode in schizophrenia. And that's often going to be experienced with negative the negative symptoms. Um, so let's talk a little bit about the negative symptoms that can be positive. Are those things that are added to the normal experience. Negative symptoms are those that are um, the typical experience is uh subtractive. So you have a social reality, which is a decreased interest in close relationships. And this goes beyond the introvert. This goes beyond the shy. It is a disconnection, almost like when we looked at schedule a typical personality disorder. This kind of bleeds into the backside. Also the loss of a reduced motivation table or persistence in everyday activities. And this is going to be differentiated from maybe a lack of motivation related to depression, although they can be comorbid. But here we're going to look at even um, oftentimes negative symptoms to the point where daily needs are not met. Hygiene, food, feeding, dressing properly, um, and just taking care of oneself are the things that tend to suffer. And then also we have blunted affect. And this is a lack of outward expression of being cautious. Um, and I had someone once early on in my training talk about I use the word blunted affect and they dispute low affect versus both. Um, lack of outward expression of emotions. Think of almost being, um, no emotional expression whatsoever, but very limited. It's like, for one thing, it's not there at all versus like. And so keep in mind that's going to be a common negative symptom also. Um, a lot of you, which is limited speech. And this is um, again going beyond someone that just is the quiet type. There's actually almost no yapping in their verbal communication. A couple of the other disorders. Um, delusional disorder is one or more delusion for one month or longer, but the criterion for schizophrenia is not met. The other thing that we see here, and the one of the differentiating factors described in the DSM in our text, is the idea that, uh, with delusional disorder that doesn't meet that criteria for schizophrenia, those delusions oftentimes or more strongly held, and the impact on the person's life is stronger than in schizophrenia. And so what you're looking at is, um, it's one month or longer, but that full criteria of criteria is not met. So someone can have delusions that can be completely impactful, derail, uh, different aspects of their life, can be intensely held and might be more intensely held than the delusions, um, and schizophrenia. The others brief psychotic disorder. Listen to the experience of one or more of the primary symptoms of schizophrenia, but less, um, than a month. So if I were to categorize for each psychotic disorder schizophrenic form disorder and then schizophrenia, what do you notice about duration of symptoms? How long? This brief psychotic disorder. What's that? This is at least a day less than a week today. Less than a month or four. It's one month. Six months. 106 months. It's up to you to conceptualize these, um, schizophrenia related disorders, keeping in mind that if you were to look at pre psychotic disorder, it's going to be a psychotic episode that meets the full criteria for a psychotic episode. But it's going to be in episode one month number one day to one month. And then if that passes that threshold of, uh, one month, then you're into schizophrenia form disorder, which is the exact same criteria as is a premium, but it doesn't meet the six month threshold. Then if they cross that threshold from schizophrenia for six months, becomes schizophrenia. So keeping in mind that someone can experience any of these without getting all the way to full criteria for schizophrenia. Someone may have a brief psychotic episode, maybe only have one, or maybe have multiple distinct episodes. Uh, but they never pass with schizophrenia or disorder because their experience never last more than a month. Does that make sense? So again, keeping in mind that, uh, these are really skills of like, uh, I think the ability to say this is, uh, a psychotic related experience that is not schizophrenia, but it's almost it's those time periods, uh, discrete time periods. Does that make sense? Yeah. Just to clarify, um, it doesn't that doesn't necessarily mean it has to be every single day. But if you go in and out in a month, uh, you know, they're likely going to experience symptoms for a period of time. It's just not going to exceed a month for a brief of disorder. They may have just a day where they, um, have a break in one of the many acts that we were talking about earlier, someone. Um, the example was someone experienced, uh, uh, significant sudden loss. And that created also led to a psychotic break. And then that psychotic break lasted just a period of time. Um, so the idea that there can be a precipitating event, oftentimes stress, trauma, someone like that experience. Um, because if you have any action on, um, so the idea of, um, um, them experiencing the event that relates to or experiences a psychotic episode, how long does that last? That's really what we're looking at in order to have a brief excuse for the form or, um, and. Yeah. In words, we might make a telephone call. Um, any questions about that? Okay. All right. Schizoaffective disorder is a little bit different in that, um, this is going to be if you look at the schizophrenia form, she has a personality disorder. She is a, uh, schizoaffective. Here's how you remember it. Schizophrenia and effective schizo affective this when you're related to mood. So when you look at schizoaffective disorder, this is going to be the distinct experience of a mood disorder, whether it be anxiety or depression or other related mood disorder. But it's going to be within the context of, uh, the active phase of schizophrenia. So if you were to look at, um, someone has severe depressed mood and they're in the active cases, uh, in the criteria for schizophrenia, you would not get schizophrenia, but it would be schizoaffective disorder. And one of the things that we're going to look at is that the depressed mood must be pervasive. And, um, um, sorry, disengagement is common in schizophrenia. And so you can differentiate between the two. But when you look at, um, how do you know schizoaffective disorder, one of the things you're looking for when it's not just depression, which may be depression with psychotic features, right. That's one of the specifiers for depression. But what we're looking for is that mood disorder happens in the active phase. And then what you're going to see is then that there is, uh, no mood disorder. And maybe when the negative symptoms are present, there's going to be a distinct period of psychotic experience, positive or negative, without mood. That's how we know it's not, uh, like depression with psychotic features. Because if if they're only depressed and then experience psychotic features, you're going to go with the mood disorder. So that makes sense. But if they experience psychotic, uh, symptoms without a mood disorder, it's going to be schizoaffective. Clear. There's my experience. There's a lot about a lot of. Things that, yeah, make a psychotic episode. And so if we don't see someone who has psychotic episode, you may not see his part of them. Right. This person in, um, discussions of disorders that need to be able to be. Like that. You know your children. Very well. But being able to understand the difference. 100. And three degrees. Is this possible because. We have the numbers that the symptoms of psychosis are present without disorder in addition to the other disorder. Episodes. So we have something. That's in there. We have somebody that comes in this way. So symptoms and but we may and we may know that we're probably using drugs on somebody to suffer medicate. And so then how do we know without getting in the way if the disorder has to go through a diagnosis, what are the drugs or how would you diagnose. We see I only. Get a number of likely. Actors saying this is what we have. So. That's not something that I know. But you might work with somebody who is healthy. So you have to work on some stabilization and other do. So again, you have been working on the fact that. They haven't. Realized that confirmation hearing about the Secretary. Of state health care supervision answering. That great question. And I think I suggest that that we put that question that's. Going to come out of this year and how. Is it. That they go through that differential diagnosis and they actually come out with a diagnosis or additional diagnosis, which you may. Understand. Better call their community psychiatrist. But that's the point. Here, let's actually I have a thought. I see your hand, and I might be able to tell you I have a visual in mind. Um, let's go to ask your question. Um, and it's related to, you know what? Um, the. If it's a disorder, if it's an active phase or unknown disorder, active basis psychosis. So I think this will answer your question. Okay. So if we were to look at, uh, the curfew, as I mentioned, there's going to be kind of a ramp up of symptoms and then an active phase. And then there's going to be kind of a negative phase and then maybe even a remission. Right. But here in the active phase. And the active phase, what we're looking for in the context of this phase is that depression, anxiety. Is there a mood related disorder? Okay then if that's true, then what we're looking for is this related to depression with psychotic features. So what we're going to need to do is look at when did depression start. And then when does depression end? If depression ends and symptoms go away, then you're looking at, um, psychotic related depressive disorder or, uh, depressive with psychotic features. If depression exists and during the active phase and then it goes away. But then you have other symptoms related the negative symptoms and you're looking at schizoaffective disorder. Does that help clarify? Seymour had not seen that happen then. So what we're looking for diagnostically is does depression exist first and then psychosis. And then once depression events, no psychosis? Or is, uh, depression in the context of the active phase. And there's still other psychotic features that happened in the person's experience. Okay. All right. Clear mud. Okay. Okay. Um. All right. Developer. But, uh, also helpful outside of statistics. Right. Okay. So now let's get into somatic related disorders. Okay. So what we have here is a classification of disorders that are related to, uh, fear, anxiety, intense focus on, um, the physical experience of symptoms, uh, or being sick. So if we're going to look at, um, kind of this cluster, think of, um, they used to be, um, you know, my brain's going, uh, like hypochondriac, uh, hypochondriac. Someone who had kind of hypochondriac things. Right? And so the idea that they're always thinking they're sick, this is that classification of disorders. Um, so there's primary features to stress related to somatic or physical symptoms. Uh, it's going to be more common in medical settings, and likely you're going to get a referral from a medical setting rather than someone coming to receive you first, and then you refer for medical treatment. However, it's possible, uh, someone does come to you. They haven't seen their medical provider and you refer. So this cluster of disorders includes somatic symptom disorder, illness anxiety disorder, and functional neurological symptoms disorder, uh, which was previously called conversion disorder. And pardon my type of this should close to zero. Uh, and then finally factitious disorder, which we're familiar with, we don't talk too much about. Um. Let's talk a little bit about somatic symptom disorder. And this is going to be distress from one or more somatic physical to play with pain being among the most common. It can be kind of very specific very specific area of the body for a general complaint of, um, either low, moderate or severe. It's not related to a medical condition. Now I'll pause and ask the same question that we've asked before. Are your medical providers who have medical causes for pain? No they're not. However, we can be aware of some general things that you may experience related to you. We talked about, uh, depression and local community, hyper somnolence, those types of things. Um, I would just want to be aware in common where heart related disorders can be a common one. So we can ask the question. Happy to hear that provider. So here what we're going to see is that there's clear evidence that this experience with pain is not related to a medical condition. There's going to be documented evidence of death. And likely these are individuals who have gone to the doctor. Likely many doctors for the same issue and the test results, despite test results that show negative for any sort of medical condition that would be related to that pain. They still experience pain. Something to keep in mind here is that is suffering is real. Even without medical college, their experience to them their physical experience is real. If someone has ongoing chest pain, even though there's been multiple, um, cardiac evaluations, no heart issues for them, they experienced that pain as well. So as we approach individuals who experience somatic symptom disorder, we look at and hold that truth. They're not necessarily just falsifying or fooling themselves. They're suffering is real. Keep that in mind. Um, there's going to be a significant an excess of worry about the Semitic experience. It's not just like I have a chronic need, especially when it's cold outside. It gets off. You know, it's not that it's, uh, think about the idea of intentional focus, word taking action and steps related to, uh, finding out or getting, um, relief from that pain. And there's also mis attribution of typical experience being something more serious. These individuals will often say, oh, I'm having a chest pain. I must have cardiac disease. So there's going to be like a mis attribution. That's going to be something a minor ailment, a minor pain, a minor experience is going to be viewed as much more significant, blown out of proportion. And they're going to take actions, multiple actions to get help or reassurance that they're actually okay. Um, does that make sense? Yes. I guess this is maybe just a comment or something I wanted to prompt out loud. So I remember that at the time when, um, endometriosis was still very new and doctors didn't know much about it, but I had friends with people who would experience a lot of pain and stress problems, and doctors could never figure anything out. So then it became kind of like this. Um, only to find out later, medical science started to figure out it is a thing. Right? So that's like, seems like something for us to keep in mind that maybe medical science hasn't figured out how to pinpoint things. So something to say aloud. Yes. And one of the things we have is, um, I'll try not to tip my bias too hard. I don't know, um, I think you've identified a real feature of the the medical profession, including the mental health profession. So all of that is that we know what we know to be true right now. And that's that's what we engage in. And, uh, looking at medical history to where we were looking at, uh, mental health disorders relating to an imbalance in humors in the body. And so, uh, bloodletting or fluid learning was the way that we brought balance. We now know that doesn't make sense. So what we know now is different from that. So I think it is much more, uh, we carry that tension of what we know now is that this is not a known medical cause. Six months, ten years, five years from now, that may actually be like individual sense where it's like, oh, we actually discovered this is a real danger to all of those people that were maybe misdiagnosed with something like somatic symptom disorder now would be diagnosed with that transition. And so I think you're you're thinking about it, right, is in some ways we carry that tension in the diagnostic. So like, okay, could this be really something we just don't know. Yeah. Um, and uh, or may be something we ourselves are not aware of in someone's presentation with the disorder may be unique and their medical provider may not understand such so likely in this case because of the last bullet point, they're going to take actions to seek reassurance and get help. There's going to be a long history of evaluation, multiple evaluations that prove that there's not a medical related causes. So we could probably a little more confidence. Look at the problems that make sense. Yeah. So um, what about like, if there's been like a leg amputated, isn't there like a phantom? Yeah. Something. So that would that would be a known medical car like the. And I'll speculate here just from that. Um, so the only 200%. But basically what I would look at, the way I would classify that is that's a known medical condition. And those nerves remain active. So actually the reason why I know my grandmother has is like I was with him, um, I can tell you a story. Um, he was funny, but, um, what happened is every day, right around the same time, you experience phantom pain. But it's because those nerve endings. So it's almost to the point where, uh, over time, the feeling of where the pain got higher because the nerve endings will become less, um, they will adjust, but it's almost. I would say that's a real medical condition. And the nerves are just fire and having no place to turn. That's creating a sense of pain, even though the limb is gone. So that wouldn't be entertainment. Um, it's still the same type of disorder. So the Stimpy story I was with my grandfather for that long. History of the reason why he got his leg amputated. I'll tell you that story. Um, but I. Walk in to the living room and sitting there. Cutting paper and everything else. And I walked out. Then I come back and he has this big grin on his face. Also, he whipped up his foot and he put ears and a little. A wonderful sense of humor. So when I when I hear that, that's when my brain goes up. He was just thrilled. And so we talked about so much for a long time. Um. All right, let's now look at, uh, illness. Anxiety disorder. This is going to be a little bit different than, um, the somatic symptom disorder in that there is concern about having an A for acquiring, uh, condition. And there's typically no experience with symptoms. There's just fear of symptoms. So a somatic symptom disorder, people experience pain, uh, different experiences. The symptoms here, there's just a fear of acquiring, uh, and almost, uh, uh, uh, acquiring a disease, illness or disorder rather than experience pain related to a disorder. Makes sense. So if you were to look at diagnostically, how's it different? What's the primary difference? What was that? Pain. It's common pain or real symptoms for somatic cell disorder. Whereas, um, with illness, anxiety, there's just fear and excessive worry about acquiring an illness or just work. So of how would you differentiate this between. Is it just presentation of how you would try to argue for malingering at this point? Um, you bring up a good point. So how do we know if they're malingering or factitious disorder? And I think that's where you're going to have to look at the criteria for if they're, um, in the same way we're looking at a diagnosis for somatic symptom or illness anxiety, we would have to look at, ah, the whole number. And so do you remember what the key feature of malingering was. So somebody it's okay if you don't remember. It's I'll put you on the spot. Yeah I like what that is doing. Right. So is there a lawsuit? Is there insurance? Is there, um, custody of children, or is there some external game that would lead to if I have this disorder, I would benefit from it. And in this case, there wouldn't be there would be real distress relative to the experience with symptoms or acquiring an illness. And that says that anxiety goes beyond kind of the person that would be, um, kind of maybe a little bit more than typically, uh, hygienic. They don't they don't they wash their hands often, but it's not getting obsessive compulsive disorder or those types of things. It's going to go along that that excessive worry is going to get caught. They're more, uh, they're worried about having a heart disease and it can be related to family history. So they, um, my grandfather, my grandmother and my father, who was have heart disease, therefore I needed. And so I researched and every, every experience I have my body. Oh that's right. Like I have this excessive worry about, um, acquiring that that this one. Thinks it's. Okay. Well, actually, this classification is functional neurological symptom disorder, which I like. Perversion disorder. It's easier to say, uh, but just know, historically, conversion disorder is what functional neurological disorder is. If you were to look at conversion disorder, it comes from the psychodynamic perspective, the analytic school of thought in which that psycho psychological distress manifested in sensory or motor dysfunction. Um, so what we have here is there's either motor or sensory symptoms without identifiable physical cause. So issues with speech, um, movement, um, even to the point where, uh, people's limbs will move, but there's no physical cause for that to happen again. Likely these people will be referred to you for a medical study. Um, and care is must have clear evidence that the symptoms are not a result of neurological issue, and it may be onset related to stress or trauma. So oftentimes, um, I've seen presentations of this in which, um, someone may not experience these symptoms until but becomes significantly stressful for others from habit, event and triggers. Um, uh, even things like, um, uh, migraines or ocular migraines or things like that, but they don't have the no logical values and there's no cause for that. So conversion disorder can be, um, anything neurological. The symptom, it appears to be logical that there's no logical basis for it except. As noted that the incident can also include, um, other technical. I don't see them, uh, include dissociative experiences. Any questions about illness anxiety? Somatic symptom conversion disorder? Okay, so let's take a five minute break, then come back and we'll finish up with culture and then we'll be done. I will leave, uh. Yeah. Yeah. I think, uh. Oh, yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah, yeah, that would be along and lines of code. So. Yeah. Um, like I, you know, I really understand. What you're doing, you know. Oh, actually. Yeah. No. Sometimes. But that's. What I mean. Yes. I mean, yeah, I'm just like, sometimes somebody randomly like, you know, them. I mean, not the pros, but. I know I need to follow them, right. Yeah. Because I don't, you know, I realize the handful of times I tried to tell you, no more typing it, that's what I am like. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. I, I guess I think we can decide to let. You know, I mean, if you. Have any. You know what. I mean, like a whole day. Or something. So I. I just, you know, I thought that I guess I was like, in moderation. We both. You know, I probably you. Know, I understood order ninth grade. Right. And like, you know. Yeah. Okay. That's all right. Very, very, very. Yeah. Yeah. That's all right. Oh I have I know, I know, I know. Yeah I know, I know, I, I literally I read like everyone dies literally. Oh I know yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah I have a very I. Was like I was like oh no, oh no I like. You know. Yeah. Oh yeah. You both are like everybody. Yeah. My wife Sally. I was. So proud. Of my wife. Who. Um, but I don't care who, um. You know. Why are you here? And I wish we could go back in time. Okay, I will say. Well, I hope you like my life, I am enough. I don't need, like, a start for the married somehow. Oh, I have a. I like the idea that you can move from size by moving. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. Precisely. Yeah, but. Like. I said no. Matter. How? Fast you go. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. All right. So this. Expression. I know we've talked the first time about our experiences and how it shapes our definition, our experience, our lands in which we see psychopathology. And so, uh, this conversation is an extension of the earlier conversations we've had. But it's incredibly important for us to understand what is culture. So I know you guys have taken multicultural issues. I think perhaps it should be a part of conversation throughout, because I think that, uh, requires that you are not the cultural counselor, but also a, well, culturally competent counselor. And particularly and through the lens of this class, um, we understand the apology. Um, so this is much like everything in this class, if that's the starting point of conversation, can give you maybe some tools and some things to think about as you work with clients. What do I need to pay attention to in order to understand my client, their lens, their experience? Uh, their understanding of psychopathology, diagnosis, implications of their, um, society, culture, um, even ethnicity and how that might impact diagnoses. Okay. So what is culture? I have a couple things listed up there, but who would give a definition of what is culture? It's up there with that. Uh, it's a pretty broad definition of the share norms. Uh. That's right. Location. People could be geographic. They could be. Uh, physical characteristics could be. Eating at certain places or coming back to do a certain thing. Um, be all right. So aspects of culture could be anywhere. Can be anything but the idea of shared values, beliefs, practices, understanding. So if I were to then look at, um, uh, the understanding of psychopathology here versus maybe, um, an East Asian culture or a northern European culture or an African culture, are they going to be the same as is the expression of symptoms going to be experienced exactly the same? You know, is the understanding of what causes. Mental health issues say no. So our task is to begin to make sure that we put on a lens that understands that the client is different than me. And much like we talked about, this idea of this is a classification system that is categorical, that uses terms, definitions, there's clinical utility to that. We can use language that other people in the industry and outside of our industry, in the medical profession can go and understand. It's all really good. And that may be very different than what the client understands. Experiences of distraction. So our job is to make sure that we, uh, pay attention to what is our ethical responsibility to be a good, accurate diagnostician. What does the industry say? We are currently, uh, learning to practice in a very Western culture that has a very specific lens. And that's okay. That's where we are. But our job is to understand that that's not the only lens to see and the experience with mental health and mental illness. Okay. So if we already know that, um, this is going to be understanding different aspects of their knowledge, their roles, their practices, what is typical? What is not typical? Uh, for example, we were just talking about experiences with, um, uh, psychotic experiences and hearing voices and delusions. So in some cultures, someone who experienced that may be seen as their revered, their special, they are to be honored in society, culture or another culture. Those people are meant to be kind of hidden away and not to be brought attention to the same experience. The symptoms, very different understanding of what the symptoms in society, culture, um, but culture also includes language, religion and spirituality, family structures, socioeconomic status, um, and a whole aspect of culture. But if we were to look at the concept of cultural psychiatry, by our God, um, that's going to be. Coming out of my house here, uh, it's going to be this understanding and using the lens of culture to define psychopathology. So in this article you discuss cultural psychiatry and diagnosis. You describe culture as a set of values or beliefs and other contributing factors. Um, but also we need to consider the diagnosis, what he states to include culture as a consideration. Because culture is so wrapped up in our entire existence as humans, in some ways we are culturally bound. And there are probably others, 36, 37 of us, including me. In this classroom, we have 37 different perspectives, which, even though some of us may grow up in the same area or very different. So it is impossible for us to separate ourselves from culture. It is important that we do not limit our understanding of cultural considerations only to specific ethnic groups for minorities, because that will limit our respect. So in that sense, we do not consider culture only for a specific population. So we need to put on that lens more broadly as we work with clients, understanding culture and then drilling down to what is our point of. So our task is clinicians is to identify, um, various aspects of our client's experience that might be unique and, um, define their experience with psychopathology. So for example, um, that could be pathogenic triggers or it could be war poverty. Are different values practices but also their attitudes towards help seeking. And what does it mean to receive a diagnosis? In some cultures, receiving a diagnosis, this means to answer. In other cultures, receiving a diagnosis could mean, um, being ostracized and isolated and outside of their, uh, of their community. So our job is to identify what are the things within our client's experience that is going to be, um, uh, maybe inform their understanding. Uh, the other thing is looking at issues of war and poverty, those things, um, even physiologically, neurologically, the impact on mental health, um, even looking at the physical structures of the brain, a child born in a war torn country, their brain is going to develop differently than the child who was raised in a non war torn country. And so even looking at the size of their mental and understanding how, um, their, their response is different or ended up being ongoing, influence and exposure to cortisol in the bloodstream changes how a child's brain develops. So even understanding physiologically but also social culturally, what is their experience. We're also going to understand different cultural influences. You know, uh, we've talked about different aspects of culture that can be micro culture, their family, their neighborhood, their faith community, but also macro, which is going to be, uh, environmental, social media. And we were just talking during the break, um, about, uh, definitions. And I even referenced a couple of times tonight definitions of mental health, uh, mental illness or representations of that that are a part of culture, movies, TV, music. Uh, so what we need to do is understand what are the different factors that are informing the client's plans. Now, the first step in this, if you recall, the first step that I mentioned in understanding our client is first understanding. So in order for me to understand my view, I need to be able to understand what is my view of psychopathology come from. How is it informed? Uh, where was I born? What is my family? What is my society? Was my faith community safe? Helping to help others? So I identify my view. I can then know if it's getting in the way of my client's view, so I can help them learn how to hold my view aside and give space for the client to be following them. Make sense? The other thing our task is I have. I have to wonder where they come up to. Half of plastic factors is going to be um, symptom expression. So understanding for the client what is the terminology and definitions that like to uh what is their understanding of the context of the narrative, even the client um therapist interaction. So if you stop me, if I told the story, there's actually research that was done on different, um, uh, power dynamics in pilots. Have you heard this story or heard this research? So it's actually after one of the crashes, I believe it was, uh, of a Korean airline. Um, there was it and other, um, collectivist cultures with a higher power differential. There was a number of, uh, crashes. And what they found is that there was a lack of the copilot questioning the pilot's authority. So within that culture, it's not common to question your authority. And even though there was an instance in which, uh, a warning indicator, like, had it, uh, lit up in the cockpit and there were, uh, the black box recording shows that the copilot actually identified three different possible ways to draw the pilot's attention to the warning indicator, but did not say, do you see this warning indicator? And then therefore do what the copilot should do take over the plane because the pilot didn't see it. That's what you're there for. And so what they've discovered in that culture and the power differential created, um, really negative circumstances within flight. So now those cultures now trained pilots in the Western method in order to create safety. So again now really long story to then get into the context of understanding that even in that context, me as the authority, as the counselor in that space, how does the client view me? What's the power differential? Oftentimes there are situations in which clients may agree with the doctor, the therapist, because they're out of respect and out of cultural norm. You would not contradict the expert. So understanding how does the client you mean? I mean even addressing that within, um, the, um, the context of therapy, they can look at the context. Different cultures have context, the same patient. Um, um. Preserving image. Um, and then, uh, so keeping in mind, who am I in the eyes of the client, and how does that impact my ability to work with them? But in this context, what are they going to say even about my question, answering the questions in the way that they think? I want them to answer the answering questions in a way that would help me understand their experience. Not that they're trying to be deceptive, but again, very different context of, um, you know, cultures looking we need to understand is that there are both cultural explanations for how and why illnesses they could be biological versus spiritual, uh, generational transmission. I understand that, um, in some cultures, understanding of, um, ancestors and health experiences, ancestors is passed down. Uh, so when we talk to the client about their experience with symptoms, we need to understand what their context. Any questions about that? Okay. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about the impact of acculturation. Who knows what acculturation is. Raise your hand if you know. Um, for those that maybe say yes or don't remember, I'll say it anyway. Is the process of acclimating to a new culture, becoming a part of and recognizing that that is an actual process. And people can be at different stages of that process, whether they're going to be ambivalent. There's ethnic exploration or multicultural acceptance. So there there's a resistance, there's a curiosity exploring, and then ultimately there's cultural acceptance. Now, not everyone makes it through to cultural acceptance. And people can be in different places. And also recognizing that there's a strong difference between first generation people who have immigrated to the country and maybe second generation and even then third and fourth generation, and oftentimes a second generation individuals that have the largest challenge because they are truly two culture, um, individuals where maybe parents came from a home culture and they are in the process of maintaining their home culture while making some adjustments to host culture, whereas the child that is born here is now living and being raised in host culture, but also trying to bridge and be with parents of culture. So oftentimes those that are second generation have some more, um, angst around, uh, acculturation. But one of the things we need to do is understand that there's an impact of, um, solid cultural identity on, um, symptom expression and that those that have a higher ethnic identity more confident, either in home culture or culture culture have higher self-esteem and higher protective factors also experience less significant. Uh symptomology. And that's not across the board, but recognizing there's a pattern. Um, it's also what we see is that higher rates of acculturation difficulty have higher rates of expressed in. Any questions about that? Okay. So for us, what we need to do is we need to adjust our approach. So as as we're talking about it for you, as you sit here now at 922 after the great crossover. As you think about it, how does this inform your lens of the process of clinical MBA and diagnostics, even as we talk about that for purposes like. Yeah. So for example, from my own culture and so maybe say this property of someone and work because like when you think about the anxiety to all them would change a lot of things is actually that's how I grow up and understanding houses. There's so many things. It's like, I don't know, I'm tired of this. All this depression is also not really effective for them because we can't get through it. And, um, it's actually I have so many symptoms from DSM, but again, it's my culture is not exist. Um, because it's we also like it doesn't do things exist for us and it's and I can imagine now how difficult will be to, for me to change that understanding of me that, oh, it's okay, you can get through it and see the, the symptoms and whether actually that person in front of me is distressed. Um, because from my personal borders, for me this is topic and that I know that will be difficult. I have to understand that and actually so like take me back and like that's it. It will be enough. So even the awareness of your cultural understanding. Yeah. Informs then how you how you're going to maybe be a little bit more understanding, sympathetic, empathetic for those that are in distress. Good others. Will it change how you ask questions? And then on us, the next question we have to say that it. Comes to mind is the need to make sure your shared. When you first ask them like they're referring to themselves in ways that you know it's what do they mean when they say that? And then what can you can you use that to really put them in? Yeah. So even clarifying their language and terminology. Yeah. And then maybe bridging the gap with some psychoeducation around. This is what that might be called in the context of this diagnosis drawing that parallels. Yeah. How about to change the way you ask questions. Notice I didn't say it doesn't change because it should change. Yes, I think it's sort of being right. I mean, it comes to mind as it creates more of a posture of humility. Mhm. Because if you're not approaching weight, this is how things are based on research. It's this is what we know is this. How do you experience that. Um, so I think approaching it with a openness of okay, generally, um, this seems to be the case, but yeah. How how are you experiencing it in the context of where you are from or how you grew up, who you are. So acknowledging that they can be the expert of themselves, rather than be accustomed to the humble humility and the humble approach to acknowledging them. Yeah. Very good. Uh, let's let's shift gears a little bit. And, um, so here's a couple of the other things that we can adjust. Uh, we need to adjust our approach to diagnosis. Um, and not being ethnocentric. And that starts with self centric, but then also not, uh, the the challenge here is, um. I don't want to say that the idea of that a person, a client, may represent aspects of a culture from which they come from, but they are not the full representative of their culture. And so even as we need not to be, uh, ego or ethnocentric in our own lives, we need to also be cautious or not to say, okay, so this client represents everyone who is like that. Uh, go ahead with that. Also translate to not treating your client as a culture. Great question. And that was actually something that, um, uh, I was that just came to mind for him. So thank you for asking the question. It's the idea of it is the client should we see the client as the best representative of their culture? Yes. And we don't rely on them to be the owner. So one of the things, it's a balance of learning from them about their culture, their definitions, without relying on them to be the sole teacher and educator for you. Um, so we can rely and lean into their understanding our questions. But then we need to do our homework and be able to ask questions. And, uh, I have some, um, some, uh, resources that I provide that we'll talk about. But that is a great approach again, because they don't represent the whole of a culture. They represent a person who was raised in that culture, and they in their micro culture within that community may be very different than the macro culture. Uh, so yeah, great. Great question. So we need to ask relevant questions of the self and client. What's the client's perspective? What's my perspective. How is it different. Where's my definition come from. How's my definition informed by that. But also by who I am my values my beliefs. Again, we are kind of always being a good student of ourselves who will help us be a good student for all of our clients as well. Um. The other thing, uh, and I think to, to highlight what you mentioned earlier is, um, we can at times see our client as maybe because their experience is different than others. It can be challenging, it can be frustrating. It could be. Well, if you would just realize that, no, you are actually experiencing post-traumatic stress disorder and you meet all of the criteria. Yes. And that's number one. So how do we create a treatment plan that incorporates that understanding their experience? Um, there's also maybe within, um, American culture, uh, similar to what uh, Melinda mentioned is like, oh, we just need to get through. We can do it. And kind of the client's approach to treatment may also inform, uh, not just pathology, but also treatment. Um, and so asking those good questions of yourself and kind of ongoing. Don't think it's a one time thing. I think we need to be, um, uh, ongoing. Students of ourselves, especially around these aspects of culture, is going to help us identify our blind spots in order to really understand our client. And there may be times that it's in the client's best interest, that you may classify their mental health condition based on your understanding, but how you communicate and treat them is going to be based on their. Does that make sense? Because you are very highly trained in understanding diagnostics. Do you understand mental health? Do you understand mental illness from what our society and culture says? But that doesn't mean you disregard where they're from. But you still have to find a way to work through the context of this life. So it's not like we throw it out, but our responsibility is to make the bridge make sense. Um. A couple of resources. How many of us heard of Hofstadter's cultural dimensions or indices? Anyone? During the concept of individualistic or collective cultures, what about masculine or feminine aspects of culture? Okay, uncertainty avoidance, power differential. And so now you're understanding. So Ofsted's research compares cultures and different dimensions of culture. And uh, there's uh, a collection of let's see if it'll actually let me open. No, something went wrong. Okay. Um, but this is why you don't touch the screen, guys. Um, so ultimately, if you go to, uh, Hofstadter's cultural dimensions and you go to the website, you can actually compare different cultures on these indices. And it's a really good starting point for understanding, for example, person, uh, individual versus collective, how a person needs uh, and goals are um, prioritize versus the goals and needs of the group for inclusion. What's the uncertainty? Avoidance is the there's a kind of come from a culture where they embrace uncertainty and engage in the unknown versus that's avoided. And there's, uh, an adverse reaction, uh, perspective of type, long term perspective versus planning for the future. Um, and then values versus short time, uh, version of the past, present oriented. What's their cultural lens. Um, so understanding these aspects of culture might provide you some good understanding of how you view the world. And you can actually call up the dominant culture and up just about any other country or culture group. And then there's a comparison and there's creates graphs and charts, and it's really fun. And I wish I could show we but, uh, we will I'll see if I can fix that and, uh, send it out or post it on discovery. But I would encourage you, it's a great starting point to look at culture. The other one is ethno work. So anyone ever heard of this website? Okay. So this is, uh, a resource. Uh, that is really from the medical perspective, but it includes concepts of mental health but incredibly rich resource around large number of cultures. It looks at history, culture, perspectives of health, um, and has um again, even some comparisons. But it's just a really good, rich description of different aspects of, uh, culture, uh, particularly from a medical and a mental health. So ethno mentorship is, um, you can sort of see that. So as I would encourage you in this, these are two resources that I've used, um, quite a bit, uh, in, in my time, but I would say have resources that you have available that you use that you can trust to be able to explore or buy as culture. And because you're not relying on them to be the full representative of the culture. I, um, and then maybe get aspects and then understand how you acquired because here they make you be an expert on themselves. And then remember, it may not be disorder that it's in line with the cultural norm. But it was out of line with the cultural norm. It may be something that's worth noting or something to pay attention to. So you need to then go. My client's experience understanding in line with even the cultural norm. And so we can ask those questions within the context of a clinical interview. How might others in your community culture, family describe your experience? How is that understood? Yeah, I just want to mention that part of crisis up to the crisis class. We watch a series of, uh, suicidal assessment, um, videos. And like everything you say in your pre I do stand watch that. I really think, like, how, uh, the counselor was like, even, like, identifying values that will be related to his culture. Um, so he was a native, Native American. So it was really important to him. And, you know, like the treatment plan was, like, related to his culture. So to me, like I say, like very loud. And I was like connecting the dots, like case studies in India. It's encouraging to know that, um, yeah. Um, is it really that that's that's how it should be, this entire process. You're like, oh, we learned about this in the past and we're worried about that and the connection. So thank you for sharing that. And really that's where it starts. Um, the other piece and I think I have this on discovery. There's the DSM cultural interview. Uh, let's go here. You know. It's here. So I posted this and this. One of the things, as I mentioned, the best way to learn how to ask questions is to see how other people are framing questions. This is actually a cultural formation interview, uh, put out by APA that it gives you an example of questions. So what brings you in today? And then it gives you a response of the individuals who received details or only mentioned symptoms. It gives you a follow up questions. But then also here it gives you an explanation, uh, of what this means and why they ask these questions. But if you look, it is like, um, I mentioned before the concept of um, uh, not only support, but what if other people in your family or friends think about what's causing the problem? Again, it's a great, great tool to even learn what types of questions may help me understand the client's experience, and then also ask questions to understand how does this fit within the context of the culture? So keeping in mind that they may not be the representative of their entire culture, but you will learn their perspective. Oh, this is actually, uh, I'm the only one that feels this way in my family. Other people in my community. They don't. They don't get it. Uh, they think that it's just I need to, um, change my perspective or whatever it is. But these these questions are a great set of questions to help support you in learning what types of questions get to those answers. Uh, right. I think. Yeah. That is all of it. Okay, so what questions remain for you? Yes, I have a question relating to that culture and finances, and I don't think that we've addressed yet how long at diagnosis sticks. And if there's some specific diagnosis that do and others that don't. Because one of the first sentences in this reading this week was diagnostic care, what diagnostic errors are saying. And they said that because diagnosis is passed from clinicians, clinicians, clinicians, one charge to the next, um, and to families and even in family mythology, you know, just saying that really can have an impact. So be aware of how you diagnose. But I'm wondering if you have a culture where diagnosis is stigma as well, like how the two questions is, are there cases for not diagnosing and um, how long do they stick and doing certain ones. Yeah. So I think uh, looking you know, I've asked this question a couple of times now we're almost through the semester. Have you guys talked in ethics about diagnosing it? Have you reached that section of ethics? I know it's one of the later, um, in the, in the ethical code, but basically what it says is that we have an ethical responsibility to provide an accurate diagnosis ethically. However, there are times in which we we withhold sharing the diagnosis if it's in the client's best interests. So there are times where maybe again, I would say clinically, according to the model that we use, it's best to work from a diagnostic lens because as we talked about last time, case formulation, treatment planning, if we have a good diagnostic understanding, we know where we're heading and we know what improvement or maybe, um, uh, when someone, um, regresses. So we we have a good definition, but you ask the great question of, okay, so what does it mean that my client comes from a culture where a diagnosis creates stigma? And that shouldn't be like. How do we how do we go about that? I think that's going to depend on a couple of things. One, if you're in private practice and you're keeping your own notes, how do you justify that legally and ethically? And maybe it is, um, working through the client seems to experience depressive symptoms and these things and however or, uh, official diagnosis is withheld based on cultural values of the client. Maybe if you're within a clinic it may be that you provide a diagnosis, but then you how do you work with your supervisor to disclose that or not disclose that? And what's the value to the client? So I think it really is kind of balancing that question of your legal and ethical responsibility and what's in the best interest of the client. And so that is it's one of those depends. But I think it's a great question. And the reality of a diagnosis can last forever. I once, uh, in my psychopharmacology class the professor said this. I said it this way. The great doctor prescribed if and no one take away. One of the challenges we have in the medical world is people prescribed medications and they're prescribed medications, and no one ever addressed those or forced them away. In the same way, in a diagnosis can be something that someone experienced and again, a snapshot of their experience. And then that stays in their medical record forever. And it could be in the lower of the family where it's like uncle So-and-so who had schizophrenia. Okay, so now our family is crazy or, you know, whatever that, that then that becomes in the family culture. But the reality is we have to blend that with what is best practice. And so I think the other thing we have a responsibility to say if a diagnosis changes, how do we document that? Because someone had a episode of major depressive disorder and it's episodic, but now they're in remission. Did we ever go back and put that in, or do we ever change the diagnosis to be major depressive disorder and remission. Adjustment disorder. And then maybe that's resolved. So how do we how do we document and tell that story to round out that story and maybe honor the fact that it's a medical record, especially electronic medical records? Do we go to the client forever? And I think that's one of the challenges we have, is balancing that reality, uh, with the expectation of the system in which we operate. So unfortunately, I don't have a really clear answer on that, except it's going to be okay. That's one of the things we would wrestle with. Yeah. Thank you. Good question. And I appreciate your wrestling with it. Any other questions? Yeah. Kind of just um, with that just to clarify. So like if somebody in their 20s had a major depressive episode and then the rest of their lives didn't ever experience, but again, would they always be considered to have a major depressive disorder in remission, or is it does that make sense, like just kind of going off and how long does it stick or. Yeah, I know, you know, and I think the reality is that could be that could be anything in that moment following. And the other thing is, as a clinician, if you see someone and it's in their chart and maybe they stay within the same insurance company, they. Call them forever, uh, because they stay in that system their whole life. So doctors that are provider, people that are part of that. I think that as a job provider, we also have the responsibility to do our own assessment. Is this client experience as well? No, no. During intake, no sign of major depressive disorder present during the summer so that you can carry forward and hold that responsibility to say, what am I seeing? I don't see that, but it's there. Like bring her experience. It also does. Well, do you document that you acknowledge that you. Know, a lot of the times you guys are asking great questions and you know, I myself. People tend to question you have some control of all the time that you have seen and experienced. So as a counselor, we've got this, uh, situation. You can come to us with a bit of information about what goes on in the middle of the life. Like, isn't it obvious? Isn't it my like, like, for example, in the Chinese culture, when they go and search to find something or if they would like to remain in place, is it not convenient for them to find there that's going to the you of other things. The opposite, the cultures. Also, the victim fights back and doesn't work in reality. What? What is that? In reality? I think my interpreter on to like people from different people. Familiar? That is one of the problems. You have on culture. The one thing that created. Our program is actually focused here are much more diverse. And so than that, we're network involved in someone who actually looks at the quality today. Yeah, that's the reality. People for people like Peter talk. There's not that like many customers who have there workforce, you know, people are out there working with. These are figures out that the official report benefits from. So I would have to say great deal or anything like that. But the reality is huge there. They're so over time that it becomes like. So. Very important that maybe you could say. Well, you know, these other things that work. So I don't think you heard any provide about that. That may be beneficial. So um, right. All right. Any other questions? I still have my exercise in my but actually here as well with an exercise that I have done. And uh, so I think for my sake, but also you're going to say. It's a.