All right. I love it. So, as I mentioned, um, uh, the addition of the exercise this afternoon is new, but I kept all of the information I would typically covered tonight included. So if you would bear with me, as I may, um, uh, making adjustments without being in class sometimes it may be the first time I've felt my way through and figure out what we need to do. Um, okay, so it might be a little bit of, um, I'll make some decisions here about recognizing that, uh, what I'm going to offer tonight, this, um, this formulation, relationship conceptualization is a model and understanding, but it shouldn't be the only place in the program here and the concept of this formulation and treatment. Right. So again, recognizing, I'll give you, um, what I probably considered the essential, uh, a lot of the information included, you'll notice, uh, actually, here's maybe what we see in Morrison, uh, data collection process. And so, uh, that's where you'll see probably to some of that tonight. So again, apologies in advance, but, uh, let me make changes. Well, let me ask you, do you guys like that exercise earlier today? Yeah. So this uh, and all always, uh, like I did last time. Feedback is really understand. Would you recommend to keep that exercise. Good. So then maybe, uh, pay it forward, and now we'll go through it. I move some of the other stuff. Okay. So when we talk about the concept of case formulation, much like we always need to understand how or why, we need to understand what is it and kind of why is it important. And so if we look at case formulation, do would take a uh, a guess at what that is. Case conceptualization. Case formulation. Yeah. It's that part of creating a treatment plan. Mhm mhm. And what you expect included perhaps a traditional diagnosis. Mhm. Mhm. And the answer is yes. Both of those. And in some ways if I were to look at the concept of coming in and someone brings in uh it's a therapy. Here's their presenting problem. And then we work through the process of diagnosis. Okay. But what do we what does that mean? We only have one piece of information. So this is the process of kind of being able to collect a large amount of data and organize it through a lens. Okay. And so recognizing that you're going to have all of your intake documents, you're going to have all the results from your clinical interview. You're going to have all of your behavioral observations and ongoing new information that you gathered every time you meet with the client. Right. You may learn something new. Um, so what the case formulation is, is kind of the schema or kind of the organizational system to be able to navigate, managing all the information we collect in the clinical intake process, in the diagnostic process. And so, uh, you're absolutely right. But it's pieces of those, those pieces fit into the case formulation. Okay. So um, I'm going to give you some information from Ingram. Um, Ingram. Excuse me. Um, it's a little bit older, but one of the things I like about this is it's a model that is not theoretically oriented. It's not about a certain type of therapy. It is a general formulation. And, uh, it doesn't that concept doesn't change with, uh, like maybe new research on acceptance and commitment therapy and so on. Okay. So here, um, Ingram quotes, uh, Liz Arum, this conceptual schema that organizes and explains and makes sense of a large amount of data and influences the treatment decision. And so oftentimes when we, uh, especially as we're learning the process of counseling, we tend to think of case formulation in this way. We have our theoretical orientation. And then we have the client and all the information they bring. And then we take our theoretical orientation. And that's overlays for how we see the client is influenced by our theoretical team. Ingram recommends. And uh a non theoretical orientation lens for case formulation. So we have the client we do respect or orientation. But when we go through the process of case formulated based formulation it is client centered rather than theoretical organization centered. Does that make sense. So what that allows us to do is create an understanding of the client that is not based on our theoretical lens, opening the door for us to be able to communicate with a wider range of providers. Uh, for example, if we come from an attachment, um, perspective and read all of our notes and conceptual objects, the client is related to an anxious and avoidant attachment. And, uh, in such early relationships and fill in the way, maybe even we can take that a step further and look at a second psychiatric perspective, talking about the medical complex. And we see and that's how we conceptualize like what if if we refer to another provider that doesn't share the same theoretical orientation, it's going to be a little bit more challenging for us to care for them, to understand even our thinking. So this is not telling you not to have a theoretical orientation, but it's just, um, a recommendation to look at case formulation. How do you identify problems? How do you define, um, what the principle and treatment goals from a non theoretical perspective. That way you can be more generalized in in medical providers. Or let's say you're working with the child and you have a diagnosis and they get referred to the speech pathologist. Yeah. And they need to understand the diagnosis related to separation anxiety and other things. And there's maybe some sort of uses for feeling that way. And your notes are written in jargon. How are they going to be able to understand what you're talking about? So, um, as a note, what I'm offering here is not, uh, Ingram has a comprehensive system for case formulation. Uh, but what I offer is pulling out sections that apply to general practice and kind of help us. Understand in the context of diagnosing, understand how that diagnosis fits the client and begin the process of treatment planning. I was going to give you some of the key elements that are kind of helpful and generalizable, right. You don't need to use the whole system. Uh, it's kind of like, um, you may come from a cognitive behavioral theoretical orientation, but it's always good practice to have other theoretical orientation tools in your toolbox. Because that may work with the client differently. Okay. So the same concept here. So briefly, this is what is a problem oriented method. And I will admit I have a problem with the statement problems because just because, uh, the client brings in, I don't like it, uh, as, uh, as defining a problem that does not turn on. Okay. Okay. Thanks. Um, so what we have here, though, is we're going to have problems and goals are well defined, and we're going to, uh, the goals are going to be attainable, measurable, and we're going to be able to, um, track the progress which equals higher quality of care. Okay. So, um, I will tolerate my problem with problems recognizing there may be challenges to stress symptoms. Uh, but for the purposes here, England calls them problems. So according to England, the most beneficial way to approach formulation is intentionally systematic and not through specific theory. So intentionally in systematic sound. Familiar process of steps of differential diagnosis. Okay. Um, and by doing so, we, uh, are identification of the present and problem can be understood by anyone if we don't use a theoretical orientation. The income highlights the fact that clients come to us because they are in distress and having problems and want help. Addressing um, is what is causing distress. And then they, uh, they want to leave feeling that they've been heard or seen and their problems have been addressed. So one of the things here in this, uh, formulation is not just like, uh, as we're looking at the concept of differential diagnosis in coming to a diagnosis, and that's the presenting concern, like, for example, uh, major depressive disorder and moderate amount of features. That's our diagnosis. This was a little bit different in that what it does is it says what's going on with the client and what experiences are the problems in life. So maybe that, uh, because I'm so tired, it's causing distress in our relationship. And so one of the problems is, um, uh, distress. And. So it goes through and maybe even looks at symptoms or challenges in life that need to be addressed in the therapy. So it's not just the diagnosis. It's diagnosis may be accumulation of problems that make sense. And, uh, what I like about that process in total is it pulls us out of just the diagnostic lens, and we start to view a holistic lens of the client, because a part of their challenge or part of their problem that they're experiencing is their diagnosis. But that diagnosis is then causing problems related to a whole host of other areas that might be the focus of treatment. And by defining them, we can start addressing them. Okay. So it's step by step. You're going to gather data, much like we've talked about many times, uh, through the different formats of your intake packet or clinical interview, um, and so on. You're going to define problems or the concerns specify outcomes and goals. You're going to apply hypotheses and then create a treatment plan. And then you're going to evaluate treatment. So now if you begin to look at beyond the diagnosis we begin to have a framework to understand. How do we understand the client's problems. Um is there a diagnosis. But then we start to be able to specify based on that diagnosis, we're going to have specific outcomes that we're going to look for. And then we're going to be able to apply hypothesis which is understanding. This is where your theoretical orientation can come into play. What is causing that distress. What would help relieve that distress. Then we're going to create a treatment plan that includes our theoretical annotation. And then it gives us the ability to understand are we making progress. So here again you begin to see that if you have a clear framework, you're not only identifying the problem, but for being able to go work all the way through to you. How's my client doing? How is treatment actually being effective? So, uh, here we're probably going to skip most of this because a lot of this is what we've talked about before. However, I will note the last line here is, uh, what? Have you ever heard of a soap note? Okay, so this is similar in concept, except it's subjective objective hypothesis and plan. So here the objective is what the client reports. Objective is what you observe the hypothesis and make sure that I state this correctly for you. Uh. The hypothesis is the clinic. The clinician's conceptual schema for understanding the problem information here should fit the data. So this hypothesis is going to be based on what the client reports and what you've identified as a problem. Not necessarily. Then you speculating. Right. So this is a data driven model of case formulation. And then it should lead forward to the plan. And so in this model you can have a number of hypotheses for every. Every problem you have a hypothesis and you have a treatment plan. Okay. Uh any questions about what we've talked about so far? You repeat the hypothesis. How are you? Absolutely. So the hypothesis is the clinician's conceptual schema or their framework for understanding the problem. So here we've identified the problem. And then this is our understanding for being able or our process of understanding or defining how we understand the problem. It should be based on what the client reports, not on our speculation and not based on our theoretical. But, uh, you know, here it can begin to this is where you can start to lean into your conceptualization through your theoretical orientation, but it should not. Um, again, it's based on the evidence that you find, uh, much like you're not going to provide a doing diagnosis based on speculation. You're not going to provide a hypothesis without the data to say, this is why I believe this is the latest. Does that make sense? Okay, good. Then of course, the plan is how we're going to work with the client. Um, here, uh, we've talked about clinical interviewing. Uh, we're going to give space for the claims to story. But one of the things we've we've talked about kind of what do I include in my data gathering? What domains should I include? So one of the things I like to point out here is the basic said, uh, Ingram points out that you can look at behavior, appetite, sensations, imagery, cognitive, spiritual, interpersonal, and then either drug or biological. And so to give a little bit of uh, description of what those are, um, behavior is what is the person doing or not doing. Uh, emotional or affective. Definitely give me emotional experiences. And this is one, um, sensation is one that oftentimes, depending on your theoretical orientation, we can forget to pay attention to what's going on in the client's body, whether they know what sensations are. They say, much like, uh, we were going to diagnose something like an anxiety disorder. That may include tension. Is the client aware? Where do you notice that? In your body. Like right here at the knees. And we can identify what sensations are going on. Now let's reverse engineer that into uh, the hypothesis. Okay. So that's the client is beginning to experience anxiety. They experience sensation of the predator's stomach. So what if we begin to teach the client to pay attention to the sensation in their stomach? Oh, I start to feel anxious. What part is what happened? So we can begin to reverse engineer that and create an intervention to help the client. Engage what's going on in the body? Next one is imagery. And this is going to be mental imagery. It's going to be how do they understand and even conceptualize in their mind. It could be pictures to words. It could be um, uh, even thinking in videos, replaying events over and over and over, uh, you know, past, present and future. This can include obsessions, nightmares, body image, flashbacks, and so on. So what's going on in their mind? And then cognitive is content of thought, self-concept, belief schemas, uh, spiritual, um religion, morality beliefs. Interpersonal is going to be their relationships. Uh, are they isolated? Do they have support? Uh what's their cultural identity, their level of relationships? Skill? Maybe, uh, one of their, uh, challenges they're experiencing is the quality of their ability to engage in healthy relationship. So begin again to explore that. And of course, drugs, uh, biological is going to be substance related or other biological issues, medical conditions and so on. Um, any questions about the basic set? So one of the things I would encourage you to do, based on Morrison, who talks about family of origin, health care, enough education, those things that we've kind of talked about before and looking at maybe something like the basic said, what domains do you intend to cover in your intake packet? What information might you gather in your clinical interview? What might you gather in other ways? And so begin to formulate, um, what, um, what information do I need and how do I get that information? Another thing, uh, Ingram, uh, tells us to pay attention to is what is called the metamodel. Now, this happens often times and maybe from a, uh, now I'm going to file it here. But from a cognitive perspective that, um, is the idea of cognitive distortion, right? So in some ways this kind of falls into line of that, but it's not then your hypothesis or your gathering that that's not true, but just kind of give context of what it like, mean for the types of information. And here what we're going to look at is things like deletions over generalization is distortions. Uh, the can'ts, the shoulds, um, kind of mind reading, cause and effect errors. And so it's kind of like generalization of men just can't be trusted. Oh, that's something to pay attention to. Uh, other things like, um, our relationship is dull. I should never step on the little platform. That's not a target of distortion. Um, I never included. And so what we need to do here is we need to begin to look at and identify. Is there challenges with the client's definitions, understanding misconceptions and generalizations that could be causing one of the problems that they're experiencing. And much like we've talked about in the process of clinical interviewing, just as a note for your clinical interview on the, um, the video, you're going to want to push towards specificity. So here we're looking at vague information. Uh, the client reports something. Therapist doesn't understand what he did. So what do you mean by that? Okay. So if you were defining that, uh, so that's your definition for other people, right? So you're going to want to if you don't understand that the client's using the word that you're not familiar with, make sure you understand the thing. And as we talked about, uh, particularly around, uh, experiences with symptoms or maybe issues of youth or sexual experience, often times where people have definitions that are, uh, very family oriented. Um, so you're going to want to make sure you understand. So kind of bust out the ambiguity. Uh, look for the overgeneralization, distortions, or normalizations and make sure you clarify what the client means by that. So and how you do that, for example, is all men can't be trusted. So as your therapist, uh, I'm a male. Does that mean that I can't be trusted? Okay, so how is it going to be to work with me, right? Because like, you can begin to pull in. Those are generalizations. Or so you mean all men can be trusted? No one. There's never been a man in your life that you can't trust. Well, okay, many men can't be trusted. Okay, so we're already beginning to help them, uh, shape their understanding and clarify. So let's talk a little bit about problems, difficulties, dysfunctions and complaints and, um, and then we'll talk about how do we name those in a way that we can measure. So if we look at um, and defining problems, this typically is a discrepancy between what the client desires, what they would like life to be like, what they like, their experience to be like, and then their reality. In some ways, um, the problem is I'm anxious all the time. I want you to call discrepancy. Feel like. Um, this is going to be something that oftentimes you're going to work, uh, collaborating with the client to define with the client. Or you can actually, um, uh, one of the ways we can do is, okay, so there's distress in the relationship, and we identified the problem as, um, being argumentative. So client engages in communication, argumentative. And there's that defined by the client. Or maybe how does your spouse or partner define that. So you can begin to use definitions that the client would understand. But also, um, not just, uh, you, you may actually encounter a client who is not willing to or maybe not able to define it, but you can work with someone in the client's life, or they may be able to identify someone that would define that problem for them. Finally, um, much like your clinical insight, your clinical judgment, some problems can be defined by you as the therapist. Keep in mind that much like the problem that you look at in the case conceptualization, what they present with may not be the problem that you're actually dealing with. Uh, so we can focus only on the issues, uh, and invite clients to address the other issues we have identified. Um, so we can say, here's the presenting problem. We can focus on that, or we can invite them to begin to engage in other problems on the comprehensive problem list. Okay. Any questions about problems? Yeah. With regard to design by a client of someone who knows the client. Um, one of the things that I'm thinking of that I gather from one of the reasons, is sometimes it's helpful to bring in others or get information from others and write about. So it's not just a subjective sort of from the client's perspective. Um, how like if it's the client coming to you individually, how often or does that actually occur where you're reaching out to maybe a spouse, maybe family member? Uh, gathering more? Uh, that's a that's a great question. Some of that will be defined on context. Some of it will be defined on the, um, availability of family or friends, uh, or even just, uh, the pragmatics of are you going to call the individuals boss? And if one of the problems is related to their relationship with their boss. Right. Versus um, so I think it maybe not as often as you would think, but it's something to keep in mind that with the release of information, particularly around, um, nuclear family, uh, if there's challenges within the family system. You might bring in the family and work on or individuals from the family and kind of get some insight or understanding, recognizing that that's probably going to be limited based on, you know, doing family therapy. But if it's beneficial to the client and defining the challenges for the client, you may, um, make the clinical judgment to include other members of the family community, faith organization, for example, if they're experiencing, um, kind of existential crisis around their faith, maybe having their spiritual leader, their pastor or rabbi, uh, other type of leader, um, as a part of a consult to understand how might this be defined within your faith community. So does that make sense? And does I'm thinking of also like in terms of, uh, cultural aspects, like for family as you're, they're an extension of this person. Mhm. Um, and that's a huge part of their life. Um. I'm just wondering how this it seems like that is a lot of work to kind of uncover some of those nuances that. So I guess, uh, what's the clinical utility versus the amount of time? What's the benefit to the client? Does it make sense? Can you progress in treatment without that? If you can, then maybe you make the decision not to. So yeah, happy to talk more, but, uh, that's a lot of the it depends. It depends on what's going on with the client. Okay. Let's talk a little bit about, um, just the definitions and then, uh, we'll move on. So definitions should be concise, specific and clear. Um. So here, Ingram recommends that it doesn't have to be a complete sentence, just even a single word. And it should not include words um, such as because as a result of or due to these, ah, statements of interpretation, they are not statements of, um, uh, they're interpretive statements that are filled with theoretical orientation. So we want to be descriptive and explanatory. So symptoms followed by an event stress after losing a spouse or uh, challenges with emotional detachment. Right. So it's going to be clear concise a problem statement 1 or 2 maybe with three words that just explains or describes. Um. I'm sorry. Describes rather than explains. It's almost 9:00. That's kind of, um. So here, keep in mind you can use the basic, um, basic set to inform that zip codes. Uh, can be another one. And here we're going to, um, generate uh, written definitions, uh, terms uh, such as difficulty adjusting to stress over an ability to conflict between are going to be problem statement types of language okay. And here's the catch. They must be solvable because if they are not solvable, how are you going to create an intervention and a treatment plan. And then how are you going to measure outcome. So for example, if there is difficulty adjusting to a new job okay. So now we can look at what difficulty is going on. Uh, demands at work communication with the boss or distress over or conflict, um, the client and children. Okay. So now we can begin to look at how do we solve the challenge with conflict between. Right. Uh, does that make sense? Question. Examples of the way in which, you know, uh. Reduce, uh, spouses emotional responses. Just how are you going to reduce the spouse's emotional response to conflict? And so you get to be within the client's power, within the structure of what we actually work on versus outside. Much like, uh, oftentimes in relationships, um, uh, even people in, uh, they're beautiful. When you're working on some of that conflict between poor, distressed human relationships. Oftentimes the focus focuses on if they if they conflict. Uh, I would be better if my partner stuff child whatever would or we can't change them. So how do we define the problem? To reduce the stress? Oh my. Doing that and say, oh, so I engaged. And so what causes stress? Well, I get angry when they leave their clothes on the floor. Okay. Now we begin to start to think this is what's so that that causes anger about that causes frustration. But then, uh, I have to pick it up. And so this is. So how do we reduce that? So that becomes a solvable problem and okay. All right. Any other questions? Yeah, sure. Okay. I'm sorry. What's that? What were the first words you said not to use? And don't use things like you describe. Um, when describing like data. Describing data. Yeah. So basically what we want to do is make it explanatory rather than evaluative. And so, um, you know, I can't find in my notes where I'm going to have that. Um. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Uh, if it comes to me all, it'll probably come to me the limit. Set it somewhere else. All right. Um. So here, avoid vague and, uh, generalized comments excessively dependent versus excessively dependent on close relationships with romantic partners. So what we're going to do is we're not going to be vague when we're defining the problem. We're going to be very specific about that problem. So here we can say the client's excessively dependent. Well they might have a dependent personality disorder. And that might make sense. But how are they dependent. It's not become of specific. Uh, the other thing is we're going to work with clients and make sure that the, uh, the, the problem statements kind of fit with the client's overall view and values. So this again, remember, it's not a theoretical or therapeutic or therapist driven model or formulation. It's client centered. Okay. Let's see if we can come back to goals. Uh, and, uh, I know that you guys work on goal setting and other classes. So let's, uh, kind of put it all together. So after we've collected all of the data from a non theoretical lands, we generate a formulation or a conceptualization of the case. So this is where we begin to look at what are the data. Say what's the pathology. What's the history. What's the present functioning. What do I think about the client's condition and begin to look at and interpret through my theoretical lens. And then understanding how the client's pathology may be shaped by history or current behavior or functioning. So this is the process. And once we have all the data, we have the problems. We have the definitions. We've established goals. Okay. So what does it mean. And we can begin to understand how all of this creates a picture of understanding of the client okay. Right. Uh, here's another way of looking at it. Um, is this we're going to because, uh, I don't know if you're list or linear. Uh, so we're going to gather data, which includes just to make it relevant to what we're top of your steps of differential diagnosis. So this is your intake your interview your assessment. And then you're going to define the problems functional impairment where word descriptions in a diagnosis. Then we're going to set goals and then have a treatment plan. And then if we were to look back and make sure I understand. That I took that slide out. Um, it's later I'll show you that basically what happens is once we get to here and we get treatment plan, we begin to assess how is everything going. One of our problem statements are within our goals and adjust the treatment plan working. Okay. So what I'd like to do in the next couple minutes is kind of describe, uh, for me, how would I put all of this together, uh, become like Stan. But, you know, that's kind of unusual. But one of the things that happens is that as I look at the process of these formulations, sometimes we look at the like, how does that or, uh, these people become so focused on things, uh, for diagnosis, particularly in this class. So the way I like to conceptualize the client's experience is this is actually have you heard of the term photo mosaic? Okay. So this is a photo mosaic. Uh, all of these are different images that make up the bigger image. So for me, as I conceptualize my client, I actually think about this in the terms of almost a video mosaic, because each experience in the client's life tells a piece of the picture. And so oftentimes what we've been talking about is maybe just the segment right here. And we're looking at diagnostics and the information and symptoms. But there may be educational history. There may be occupational history. There may be family issues. There may be trauma, there may be opportunities for success and growth and all of these other things that if we were to really look at, you're going to see a client for a year, you think that you'd be able to have a full picture and understanding of every aspect of that client's life? No, it would be impossible. We would probably be able to meet that point for 20 years, and we would have an expert about that and understand we would still not know everything. So one of the goals that I would encourage you to keep in mind, you know, in a video photo mosaic, we would be able to touch it in experience. And I actually had a student one time offer any graphic design ever student graduated. We never got there, but the idea of zoomed in and said, tell me about your family history. There are thousands of videos that can be played about that, but what we can do is we can begin to understand the pieces and what we want to do in this process of case formulation. And kind of the intake process is we want to have representative samples of what's going on in the client begin to fill out the picture. Now we and our work with the client based on just the reality. We may get this one and that's okay, but other people may work on other aspects or touch other aspects of the client's life. So keeping in mind as we get into this process and we formulate one of the the fears that I recognize that sometimes I don't know, I don't know everything about the client. Oh, yeah, it's important to be diligent and faithful as you build your conceptualization of treatment. Make sure that you are gathering representative samples of the basic state of the domains and recognizing that you kind of expanded those up, and then each one of those probably has 1012 million visitors. But like representing and that place is great. But overall, what happens is if we gather, the more data we gather and the more understanding we have with the clear answer. Any questions about this or anything else we've touched on. Now that operation is going to be tight. Yeah, sure. All right, let's move past. Now I'm going to move to bipolar disorders. Okay. Uh, here's the other slide. Let's just touch base on that. Okay. So we're going to have to provide you a diagnosis treatment plan and then come back. And at any time remember that you can only visit the intake the clinical interview process anytime a new piece of information comes up. So keeping in mind that if you're going to understand the video, a photo mosaic of a client, anytime a new domain comes up, you might need to switch back into data gathering because that will help inform your case population. All right. Any questions before we move up? Yes. No. Know. I just wish that. Uh, you know, just out of curiosity, um, I said, now that I think it's really important that I think I. You to understand a little bit better. So let's talk about when I get there. You know, I don't know if they they always pay attention like this. Just like the first session. They might. Um, I think you will to actually make that shift. Um, someone comes in. I'm just not leaving the left. You might be able to sort of tell me what's going on. Um, well, you know, I try to fall asleep at around 3 a.m. I wake up and there I pick up my phone and I scroll through Instagram. I get really frustrated, and I like, um. Oh, okay. How long have I been doing that? That happens with, you know, other things going on. Um, it's just that she was like, so. Okay, so how's that? Is that for you to, like, move back into therapy with them? Yeah. So that they might feel it. But if, uh, with your good rapport and your excellent interviewing skills, they're just going to roll with it. All right. Other questions before we move on. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about bipolar disorders. And then we're going to touch on the main domains of um personality disorders. Recognizing that you could probably get uh, an advanced degree in working just with personality disorders. We're just going to talk about major domains and classifications so we can have a working understanding okay. All right. Bipolar disorders. As I mentioned, any time that we, um, have a client that reports a depressive experience, we should evaluate for manic episode. And so what we have is, um, bipolar disorders, even with where they're placed in the DSM, it bridges the gap between psychotic disorders and depressive disorders. In order to have bipolar, you need to have typically a manic depressive. Experience is required. There's a strong genetic component with first degree relatives. Therefore, it's important to evaluate. If a client comes in and in the, uh, family history and do they report that their, uh, sibling, their father, their, uh, mother has, um, bipolar disorder? We want to pay attention to that and possibly screen for it. There's also implications of low serotonin and dysregulation of the dopamine systems as well as norepinephrine. So keeping in mind that it's not just, um, uh, psychological, there's actually a physiological component that is considered, uh, for the cause. So if we look at bipolar one disorder, um, there's bipolar one and two, and the easiest way to classify it or kind of conceptualize the difference between five over one and bipolar two is one is going to be focused more on the manic experienced side. The other one is going to be hypomanic with depression. That's kind of the primary feature. So bipolar one manic episode is required. Manic episode is different than a hypo or low manic experience. And so if someone has only had hypomania, it doesn't quite meet that full threshold of a manic experience which is persistent. Elevated mood can include irritability, incredibly high energy. There's tremendous grandiose depression speech, uh, racing thoughts. There's going to be risk taking behaviors that could be sexual experiences, spending typically self-destructive followed by a hypomanic or depressive state. But in order to be bipolar one, they have to reach a full threshold within their experience. Yeah. You say freshman speech was a lot like, um, it is so hard to emulate. But if you see it, you know, when they talk about everything, it's just been the just they can't almost like they can't get the words out fast enough. And the plight of it is it's they're they're just all over the place. Um, there's an episode of The Office where Michael eats an entire lunch, uh, uh, something really sugary, and he kind of emulates a pressured speech type of experience. But it it's one of those things that it is actually, uh, it's actually pretty hard to, to mimic, but, uh, think about it's almost like their mouth can't keep up with their ideas, and it's just almost it's it's being forced out. Pressured. Um, so we're going to see the racing cars and attention. They're going to be goal directed. And oftentimes that goal directed may not always make sense. A full manic episode can lead to an experience related to psychosis. And oftentimes, uh, a full manic episode can actually result in hospitalization. So it's kind of the extreme side of the manic versus the hypomanic is going to be, um, kind of below that threshold. There's still going to be maybe, uh, less need for sleep. There's going to be grandiose thoughts, there's going to be some pressure. Speech can be risk taking, but it doesn't kind of peak at that upper level of, um, severity as a manic episode. Uh, keeping in mind that there are specifiers, uh, for severity, psychotic features in remission. And as you know, you're going to code based on the most, uh, symptom or the most current episode, uh, could be the most current episode. Depressive with a history of manic experience or history of medical. And then, uh, bipolar two is going to need to experience at least one hypomanic and then a depressive episodes. And now here, instead of rather having a manic expression, it's going to be depressive. Symptoms are more common in bipolar two. Keeping in mind that clients likely will not present in your office when they're in the hypomanic phase. They elevated sense of self, their goal directed. Oftentimes, they're going to be an employer's best employee because they've just got energy. They're going to solve the problems. They're going to go, it's going to be good. But inevitably what happens is that creates tension and problems when, uh, risk taking and attention and other problems begin to happen and then inevitably, a crash into a depressive symptoms. Um. Uh, then we what we need to do is re, uh, differentiate between the return of mood after, uh, depression and hypomania. And really what that means is you're just going to pay attention to that, um, someone who is experiencing, uh, depression. Or they may feel depressed after being hypomanic, but they've actually just kind of arrived at maybe a more typical state, but then they feel less, um, the mood, maybe less that that makes sense. So we need to differentiate. Is this, uh, return to baseline or are they experiencing a depressive episode after the hypomanic? Questions. So bipolar one. Manic, full manic with depression, extreme depressive experience. You can actually, um, diagnosed bipolar one with only a manic episode. But if there's a depressive episode, you only you cannot diagnose bipolar unless there's a manic or hypomanic. Does that make sense? Yeah. So I would encourage you to look at the diagnostic criteria about a manic expression episode a client has one manic episode, can diagnose bipolar one and like they can. Yes. What would you say is like, uh, a big, noticeable indicator of a manic episode? Yeah. Uh, do you like it? Yeah, probably. Uh, again, a manic episode will might be more evident in that it elevates to the point of psychosis and hospitalization. Uh, in many cases. Uh, but what you're going to see is probably, uh, spiraling up. Lack of sleep, goal directed behavior, beginning to take risk taking behaviors, elevated sense of self and grandiosity. Hey, man, I'm just going to take on the world and watch out. It's off the cuff. Speech becomes pressure. So again, you'll probably begin to, um, family will say, just in the last week or so, it's been like this increase and now it's they're uncontrolled and they're out. Likely you may not see someone in a full manic episode in your in your day to day practice. Uh, you may experience someone who is on the depressive side, but has a history of a manic experience or hyper aware of it. So that's why we need to ask about, uh, the if there's a depressive experience, if there's ever been elevated many times and if at all like, it will be all of those things, not just one of those, uh, components. Uh, again, you're going to look at the diagnostic criteria for a full manic episode in a hypomanic episode and then make an evaluation report. Likelihoods going to be destroyed. Uh, I thought, oh, I was just wondering about this because I was wondering if, um. Yeah. So I guess that's like major depressive disorder is episode, but there are going to be times when someone is like woman and then and then it will be their swing back up into a high flow state board. And so that might depend upon the individual patient compliance and so on. So the gap between episodes, um, it's not like, uh, sacrificing for their. I think it's and it's definitely helpful that you to do that. Yet also with that, since they tend to fret over like people's rights and like, you know, with episode eight was the year, I think. Yeah, I don't quote me on this, so I haven't read it. But many of these types of disorders, um, where there's elevated levels of stress or trauma, they trigger an episode of more television and some of and become more severe. There doesn't always have to be a trigger. What I like about it, because there is a genetic component to the unfortunate, but it may be really just the body condition. You know, that sometimes switches to eligibility for people to able to do that. So if they're in an office and I have to give them some medicine. Yeah. That in the diagnostic process. Yeah. So they're there and maybe they're feeling. Um. So you might ask questions like, have you ever experienced anything that you would consider having, uh, more than one interview material? Uh, have you ever had, uh, a time where you really. Oh, different. For every season, I have more, um, response than others. Like every three or, uh, you know, maybe something with that same sort of experience. I don't think that you might just interrupt. How would you understand the American diplomatic experience? And then what questions do you ask? Uh, and so again, generally, uh, you might have to ask one in case of the what have they been hospitalized for? Physical condition? Uh, surgery on my, uh, I had a tendency for psychiatric conditions like, um, uh, uh, Harborview. So I think that's why they've been advocates that they would know that they ask, is that possible? So or just ask about symptoms of elevated mood or other times or you're feeling. I think you're pretty going to of times you feel different. How long does that work? What kind of things happen? Where would you experience that? Does that make sense? Other events. Question. Yes. Um. I met someone with my name. We had a fight. I was younger and know she had. You know, um, it was good for his safety. Yeah. You got to make yourself comfortable with that. Oh my God. Was it, uh, actively suicidal, or was it just ran out of, uh, a shared sense of reality? Do you think that you were out of kind in that psychotic. Uh, you know, again, I would I would try to understand what's going on in that experience of untangling that psychosis. Was it, uh, drug related or was it something else? That's not. Is it just sort of bipolar? What does the diagnosis question was? And then how how do we make it bigger or overlap? Uh, there is an overlap. One of the things. So, um, let's go to the manic. Uh, bipolar. And even with the tabs I can't find. Any. So anyone have an open bipolar? An eight 139 139. Report on this. Okay. So we're going to do page. 140 501 49 and so schedule affected at least a. Personality disorder. Likely. Without thinking too much. Um, I just want to like what it's going to be is that, uh, someone can recreate the whole experience of experiencing psychotic related disorder or psychotic break within a manic episode. Um, well, what you're going to do is you're going to look at it. A psychotic episode may not include some of the other features of meth, uh, experience, such as cold or anticipated or, uh, risk taking out of the visions. Uh, uh, maybe some, uh, depending on the type of psychotic disorder in your thinking, but it's not going to have a shared reality. Uh, so likely you're going to see features of manic episode that are different from the psychosis. And what I would do is I will see. It's like, well, here's, uh, for bipolar, schizophrenia, depression symptoms that may be accompanied by major depressive episodes right there in your state if no major depressive disorders have been, uh, uh, people at this stage of symptoms, um, if they have occurred. Currently, the diagnosis of schizophrenia is a major depressive episode for only the right time. So again, they're going to give you a hint on that, but I'll see if I can find the clear answer, which means psychotic disorder or something. I thought, um, next time. Yeah. Uh, bipolar? Yes. All right. And again, that's why we have a man. Because I've been doing this a while and I still don't remember everything. So excellent. Great question. And I'll see if I can find a clear answer. All right. Let's talk briefly about bi, uh, personality disorders. Something to keep in mind. And as I work with early diagnostician, oftentimes we jump to personality disorders probably a little too easily. Uh, and that's the threshold of a personality disorder is probably, um, one that they're not as, uh, prevalent. The occurrence is less frequent that some of the other issues that I do. And the other thing that we're going to see is that first phrase up here and enduring pattern of thinking, feeling, perception and behavior. These are things that make them uniquely them. Okay, so health then is this concept of when there's balance between myself and others and pathology with personality disorders is there is a persistent self or others focus when that understanding of kind of that balance of relationship between me and others skews one way or the other. We get begin to get into, uh, personality disorders. So keeping in mind that is going to be a pervasive lifelong pattern. And these are characterized by interpersonal issues and conflicts. And it's going to oftentimes be related to attachment. And it's either going to be over or under attack. There's also the threshold from disorder and not disorder. The challenge it's not clear. How do you know if this is something that is a personality disorder. Or someone just has tendencies that resemble narcissistic, avoidant, um, dependent type of personality? So what's the difference between what would just be considered? This person is unique, idiosyncratic, it's just kind of their type of behavior. And then what is pathology. So our task then is to be able to work towards defining some of these things. One of the features that we can pay attention to is the difference between a typical pathology is context dependent, and so the ability to adapt to the demands of life and relate to the relationship as they arise can be compromised. We have individuals, the personality disorders such as Ocpd, obsessive compulsive personality disorder. People begin not to be able to adjust and be flexible within the context of just everyday life. Types of situations. Oftentimes, people with personality disorders will lack flexibility and often make situations worse by simply responding in the way of who they are. Keeping in mind that these are what we would call, um, ego set and tonic states. They're not distorted. People don't perceive their life as having a problem. Some of their experiences. Um, oftentimes if we look at anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, eating disorders, it causes them distress. They're experience specific. Personality disorders. It's just as much as you feel like in in your world, in your life. This is who I am. That's okay. So how do we then, uh, differentiate is, um, is their behavior impacting other people, and are they aware of other people and is a pervasive is it excessive? Does it, uh, look like it's something that is kind of generally how they perceive the world and engage in the world. And then. Oftentimes this impact on those around them is often significant causes some distress, some disruption versus significant, um, thinking of someone who has antisocial personality disorder, which is a general, um, disregard for the safety and well-being of others. They lack empathy. They take action and do things out of, uh, complete indifference to the care for others. Imagine that has a significant impact on other people. So if we look at domains of, uh, personality, there's social motivation. And this is there's two major motives when we look at social motivation. It's going to be affiliation and power. Affiliation is related to the connection or avoidance of, uh, intimate relationships. Whereas power is need for admiration, high achievement and status. So if you were to look at things like gives a typical or dependent personality disorder. It has to do with issues related to, um, avoidance versus narcissistic or even, uh, histrionic or borderline may have to do with admiration, power, status, attention. There's also a cognitive perspectives that, um, personality disorders typically involve disordered, uh, thinking of self and self-image. And here we see it's either they think too highly of themselves or think to really of themselves. And this leads to instability can even be states. And, uh, one of the things that we see here is a lack of view of, um, a real view of life. Others, uh, just a kind of a different sense of reality. Uh, um, paranoid beliefs, for example. So when we look at personality and domains of personality, uh, we're going to see temperament. This is how people behave. So if we're going to understand personality disorders, we then understand that, um, that temperament is the basic innate characteristics of how they relate to the world. These are things that we're going to see even from, um, people being, uh, infants have given away. They were just such a big topic. There's these concepts of you can tell and genuinely love someone is you learn from them how they smile, their age. They they're curious. They're fill in the blank. Um, and they tend to be, again, the way we described people. Oh, that that kid is just so energetic. They're quiet, they're shy, they're difficult, they're irritating. Fill in the blank. And then there's some predictive features, uh, connection between impulse control and childhood and conduct disorder with personality disorders. For example, you cannot diagnose, um, uh, antisocial personality disorder without a conduct disorder in childhood. So keeping in mind, again, this isn't something like where we see, even with the psychosis or schizophrenia, where you may have an onset and a shift, complete shift in who they are in their reality. But these are going to be things that we see even lifelong. And there's going to be characteristics, even from childhood or early adolescence, that carry through into adulthood. Um, briefly, just keeping in mind that there are some disorders that, uh, there are gender differences. Ethnic differences are limited. And then, um, age characteristics, there are some disorders that you're going to be characteristics in childhood antisocial being one, but you're not going to, uh, diagnose antisocial personality until weeks ahead of time. So for that, you're not going to give that diagnosis, but you need to look at the history. But the other thing you can look at is there other factors that have changed this person's experience to where they become. They have antisocial tendencies, maybe trauma, maybe had, uh, traumatic brain injury or others, um, related to something that shifts. You wouldn't give a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder. You might talk about antisocial behaviors, tendencies, but it would be related to maybe a shift in onset, something later versus if there's that history. And this is where, again, keeping in mind the diagnosis of personality disorders is much more lifelong, prevalent, um, persistent and uh, evident throughout their lifespan. So as we look at the concept of personality disorders, keep in mind there's three clusters, uh, including uh A, B and C. And let's talk about each one of these briefly. Uh, general personality disorder, uh, can be a diagnosis. And there's this maladaptive, rigid personality that causes significant disruption. So here you're going to have someone that just has a general challenge with the personality that doesn't fit some of these other categories of, um, specific personality disorders. It's going to include, um, uh, symptoms later in adolescence or younger and then stable and enduring and long term in life includes cognitive distortions of self others challenges with that fact limited. It's there going to be either limited or they're going to be grandiose, expansive experiences, and it's not associated with situations or circumstances. So here we need to understand when did it start? Is there any precipitating events that could have caused this drastic shift? Uh, for example, maybe you have someone that, uh, they lost, uh, a parent in that adolescence. And from that time on, they become, uh, disruptive mood, almost like a whole personality shift that would be based on circumstances, not on a personality issue. Makes sense. Okay. So cluster eight includes paranoid personality disorder, schizoid, and schizo. Typical. Now paranoid is inappropriate and unwarranted suspicion of others. Now, this just goes beyond, uh, someone who's maybe a little leery. This is think of someone that is, uh, pretty pervasively and exceedingly suspicious of others that personal their criteria, but they have to be suspicious of others. Other people are trying to take advantage of other people trying to steal from the community that goes on. And it's not just a person, a circumstance, it's their lens in which they see the problem. So think of paranoid. It's, uh, fear of being harmed, taking advantage of by others, and it's based in reality, but can so it's a lack of delusion. So, uh, we'll talk a little bit more about delusions next time. But delusions are then kind of an altered understanding of reality. And that's, that's a differential. That's the difference between, uh, paranoid personality disorder, in his opinion. Now, for me, I will tell you, I always have trouble schizoid. So typical. How do you keep those straight in your mind? Uh, just have to memorize them. But schizoid. Is that going to be a complete, uh, indifference towards intimate relationships? Oftentimes, these individuals don't marry. There's a lack of interest in, uh, not just, uh, intimate communication. There's lack and, um, interest in sexual experience with others. They're typically loners. Um, jobs suffer because they can't get along with other people, and they really only function in jobs in which isolation may be, um, possible. Like if they have a remote job where they do programing and they can get in and work in there all by themselves, they may find success. Shares are typical, on the other hand, is kind of going to be, uh, the eccentric, uh, idiosyncratic behavior and cognition. And it goes beyond maybe someone who might be an entertainer or a woman going out there as it gets into a different sense of reality and understanding of self, eccentric behavior and stress. Um, uh, maybe you get some of the usual ideas about the world, uh, but it's going to be, uh, they're going to have a different reality, but it's not at all such a psychosis related experience. Okay. So schizoid. Uh, isolated, uh, excuse of typical. Idiosyncratic. Cluster B includes, uh, antisocial, borderline and, uh, histrionic personality disorders. As we talked about, antisocial personality disorders can be related to, uh, um, think of in some ways, um. This can be conceptualized even individuals who like serial killer type people who have complete indifference of concern for others, they may take action, uh, that, uh, they're irritable, aggressive, they may drive recklessly. They may do things that are complete disregard, like they're up in a tall building. They take something and just throw it up like, well, what are you doing? There's going to be people down there like, I don't care, right? So it's a complete disregard for and care for others lack of empathy. There's going to be no conformity with social rules, um, social holes and being deceptive, manipulative. And um, again, here we're going to need a history of a conduct disorder in the past, borderline personality disorder, uh, although it can happen in men, is oftentimes more prevalent in women. Antisocial personality disorder, more prevalent in men than women. Uh, and here we have borderline it's in instability in relationships. Now imagine someone it's almost they I love you, I hate you. Uh, there's going to be instability in how they engage with, um, people. That is a fear of abandonment. So, uh, we're going to do things like, uh, maybe be really successful. And right before they get emotionally, they don't want possibly to be that they don't, um, uh, that they don't get promoted or before they, um, meet a goal or in a relationship and they will leave before it gets too serious so they don't get left. So it's not just, uh, kind of the erratic behavior, but there's also going to be, um, manipulation, again, intention, um, risk taking oftentimes like, uh, self-harm, um, uh, even suicidal ideation and ability to I need your attention to detail, but it's going to be have instability I love you, I hate you. Uh, the person is like the best person more or. Uh, there. Also, I'll say that you'll probably feel that before you get married, you're going to see, uh, the client will come in and you'll be working with them. They have quite a handle on what's going on until. Well, and then they leave you and they come back, and then you have this direct relationship with you. Like, if you're going to feel it, you guys are upset that, um, your partner's too late to make it with the separation. Uh, separation anxiety is going to be a little different because that's going to present with more like, uh, probably panic related, um, pride here in discussing this with negative possessions about something that's going to happen to my mom or dad. And here again, personality disorder. And this is their way of being. So separation anxiety will be destructive to the individual. This they may be driven by fear. But this is just this. Is that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Um, and so they're reminded of the story of the 1978, almost like it feels like any other person. Uh, I'm not sure I heard of a couple things. So where was this enemy? By chief. Okay. What one? You. So he took the girls out? I don't know, and, uh, he's one that went out to the wilderness. Uh, yeah. Yeah. So I didn't follow that story, but, uh, if he was diagnosed with borderline, uh, again, it could be even the concept of, um. Without looking at the case of fire, we just kind of infer, uh, that might be. I'm going to kill my children before they leave me, or so up for me. Right? So it's excessive behavior related to the fear of abandonment or, um, moving the risk of being left. I'm going to take action to avoid that to some extent. Yeah. So again, about following in the case, I might look at it generalized that type of experienced. Um, histrionic personality disorder oftentimes can present similarly to borderline in that there's attention seeking. But the difference is to get attention versus to avoid being at the end. That's going to become the primary one of the primary differences. The other thing is, uh, histrionic individual people experienced histrionic personality disorder are going to be uncomfortable when they're not the center of attention. It's like it has to be about them versus don't leave. Does that make sense? Almost like, what's the motivation behind the experience of acting out here is going to be flirtatious. Oftentimes oversexualized experienced. They're going to use their looks to get what they want. Um, oftentimes their clothes are going to be representative of what would be maybe not socially typical, uh, maybe revealing, type fitting, uh, those types of things. Um, and I know there were two more at the. Uh, the, uh. So, um. What? Here. We have, uh, intense desire to impress others, and they expend, uh, excessive amount of time, attention and effort to gaining the attention of other people. So, again, it's about them being the center. So when you look at self-harm behavior behaviors here is going to be different than borderline here. You're going to have to self-harm behaviors to draw their attention versus, hey, if you leave me, I'm going to kill myself. Does that make sense? So again, uh, kind of the focus, the attention is a little bit different. And oftentimes what we're going to have is, uh, people who experience histrionic, uh, uh, symptoms, they're going to overestimate intimate intimacy of relationships. Uh, we're just best friends. It's not always sexual, but you think, oh, we're just going to say this today. Uh, this person's going to be my husband, my wife, my friend, the wife, everything. The person. But, uh, tell me that nothing interesting there. That I have this perception. That's more than what it actually is. Now, a narcissistic personality disorder. A little bit different than this, that gets us. Uh, remember we talked about oftentimes it's, uh, a difference in the balance between self and others here. It's all about self. Narcissistic personality disorder is, uh, I see myself as the best of everyone else. Also, uh, there's a sense of irritation. Others don't see themselves in the same way that they do. Uh, even to the point where if someone has just a personality disorder is confronted or they don't feel that they are seen and or the courageous person that they are, there's an experience of, uh, even depression in the school or even taking action to appear. Um, but it's really, you know, I'm so glad that I'm here. So again, it's, uh, the idea of the excessive, uh, sense of self and self-importance. Now, I used to do an exercise, uh, I'm tempted to put it back in, and we would look at, uh, disorders as represented in my head and then try to use it and do the diagnostic process. And oftentimes someone that comes up with this disorder in the previous. 100 days that I, you know, uh, he actually has been diagnosed with bipolar disorder and so on, but, uh, kind of like the selfie with the other person. Yeah. Uh, I think that Julian. Was kind of brought up. On that topic under microscope. Now, the difference is, um, in some ways, he thinks he's the best. He's the regional manager. He gets upset when people see him that way, but he tends to have empathy and care for others. So maybe narcissistic tendencies, but he might be an image of one that you're like, hmm, okay, I see it. So he brings, uh, donuts or just sits there with the same people, I think. Oh, it was for those for my birthday. No, it's your birthday. Happy birthday. Because that way people get to see him having a center of attention and important. Okay. And probably the others. True. I'm not as familiar with, uh, the king from Madagascar, but if I remember, I think I could. I could see that, um, Johnny Bravo, probably. Yeah. Um, okay, let's quickly, uh, talk about cluster C, and this is avoiding the tendency for obsessive compulsive personality disorder. Now, avoidant personality disorder, uh, goes beyond just kind of people who are shy, uh, introverts. These are people who, out of a strong sense of fear of being judged and evaluated outside of, um, uh, uh, like social anxiety disorder, uh, similar expression. But again, you know, there's a lot of stress related to it. People who experience, uh, social anxiety, stress people here. What we have is they, uh, there's this, um, strong inhibition in social relationships out of fear of being judged or criticized or evaluated by others. And so they take extreme action to, um, uh, evaluate the actions of others and pay attention to what's their motive. They're just, uh. They just did that to you? Slightly. Not quite paranoid, but I don't want to be dependent. Personality disorder goes on the other side of that, where these people kind of get stuck even in making a decision. What should they. What should I have for breakfast? I don't want to make the wrong decision. I need someone else to, uh, basically make the decisions for you. That even someone else in your version. Someone that maybe is just, uh, afraid. Someone who, uh, doesn't like to take risks, but there's going to be, um, kind of a pervasive sense of doubt, self-doubt and pessimism. Uh, they will even take extreme actions to avoid disagreeing with other people for fear that they will be judged or evaluated, or that that person will take care of them. Obsessive compulsive personality disorder. And I noticed, uh, when we started talking about obsessive compulsive disorder, this can sometimes be one that we think of here. Someone might need a sense of perfection and obsessive compulsive disorder, but again, it causes distress. There's a sense of anxiety. There's a sense of fear related to this action. It's not taken. There's this obsession. If I don't take this compulsive action, then something horrible is going to happen. Here. These people just have a strong sense of need for protection and control, and they need rules to be able to exist in life. And when things are perfect, they get, um, flustered to the point where they can't operate. Uh, so, for example, someone, uh, may spend an excessive amount of time on a project at work because it's just not right, but perfect to the point where it causes problems that maybe, uh, negatively impact their ability to. Go get something. But it's not about dealing with a stressful session. It's just enough to, uh, to control that. Yeah. Recognition in some ways. Um, again, depending on how you define something that's perfectionistic and associated with, um, uh, even various, uh, disorders or personality types that are disordered people that just want to get things right. So imagine perfectionism, but to an extreme. Does that make sense? Again, looking at this order, just as someone, uh, as a recovering perfectionist. Okay. Uh, the reality is, uh, we all some of us have different levels of I need to get it right. Or dreaded sense of responsibility for things to be right. But this goes far beyond that. This excessive pervasiveness, uh, control in that kind of like circumstance, this is just more extreme marketing. And what about the person who will get on the public persona? I guess likely these people are going to take action and, and, uh, fear of being rejected and test their plans on how they see the world, um, in in a way that they may, uh, differ in their own values in here. Uh, people may experience discomfort, but it's just that, uh, it's almost like in the lens of how they see the world versus, uh, how good what it was that he could worry about. Right, right. And so if they're worried about it versus these people are just more, uh, suspicious. And, um, the person these people are attacking me and I. I'm not having a good response is symptomatic of me. Let me, uh, let me think a little bit more to clarify the difference, and I'll make sure, um, but in the moment, I'm not able to articulate it's in here. They have an all powerful impact on the personality. It's not, you know, and the only person that's like, close to that, like a family or is that they give up on everybody. I think there's probably going to be less likely to happen because some people in their life, but it's more so. But it's a general sense of who I have and like that. And then I think some of the people like, uh, a lot of people can't do it. I don't want to go on trips, but you have a good answer. Okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, um, that would be a food that he avoided. Um, not withdrawn and have very few, few close relationships, but with social anxiety, they have a lot of friends, but there's been a lot of them. So that was a big part. Of them first is people who have personalities may have their differences, but the other person I had that might be a little off, like, uh, you mentioned earlier, you think that we probably won't encounter you before, but then you will encounter them. But again, it's like, um, oftentimes when you work through the process more, when you have conversations are like, um, the exercise of taking a character from TV or movies. So seeing that as meaningful, um, versus personality disorders in some way, you look at that threshold of what's the most, uh, intrusive of things in your diagnosis of a personality disorder to that upper limit sometimes. So not that we shouldn't be aware and shouldn't diagnose, but even like there's not as prevalent it's gotten to the base of in my blog. It's very specific in the sense it's less likely to be possible. Um, like I have tried to reflect. It's been a while, but I think I've had at least one patient that made his personality. Um. But I never worked through the process. But looking back, that would be one thing that I. Would say is among the most common forms of psychopathology. What? Is that again? So if someone's going to come to work with the nurses personality disorders, I think they're going to come here because they like you. But just in my in my experience and my understanding of the prevalence rate will likely come as people are at home in the spring practitioner sales. That is unacceptable. Yeah. Yes. Because one of them to us, I mean we. Tend to. Be um, so, um, you know, like my, like, for, like leukemia. For us. Right. What is that like? Is it the same thing for the rest of us? I'm wondering if it's like this. Yeah. You would love to look at the DSM and their classification. Like maybe the general personality disorders, rigidity, inflexibility and general challenges and how they relate to the world and then also being part of the experience. Um, again, I would I would certainly wasn't the DSM say about how do you classify, uh, um, how do you describe that within the context that maybe they don't need for criteria? So looking at the mosaic of the good life. How does that influence your conceptual impression of being on the television show? That may not have ultrasound disorders and they have tendency. So how does that make sense? So he does 200g of the art facility and they don't do that right. So I just put that. In the way of understanding the you know, the system. But in some ways, um, I would look at that generally. Uh. Uh, and so again, for those that, um, that the reason that you got, for example, some of the practices of how do say you're in trouble with their perception of the site. It's not that they don't have to be told. So if you were to look at it, it's generally important first that many of the people on the other side, uh, the, the uh, the first one, this is, this is the way the world is my this is my idea. I know I see the world differently. Uh, I'm aware for different purposes. Yeah, yeah. But and but also very, very, very quickly then you can hear what the investigation. Was like not the right way, but again, looking at the severity of pathology, see things in different settings that other um, and prison uh, conditions uh, something like that. Uh, yeah. Uh, the curious about the safety should for clinicians see the borderline, uh, clients come to them and we know working does we begin to know any specific special training we need to have for say that with personality disorders, much like eating, um, even, uh, severe trauma related disorders, likely, uh, having area of specialization, working with personality disorders, uh, because, again, they might perceive the world differently. Um, there's a sense of who they are versus I know this is part of who I am, and it doesn't mean that other people experience. So this, uh, this the challenge versus this other side. Uh, so working with them might be different because the other thing is keeping in mind the, um. The chronic nature of personality disorders versus the episodic nature of other. Disorders. So what does treatment look like? Is it managing the experience and increasing the skills to reduce the impact on others and themselves versus something like a major depressive disorder? Or others might be treated with medication therapy, increased support remission, explaining to them what versus personality disorders. And they approach treatment differently and look at other skills development treatment like self-medication versus reduction. Does that make sense? Yeah, I spoke with a therapist. They say the borderline disorder is the one that are difficult to work with because they have this issue of I hate you, I love you, and yeah, yeah. And that's where specific therapy, uh, like, dialectical behavior became part of this, trying to work with individual borderline personality. They need to be certified and trained with that. And we work with individuals with that work. But, uh, believe correct me if I'm wrong. If you have patients who have that. I think that's Marshall. And I had, uh, uh, uh, developed dialectical behavior. Yes, yes. All right, so with the shift and all of this happened today, I don't know if we're gonna be able to get to the technology question. Right. Um, I try. To, uh, appreciate your patience and understanding what will be the next time we will start the first thing, uh, the technology. That that we have. And then what we'll do is next time, it should be, uh, either culture or, uh, faith or those, like, people who do know this show. And I would definitely practice to be at least five minutes, uh, with, uh, with that going into. The regular.