Remember, everything is through the lens of either Toy Story first and then Pixar movies. So that was up to her. So, um, where was I? We were talking about vignettes. Overall, one of the things I appreciate is, uh, kind of seeing how you're conceptualizing the client's experience and just the creativity and the engagement and different approaches. Some are very much like clinical notes, some are more of a story. And all of those are okay. Uh, when we get to, uh, practice tonight, uh, we're going to talk about clinical interviewing, and then we're going to step into the process of actually not reading the vignette in total, but starting with the whole book and giving opportunity to ask. Good question. So likely, uh, if I can get my, my self focused and get you into that practice early will have a little more time because the intention is to start developing that skill and, uh, getting some feedback from each other. Okay. Uh, and if we have time, I'll put myself in the hot seat and demonstrate, uh, clinical interviewing. Um, if someone would be willing to be a client, uh, when we get to that point role for your clients. But you is inviting you to answer any questions, uh, so far about the vignettes, about feedback. No. Okay. Excellent. So let's, uh, do a little bit of review from last class. Uh, and as again, you might see some of these issues you all see tonight. So what are some of the key features. And again maybe not diagnostic criteria, but key features that might point you in the direction of a client experiencing depression. What might those be? Yeah. Um, one of them is the loss of interest and the loss of interest in daily activities. What could that look like? It's not interest about anything. Lost interest and lost interest. Right. So what might be a phrase a client might say? Yeah. No. Feeling nothing. Yeah. What's the point? What's the point? Or, uh. Or try. Right. Or even just. So what did you do today? Nothing. Exactly. And you were going to say I was going to say, um, and then the different thing would be like fatigue or sleeplessness, fatigue or sleeplessness. Yeah. Or the other side of that is a lot of sleep, right? So keeping in mind that your client just says, oh, I'm tired or even I, I just feel on edge. I just feel grumpy. My, my wife is telling me I'm just sharp. Irritability is another key feature again. So keep in mind that what we're we're developing the the layers of skill of understanding, not just, uh, the diagnostic criteria, but what could the be the presentation that leads us to see if that criteria is met. Okay. And so what are the key features of anxiety. Now last time I mentioned anxiety in general is kind of this, this big category. And each one of the disorders then kind of having an area of focus, the what is the essential feature of the word. And so what would be the main essential feature of generalized anxiety disorder? Yes. Worry, worry. Okay. About what? All things being small. All things making the small. And with that, every. Every day. That's right. So that's kind of the feature though. What we're looking for is its general worry and a general state of worry and about everyday things, not necessarily like other, uh, domains that we'll talk about. So how am I going to pay the bills? What's going to happen? My kids, uh, probably get fired. Um, maybe even just in, uh, an increased sense of distress related to, uh, social and political climate or other things. Again. So we're going to have to tease apart what would be considered a typical response and what is a non-typical or exaggerated or persistent excessive response. Okay, so social anxiety and what's the key feature? Or, um, from your, um, from your, um, a safe, normal way. I mean, go out, we can see people. Okay. So you don't go out and see people, right? So there's a kind of the pressure being evaluated by other schools, right? So the pressure of feeling evaluated by others. Right. And so then that then presents itself in avoiding social situations. Right. So one of the things we're looking for is what is that threat of conversation where there is concern about general evaluation or being judged by others, that then keeps them from engaging in multiple areas of life? Uh, maybe they avoid, um, going to the grocery store and interacting with the clerk. Maybe they shop all online. Or maybe, uh, again, shopping online is not diagnostic. But if they refuse to go out and they only shop online and that is avoidance, that maybe something they don't eat in a restaurant and it's not because of, um, dietary issues or monetary or it's like out of principle, we only eat at home. It's because people fear how, um, the waiter is going to judge how I order. I'm not going to order. Right. Um, someone's going to watch me eat, and they're going to be, uh, they think I eat too much, too little, too loud too. And so there's fear of being evaluated by others. Specific phobia. What's the key feature there? Yes, the fear of surrender is surrounding a specific stimulus. So fear around specific stimulus. What? What can that stimulus be? Spiders, spiders. Heights. Anything. Right. And does it have to be rational? No, no. Uh, fear of a pen. Yeah. We don't know where that stems from. And we're not necessarily saying why you have to understand where it comes from. But that response that it is anywhere from mild discomfort and maybe disgust to full panic experience and anything in between. But that response happens every time. Whether it's mentioned, seen, touched, heard, uh, someone mentioned, uh, a phobia. Yeah, similar to social anxiety in the sense that this is one of the main differences. Uh, there's a fear of crowded places like crowded spaces, open spaces, fear of and a lot of key features going to be the fear of being in this stuff before there's no escape. So being on the bus and I can't get off, um. That's okay. Yeah. And then, um, I wonder if the local media, like, your name was confused specifically because, uh, like. There can be a panic. But again, so if we look at panic disorder, which would be the fear of what? Panic attacks. So in some ways I think don't go out. And there is fear of having panic attacks that can be a part of a bigger phobia. But that's not there. I'm not going to go out because I don't want to have a panic attack. Does that make sense? So in some ways there there is that feature of I, I will be, uh, I won't be able to maintain control. I'll have a panic attack. But it really is the, uh, the root of the problem is that I won't be able to escape. I want to go get help. Right. So, um. Something else. Okay. With that, you just have to go back. Right. And so, uh, keeping in mind, we talked about a panic attack as a specifier. What can the panic attack specifier for attaches to which disorder? Has the trick. What happens to that person? What's that? What? All of that OCD, uh, depression, basically, panic attacks can happen in the context of just about any panic, just, um, any mental health disorder, except you do not have a panic attack specifier in panic disorder. A panic attack is a pre is, uh, is a requisite for adding disorder. Yeah. Clarify the difference between a guard for the agoraphobia. Yeah, yeah. Okay. So claustrophobia is a fear of confined spaces where agoraphobia is kind of the opposite of that. It's fear of open spaces or crowds because you won't be able to escape. So in some way there may be, uh, similar feature of I'm, I won't be able to escape. But again, it's kind of a different context. Claustrophobia, small confined spaces. Yeah. Yeah. Great. Great distinction. Any other questions? All right. Last one separation anxiety. What's the key feature there? This is separate from the feedback. Yep. Fear of being separated from the attachment figure. Who's the attachment figure? Anyone? Anyone who the person is attached to. What's the difference? Maybe between a [INAUDIBLE] and children and adults. I hope I will see a distinction. There's a natural phase in life where young children will be attacked and have that natural anxiety of separation, as opposed to what's natural. Can you get past that? Right, right. And so there's a little bit of this, even with children who are securely attached and have some separation issues at times. But when it gets persistent, excessive. But in adulthood, what could be maybe something that is, um, the attachment figure, that may be something you hear more of than my parent or, uh, caregiver person though. Yeah. Your your home. Exactly. So one of the things that we're looking for in, in adults is that threat of and the difference between a more phobia and, um, uh, separation anxiety. Again, what's the nature of the fear? The nature of the fear is something bad will happen to either me or the home if I am not at home, or to my attachment figure versus agoraphobia is I'm going to be out there and something bad will happen. I won't be able to escape. Or, um, I might be out of control and not being able to. So it's, uh, the difference between, um, the separation or the reason why people stay home is different. Right. So, um, but the result or the symptom could look the same. Okay. And we talked a little bit about that last time. That's a thread of the continuum based experience. Right. The symptoms can overlap. And so which one is it. Well today we're going to talk a little bit more about the clinical interview and the process of getting to. Which one is it. Okay. Uh any questions about these or anything else we've talked about so far? All right. So let's talk about clinical interviewing and, uh, and what is it? So in your from your reading or just from your general knowledge, what's the difference between clinical interviewing and maybe therapy? Yeah, I think he's on a clinical interview. You, uh, you have a specific time? Um, it's a management one session time to ask specific questions about, um. Um, many questions about that, uh, about families that concerns about previous life. And I'd like to have a the the I focus the general understanding called the person health. Um, mental health and the physical health. For that limited time. Yeah. In this directive, I get I. Should I see your hand? Yeah. I'm just going to say it's, uh, the focus is not as much on right for poor performance. Right. Uh, you kind of come in and maybe not as focused on that report piece. What else? What could be some differences between therapy and clinical interviewing? Yeah, it's going to be more emphasis on the, um, interviewer guiding the conversation and speaking more, asking those questions. Yes, it's interviewer driven versus more client focused. Yeah. And you, um, I think it's more about gathering information and discovering about the client that addresses any issues or like unpacking. Right. So gathering information versus addressing issues to all of these are correct. But one of the key features here is it's, uh, it's different in that you are guiding the discussion. And in some ways, one of the things I want to acknowledge is we are spending so much time developing that skill of almost being gentle and non directive person to center, following the client, not necessarily imposing or interrupting per se. Right, who are developing that skill, kind of almost hands off. So this process is almost like opposite of that. We are very hands on. We are directed and sometimes it can feel very intrusive and almost and I've heard some, uh, some students report it feels like on both sides, either I was interrogating the client or I felt interrogated by my, you know, by the student therapist as we were working on this skill. And the answer is it can feel that way. So one of the things that we need to do is learn how to blend the skill of being direct and leading the conversation and being gentle and building rapport, because we can't get to what we need to without any rapport. But it really is. It's a very different process, and in some ways I liken it to this. And, uh, you'll have assessment this next semester. Uh, but the process of being, uh, like, uh, doing psychological assessment and testing is very different than therapy. And this, this skill, the client kind of feeling for me kind of lands in the middle. You have just the warm client centered. You have this directive, but still somewhat client focused. And then the other side, psychological testing and assessment. As you're pushing a client towards the end of their upper limit of their memory or intelligence or whatever, and you're evaluating maybe for traumatic brain injury and they know there's something wrong and they just break and they weep and you're like, it's hard. Are you ready to move on? Well, yes. Just like because the nature of your purpose of being there's different. So this is that nice middle ground where we can be directive and still warm. Okay. That's not half. Yeah. Do you think it's appropriate to specify that you would like to tell them like this is going to be more directive and more intense, like interrogated, but absolutely, absolutely. Um, did I post my notes online? Because that's exactly oftentimes what I do in the first session. I acknowledge that this is going to be a little different. And so in some ways, however, in your own personal style, it it can be the case of the first session. Maybe the first couple of sessions can be very directive because I really need to explore, uh, understanding your experience so I can really understand how we can work together towards finding health or wholeness or and then so in some ways, hey, you just kind of hang with me and trust it'll get a little different. Um, but one of the ways that I do that, and, uh, I'm not too far ahead in my notes, is what I'll do is, uh, if I have the luxury, an intake session often times like I've talked about, could be 15 minutes, it could be two sessions, maybe it's one 90 minute session. And, um, Morrison says about 18% of your time should be open free speech, giving the client a chance to engage in telling their story. Now, in, uh, one of the clinical settings that opportunity to work in, we had up to three sessions to gather information to get a working hypothesis towards a diagnosis. So the first session, informed consent kind of do the nuts and bolts, hey, this is the limits of confidentiality. All of the good and uh, official legal ethical things. And then I would put my paper down and we'll talk about the use of notepads and paper, um, as we talk about this process. But then I would say, would you be willing to tell me your story and then just listen, don't take notes, just gather. But again, putting on the lens of diagnostics, maybe asking some questions, but really giving this nice open space because that's where rapport happens. So one of the balances we have, what if you only have 15 minutes, you still need to have some rapport building. Starting with with the session opens up. Well, hey, I'm so glad you found the office. Sometimes people have trouble finding it. Oh, can you believe the sun's actually out today? Or how about those Seahawks? I don't know if they're football fans. For me, football season ended a couple weeks ago in this. Seahawks beat the 40 Niners. But I mean it's baseball season. So the idea here is you kind of diffuse just in your own personality. Kind of have um, a phrase or comment, a quick little interaction just to help them feel at ease. Um, and then you can go into your, um, kind of the nuts and bolts logistics, informed consent and then asking them, so tell me what brings you in today. Nice. Good open question which we'll talk about how to start and then giving room just to listen. Because then that's going to make them understand you're there for them. And believe it or not, even that 18% nine minutes in a 60 minute session, you can build that rapport. But the challenge is it's not very much. So we're going to have to build that in as we go. And some of those good micro skills of counseling will help you do that. And yeah. Is it okay to do some of this ahead of time, I guess by sending them a form to fill out and I sharing my notes. Absolutely good insight. So really what we have here and when we're building a clinical interview, it really is. You gotta think about the entire intake process, which includes, um, even if you go to the medical doctor, they have forms you fill out and some of those are even mental health questionnaires or questionnaires about, uh, medical history. So you can build a packet that then has detailed information about specific areas and domains. And then your clinical interview should then kind of dovetail off of that, uh, maybe touching on some important pieces. Sometimes I would even go through the intake packet. Oh well okay. Yep. So we use the aces. Um, uh, the childhood trauma assessment. I see you've listed some things here. Is that something that would be important for us to pay attention to in our time together? Okay, great. I'll make a note, move up and walk through. Oh, I actually have a family history of bipolar disorder. And just to clarify, who is that? Right. So acknowledging their hard work and filling out those papers. But it and then also not diving deep into those because you have that data. And then in the end you're going to consider your, um case formulation from all of those pieces together. So your clinical interview will dovetail with that information and maybe include some pieces, but avoid duplicating, because then there's no way you're going to be able to duplicate everything on your form and get to the new stuff that you need to get to, and we'll talk more about this. How many forms is too many? How many is not enough? Uh, you send your client a 300 page intake form. They are likely just going to cancel their appointment and come back. But if you send them one and it's just like one form, uh, maybe demographic information now, you don't have enough data to actually kind of get get what you need to formulate how to help them. Does that make sense? Yeah. So we can, uh, kind of put some of those conversations together into what should be in an intake packet, but how do I build an intake interview? Um, but yeah, we'll talk more about that. Absolutely. Um, you should collect some data ahead of time. Yeah. Okay. So, uh, where we have the conversation. We talked about everything different now. All right. So one of the things that we need to do is recognize that a good interview is going to gather all of the relevant information efficiently, and balances that building up rapport. One of the things that we can and need to pay attention to is not only just like the diagnostic information, but also think of a psychodynamic perspective. How are their relationships? What's their quality of their attachments? Because that may not only be diagnostic when we're looking at things like separation anxiety or phobia or others, but it's going to give us insight into formulating the case. So one of the things that, um, as we go through recognizing that this diagnostic piece is only one aspect of your entire case formulation, focus of this class is kind of focusing in on that diagnostic process, but it's beginning to push towards that idea of case formulation and using this as a piece, not the piece, but a piece of, uh, the conceptualization for treatment. Okay. So the other thing we need to look at is, uh, the behavior and understanding. Are there social, cultural norms or is there things that maybe they have been behaviorally conditioned to experience based on their environment, uh, based on their experience growing up, maybe trauma histories. Therefore that then impacts, uh, their experience with symptoms. So recognizing it's not just, um, uh, what are your worry thoughts? What's the contents of those worry thoughts and how often do they happen? Uh, our clinical interview should include a wide range of information to help understand who they are and their experience at all. Makes sense. Okay. All right. Because we look at the process of clinical interviewing. It's going to be a blend of providing direction and report building. Uh, and he got me ahead. So let's just see where we're going. Uh, so, uh, let's jump down to here. So one of the things that happens is we need to have a good working understanding of the domains that we want to cover. So as I articulated, um, uh, as I responded to that question, we may have some information that we gather medical history, family, mental health history, education, history, other things from the form or intake packet that we provide. But then we're going to have a clusters of questions or domains of questions that we are going to cover in our interview. Now, that might be slightly adjusted based on what the client brings in, might be adjusted even as you shift and work with different clients of different ages. Uh, maybe the nature of the case. Maybe you're working with someone who is specifically coming and they are, uh, court mandated versus, um, and they're just there on their own. Uh, that might dictate, uh, some of the different questions you ask. But, um, then we'll talk in more detail about what we're wanting to do is have a clear picture, um, education history, family history, sexual history, abuse history. Uh, then we'll build out that understanding of who the client is while also sprinkling in direction of the presenting problem so that the presenting problem is only a piece of the clinical interview. Makes sense. Yeah. At the question. So get the person. Um, the client came with, uh, crisis or suicide on the TV show the first time and the first, we need to assess the suicidal ideation and everything. That means how long it takes to control the situation. So this crisis enough that I said, does this. Everything all right? And I'll come back to the clinical exam of that. Yeah. Uh, and that depends. Um, because, uh, is it uh, and so one of the things that we see is that have a clear understanding, you need to assess for suicide early in the first session, because what you don't want is simply for that reason. You get to the last seven minutes of your session. And, you know, based on the population and the clinic you're working and your client is sitting in the lobby, the next client's in the lobby. So it's going to be you're done in seven minutes. You have five minutes between sessions. And then the next one happens. Right. So what you need to do is make sure that you assess for suicide, suicide, suicidal ideation early in the session, because that gives you a chance to change directions, because ultimately, any time we assess for suicidal ideation or we, uh, feel that there's possibility of, um, risk of suicide, everything else just pauses. We go into evaluation and assessment of, uh, suicide risk. So we would not necessarily worry about moving on to the other domains. So we'll talk, uh, much more in detail about assessing for suicide. But the other thing is suicide assessment early substance use early because substance use, um, well, mimic or mask any and all of the mental health disorders symptoms, uh, are related to intoxication, withdrawal or use and abuse of different substances. So it can mirror mask confused the process. So one of the things we need to do early is understand is there a client at risk. Do I need to shelf the rest of my intake process and go into risk assessment? And in order to understand what is maybe shaping the client's information and how, uh, their symptoms may be experienced, their history, even their reporting of their history, is that shaped by substance use or abuse? So we need to assess for those too much earlier. So as you look at domains make sure those two are front loaded in your time. Okay. Yeah. Um how do you manage. They're like, yeah. Even like my own experience. The first session in counseling at the client, I'm very nervous. Mhm. Um, and so it's very hard to open up, uh, especially when it's like substance abuse, suicidal ideation, planning provided. How, what have you seen as the test or what. It's. Yeah, in a lot of ways it's you being there, being present and being call uh, as a clinician is going to help the client. Now the reality is, one of the challenges we have is, um, clients may not feel comfortable right away telling you why they're actually there. And so we'll probably mention this again later as I get to it in my notes, is the idea of their their reason for coming may not be their reason for coming. What they tell you in the moment may be true, but it may not be the full truth. It may not be. Uh, they may disclose that. Yeah, well, I have an occasional drink. Uh, but what they don't disclose is then maybe other recreational drugs or the volume of drinking actually is minimized in order to say, I don't know if they could trust you, to be honest. Yes. So one of the challenges we have is, much like we talked about last time, because we kind of have to trust what the client is telling us is true and have a good, healthy level of skepticism at the same time. So we need to be open to the idea that they may not tell us everything. Uh, for example, there are some some domains that, as we assess, will be anxiety provoking. Generally for different clients, different things may be more anxiety provoking, but we ask about sexual history, sexual abuse history, substance abuse history. Those three tend to be ones that clients get a little bit nervous about. Others may family history, um, or other aspects, right, depending on their experience. But, uh, when we assess for those things, um, suicide would be would be the other one. When we ask about those things, how we ask about those is going to be incredibly important. And so, um, if we are uncomfortable, we'll talk more about that. They're going to be uncomfortable. So yeah. Where does disclosure come in this. Because it feels like is it too late to already say what you say? I might have to report on like where does that fit. So again, this assumes that you've already done your kind of the intake paperwork as far as informed consent. Okay. So for me, if I were to conceptualize this, uh, some of that documentation and informed consent may be filled out in the lobby or mailed to have they come back, you cover the court informed consent. Hey. What you're here's what you can expect in therapy. Here's the client's rights and responsibility. Here's the therapist rights and responsibility. This is confidentiality. I'm a mandated reporter, so there may be times in which I breach confidentiality. Okay, great. So all of that nuts and bolts paperwork. And then now. Okay. So what brings you in today. Right. So they may have on your intake form reason, uh, chief complaint, reason for a visit, which that may be. So I, I see you've listed feeling just kind of down as to why you're here. Can you tell me a little more about that after you kind of get to the disclosure piece? Does that make sense? Yeah. So in some ways you're going to have to balance depending on the setting, how and when that happens. But that good informed consent piece is kind of assumed happening before this piece. Yeah. Great question. And you have 50 minutes right. Maybe maybe 90 maybe three sessions. Um, we don't have to go far down the track with the human resources part of my brain. Just hundreds of serious ethical or legal considerations in terms of like personalizing your interview or the concept. Um, I don't know. Well, I'd say personalized, like my therapist or like, how standardized does that process for right there? Uh, very widely. Okay. Um, the setting and in some ways, what we're talking about in the clinical interview are kind of really good pieces. And then how that looks and, um, you are setting the informed consent piece, like in there. So, um, for sure, if ultimately, once you have the client agreed, I understand, especially as you go in the intake and they just start closing, um, they either 17 years old and they're still a minor and they disclose abuse at all. That's different than their 19 or even 18. And how you address that and how you're mandated. Reporter. And you have different data in different contexts. So having a good informed consent first um, engaging in the process. But even that how you do that when you do that sometimes like your site or you establish that maybe as a private practitioner, what does that look like? But you have a, um, good working understanding of the law and ethics and how what needs to be disclosed that you have some how much that creative freedom, but there's room for you to be an individual therapist and put that in that way. It's true. It's congruent because anything we do. Or with the client. If we come in and are informed, consent process is robotic and they're like, oh, you're kind of in or you're just kind of loose and, you know, not taking it seriously. They're like, I don't know if I can trust you, right? So and it is about having a style while still upholding the requirements. Does that make sense? Yeah. Okay. And, uh, the intake process may be structured, uh, if you're working in an inpatient setting or, um, even outpatient, um, intensive treatment type place, they may have a schedule, uh, a structured interview process. But as a private practitioner or, um, kind of working in a cooperative private practice, community mental health, you might have a lot more latitude. Does that help? Yeah. Okay. Other questions? Okay. Okay. So one of the things that, um, uh, I want to we come back to, we started to talk about is the idea of how do you actually engage in the process of, uh, starting this process and in some ways, um, how many of you have seen some sort of representation of council on television? And to your knowledge, how accurate was was it? Some. Yeah. Ironically, one of the most accurate that I've seen, interestingly, is modern ballet with one of the, uh, the young ladies in the family goes and sees a therapist. Just his style. His interaction is like that actually felt a lot like therapy. Now, again, we didn't go through the intake process and all of that, but just looking at the representation, I was like, that's actually fair. Not perfect, but it's fair. Others, you're like, oh no, that's not even remotely close. Um, my wife will attest to this. We watch, uh, everyone know the TV show Frasier? Yeah. And forever. And, uh, [INAUDIBLE] say something and I'm like, no, that's not ethical. No, it's like that. My wife like, do you have to say that everybody likes it? Yes I do, it's core to who I am. So, um, really, what it is, is representing, um, what therapy is. In some ways, you get to dictate in that first session what the client expects. And this process, this clinical interview process likely should be different than the way you approach therapy. So one of the things that you have the opportunity to do is describe even what is the intake process going to be? Well, I'm likely going to it's going to feel like I'm asking you a lot of questions. Uh, maybe even a lot of open questions. But also sometimes I'm going to have to ask specific questions. And I know some of the things we're going to talk about may be kind of hard or embarrassing, but just know I need to know as much as I can so I understand how best to help you. All right. And so if something feels uncomfortable, please let me know. We'll talk more about it. About what's uncomfortable. I didn't notice I didn't say we won't talk about it. We'll discuss. What about. It's uncomfortable. And then, uh, and then give a description. Maybe. How do you work? Typically, I work from, uh, a blend of acceptance and commitment therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy. And then the feel it's just going to be a lot different. Okay. But for now, hang with me. So just be aware that you can set that pace, that tone to put the client at ease. But how you do that sets the tone. Now, one of the things, um. Maybe I won't get to that yet, because then I'll have to repeat it again later. Um. So one of the things that we need to talk about is, uh, this concept of suicide assessment. So one of the things that happens is oftentimes, um, without a show of hands, maybe to think to yourself, am I have comfortable talking about suicide? Maybe even just kind of reflect on the concept of you're in a room with the client and they they disclose to you that they have active thoughts of taking their own life. How do you feel on the inside now? Nervous? All so I'll disclose for myself. You don't have to. That is one of the triggers for me. It's scary. I had a family member as a child who took their own life. And so all of that, it's like I have to be aware of what is my experience around that. We can also generalize that to other areas. Sexual abuse, um, sexual experience. In total, there might be taboo topics that maybe because of our family culture, maybe our faith culture, those things are off limits. We don't speak of such things, but yet clinically we need to ask. So one of the things that we need to do is be direct and, uh, competent in asking about suicide. So one of the things that we've seen is that the suicide risk assessment and likely this is the model, hopefully this is not actually I know this is not the only time you'll talk about suicide assessment. So recognize this is not in total. And I will encourage you. Um. Um, your state license will need to be maintained. And you can take a suicide assessment course often and continuing education. But even as you look at, uh, preparing yourself being in practicum, there are some great, um, continuing med type courses that really even two and three day courses intensive about suicide assessment. And I would look at it from a variety of different, um, perspectives because it's a skill we need to be able to have. And I saw was there and back there, I just wanted to add, um, for the crisis and abuse that we just assaulted. So which, uh, ethos and this is the eight hours videos about the suicide. So then hopefully this is a repeat. I want to remove what I say because I might say differently and might strike something differently. Um, but, um, bear with me better, more because good memory theory says repeated exposure actually. Okay. So great. Thank you for sharing that. We have had that. And that's um, another recall that, uh, uh, the suicide assessment, uh, module was added this year. Let me just watch. How was that? Was that was good. Oh, yeah. Really? That's really good. So maybe I won't spend as much time here, but we'll make sure we get through it. One of things that you're going to notice, the individual moves and experiences shift between and after sessions. So you might have a session with a client and they're in a really good place. And then after they leave, um, something shifts and now they may even take their life. And you think it was beyond your awareness. And it was there was no like, red flag. The other thing is, they can be totally in a negative place and have a shift after a session and get better at one of the challenges we have. And I'm sure the, um, the module you engaged in talked about is sometimes you see a dramatic shift in someone that has suicidal ideation. They become positive that are happy. That's actually a red flag that they might have made the determination to take their life. And now it's just that that burden is of wrestling with that decision is gone. So now they're just kind of making their rounds of saying goodbyes. So again, if it's you drastic shift, it's like, okay, great recovery. That is a red flag. Um, or like uh, the other way client who is maybe not typically that way becomes increasingly, um, um, sad, hopeless, uh, distress. Yeah. Can you give sorry, for example, about, uh, but what if it was on the skin? And so you're talking with the client, for example. Uh, I worked with a client that was chronically suicidal. Uh, just always had the experience of having thoughts of hopelessness. Thoughts of death. I'd be better off. Uh, the world would be better off without me, and sometimes even a little more active ideation. And so always kind of almost, uh, the dysphoric type of presentation generally at that time came into me and say, hey, you know what? This is just great. Everything is wonderful. I just want to thank you so much for all giving given me. Uh, you know, you've been very helpful. That drastic shift to something. Okay, so what's what's going on? And not always that they might they might have had a true breakthrough, but that would be something I would want to know a little bit more about, because there are sometimes those that wrestle with suicidal ideation can have that shift as they've made that determination that they're going to say goodbye and they just sucks. Yeah. So just again, not that it's like it has to be, but it would be something that I would definitely pay attention to if you see that that pretty significant shift. So the outcome that we that we desire for a client is more like a moderate, uh, improved mood rather than something like very drastic. Well, not necessarily. I would just want to understand that the significant quick shift and understand, uh, so last week help me understand last week you were feeling, like, really hopeless. What shifted for you? And that's where we go into assessment mode versus what? That is wonderful. Great. Thanks so much. And you know, keep our session next week. They're like well let me think about that. Off they go. Right. So it is in some ways uh, but what if on the other side, what if they really did. They've been really wrestling with uh, low mood and maybe their medication had a, had a shift in they had, uh, something that has been distressing in their life, relationship or other challenge kind of resolve and some good interaction happened. And they come in and they're just feeling better. Not a. But you want to make sure that. Just be aware that that can be that type of shift is something to pay attention to. If suicidal ideation has been a topic of concern. All right. So one of the things that we see is that, uh, clients experiences are similar but unique. We see threads much like even microbiology, someone's experience with, uh, thoughts of suicide. Uh, there's kind of commonalities. There's threads, but their experience, it is unique. Um, so the assessment really needs to be considered unique and, um, evaluated based on each client, not just common science. So one of the things we have is this assessment tool is for anyone familiar with that. All right. So, uh, and then I've listed some other suicide assessments. Um, the reality is I would say have assessments, have your own interview and have that polished and working and then have that, um, the written assessments as possibilities, uh, and be familiar with how they work, um, in tandem with your interview, uh, to understand, um, how best to use them. We won't get into each one of these scales, but just be aware. There are, uh, assessments you can use. But if we look at is path warm? In some ways, this isn't necessarily a full assessment, but it's kind of a conceptual framework for understanding risk of suicide. And so is platform is an acronym that uh, and each letter stands for different threats or different possible domains that we would want to pay attention to. For example, ideation is pretty clear. Clients have thoughts of suicide. All the thoughts and verbalize actions should be followed up. So if someone says, you know, I don't know if things are just so hard, I, I just don't think I can do it anymore. Well, what do you mean by I don't think I can do a follow up about each one. Uh, each thought and verbalization, uh, substance use. And this is where you see it's problematic or it's increased. Those are, uh, often associated with risk factors of suicide. Another key one, uh, especially when you're dealing with clients who are dealing with, uh, anxiety, depression. They feel purposeless and indications of feeling their life is not worth living. And so what might not they might not say, my life is purposeless, but you're listening for that thread that's telling you they are feeling like this purposeless or inviting or feeling trapped. That's a big one. The clients who feel there is no other way out. They're trapped in their circumstances with their current experience. So we listen for those things. Hopelessness. Uh, there's a high, um, high correlation between sense of hopelessness and suicide, but also withdrawing that if you see a client stopping social engagements, uh, not visiting family, they're withdrawing, um, from, uh, friends, family and life. Oftentimes that's a way for them to manage or reduce the challenge of making the decision to take their life. Anger, recklessness. Uh, maybe, uh, you see a client who starts engaging in risky behaviors. Now, is that pathological, related to a manic experience, or is it they're just like, you know what? Doesn't matter. I'm going to die anyway. So in some ways, um, have you ever heard of the the the concept of, like, suicide by cop where someone's they just they're bent on my life as there's no other way out. So I'm just going to go out and I'm going to engage in behavior. And they engage an officer with the intention that the officer is going to take their life. So in some ways, they engage in that process. So there's a sense of recklessness, but also dramatic mood shifts. Like I said, either direction we want to follow up with, um, and as you noted here can be positive. So as you as you think about assessing for suicide, this can be a lens that you can use just as you work with clients in general. Is pathway or is there something leading, um, towards suicidal risk? Any questions about this? Okay. It might be, actually. Okay. Um, so does it. Yeah. Okay. So one of the things that happens is, uh, this can be a really hard topic. And as I disclose, it's a hard topic for me. It's one that I have to work through. How do you ask about it? Because you don't know this person. Yeah. You're going to ask them. One of the most personal, maybe, uh, challenging questions that you can ever ask. Um, and you don't have to answer this question by a range of hands, but have you ever had to ask this question of someone? Okay. It's a challenging question to ask. Because what if they say yes? What do I do? What if they say, you know, why do you ask me that? Don't you trust me? Don't you know what? If they get mad at me? What if I ask it? Well, what if I offend them? What if I am I? And so we have to kind of work through our own anxiety related to how to ask this question. But I'll say the best way. Be direct. Just ask the question. Don't ask around the question. So if you ever thought that maybe things are just too hard. Right. Because we're we're afraid to ask the question. But ask the question. Be direct. Be confident. Be calm, be humble. So, uh, this is a question I ask all of my clients. Um, have you ever had thoughts of taking your own life? No. Okay. Well, thank you for sharing. What about thoughts? For that life is too hard. And it would be better if you were dead. Or if you ever thought of that. More thoughts of harming yourself. Just asking, you know. Do you prefer Coke or Pepsi? Have you ever had thoughts of killing yourself again? That's a good way of saying it, but as comfortable as you are asking the other questions, just find that because if you're nervous about it, they'll be nervous about it. If you're weird about it, they're going to be worried about it. So I would recommend practice asking this question. Learn the phrase like, master, just, you know, asking this question. Um, so, um, the other thing we can do is, uh, be aware of pathology with increased risk. And one of the wonderful things about the DSM is they do disclose and talk about, um, the statistics or even the research around disorders that have higher risk of, uh, suicidal ideation or attempts. And so just being aware of, uh, things like, uh, depression, substance use, even, um, uh, uh, schizophrenia related disorders have a higher rate of suicide risk than other other, um, uh, have ology. So the other thing we need to do is be observant of the non-verbal, the incongruity and the risk phrases or topics. So as you ask that question and you're comfortable with that question, how does the client answer the question? They look down in a way to like, uh, um, no. Versus no. Never have. Like if again if you put it out they're comfortable. If they're comfortable they'll respond back. So being aware of how they answer the question. The other thing is look for the input for us. And this is something that I know is a skill in just in the therapeutic setting, as the client, uh, basically is talking about, have you ever had thoughts of taking your life or, uh, harming yourself? And they say, no, but yet the threat of conversation is hopeless and that things are too hard, that there's no, uh, you know, its purpose. It doesn't make any sense. It's not worth it. I'm gonna lose my job anyway. There's other things that they're saying that leads to maybe understanding. Is this a risk? Makes sense. Yeah. So, um, I couldn't answer. But, um, just like from your experience, honestly, I. Is it? Have you found it to be difficult to identify when a client is suicidal? If you're changing it in some ways it's always been a challenge. But if we're comfortable and are aware of the risk factors and the reality of here's some really, really, really hard truth, in some ways, even if we are masters at assessment for suicide rates. The reality is the clients make a choice for themselves. And even if we do all of the treatment, the planning, the, you know, the accountability, have good rapport, we ask, they say no, we follow up, they say no, and there's still risk. And so in some ways we just kind of have to sit with that tension. Um, and I think in some ways you'll develop that, that clinical judgment, um, that spidey sense of some something's just not feeling right here. And so, for example, it's not something that, uh, even with my client that was chronically suicidal. It's not something I ask about every session, but because I know it's a thread, I would check in more regularly with that client than I would with others. And there's sometimes I ask about suicide assessment in the first session and it never comes up again because that's it. There's just not risk factors I'm not seeing. And so it really does kind of depend. And that's where you have to trust your gut and say something just doesn't feel right. And also give yourself the space to say you could do everything quote unquote, the right way. And it really is. The client's life is their own. Yeah. So it's really hard tension to say, yeah, if the client suicide don't do you involve their families even if they are dogs or do you ask for help like so? I know you're in ethics class right now, so what? Um, what would you say? Would you need to breach confidentiality in my family? No. Yeah, yeah. If there is imminent risk of harm to self for others. Yes. Uh, and maybe they don't have an emergency contact or that mercy contact's not available. 911 had the realities. In some ways. That's where, you know, you would need to know what is your plan if a client discloses how do I assess, uh, and if the risk is imminent, then what's my protocol or what's the protocol of the, uh, the clinic I'm working at, the organization I'm working for. They would have a pathway. And so, um, that's where preplanning really helps you with understanding what happens if you don't want to answer that question. What do I do now? The first time you have a kind of suicidal, you want to have, you know, that built out. Does that make sense? And so, uh, that's where you have in your drawer in your office, you know, all of the phone numbers you need, uh, risk. You know, you would have all of those available because in that moment, again, that's a hard, heavy thing to manage. You want to make sure that you have everything you need at your fingertips to where you don't have to think about it. It becomes you just go into your process while you're caring for the client in that moment. Yeah. I had a couple of question to, um, about my question in Congress, if you already asked very directly, um, and they responded that they never thought about it in their life, and then later you're picking up on it, is it appropriate to ask that question very directly again later? Or I go by the way, again, that's your clinical judgment. But my question is, if it were you, would you want someone to to check? Yeah, yeah. And in some ways I'll say this. It's amazing. That people will. They've just met you. Maybe you're now seven minutes, eight minutes into the relationship with this person. They'll answer that question honestly, because sometimes you're the only person in their life that have ever had the strength and courage and calmness and confidence and love for them to ask that question. So they're like. Actually I have. Okay. So tell me more about that. Then again it shifts and you go into assessment. Well it's just really hard. Well do you have a plan. Do you have the access. Do you have means all of those types of things that you've learned in your module. But that's where you would take your intake interview and set it aside. And if it's a clear assessment, meaning that they've had suicidal ideation, there's hopelessness, but you've determined they're in a good place or at least a safe place. For now, you can move back into your interview, right? It doesn't mean that you're like, oh, so you can't do treatment now because like I said, I worked with someone I know that's just a common that's their state of being. But there's, um, they were much older. They were an older adult. And this has been an experience since their 20s. So, um, what's the risk? Right. It's always a risk. But imminent risk is different. Um, versus risk of not, um, exhibitions. Chirality. How would you go about like. It's a good question. I'll answer it briefly, recognizing that that likely will move into one of your your other other classes. But for me, I would say know, um, I'm really concerned for you, uh, and what you've told me and just remind you this is something that I feel would, uh, I would need to talk with one of your loved ones or your your emergency contact to make sure you get the help you need. And so at that point, you know, again, having a clear plan about how you address that, where your phone numbers, you let your if you're in a clinic, maybe you get support like, um, letting the front office staff know to cancel your next appointment or whatever it is. You have a clear plan, but I would just stop. And if it's that they're at risk, I would engage in that place. So, um, and that plan, again, might be dictated by your site, might be dictated by the clinic. Um, if you if it's not, then I encourage you to have one. Yeah, yeah. You said do, um, 320 calls. So. So I don't blame you for that, actually. Um, yeah. Uh, again, recognizing that, uh, from a strength based model, the client has had thoughts of death and suicide most of their life, but yet here they are. They're still seeking help. Uh, so the hope is, um. Well, you know, in some ways, I'm so thankful you you were willing to share that with me. And it's now something that, uh, it's so important to me to know you're safe. I'll check in about him. Okay. So how would you. You can even talk about how that would look. And someone who has experienced that. Likely it's not the first time they've encountered that. Maybe not the first time they've been in treatment. Um, so it depends on the client. But, um, I say the hope comes from they're still here and they're seeking help. Um, so you got to hang on to that hope. Um, sometimes, as you know, we hold hope for our clients when they don't have it. So sometimes, uh, that that's part of the process. Okay. Is the, um, the therapeutic would be that purpose of life again, that depends on what stage or. Yeah, but, um, yeah, kind of um, but but let, let um. So any good thoughts. All right. So like everyone just take a deep breath. Recognize, um. It's going to be okay. We will, uh, you will ask hard questions. You will get difficult answers, and you will have training. You will have supervision, you will have support. And when you sit across from the student, you may not have done it before, but you will be ready not just to, uh, like language to an open mind. Yeah. Do we know just to put some reality to it, what the chances are that how often this will come up. Yeah. Actually, uh, in one of my future slides. Let's see, maybe we can jump in. Sorry. Now, what I love is, uh, you guys are asking the questions that are showing. You're thinking, well, about. Because if I'm going to reach in, going to talk about it like it's what you want to know. So it gives me hope that, uh, I'm on the right track with what I'm sharing for you. Okay. And you see. Where that comes in. And I may have. Yeah. Okay. That was actually, uh, related to this slide here. So when students, uh, summarizes that existing research, uh, says that 70%, 71% of counselors work with. Clients who have attempted suicide, 28% have a client to complete suicide. So if I could just, uh, make this statement, it's not something to be feared, but it is something to be a risk. So in some ways, up to almost 30% of active clinicians at the time of this study, um, actually, uh, had worked with someone who had completed suicide. Now, that depends on the population who are working with. Some are going to have a disproportionate number of clients who attempt or complete suicide. Others, you may never have that happen. So but it is a risk. And it's one again to be respected and not to be feared. I was just curious, you know, and might not, um, you know, that the average or 71 is, uh, again, it's based on the survey that, uh, that they, they conducted based on, uh, like national mental health data. You know, maybe I'll encourage you, maybe not even look, because the reality is, um, whether it's 0 or 100% chance you need to be prepared. And so we pray that maybe you would never have a client that is in that space, that a chance or a complaint. But in some ways, we carry that weight of significance that it could, uh, it could happen. Um, okay. All right. So let's go back into the clinical interviewing process. Now as I highlighted, the chief complaint sometimes is I mean focus on therapy. Sometimes it's not. Now this is the chief complaint is what you are going to ask the client about. And some ways it shapes the direction of your clinical interview. Because if they come in and they're talking about, uh, relationship distress or symptoms related to eating or anxiety or fill in the blank, that's what we're going to want to make sure that we attend to that area. However, one of the other things that happens is, as we do the intake interview, much like we touch on the topic of suicide and that becomes, you know, that may be related to their pathology. It may not be, but we stop and we follow that it. So one of the things we need to do is balance. What's the chief complaint recognizing that sometimes they tell us right away. And again, I'm always honored and amazed at when the client looks like they will disclose to you things that they've never told anyone else. And sometimes, um, like I had a client who we worked together for probably six months. Uh, then they disclose their real reason for being in therapy, got what they felt like they needed, and then continued. But it took six months for them to get to the point where they were comfortable asking me the real reason for for being there, and it was resolved and just kind of in, in a really, really interesting thing. But we had worked on quite a bit of other things, had gotten to the point where they were ready to actually engage in that. The other thing is, what they tell you now may be different than what their life is like six months from now. So again, the chief complaint is kind of the focus, but it's not, um, the only thing that we tend to want to be. Other questions I get often and uh, more than address is how do I know I'm actually following the right thing? One of the clients said something important and I listened. So what happens? He will tell again and I'll tell it again. You have to trust the process. In some ways, if it's important to the client and you miss it, they'll bring it up again because it's important to them. So in some ways, uh, it releases us from a responsibility of having to hear everything, see everything, catch everything. Um, and, uh, even I forget where today, in the day of getting ahead of myself in my notes. But we'll get there again. Uh, but the reality is, there are some times where we need to listen not to what the client says, but what they need. And so this whole process is related to that concept of, okay, so what are they meaning by what they're saying. And um, what if I miss it? I gotta trust that will come back up again. Same thing in therapy. Right. If you are working on something and the client says something. It'll come back up again. And you just got to trust the natural process. Trust yourself. Uh, likely. Um, you're not going to miss it every time. You might miss it more than once. So. Yes. Um, but they will. You'll get there. Um, and eventually the client will tell you one way or another again, maybe by what they mean, like, you can finally pick up on what their meaning. Um, and by gathering all of the different pieces of data, you're like, oh. I now see what the client needs. Um, and that's therapeutic. And, uh, in the intake process. Okay. So let's talk about Brooke before we mentioned it. What is it? Yep. Your relationship or connection to the client relationship in connection with the client. And why is that important? It's the 1%. Is this the business for change or for for positive? And in your between 79% of therapeutic changes based on the relationship. So nothing personal. But, uh, if you're not a skilled clinician, but you're a really good person, and you connect with people and you're clumsy with your interventions, that's not an excuse. Um, but the reality is you will still have therapeutic change. And so, ah, imagine if you are really good at building report and you're skilled at the discipline, how much more positive and impactful you can be. Um, and I'm sure you, you may be able to reflect even in your own lifetimes where just being present with someone during a hard time. Makes all of the difference. And you're like, thank you so much. Like, I didn't do anything and you're like, you are here. You get that privilege, you're here. So for you think about it for a second. How do I look like think about that question for just a second. Then I'm going to ask you. Give me examples. Think about it. Who would share. How do you build rapport with clients? Yeah, having a childlike curiosity, a childlike curiosity. And what might that look like? For the client. Matching the expression spectrum expression. What else? In general. It. In your expressions, in your smiles. And so being genuine, being curious, you think about listening listening in on that? Yes. So how do they know you're listening? Okay. I think audio. Yeah. Um, being present, um, as part of that. So what is being present mean, like, for you when you say, this is how I do this, what does that look like for, um, engaging, asking for remembering details. Um, um, yeah, just being a part of their experience and. Having empathy. Yeah. All of the technology. Yeah. Yeah. I see. Yeah. Yeah. I don't I don't think there's stuff that you feel like true genuine care or genuine care. And I think overall, all of you are pointing to this good microscope. Um, go ahead and add yourself there. I didn't see the hand. I didn't know that. That's good. I what I was going to suggest, um, maybe even ask the question is not necessarily interview therapy kind of question about, um, interest that you said. Yeah, just something about the quality of whatever makes something like. Right. Even from from the lobby or the door in your office to the seat. So how was that convention? Oh, great. Yeah. Well, yeah. But maybe hear about that sometime. So how is this week been for you? So. Right. Just like you can catch on to who they are. Um, uh, hold that thought. But to hang on to that. Uh, the reality is being yourself using all of your good micro skills, the listening, the tuning, the asking, the good questions. But one of the best ways is for you to be comfortable being you in that space. You know how many of you have developed your full therapeutic identity and feel comfortable sharing that space with the client? And I'm going to go ahead and disrupt that and build this entirely different process and skill set and the different approach, attention and types of questions. Probably not many. Some might be. Some might have a really natural like it, just a little bit easier for you to be in that space and be genuine to yourself. But the reality is it's going to be cocky. It's going to be clumsy, it's going to be different at first. But ultimately, if you can just be yourself and be present, be genuine, you're going to build rapport. So when we go into this conversation of clinical interviewing, recognizing that that first session, we don't have a lot of space to use some of the other skills we have. This is where you're going to need to lean into. How do I build rapport quickly? And even from the time, how do I greet the client? And I mean, I don't know if any of you work with kids. Let me give you a little taste of working with kids. Yeah. So good to see you. They are. They swim in the seas of knees and hips. Yeah. And for you to take time. And when you ask a question, don't just ask parents, caregivers talk to the child is ultimately there going is that that person gets me. That person sees me. So again, how do you build rapport? How do you engage with someone that's an adolescent versus an older person? And again, you don't have to put on a different view, but you just need to be you and understand how to do that. Because maybe in maybe in this process, you have from the time that the, um, the staff brings them to your door till they sit down and that first 30s to build rapport, make them feel comfortable. And maybe you have more time than that. But ultimately, this is a question. In this process, I challenge you to think about how do I build rapport and how do I do that quickly and how I view myself. Makes sense. Okay. Any questions? Yep. And so I work with couples in my therapy that I really want. Yeah. That means that support will be the whole family coming. Mhm. You you find a connection with everybody somehow some way. But what is the right way. Yeah. That's and that's my wife and I, uh we, we don't have a lot of time to get into that, but I think you're asking an important question. And even for the process of diagnostics and intake, how do you build a rapport within an entire group? Might be different than working with an individual and work with the child or so on. Makes sense. Yeah. If you want to go back to your question, I don't want to leave you hanging. I just like the thought about how you know. Mhm. I don't know if it's like completely right. I think like Councilor Byers like I said, there's nothing that will help you report faster if you just like try to understand a person without like any of what how performing how. Um, like taking yourself, like, um. Um, and then, like, I feel like that's something personal where it's. So that is that important? That's what they taught you. So you actually did want to share? Yeah. Kind of get a bit getting out of ourselves. There's a big replay system. Okay. Um, all I am, uh. Yeah, I was going to say you're getting on the client or meeting them for their act. Um, and like you, it's a really powerful thing when it's like. And you mean, like, get on their actual level, like, can you remember a time and then and children and everything was first, probably like the first day I was there and this young girl came in with her dad. Very tempting. And I said hello. And then she was very shy, like next to her dad. And then I got down on the floor at her level, and then she just lit up and ran over and gave me a hug. Yeah. And at that point, it's like it reminds me that how how valuable it is to reach someone's a level, whether it's you as a kid or something alongside them, and you share it in a way, your share. It's mirroring, uh, body language and energy level, all of those. I think. Yeah, that's a funny story. Um, all right, let's move on and, uh, likely get through the rest of. Structured and or clinical interviewing and maybe get to the park and asking some questions and okay. Okay. So one of the things to keep in mind is that there are a couple of different processes in clinical interviewing. There are both structured and unstructured, uh, interviews, as anyone who encountered a structured clinical interview like the skip. Um, it's like a you have a list and they walk through and you don't deviate from the list. The benefit there is, it's clear that results are known in this research phase to get to the evidence needed to support, uh, the diagnostic process. Uh, but there's also unstructured or even semi-structured, and most of what you're going to see likely in counseling practice is going to be, uh, semi-structured, where you're going to have some guiding questions but follow where the client leads. The reality is, um, it may be counterintuitive. Maybe not, as the idea of structured interview actually requires less training and clinical judgment and, uh, semi-structured, unstructured interview. Because one of the things of the structured interview, you can train someone to ask the questions and follow up questions. And then by rule, you don't deviate from a semi-structured or unstructured interview. Um, is going to be you would have your domains. And while we're talking largely about semi-structured, you have your domains, you have some questions that you ask. Can you follow up based on what you see? Having the ability to track and understand and follow the client takes a lot more training and skill. So you might encounter some of these in different settings. For example inpatient setting might use um structured interview whereas outpatient might use semi-structured and you yourself might use uh um so my structured in like everyday type practice. So a lot of things uh, so much richer interviews are adaptable to meet the needs of the client and the setting. And overall, one of the benefits of the semi-structured is you can sprinkle on a little bit more of yourself and build better for that. Again, as I mentioned, it requires more training, more skill, and more clinical judgment because you need to be able to, um, follow up as necessary versus here. And I provide the structured clinical interview, um, uh, through the DSM, it's called the scan. Um, and if you click that link, it will take you to that. Um, um, actually I want to allow me to do it here. Sometimes it does that because it does not. Okay. So this is a kind of structured clinical interview. Um, oftentimes you that they don't let you inside, um, because they're controlled questions because assessment. Um, uh, moderated. Um, but ultimately, um, I would recommend you look at different structured clinical interviews. Different structured interviews. It's ultimately why we, uh, rebuild the process is developing. Good questions. If there's been research to understand how diagnostically to get to certain information, maybe use that as a good starting point and be familiar with how others are asking questions. Um, we'll talk a little bit more about that as we talk about being part of, um, uh, asking questions. All right. So in practice you're you're likely going to semi-structured. And usually it's going to be best when blended with a strong diagnostic interview. So if you have, uh, so much structured interview and then you have really good diagnostic skills, that's going to be, uh, a really good with. The other thing we can use is self-report measures and questionnaires. And I have a link here too. And sometimes it. Sometimes it doesn't. Uh, this is, uh, the DSM crosscutting tools. Have I mentioned these in here before? Okay. So one of the things that you can include in your packet is a level one crosscutting tool. And um, these are somewhat open source. Uh, they are required to have skill in using them. But ultimately what happens is they provide you with, uh, assessment and then the interpretation of that assessment and you can provide the level one is general. And then depending on the results of the level one, you would then maybe go to, for example, if there's depressive symptoms there may be a depressive scale and then different levels to where you would be able to follow that and have the client fill out those questionnaires as a part of the diagnostic process. As we mentioned last time, it's does not equal a diagnosis. No, it does not equal a diagnosis. It's a good starting point to clarify the direction that you would want to go and confirm, because as a clinician you provide the diagnosis. So here as you see, uh, little interest and pleasure of feeling down depressed. And it gives a scale and then you add those up, uh, follow the instructions. And based on that you would follow up with either a level two or if you gave this as a part of the intake process, they do this in the interview or um, in the lobby as or as you're waiting for you. Then you take and you look at that quickly. You may even use this as a guide to help you start which question to ask. Um, as you yeah, I see here mentioned a lot of things where you maybe not feeling like you find pleasure. Tell me a little bit more about that. So it can help guide even the questions you ask as a starting point. Makes sense. Okay. And those are again those are available. I encourage you to take a look and see if you find them. Uh, another one is the Aces Adverse Childhood Experiences. Anyone familiar with that assessment? Um, and it's a it's a great tool. Um, to ask if there are experiences early in life that the client would consider, uh, adverse sexual trauma, physical abuse. And again, those might be things that indicate things, uh, uh, well, likely important things to follow up with. Or there's maybe trauma history that you would want to follow along with. Uh, you, I usually, um, putting this was included in mind and it would ask, um, I would kind of look at it, ask questions. This is something that's important for you to follow up. And then the other thing to keep in mind is as we look at so you have your intake packet with these self-report questionnaires maybe the diagnostic tools or the crosscutting tools. Is there going to be many, many, many, many others. If you were to look at that, um, the level or the number of assessments that are available and uh, measures that are available in intake paperwork, it's almost like I said, you can't give your client a 300 pages. So what you need to do is recognize, based on the setting, what information is going to be helpful for me to have ahead of time. That's going to inform my clinical interview and recognize that there's a wide range of sources. Great starting point. When you go to your practicum, what do they ask? What do they use? And when you if you stay at the same place for internship, uh, that's great. But then maybe after you graduate, you're first setting. What's there to look like? What's included in that? How does that work with their their intake process? Some of you might work in a setting where someone else does the intake, and then you get that intake report and you start therapy. It doesn't happen all the time. I worked, um, uh, college counseling center at one of my clinical sites. And, uh, they had one of the other people did the intake, and then they came to me with a diagnosis and a recommendation for starting treatment action. So we have that clinic up right now. You might have other clinical insight judgment, but at least as a starting point, here's the diagnostic. Here's the intake form. And but likely a lot of the settings. You're going to have to do this yourself. Any questions. Okay. Let's go ahead and take a break and until 8:00. Uh, these folks here, and we'll sort.