CASTONGUAY, OLTMANNS & LOTT — Psychopathology: From Science to Clinical Practice (2nd ed.)
Chapter 10: Bipolar Disorder
Chapter 11: Schizophrenia
================================================================================

C H A P T E R 1 0
Bipolar Disorder
Sheri L. Johnson
Michael W. Otto
Alexandra K. Gold
Matthew V. Elliott

-- 315 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	295
Three major forms of BD are recognized in DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013). Bipolar I disorder (BD-I) is defined by at least one episode of mania.
Bipolar II disorder (BD-II) is defined by at least one hypomanic, but not full manic, epi-
sode and one or more depressive episodes. Cyclothymic disorder is defined by chronic
fluctuations between high and low moods that are not severe enough to qualify as
hypomanic or depressive episodes yet persist for 2 years (1 year in children and
adolescents). Although much of the extant research focuses on BD-I, milder forms
of disorder merit attention, in that BD-II also is characterized by high rates of recur-
rence and comorbidity (Del’Osso et al., 2017), and subthreshold manic symptoms
robustly predict the onset of diagnosable BD among offspring of those diagnosed
with bipolar disorder (hazard ratio = 7.57) (Axelson et al., 2015).
Across the BD spectrum, DSM-5 provides specifiers for rapid-cycling and mixed
episodes. Rapid cycling is defined by at least four distinct episodes within a 1-year
period. Mixed episodes are defined by at least three symptoms of the opposing polar-
ity (e.g., depressive symptoms during a manic episode, or manic symptoms during a
depressive episode). The presence of either specifier predicts a more severe course of
BD (Valentí et al., 2015; Vieta & Valentí, 2013).
There is considerable heterogeneity in the severity of depression within BD.
About one-fourth of people with BD do not experience depressive episodes during
their lifetime (Johnson, Cuellar, & Peckham, 2014), although depression rates are
higher among those who seek treatment. In a 13-year prospective study, subsyn-
dromal symptoms of depression were present during half of the weeks of follow-up
(Judd et al., 2002).
Associated Clinical Features
One of the most intriguing aspects of BD is the extreme variability in outcomes. BD
is overrepresented among those in creative professions (Kyaga et al., 2013), those who
have achieved eminence for creativity (Jamison, 1993), and those with exceptional
scholastic accomplishment (Vreeker et al., 2016). Nonetheless, functional outcomes
are poor for many people with the disorder. BD is the 12th leading medical cause of
global disability (World Health Organization [WHO], 2011). Even when asymptom-
atic, persons with BD often report low quality of life (Brissos, Dias, & Kapczinski,
2008). In studies of functioning, gains are noted across the full year after hospitaliza-
tion, but less than half of patients diagnosed with BD-I or BD-II are employed (Sup-
pes et al., 2001). Although social outcomes are highly variable, on average, people
with BD report less support than those without psychological disorders, particularly
as they experience recurrent episodes (Romans & McPherson, 1992). The disorder is
associated with high rates of family conflict (Simoneau, Miklowitz, & Saleem, 1998),
marital dissatisfaction, separation, and divorce (Coryell et al., 1993).
Cognitive function may be an important predictor of functional outcome.
Although subjective reports of cognition may be biased downward by depression,
objective cognitive tests consistently indicate that executive functioning is lower, on
average, among those with remitted BD and among their family members as com-
pared to healthy controls (Arts, Jabben, Krabbendam, & van Os, 2008; Bora, Yucel, &
Pantelis, 2009). Executive function, though, is highly variable, and lower levels are

-- 316 of 498 --

296 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
tied to earlier onset (Bortolato, Miskowiak, Köhler, Vieta, & Carvalho, 2015), lower
educational attainment (Bora et al., 2016), poor emotion regulation, and lower occu-
pational function (Lima, Peckham, & Johnson, 2018).
Suicide is all too common in BD. In one national cohort study, 8% of men and
5% of women diagnosed with BD died from suicide (Nordentoft, Mortensen, & Ped-
ersen, 2011). In the representative sample of the WHO study of 61,392 adults in 11
countries, one in four persons diagnosed with BD-I reported a suicide attempt, one
in five persons diagnosed with BD-II reported a suicide attempt, and more than half
of those with BD-I or BD-II reported suicidal ideation within the past 12 months
(Merikangas et al., 2011). Suicide attempts are more likely among those with a family
history of suicide, in the presence of depressive episodes, and when comorbid anxi-
ety or alcohol/substance use problems are present (Schaffer et al., 2015).
Epidemiology
In the cross-national WHO study, lifetime prevalence was estimated to be 0.6% for
BD-I, 0.4% for BD-II, and 1.4% of persons reported at least one symptom of mania.
Rates were approximately doubled in the United States (Merikangas et al., 2011), and
the disorder appears to have an earlier onset, a longer delay until treatment receipt,
and a more severe course among those in the United States compared to other coun-
tries (Post et al., 2017). The mean age of onset of BD-I is between 18 and 20 (Meri-
kangas et al., 2011), and earlier age of onset predicts a worse course of illness and
greater risk of suicidality (Perlis et al., 2004). Men are slightly more likely to receive a
diagnosis of BD-I, and women are slightly more likely to receive a diagnosis of BD-II
(Merikangas et al., 2011).
Although the prevalence of BD is unrelated to race or ethnicity in the United
States when careful diagnostic measures are used (Merikangas et al., 2007), several
studies suggest troubling gaps in the care received by minorities with BD. African
Americans with BD are at risk for overdiagnosis with schizophrenia (Haeri et al.,
2011). Among those diagnosed with BD, African Americans are less likely to receive
psychiatric medication, outpatient follow-up, or appropriate mood stabilizer medica-
tions, and more likely to receive antipsychotic medications (Gonzalez et al., 2007; K.
Johnson & Johnson, 2014; Kilbourne et al., 2005; Kupfer, Frank, Grochocinski, Houck,
& Brown, 2005).
Comorbidity
Psychiatric comorbidity is elevated in BD, including childhood externalizing dis-
orders (including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder), anxiety disorders, and
substance abuse (Kessler, Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005). In the WHO international
study, 34% of participants with BD met diagnostic criteria for alcohol or substance
disorder, and 63% met diagnostic criteria for anxiety disorders during their lifetime
(Merikangas et al., 2011). Many studies overestimate the occurrence of comorbid per-
sonality disorders by assessing personality symptoms during mood episodes (Post
et al., 2018). Nonetheless, among those in remission from episodes of BD-I, more than
one-fourth meet diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder (George, Miklowitz,
Richards, Simoneau, & Taylor, 2003; Post et al., 2018).

-- 317 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	297
BD also has been related to high rates of medical illnesses such as cardiovascu-
lar disease and type 2 diabetes (Fiedorowicz et al., 2009; Vancampfort et al., 2016),
even among youth with BD (Goldstein et al., 2015). Some of these illnesses, in turn,
predict a more severe course of BD (Calkin et al., 2015) and contribute to premature
mortality in BD (Hayes, Miles, Walters, King, & Osborn, 2015; Laursen, Munk-Olsen,
Nordentoft, & Mortensen, 2007).
Clinical Implications
A number of clinical implications follow from the phenomenology of BD. In addi-
tion to assessing symptoms, clinicians should systematically evaluate occupational,
social, and medical functioning. Not only could this allow therapists to provide care
aimed at improving life quality, but it might also reduce risk for relapse or recurrence
of symptoms. Because risk for relapse is very high, clinicians should educate clients
about such risk, teach them to self-monitor for incipient symptoms, and arrange for
maintenance treatment. It is also crucial for the clinician working with BD to evalu-
ate risk for suicide, with particular concern about risk among clients with early onset
of BD (McGrady, Lynch, & Rapport, 2017).
Given that a poorer course of BD has been found for those with comorbid con-
ditions (Dunayevich et al., 2000; Masi et al., 2004; Otto et al., 2006; Tohen, Water-
naux, & Tsuang, 1990), such conditions should be addressed. Sadly, reviews of 13
pharmacotherapy studies and eight psychosocial treatment trials of comorbid BD
and substance use disorders found that no treatment consistently yielded significant
improvements in both mood and substance use symptoms (Gold et al., 2018; Salloum
& Brown, 2017). In early findings focused on treatment of comorbid BD, valproic acid
was found to help address comorbid alcohol use disorder (Salloum et al., 2005), and
integrated group therapy (IGT) and citicoline were shown to reduce comorbid sub-
stance use disorder (Brown et al., 2015; Weiss et al., 2007).
ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
There is strong evidence for the heritability of BD, including evidence from one
adoption study (Wender et al., 1986). In a representative community-based twin
study, heritability was estimated at 85% (McGuffin et al., 2003). In that study, 71% of
the genetic liability to mania was distinct from that of depression (McGuffin et al.,
2003), suggesting that people with a lifetime history of mania may vary considerably
in their genetic propensity toward depression. One genome-wide association study
of over 20,000 individuals diagnosed with BD-I and BD-II identified 30 genetic loci
related to BD, eight of which overlapped with schizophrenia (Stahl et al., 2019). The
identified genes related to neuronal plasticity, ion channels, neurotransmitter trans-
porters, and synaptic function, and accounted for about 8% of the variance in BD.
Many people with BD worry whether their children might develop the disorder.
Even though children of parents diagnosed with BD have a fourfold increase in risk
of developing a mood disorder, most (91%) will not develop manic or hypomanic epi-
sodes by late adolescence (Axelson et al., 2015; LaPalme, Hodgins, & LaRoche, 1997).

-- 318 of 498 --

298 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Psychosocial Risk Factors
Psychosocial factors often differentially influence bipolar depression versus mania.
We first consider variables that appear to contribute to manic and depressive relapse,
then psychosocial predictors of bipolar depression, and last those related to manic
symptoms.
Triggers for Manic and Depressive Symptoms
Several variables appear to be tied to both manic and depressive symptoms, includ-
ing affective dysregulation, impulsive responses to emotion states, and high levels
of trauma. These risk variables may overlap, in that trauma exposure may contribute
to emotion dysregulation and emotion-triggered impulsivity.
Increased affective intensity and variability are present among those with remit-
ted BD (Barnett et al., 2011; Gruber, 2011) and their offspring (Tseng et al., 2015), and
have been shown to predict the onset of BD (Youngstrom, Findling, Youngstrom, &
Calabrese, 2005). Youth with a family history of BD show altered amygdala activa-
tion and functional connectivity when viewing emotional faces compared to con-
trols (Acuff et al., 2018; Manelis et al., 2015), and emotional stimuli appear to capture
attention more for those with BD (Miskowiak et al., 2019). Most with BD endorse
using a wide range of emotion regulation strategies (Dodd, Lockwood, Mansell, &
Palmer-Clauss, 2019) and are able to regulate emotions when instructed to do so in
laboratory settings, yet they still report less confidence in their emotion regulation
efforts (Gruber, Harvey, Gross, 2012).
Those with BD, even during remission, endorse problems with impulsivity in
the face of heightened emotions (Muhtadie, Johnson, Carver, Gotlib, & Ketter, 2014),
even though measures of non-emotion-related impulsivity show only modest eleva-
tions after remission (Strakowski et al., 2010; Swann, Pazzaglia, Nicholls, Dougherty,
& Moeller, 2003). For those with BD, the degree of emotion-related impulsivity pre-
dicts more functional impairment, lower quality of life, greater severity of suicidal
ideation and action, and more difficulties with aggression (S.L. Johnson & Carver,
2016; Muhtadie et al., 2014; Victor, Johnson, & Gotlib, 2011).
At least half of those with BD report exposure to serious childhood adversity
(Garno, Goldberg, Ramirez, & Ritzler, 2005). Childhood adversity, in turn, predicts
earlier onset; more severe and frequent manic and depressive symptoms; greater
risk of comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and substance use
diagnoses; and increased suicidality (Agnew-Blais & Danese, 2016).
Psychosocial Predictors of Bipolar Depression
Many of the variables that predict unipolar depression also predict bipolar depres-
sion, including neuroticism, negative cognitive styles, negative life events, and lower
social support (S. L. Johnson, Cuellar, & Peckham, 2015). “Expressed emotion” (EE),
defined by family criticism, hostility, or overinvolvement toward the patient with
BD, has been found to predict bipolar depressive symptoms (Yan, Hammen, Cohen,
Daley, & Henry, 2004). In summary, psychosocial models of unipolar depression are
applicable to understanding bipolar depression.

-- 319 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	299
Psychosocial Predictors of Manic Symptoms
Many of the variables that predict bipolar depression do not predict the course of
manic symptoms. For example, in prospective studies, negative life events (S. John-
son, 2005; for a review, see Hosang, Uher, Maughan, McGuffin, & Farmer, 2012) and
low social support (S. Johnson, Winett, Meyer, Greenhouse, & Miller, 1999) do not
directly predict mania. Although negative cognitive styles are often documented in
BD, they are most likely to be found during depressed rather than well periods (S.
Johnson et al., 2015), more consistently predict depression than mania (S. Johnson &
Fingerhut, 2004; but see Alloy, Reilly-Harrington, Fresco, Whitehouse, & Zechmeis-
ter, 1999), and can be explained by the presence of depressive history rather than
manic history (Alloy et al., 1999). In contrast to general models of psychosocial dis-
ruption, current models highlight two types of predictors of mania: goal dysregula-
tion and sleep deprivation/schedule disruption.
GOAL DYSREGULATION
The goal dysregulation model suggests that mania may be triggered by excessive
goal engagement secondary to increased sensitivity of the dopaminergic reward
pathways (see S. Johnson, Edge, Holmes, & Carver, 2012, for review). Multiple stud-
ies indicate that people with BD describe themselves as more sensitive to rewards;
that is, they endorse feeling more energized and excited by opportunities to pursue
goals, even during remission. This sensitivity to reward predicts the onset of BD
and a more severe course of mania (S. Johnson et al., 2012). Ability to use coping
strategies to modulate responses to rewarding and frustrating events can influence
symptom profiles in response to reward-related life events (Chan & Tse, 2018). Exces-
sive reward sensitivity and goal focus may heighten reactivity to success. In keeping
with this idea, life events involving goal attainment predict increases in manic, but
not depressive, symptoms (S. Johnson et al., 2012).
Functional magnetic resonance imaging research suggests that those with BD
show atypical activation patterns in reward-related neural regions in response to
anticipation of reward, including the ventral striatum, anterior cingulate, and
orbitofrontal cortex (Nusslock, Young, & Damme, 2014). Reward-related activation
patterns, as with behavioral indices of reward, are blunted by even minor depres-
sive symptoms (Redlich et al., 2015). Overall, these findings, along with findings of
diminished ventral striatal volume in BD (Lancaster, 2018), experimental pharma-
cological manipulations, and positron emission tomographic (PET) findings of ele-
vated striatal dopamine (D2/3) receptor availability, suggest dopamine dysregulation
as a potential neurobiological marker of BD that might help explain the behavioral
goal dysregulation profile (Ashok et al., 2017; Whitton, Treadway, & Pizzagalli, 2016).
SCHEDULE DISRUPTION
Researchers have focused on sleep deprivation, as well as more general schedule
disruption, as a trigger of manic symptoms (Murray & Harvey, 2010). Drawing on
the clinical observation that manic episodes are often preceded by life events that
involved sleep disruption, such as transmeridian flights or childbearing, Wehr,

-- 320 of 498 --

300 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Sack, and Rosenthal (1987) suggested that sleep disruption might be one mechanism
through which life events influence symptom generation. Congruently, experimen-
tal studies of sleep deprivation suggest that a single night of sleep deprivation can
trigger manic symptoms for more than 10% of people with BD depression (Barbini et
al., 1998). Across studies, melatonin and cortisol diurnal rhythms of those with BD
are phase delayed compared to control participants (Melo, Abreu, Linhares Neto, de
Bruin, & de Bruin, 2017).
Ehlers, Frank, and Kupfer (1988) suggested that those with BD, consequent to
biological underpinnings of the disorder, might be vulnerable when social zeitgebers
(timekeepers) are disrupted (e.g., a job with shifting work hours). Although find-
ings using the social rhythm metric (SRM), a measure of the constancy of the daily
schedule (Monk, Frank, Potts, & Kupfer, 2002), have been mixed, it does appear that
BD is tied to lower activity levels (Ashman et al., 1999; Jones, Tai, Evershed, Knowles,
& Bentall, 2006). Patients with BD report more life events involving social rhythm
disruption (events that affect sleep or wake times, or daily routines) before the onset
of mania than before depression (Malkoff-Schwartz et al., 2000). Together with the
previous findings, it appears that sleep deprivation and schedule disruption may
trigger increases in manic symptoms.
In summary, the variables hypothesized to influence the onset of mania include
goal dysregulation and sleep/schedule disruption. As discussed below, some of these
risk factors are amenable to modification through psychosocial intervention.
TREATMENT
Pharmacological Treatments
Mood-stabilizing medications—such as lithium, anticonvulsants, and atypical
antipsychotics—are used to resolve acute episodes and to prevent mood episode
recurrence. Anticonvulsants include divalproex and lamotrigine, and atypical
antipsychotic medications include olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, and lurasi-
done, also provide mood stabilization. For acute episodes, U.K. and U.S. treatment
guidelines suggest use of lithium, valproate, or antipsychotic medication (American
Psychiatric Association, 2002; Goodwin et al., 2016). For longer-term maintenance
treatment, U.S. guidelines recommend lithium or valproate, but U.K. guidelines rec-
ommend lithium, valproate, lamotrigine, or antipsychotics (dopamine antagonists) as
first-line approaches (American Psychiatric Association, 2002; Goodwin et al., 2016).
More specific approaches designed to target cognitive features of the disorder remain
in preliminary phases of testing (Miskowiak, Carvalho, Vieta, & Kessing, 2016).
In practice, mood-stabilizing medications are often combined with antidepres-
sants or anxiolytic agents (benzodiazepines). Despite the popularity of antidepres-
sant medications for bipolar depression, meta-analytic findings indicate that when
added to a mood stabilizer regimen, antidepressants are no more effective than pla-
cebo (McGirr, Vöhringer, Ghaemi, Lam, & Yatham, 2016). In addition, antidepres-
sants can trigger manic episodes in patients with BD when taken without a mood
stabilizer (Ghaemi, Lenox, & Baldessarini, 2001). There is also no evidence support-
ing the efficacy of benzodiazepines for BD (Bobo et al., 2014).

-- 321 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	301
Psychosocial Treatment
Despite advances in pharmacotherapy, recurrences of mood episodes and chronic
subsyndromal depressive symptoms are normative aspects of BD, even among
patients receiving ongoing treatment (e.g., Tondo, Vasquez, & Baldessarini, 2017).
Even with documented medication adherence, rates of relapse within BD are high—
as many as one-half of patients with BD relapse within the first year after an epi-
sode (Keller et al., 1986), and three-fourths of patients relapse within 4–5 years (Git-
lin, Swendsen, Heller, & Hammen, 1995). Medication nonadherence, which greatly
increases risk of relapse and suicide (Tondo & Baldessarini, 2000), is common among
those with BD (Bauer et al., 2019), so it is another important target for psychosocial
treatments. Psychosocial treatments for BD have gained strong research support,
reflected in part by inclusion in pharmaco-centric treatment guidelines (e.g., Good-
win et al., 2016).
Despite different theoretical orientations, there is a surprising degree of similar-
ity among current empirically supported psychosocial treatments. Most treatments
include psychoeducation about BD and the importance of medication adherence,
and rehearsal of methods for the early detection of symptoms. In addition to these
basic elements, treatment approaches may include problem solving, stress manage-
ment, cognitive interventions, activity and sleep management, amelioration of nega-
tive interpersonal/family interactions, and goal regulation interventions.
For each of these empirically supported psychological treatments, we briefly
describe the intervention and the evidence of its effectiveness for depression and
mania outcomes. Where evidence is available, we also note findings regarding mech-
anisms of change. We conclude our review of treatment studies by identifying prin-
ciples of change that can guide tailored interventions based on the specific treatment
goal and risk factors for a particular patient. Beyond the psychological interventions
noted here, system-level interventions, such as providing rapid access to well-trained
nurse practitioners, coupled with psychoeducation, have shown benefits (see Simon
et al., 2005).
Psychoeducation and Relapse Prevention Programs
In addition to providing basic education about BD, many psychoeducation programs
incorporate a range of strategies designed to prevent relapse. Psychoeducation may
be delivered in an individual or group format. In one trial, 120 BD-I and BD-II outpa-
tients in remission were randomized to receive structured, group-based psychoedu-
cation or nondirective group therapy as adjuncts to standard medication treatment
(Colom et al., 2009). Psychoeducation included six sessions focused on BD and its
course, two sessions focused on symptom detection, six sessions focused on educa-
tion about different medication classes, and five sessions focused on avoiding trig-
gers (e.g., substance abuse, sleep disruption) and coping with early symptoms. Psy-
choeducation significantly reduced the number of episodes and hospitalizations per
patient, and delayed depressive, as well as manic–hypomanic–mixed, recurrences.
The psychoeducation intervention continued to be associated with diminished rates
of recurrence and hospitalization in a 5-year follow-up. Multiple effects could con-
tribute to the positive outcomes. For example, psychoeducation improves medication

-- 322 of 498 --

302 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
adherence and quality of life compared to medication alone (Demissie et al., 2018;
Javadpour, Hedayati, Dehbozorgi, & Azizi, 2013; Michalak, Yatham, Wan, & Lam,
2005)
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
A meta-analytic review demonstrates the value of adding cognitive-behavioral treat-
ment (CBT) to treatment as usual, with moderate effect sizes for reduced relapse and
mania severity, higher quality of life, and overall positive but varied effect sizes for
depression (Chiang et al., 2017). Several CBT manuals have been developed (cf. Lam,
Jones, & Hayward, 2010; Otto et al., 2009). The relative emphases in these manuals
differ, but all of the CBT manuals include psychoeducation about BD. They tend
to focus on identifying maladaptive negative thoughts about the self and teaching
skills to challenge these overly negative thoughts. Many also include interventions to
improve treatment engagement, and to target the overly positive thoughts that might
be present during mania. The manual by Lam and colleagues (1999) provides more
strategies to support self-calming and to diminish excessive goal engagement, and
the Otto and colleagues (2009) manual provides treatment modules (e.g., anger man-
agement, anxiety management, assertiveness training) that can be added as needed.
Self-help books are available to facilitate application of these approaches (Jones, Hay-
ward, & Lam, 2009; Otto et al., 2011; Roberts, Sylvia, & Reilly-Harrington, 2014).
Support for these approaches includes a randomized trial by Lam and colleagues
(2003) comparing brief individual CBT (12–18 sessions within the first 6 months, and
two booster sessions in the second 6 months of care) relative to standard pharma-
cological care. Patients who received CBT had significantly fewer bipolar episodes,
higher social functioning, and less depression during the first year of follow-up than
did patients in the control group. In a 2-year follow-up study, significant advantages
were seen for CBT efficacy in reducing depressive, but not manic, symptoms (Lam,
Hayward, Watkins, Wright, & Sham, 2005). In another study, Miklowitz and associ-
ates (2007) showed that CBT as well as family-focused therapy and interpersonal
psychotherapy with a social rhythm component (see below) lowered depression rela-
tive to a minimal treatment control. More recently, studies have explored CBT for
BD with added treatment elements. Jones and colleagues (2015) evaluated a targeted
“recovery-focused” CBT adjunctive that supplemented standard CBT with treat-
ment components such as recognizing the association between mood symptoms
and attainment of recovery goals, creation of a recovery plan, and evaluation of the
relationship between general functioning and recovery. Recovery-focused CBT plus
standard medication treatment was associated with an increased time to relapse up
to 15-month follow-up and improved personal ratings of recovery up to 12-month
follow-up relative to standard medication alone.
Family Therapy
Drawing on the links between EE and the course of the disorder, researchers have
considered whether family or marital approaches can help reduce bipolar symptoms.
The best-studied approach, family-focused therapy (FFT), provides psychoeducation
for patients and their family members, and draws on family interventions that have

-- 323 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	303
effectively improved family communication and delayed relapse in schizophrenia
(e.g., Hogarty et al., 1991; Miklowitz & Chung, 2016). The family components include
communication enhancement training, in which patients rehearse expressing posi-
tive and negative feelings, listening, and requesting changes in others’ behaviors,
and problem-solving skills training, in which patients learn to identify, define, and
solve specific family problems (Miklowitz & Goldstein, 1997).
Miklowitz, George, Richards, Simoneau, and Suddath (2003) randomly assigned
patients with BD and their family members to receive FFT (21 sessions) or a less
intensive clinical management approach as adjuncts to standard pharmacotherapy.
Compared to clinical management, FFT was associated with lower levels of symp-
toms and longer time before relapse. Significant interactions between time and treat-
ment were observed for depression but not for mania scores.
Similar support for FFT was obtained in a randomized clinical trial of FFT ver-
sus individual treatment among patients with a recent manic episode who were on
mood-stabilizing medication. Patients who received FFT experienced fewer relapses
and hospitalizations than did those who received individual treatment (Rea et al.,
2003). It is not clear whether improvements were specific to depression, though,
because analyses collapsed across mania and depression.
In one prevention trial, researchers considered whether FFT would be helpful
for youth with mood symptoms and a first- or second-degree relative with BD (Mik-
lowitz et al., 2020). Compared to psychoeducation, youth who received FFT showed
longer intervals without depressive episodes, but did not differ on time to manic or
hypomanic episodes.
Some forms of family therapy other than FFT have not been shown to produce
changes in manic or depressive symptoms (Miller, Solomon, Ryan, & Keitner, 2004;
van Gent & Zwart, 1991). FFT is distinguished from these other approaches by its
longer duration, as well as more structured exercises concerning family communica-
tion, more education about BD, and more specific strategies for responding to symp-
toms.
Some research has been conducted on the mechanisms of change for family
therapy. For example, family therapy has been found to significantly reduce EE from
spouses of patients with BD in one study (Honig, Hofman, Hilwiq, Noorthoorn, &
Ponds, 1995), and improve positive communications among family members with-
out reducing negative interactions in another study (Simoneau, Miklowitz, Richards,
Saleem, & George, 1999). Improvements in positive nonverbal communication were
correlated with improvements in mood. Findings are consistent with the idea that
one mechanism involved in family treatment is improvement in family communica-
tion and functioning. Congruent with the inclusion of psychoeducation in FFT, per-
sons who receive FFT also demonstrate better medication adherence than do those
who receive clinical management (Miklowitz et al., 2003).
Interventions to Improve Sleep
Wehr and associates (1998) theorized that a light–dark cycle that mirrors the natu-
ral rhythm of the sun might help protect sleep and thereby reduce symptoms in
BD. Accordingly, they asked a person with BD to rest in bed in a dark room for 14
hours per night. Over a 19-month period, the dark period was gradually reduced

-- 324 of 498 --

304 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
to 10 hours. Symptoms were tracked daily for several years before the intervention
and throughout the 19 months of the intervention. This intensive treatment success-
fully improved sleep, activity, and mood symptoms. More recently, reductions in BD
symptoms and relapse rates were observed in a randomized controlled trial of CBT
to reduce insomnia as compared to psychoeducation (Harvey et al., 2015).
Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy
Similar to traditional interpersonal therapy, interpersonal and social rhythm therapy
(IPSRT) focuses on four types of interpersonal problems: grief (extended to cover
grief over the “lost healthy self” with the diagnosis of BD), interpersonal conflicts,
role transitions (i.e., changes in employment situation), and interpersonal deficits (i.e.,
social isolation), but supplements this focus with techniques to improve medication
adherence and to address social rhythm disturbances (Frank, 2005). Hence, IPSRT is
designed to address many of the triggers of bipolar symptoms, including medication
adherence, schedule disruption, negative life events, and low social support.
In one study, Frank and colleagues (2005) randomly assigned 175 acutely ill par-
ticipants to receive either IPSRT or clinical management. IPSRT was administered as
acute therapy (weekly sessions for several months) or maintenance therapy (monthly
for 2 years), leading to four combinations of acute/maintenance treatment. Find-
ings from the study were mixed, in that acute IPSRT treatment led to longer periods
before recurrence, but maintenance IPSRT did not yield improvements in symptoms
compared to clinical management. In a randomized controlled trial of 100 persons,
IPSRT and supportive care attained comparable results (Inder et al., 2017). In the
large-scale Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-
BD) trial, IPSRT achieved better outcomes than did clinical management (Miklowitz
et al., 2007).
Some research has examined the mechanisms through which IPSRT produces
change. Patients who received IPSRT achieved greater stability of daily routines than
did those who received clinical management (Frank et al., 2005), and those improve-
ments predicted less likelihood of relapse (Frank et al., 2005; but for negative results,
see Frank et al., 1997; Shen et al., 2008).
Mindfulness‑Based Training
There has been hope that mindfulness training could help reduce the stress and anx-
iety that are often present for those with BD (Murray et al., 2017). There is emerging
data indicating that mindfulness has reliable benefit for bipolar depression, although
effects appear to be lost over longer follow-up periods (Xuan et al., 2020; cf. Chu et
al., 2018).
Predictors and Moderators of Psychosocial Treatment Outcomes in BD
Studies have evaluated various factors that may predict psychosocial treatment out-
come or moderate response to different psychosocial treatments in BD, though this
remains a relatively unexplored and nonreplicated area of research. Collectively,
data across studies to date suggest that an elevated body mass index, more comorbid

-- 325 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	305
medical conditions, and more tendency to engage in extreme attributions (all-or-
nothing explanations for various life events) can interfere with achieving full benefit
from psychosocial treatment for BD (e.g., Peters et al., 2015; Frank et al., 2005; Stange
et al., 2013).
Principles of Change
Given the range of available treatment options and the relatively comparable evi-
dence for many of these treatments, clinicians may want to tailor their choice of
treatment to the patient by considering principles of change; that is, the best treat-
ment options likely depend on whether the goal is reducing manic or depressive
relapse, and the particular social and psychological risk factors for a given patient.
In Table 10.1, we consider principles of change and specific interventions that
might address each domain. Psychoeducation has the strongest long-term support
and might be considered a first line of psychological intervention for those patients
who have not yet received solid information about their disorder and treatment
options. Several options have been found to reduce depressive symptoms, so the
clinician might choose treatments to address depression based on whether a patient
demonstrates interpersonal difficulties, social rhythm disturbances, family conflict,
or negative cognitive styles. Early detection and intervention strategies have been
applied successfully to preventing the occurrence and severity of manic relapse.
CONCLUSION
People diagnosed with BD are at high risk for recurrent episodes and medical comor-
bidity, and they incur substantial losses to their social and occupational worlds.
Their risk for suicide is higher than rates observed across most psychiatric disorders.
Clearly, there is a need for treatment development and innovation.
Every major treatment guideline recommends medication as the best way to
reduce acute symptoms and to protect against recurrence over time. Medication non-
adherence can trigger increases in depressive and manic symptoms. Even with such
medications, however, rates of relapse remain disappointingly high.
Although genetic heritability is clearly the major force involved in whether
a person develops the disorder, genetic models are less helpful in predicting the
course of disorder. Psychological variables have been found to predict the course
of disorder. Emotional lability, trauma, and emotion-related impulsivity may pre-
dict more serious manic and depressive symptoms over time. Negative life events,
negative cognitive styles, and family criticism are related to more severe depressive
symptoms over time. Schedule and sleep disruption, as well as various facets of goal
dysregulation, predict increases in mania over time. Each of these variables can be
considered a potential treatment target.
A growing body of evidence supports the efficacy of specific psychosocial
treatments for BD. Psychoeducation, training in medication adherence, and symp-
tom monitoring appear to have significant relapse prevention effects. CBT has been
found to reduce depression significantly, and there is evidence for the prevention
of mania during the first year after treatment, but not the second, with one of the

-- 326 of 498 --

306 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
TABLE 10.1. Principles of Change in Psychological Treatment Approaches for Bipolar Disorder
Principles of change 	Examples of specific guidelines
Improve awareness of symptoms. 	Teach the patient to routinely review symptoms, in
order to be alert to the signs and symptoms of an
incipient mood episode.
Increase motivation for medication
adherence.
Teach the patient about course of disorder and role
of mood stabilizers as a relapse prevention treatment
(i.e., to be taken even in the absence of symptoms).
Increase treatment engagement. 	Educate the patient, care providers, and support
network about efficacy of specific psychosocial
treatment. Establish strong rapport, provide forum
for discussing the meaning and hardships associated
with illness. Provide education and support to
improve motivation for treatment. Teach strategies
to enhance regular medication regimens, including
techniques to prevent forgetfulness and to manage
side effect of medications.
Reduce risk factors for episodes. 	Teach the patient about the dangers of substance
use for symptom management; consider behavioral
strategies to help reduce substance abuse. Teach skills
to manage stress and/or anxiety comorbidity.
Improve family functioning. 	Teach communication skills to the patient and their
family (e.g., constructive expression of both positive
and negative feelings, listening, assertiveness
training).
Develop plans to foster appropriate
support from close others and treatment
providers if mood episodes emerge.
Consider use of treatment contracts that specify
actions of providers and others (e.g., preferred
hospital should severe mood episodes be
encountered).
Promote regular sleep–wake cycles and
activity cycles.
Teach the patient sleep hygiene skills, help them
extend resting period in bed, and enhance stability of
daily routines.
Diminish excessive engagement in
overly ambitious goal pursuit and
practice self-calming skills after goal-
attainment life events.
Help the patient learn to avoid periods of overly
confident risk taking and frenetic goal engagement.
Help the patient learn to avoid acting on surges of
confidence present after small successes.
Address interpersonal stress and social
isolation.
Help the patient identify core interpersonal goals
for change and use behavioral strategies to promote
change.
Address maladaptive thoughts. 	Identify and challenge overly negative self-relevant
thoughts with use of cognitive strategies similar to
those employed for unipolar depression.

-- 327 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	307
available CBT manuals. Family treatment has been shown to enhance a range of out-
comes but to influence depression most directly. Intervention to address insomnia
has been shown to help reduce symptoms. IPSRT integrates interventions to address
both schedule disruption and interpersonal stressors, and has been found to provide
symptom relief when offered as an acute treatment but not as a maintenance treat-
ment. The large-scale STEP-BD study suggests that CBT, FFT, and IPSRT performed
comparably in reducing depressive symptoms.
Beyond the encouraging findings relative to symptoms, several studies suggest
that psychotherapies can bolster social and occupational functioning; that is, brief
psychoeducation (van Gent & Zwart, 1991), FFT (Miklowitz et al., 2003), IPT (Frank
et al., 2008), and CBT (Lam et al., 2003; Miklowitz et al., 2007) have been found to
improve social functioning. More work is needed for these targets, though, given the
extreme occupational and social distress associated with this disorder.
In summary, the findings from the host of treatment outcome studies are encour-
aging, in that a range of mechanisms has been targeted, with beneficial effects on a
broad range of outcomes. Notwithstanding the significance of these gains, there is
a need for more precise studies of the mechanisms involved in symptom genera-
tion and for treatments that more directly target these mechanisms. For example, it
remains unclear whether sleep or schedule disruption are better predictors of out-
come, and knowing this would certainly shape treatment targets. Such analyses of
which variables are most predictive could help refine treatment targets.
Overall, treatment outcome research on BD has achieved a great deal. The
early findings suggest that a host of treatments can be helpful. Psychoeducation can
enhance medication adherence and diminish symptoms. More specific interventions
are designed to address other mechanisms involved in the course of the disorder.
These basic findings on treatment outcome in BD set the stage for more careful inte-
gration of specific mechanisms with intervention studies, and extension of research
to a broader range of outcomes and populations.
REFERENCES
Acuff, H. E., Versace, A., Bertocci, M. A., Ladouceur, C. D., Hanford, L. C., Manelis, A., . . .
Phillips, M. L. (2018). Association of neuroimaging measures of emotion processing and
regulation neural circuitries with symptoms of bipolar disorder in offspring at risk for
bipolar disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 75(12), 1225–1233.
Agnew-Blais, J., & Danese, A. (2016). Childhood maltreatment and unfavourable clinical out-
comes in bipolar disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 3(4),
342–349.
Alloy, L. B., Reilly-Harrington, N., Fresco, D. M., Whitehouse, W. G., & Zechmeister, J. S. (1999).
Cognitive styles and life events in subsyndromal unipolar and bipolar disorders: Stabil-
ity and prospective prediction of depressive and hypomanic mood swings. Journal of
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 13, 21–40.
American Psychiatric Association. (2002). Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with bipo-
lar disorder (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.

-- 328 of 498 --

308 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Arts, B., Jabben, N., Krabbendam, L., & van Os, J. (2008). Meta-analyses of cognitive function-
ing in euthymic bipolar patients and their first-degree relatives. Psychological Medicine,
38(6), 771–785.
Ashman, S. B., Monk, T. H., Kupfer, D. J., Clark, C. H., Myers, F. S., Frank, E., & Leibenluft, E.
(1999). Relationship between social rhythms and mood in patients with rapid cycling
bipolar disorder. Psychiatry Research, 86, 1–8.
Ashok, A. H., Marques, T. R., Jauhar, S., Nour, M. M., Goodwin, G. M., Young, A. H., & Howes,
O. D. (2017). The dopamine hypothesis of bipolar affective disorder: The state of the art
and implications for treatment. Molecular Psychiatry, 22(5), 666–679.
Axelson, D., Goldstein, B., Goldstein, T., Monk, K., Yu, H., Hickey, M. B., . . . Birmaher, B. (2015).
Diagnostic precursors to bipolar disorder in offspring of parents with bipolar disorder:
A longitudinal study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172(7), 638–646.
Barbini, B., Colombo, C., Benedetti, F., Campori, E., Bellodi, L., & Smeraldi, E. (1998). The
unipolar–bipolar dichotomy and the response to sleep deprivation. Psychiatry Research,
79, 43–50.
Barnett, J., Huang, J., Perlis, R., Young, M., Rosenbaum, J., Nierenberg, A., . . . Smoller, J. (2011).
Personality and bipolar disorder: Dissecting state and trait associations between mood
and personality. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1593–1604.
Bauer, M., Glenn, T., Alda, M., Bauer, R., Grof, P., Marsh, W., . . . Whybrow, P. C. (2019). Tra-
jectories of adherence to mood stabilizers in patients with bipolar disorder. International
Journal of Bipolar Disorders, 7, 19.
Bobo, W. V., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Ketter, T. A., Brody, B. D., Kinrys, G., Kemp, D. E., . . .
Kamali, M. (2014). Effect of adjunctive benzodiazepines on clinical outcomes in lithium-
or quetiapine-treated outpatients with bipolar I or II disorder: Results from the Bipolar
CHOICE trial. Journal of Affective Disorders, 161, 30–35.
Bora, E., Hıdıroğlu, C., Özerdem, A., Kaçar, Ö. F., Sarısoy, G., Civil Arslan, F., . . . Tümkaya,
S. (2016). Executive dysfunction and cognitive subgroups in a large sample of euthymic
patients with bipolar disorder. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 26(8), 1338–1347.
Bora, E., Yucel, M., & Pantelis, C. (2009). Cognitive endophenotypes of bipolar disorder: A
meta-analysis of neuropsychological deficits in euthymic patients and their first-degree
relatives. Journal of Affective Disorders, 113(1–2), 1–20.
Bortolato, B., Miskowiak, K. W., Köhler, C. A., Vieta, E., & Carvalho, A. F. (2015). Cognitive dys-
function in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia: A systematic review of meta-analyses.
Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 11, 3111–3125.
Brissos, S., Dias, V., & Kapczinski, F. (2008). Cognitive performance and quality of life in bipo-
lar disorder. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 52, 517–524.
Brown, E. S., Todd, J. P., Hu, L. T., Schmitz, J. M., Carmody, T. J., Nakamura, A., . . . Lo, A. (2015).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of citicoline for cocaine depen-
dence in bipolar I disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 1014–1021.
Calkin, C. V., Ruzickova, M., Uher, R., Hajek, T., Slaney, C. M., Garnham, J. S., . . . Alda, M.
(2015). Insulin resistance and outcome in bipolar disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry,
206(1), 52–57.
Chan, S. H. W., & Tse, S. (2018). Coping with amplified emotionality among people with bipo-
lar disorder: A longitudinal study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 239, 303–312.
Chiang, K. J., Tsai, J. C., Liu, D., Lin, C. H., Chiu, H. L., & Chou, K. R. (2017). Efficacy of
cognitive-behavioral therapy in patients with bipolar disorder: A meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. PLOS ONE, 12, e0176849.
Chu, C. S., Stubbs, B., Chen, T. Y., Tang, C. H., Li, D. J., Yang, W. C., . . . Lin, P. Y. (2018). The
effectiveness of adjunct mindfulness-based intervention in treatment of bipolar disor-
der: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Affective Disorders, 225, 234–245.
Colom, F., Vieta, E., Sanchez-Moreno, J., Palomino- Otiniano, R., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M.,

-- 329 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	309
. . . Martinez-Aran, A. (2009). Group psychoeducation for stabilised bipolar disorders:
5-year outcome of a randomised clinical trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194, 260–265.
Coryell, W., Scheftner, W., Keller, M., Endicott, J., Maser, J., & Klerman, G. L. (1993). The endur-
ing psychosocial consequences of mania and depression. American Journal of Psychiatry,
150, 720–727.
Dell’Osso, B., Shah, S., Do, D., Yuen, L. D., Hooshmand, F., Wang, P. W., . . . Ketter, T. A. (2017).
American tertiary clinic-referred bipolar II disorder versus bipolar I disorder associated
with hastened depressive recurrence. International Journal of Bipolar Disorders, 5, 2.
Demissie, M., Hanlon, C., Birhane, R., Ng, L., Medhin, G., & Fekadu, A. (2018). Psychologi-
cal interventions for bipolar disorder in low- and middle-income countries: Systematic
review. BJPsych Open, 4(5), 375–384.
Dodd, A., Lockwood, E., Mansell, W., & Palmier-Claus, J. (2019). Emotion regulation strategies
in bipolar disorder: A systematic and critical review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 246,
262–284.
Dunayevich, E., Sax, K. W., Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., Sorter, M. T., McConville, B. J., & Stra-
kowski, S. M. (2000). Twelve-month outcome in bipolar patients with and without per-
sonality disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61, 134–139.
Ehlers, C. L., Frank, E., & Kupfer, D. J. (1988). Social zeitgebers and biological rhythms: A uni-
fied approach to understanding the etiology of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry,
45, 948–952.
Fiedorowicz, J. G., Solomon, D. A., Endicott, J., Leon, A. C., Li, C., Rice, J. P., & Coryell, W. H.
(2009). Manic/hypomanic symptom burden and cardiovascular mortality in bipolar dis-
order. Psychosomatic Medicine, 71, 598–606.
Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s guide to interpersonal and social rhythm
therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Frank, E., Hlastala, S., Ritenour, A., Houck, P., Tu, X. M., Monk, T. H., . . . Kupfer, D. J. (1997).
Inducing lifestyle regularity in recovering bipolar disorder patients. Biological Psychiatry,
41, 1165–1173.
Frank, E., Kupfer, D., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., . . . Monk,
T. (2005). Two-year outcomes for interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in individuals
with bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 996–1004.
Frank, E., Soreca, I., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., Mallinger, A. G., Thase, M. E., . . . Kupfer,
D. J. (2008). The role of interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in improving occupa-
tional functioning in patients with bipolar I disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165,
1559–1565.
Garno, J. L., Goldberg, J. F., Ramirez, P. M., & Ritzler, B. A. (2005). Impact of childhood abuse
on the clinical course of bipolar disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186(2), 121–125.
George, E. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Taylor, D. O. (2003). The
comorbidity of bipolar disorder and axis II personality disorders: Prevalence and clinical
correlates. Bipolar Disorders, 5, 115–122.
Ghaemi, S. N., Lenox, M. S., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2001). Effectiveness and safety of long-term
antidepressant treatment in bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 565–569.
Gitlin, M. J., Swendsen, J., Heller, T. L., & Hammen, C. (1995). Relapse and impairment in bipo-
lar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1635–1640.
Gold, A. K., Otto, M. W., Deckersbach, T., Sylvia, L. G., Nierenberg, A. A., & Kinrys, G. (2018).
Substance use comorbidity in bipolar disorder: A qualitative review of treatment strate-
gies and outcomes. American Journal of Addictions, 27, 188–201.
Goldstein, B. I., Carnethon, M. R., Matthews, K. A., McIntyre, R. S., Miller, G. E., Raghuveer,
G., . . . McCrindle, B. W. (2015). Major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder predis-
pose youth to accelerated atherosclerosis and early cardiovascular disease: A scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 132(10), 965–986.

-- 330 of 498 --

310 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Gonzalez, J. M., Thompson, P., Escamilla, M., Araga, M., Singh, V., Farrelly, N., . . . Bowden,
C. L. (2007). Treatment characteristics and illness burden among European Americans,
African Americans, and Latinos in the first 2,000 patients of the systematic treatment
enhancement program for bipolar disorder. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 40, 31–46.
Goodwin, G. M., Haddad, P. M., Ferrier, I. N., Aronson, J. K., Barnes, T. R. H., Cipriani, A., . . .
Young, A. H. (2016). Evidence-based guidelines for treating bipolar disorder: Revised
third edition recommendations from the British Association for Psychopharmacology.
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30, 495–553.
Gruber, J. (2011). Can feeling too good be bad?: Positive emotion persistence (PEP) in bipolar
disorder. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 217–221.
Gruber, J., Harvey, A., & Gross, J. (2012). When trying is not enough: Emotion regulation and
the effort-success gap in bipolar disorder. Emotion, 12, 997–1003.
Haeri, S., Williams, J., Kopeykina, I., Johnson, J., Newmark, A., Cohen, L., & Galynker, I. (2011).
Disparities in diagnosis of bipolar disorder in individuals of African and European
descent: A review. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 17, 394–403.
Harvey, A. G., Soehner, A. M., Kaplan, K. A., Hein, K., Lee, J., Kanady, J., . . . Buysse, D. J.
(2015). Treating insomnia improves mood state, sleep, and functioning in bipolar disor-
der: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83,
564–577.
Hayes, J. F., Miles, J., Walters, K., King, M., & Osborn, D. P. J. (2015). A systematic review
and meta-analysis of premature mortality in bipolar affective disorder. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 131(6), 417–425.
Hogarty, G. E., Anderson, C. M., Reiss, D. J., Kornblith, S. J., Greenwald, D. P., & Ulrich, R. F.
(1991). Family psychoeducation, social skills training, and maintenance chemotherapy in
the aftercare of schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 340–347.
Honig, A., Hofman, A., Hilwiq, M., Noorthoorn, E., & Ponds, R. (1995). Psychoeducation and
expressed emotion in bipolar disorder: Preliminary findings. Psychiatry Research, 28,
299–301.
Hosang, G. M., Uher, R., Maughan, B., McGuffin, P., & Farmer, A. E. (2012). The role of loss
and danger events in symptom exacerbation in bipolar disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 46(12), 1584–1589.
Inder, M. L., Crowe, M. T., Moor, S., Carter, J. D., Luty, S. E., Frampton, C. M., & Joyce, P. R.
(2017). Three-year follow-up after psychotherapy for young people with bipolar disorder.
Bipolar Disorders, 20, 441–447.
Jamison, K. (1993). Touched with fire: Manic depressive illness and the artistic temperament. New
York: Free Press.
Javadpour, A., Hedayati, A., Dehbozorgi, G. R., & Azizi, A. (2013). The impact of a simple
individual psychoeducation program on quality of life, rate of relapse, and medication
adherence in bipolar disorder patients. Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 6, 208–213.
Johnson, K. R., & Johnson, S. L. (2014). Inadequate treatment of black Americans with bipolar
disorder. Psychiatric Services, 65, 255–258.
Johnson, S. L. (2005). Life events in bipolar disorder: Towards more specific models. Clinical
Psychology Review, 25, 1008–1027.
Johnson, S. L., & Carver, C. S. (2016). Emotion-relevant impulsivity predicts sustained anger
and aggression after remission in bipolar I disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 189,
169–175.
Johnson, S. L., Cuellar, A., & Peckham, A. H. (2015). Risk factors for bipolar disorder. In I. H.
Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (3rd ed., pp. 315–333). New York:
Guilford Press.
Johnson, S. L., Edge, M. D., Holmes, M. K., & Carver, C. S. (2012). The behavioral activation
system and mania. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 243–267.

-- 331 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	311
Johnson, S. L., & Fingerhut, R. (2004). Negative cognitions predict the course of bipolar depres-
sion, not mania. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 18, 149–162.
Johnson, S. L., Winett, C. A., Meyer, B., Greenhouse, W. J., & Miller, I. (1999). Social support
and the course of bipolar disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 558–566.
Jones, S., Hayward, P., & Lam, D. (2009). Coping with bipolar disorder: A CBT-informed guide to
living with manic depression. Oxford, UK: One World.
Jones, S. H., Smith, G., Mulligan, L. D., Lobban, F., Law, H., Dunn, G., . . . Morrison, A. P. (2015).
Recovery-focused cognitive-behavioural therapy for recent-onset bipolar disorder: Ran-
domised controlled pilot trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 58–66.
Jones, S. H., Tai, S., Evershed, K., Knowles, R., & Bentall, R. (2006). Early detection of bipolar
disorder: A pilot familial high-risk study of parents with bipolar disorder and their ado-
lescent children. Bipolar Disorders, 8, 362–372.
Judd, L. L., Akiskal, H. S., Schetteler, P. J., Endicott, J., Maser, J., Solomon, D. A., . . . Keller, M.
B. (2002). The long-term natural history of the weekly symptomatic status of bipolar I
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 530–537.
Keller, M., Lavori, P., Coryell, W., Andreasen, N., Endicott, J., Clayton, P., . . . Hirschfeld, R. M.
(1986). Differential outcome of pure manic, mixed/cycling, and pure depressive episodes
in patients with bipolar illness. Journal of the American Medical Association, 255, 3138–3142.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comor-
bidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.
Kilbourne, A. M., Bauer, M. S., Han, X., Haas, G. L., Elder, P., Good, C. B., . . . Pincus, H. (2005).
Racial differences in the treatment of veterans with bipolar disorder. Psychiatric Services,
56, 1549–1555.
Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., Grochocinski, V. J., Houck, P. R., & Brown, C. (2005). African-American
participants in a bipolar disorder registry: Clinical and treatment characteristics. Bipolar
Disorders, 7, 82–88.
Kyaga, S., Landén, M., Boman, M., Hultman, C. M., Långström, N., & Lichtenstein, P. (2013).
Mental illness, suicide and creativity: 40-year prospective total population study. Journal
of Psychiatric Research, 47(1), 83–90.
Lam, D. H., Jones, S. H., & Hayward, P. (2010). Cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: A therapist’s
guide to concepts, methods, and practice (2nd ed.). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham, P. (2005). Relapse prevention in
patients with bipolar disorder: Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 162(2), 324–329.
Lam, D. H., Watkins, E. R., Hayward, P., Bright, J., Wright, K., & Kerr, N. (2003). A randomized
controlled study of cognitive therapy of relapse prevention for bipolar affective disorder:
Outcome of the first year. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 145–152.
Lancaster, T. M. (2018). Evidence for association between familial bipolar risk and ventral
striatal volume. Journal of Affective Disorders, 232, 69–72.
LaPalme, M., Hodgins, S., & LaRoche, C. (1997). Children of parents with bipolar disorder:
A meta-analysis of risk for mental disorders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 42, 623–631.
Laursen, T. M., Munk-Olsen, T., Nordentoft, M., & Mortensen, P. B. (2007). Increased mortality
among patients admitted with major psychiatric disorders: A register-based study com-
paring mortality in unipolar depressive disorder, bipolar affective disorder, schizoaffec-
tive disorder, and schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 68, 899–907.
Lima, I. M. M., Peckham, A. D., & Johnson, S. L. (2018). Cognitive deficits in bipolar disorders:
Implications for emotion. Clinical Psychology Review, 59, 126–136.
Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B. P., Hlastala, S. A., Luther, J. F., & Sherrill, J. T.
(2000). Social rhythm disruption and stressful life events in the onset of bipolar and uni-
polar episodes. Psychological Medicine, 30, 1005–1016.

-- 332 of 498 --

312 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Manelis, A., Ladouceur, C. D., Graur, S., Monk, K., Bonar, L. K., Hickey, M. B., . . . Phillips, M.
L. (2015). Altered amygdala-prefrontal response to facial emotion in offspring of parents
with bipolar disorder. Brain, 138(9), 2777–2790.
Masi, G., Perugi, G., Toni, C., Millepiedi, S., Mucci, M., Bertini, N., & Akiskal, H. S. (2004).
Predictors of treatment nonresponse in bipolar children and adolescents with manic or
mixed episodes. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 14, 395–404.
McGirr, A., Vöhringer, P. A., Ghaemi, S. N., Lam, R. W., & Yatham, L. N. (2016). Safety and
efficacy of adjunctive second-generation antidepressant therapy with a mood stabiliser
or an atypical antipsychotic in acute bipolar depression: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised placebo-controlled trials. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 1138–1146.
McGrady, A., Lynch, D., & Rapport, D. (2017). Psychosocial factors and comorbidity associ-
ated with suicide attempts: Findings in patients with bipolar disorder. Psychopathology,
50, 171–174.
McGuffin, P., Rijsdijk, F., Andrew, M., Sham, P., Katz, R., & Cardno, A. (2003). The heritability
of bipolar affective disorder and the genetic relationship to unipolar depression. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 60, 497–502.
Melo, M. C. A., Abreu, R. L. C., Linhares Neto, V. B., de Bruin, P. F. C., & de Bruin, V. M. S.
(2017). Chronotype and circadian rhythm in bipolar disorder: A systematic review. Sleep
Medicine Reviews, 34, 46–58.
Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E., Hirschfeld, R. M., Petukhova, M.,
& Kessler, R. C. (2007). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 543–552.
Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J.-P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., Sampson, N. A., . . . Zarkov, Z. (2011).
Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the World Mental Health Sur-
vey Initiative. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(3), 241–251.
Merikangas, K. R., Swendsen, J., Hickie, I. B., Cui, L., Shou, H., Merikangas, A. K., . . . Zipun-
nikov, V. (2019). Real-time mobile monitoring of the dynamic associations among motor
activity, energy, mood, and sleep in adults with bipolar disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(2),
190–198.
Michalak, E. E., Yatham, L. N., Wan, D. D., & Lam, R. W. (2005). Perceived quality of life in
patients with bipolar disorder: Does group psychoeducation have an impact? Canadian
Journal of Psychiatry, 50, 95–100.
Miklowitz, D. J., & Chung, B. (2016). Family-focused therapy for bipolar disorder: Reflections
on 30 years of research. Family Processes, 55, 483–499.
Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Suddath, R. L. (2003). A ran-
domized study of family-focused psychoeducation and pharmacotherapy in the outpa-
tient management of bipolar disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 904–912.
Miklowitz, D. J., & Goldstein, M. J. (1997). Bipolar disorder: A family-focused treatment approach.
New York: Guilford Press.
Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J.
N., . . . Sachs, G. S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression: A one-year ran-
domized trial from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64, 419–427.
Miklowitz, D. J., Schneck, C. D., Walshaw, P. D., Singh, M. K., Sullivan, A. E., Suddath, R. L.,
. . . Chang, K. D. (2020). Effects of family-focused therapy vs enhanced usual care for
symptomatic youths at high risk for bipolar disorder: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry, 77(5), 455–463.
Miller, I., Solomon, D. A., Ryan, C. E., & Keitner, G. I. (2004). Does adjunctive family therapy
enhance recovery from bipolar I mood episodes? Journal of Affective Disorders, 82, 431–
436.
Miskowiak, K. W., Carvalho, A. F., Vieta, E., & Kessing, L. V. (2016). Cognitive enhancement

-- 333 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	313
treatments for bipolar disorder: A systematic review and methodological recommenda-
tions. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 1541–1561.
Miskowiak, K. W., Seeberg, I., Kjaerstad, H. L., Burdick, K. E., Martinez-Aran, A., Del Mar
Bonnin, C., . . . Vieta, E. (2019). Affective cognition in bipolar disorder: A systematic
review by the ISBD targeting cognition task force. Bipolar Disorders, 21(8), 686–719.
Monk, T. H., Frank, E., Potts, J. M., & Kupfer, D. J. (2002). A simple way to measure daily life-
style regularity. Journal of Sleep Research, 11, 183–190.
Muhtadie, L., Johnson, S. L., Carver, C. S., Gotlib, I. H., & Ketter, T. A. (2014). A profile approach
to impulsivity in bipolar disorder: the key role of strong emotions. Acta Psychiatrica Scan-
dinavica, 129(2), 100–108.
Murray, G., & Harvey, A. (2010). Circadian rhythms and sleep in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Dis-
orders, 12(5), 459–472.
Murray, G., Leitan, N. D., Thomas, N., Michalak, E. E., Johnson, S. L., Jones, S., . . . Berk, M.
(2017). Towards recovery-oriented psychosocial interventions for bipolar disorder: Qual-
ity of life outcomes, stage-sensitive treatments, and mindfulness mechanisms. Clinical
Psychology Review, 52, 148–163.
Nordentoft, M., Mortensen, P. B., & Pedersen, C. B. (2011). Absolute risk of suicide after first
hospital contact in mental disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(10), 1058–1064.
Nusslock, R., Young, C. B., & Damme, K. S. F. (2014). Elevated reward-related neural activation
as a unique biological marker of bipolar disorder: Assessment and treatment implica-
tions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 62, 74–87.
Otto, M. W., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Knauz, R. O., Henin, A., Kogan, J. N., & Sachs, G. S.
(2011). Living with bipolar disorder (expanded ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Otto, M. W., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Kogan, J. N., Henin, A., Knauz, R. O., & Sachs, G. S.
(2009). Managing bipolar disorder: A cognitive-behavioral approach (Therapist guide). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Otto, M. W., Simon, N. M., Wisniewski, S. R., Miklowitz, D. J., Kogan, J. N., Reilly-Harrington,
N. A., & STEP-BD Investigators. (2006). Prospective 12-month course of bipolar disorder
in out-patients with and without comorbid anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry,
189, 20–25.
Perlis, R. H., Miyahara, S., Marangell, L. B., Wisniewski, S. R., Ostacher, M., Delbello, M. P., . . .
STEP-BD Investigators. (2004). Long-term implications of early onset in bipolar disorder:
Data from the first 1000 participants in the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program
for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Biological Psychiatry, 55, 875–881.
Peters, A. T., Shesler, L. W., Sylvia, L. G., da Silva Magalhaes, P. V., Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M.
W., . . . Deckersbach, T. (2015). Medical burden, body mass index and the outcome of
psychosocial interventions for bipolar depression. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 50, 667–677.
Post, R. M., Altshuler, L. L., Kupka, R., McElroy, S. L., Frye, M. A., Rowe, M., . . . Nolen, W.
A. (2017). More childhood onset bipolar disorder in the United States than Canada
or Europe: Implications for treatment and prevention. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 74, 204–213.
Post, R. M., Leverich, G. S., McElroy, S., Kupka, R., Suppes, T., Altshuler, L., . . . Hellemann, G.
(2018). Prevalence of axis II comorbidities in bipolar disorder: Relationship to mood state.
Bipolar Disorders, 20(4), 303–312.
Rea, M. M., Tompson, M., Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Hwang, S., & Mintz, J. (2003). Fam-
ily focused treatment vs. individual treatment for bipolar disorder: Results of a random-
ized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 482–492.
Redlich, R., Dohm, K., Grotegerd, D., Opel, N., Zwitserlood, P., Heindel, W., . . . Dannlowski, U.
(2015). Reward processing in unipolar and bipolar depression: A functional MRI study.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 40(11), 2623–2631.

-- 334 of 498 --

314 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Roberts, S. M., Sylvia, L. G., & Reilly-Harrington, N. A. (2014). The bipolar II disorder workbook:
Managing recurring depression, hypomania, and anxiety. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Romans, S. E., & McPherson, H. M. (1992). The social networks of bipolar affective disorder
patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 25, 221–228.
Salloum, I. M., & Brown, E. S. (2017). Management of comorbid bipolar disorder and substance
use disorders. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 43, 366–376.
Salloum, I. M., Cornelius, J. R., Daley, D. C., Kirisci, L., Himmelhoch, J. M., & Thase, M. E.
(2005). Efficacy of valproate maintenance in patients with bipolar disorder and alcohol-
ism: A double-blind placebo controlled study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 37–45.
Schaffer, A., Isometsä, E. T., Tondo, L., Moreno, D. H., Turecki, G., Reis, C., . . . Yatham, L. N.
(2015). International Society for Bipolar Disorders Task Force on Suicide: Meta-analyses
and meta-regression of correlates of suicide attempts and suicide deaths in bipolar dis-
order. Bipolar Disorders, 17(1), 1–16.
Shen, G., Sylvia, L., Alloy, L., Barrett, F., Kohner, M., Iacoviello, B., & Mills, A. (2008). Lifestyle
regularity and cyclothymic symptomatology. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 64, 482–500.
Simon, G. E., Ludman, E. J., Unützer, J., Bauer, M. S., Operskalski, B., & Rutter, C. (2005). Ran-
domized trial of a population-based care program for people with bipolar disorder. Psy-
chological Medicine, 35, 13–24.
Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Saleem, R., & George, E. L. (1999). Bipolar
disorder and family communication: Effects of a psychoeducational treatment program.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 588–597.
Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., & Saleem, R. (1998). Expressed emotion and interactional
patterns in the families of bipolar patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 497–507.
Stahl, E. A., Breen, G., Forstner, A. J., McQuillin, A., Ripke, S., Trubetskoy, V., . . . Sklar, P.
(2019). Genome-wide association study identifies 30 loci associated with bipolar disor-
der. Nature Genetics, 51(5), 793–803.
Stange, J. P., Sylvia, L. G., da Silva Magalhaes, P. V., Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E.,
. . . Deckersbach, T. (2013). Extreme attributions predict the course of bipolar depression:
Results from the STEP-BD randomized controlled trial of psychosocial treatment. Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 74, 249–255.
Strakowski, S. M., Fleck, D. E., DelBello, M. P., Adler, C. M., Shear, P. K., Kotwal, R., & Arndt, S.
(2010). Impulsivity across the course of bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 12(3), 285–297.
Suppes, T., Leverich, G. S., Keck, P. E., Nolen, W. A., Denicoff, K. D., Altshuler, L. L., . . . Post,
R. M. (2001). The Stanley Foundation Bipolar Treatment Outcome Network: II. Demo-
graphics and illness characteristics of the first 261 patients. Journal of Affective Disorders,
67, 45–59.
Swann, A. C., Pazzaglia, P., Nicholls, A., Dougherty, D. M., & Moeller, F. G. (2003). Impulsivity
and phase of illness in bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 73, 105–111.
Tohen, M., Waternaux, C. M., & Tsuang, M. T. (1990). Outcome in mania: A 4-year prospec-
tive follow-up of 75 patients utilizing survival analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 47,
1106–1111.
Tondo, L., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2000). Reducing suicide risk during lithium maintenance
treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61, 97–104.
Tondo, L., Vazquez, G. H., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2017). Depression and mania in bipolar disor-
der. Current Neuropharmacology, 15, 353–358.
Tseng, W.-L., Guyer, A. E., Briggs-Gowan, M. J., Axelson, D., Birmaher, B., Egger, H. L., . . .
Brotman, M. A. (2015). Behavior and emotion modulation deficits in preschoolers at risk
for bipolar disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 32, 325–334.
Valentí, M., Pacchiarotti, I., Undurraga, J., Bonnín, C. M., Popovic, D., Goikolea, J. M., . . . Vieta,
E. (2015). Risk factors for rapid cycling in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 17, 549–559.

-- 335 of 498 --

Bipolar Disorder 	315
van Gent, E. M., & Zwart, R. M. (1991). Psychoeducation of partners of bipolar manic patients.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 21, 15–18.
Vancampfort, D., Correll, C. U., Galling, B., Probst, M., De Hert, M., Ward, P. B., . . . Stubbs,
B. (2016). Diabetes mellitus in people with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major
depressive disorder: A systematic review and large scale meta-analysis. World Psychiatry,
15(2), 166–174.
Victor, S. E., Johnson, S. L., & Gotlib, I. H. (2011). Quality of life and impulsivity in bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 13(3), 303–309.
Vieta, E., & Valentí, M. (2013). Mixed states in DSM-5: Implications for clinical care, education,
and research. Journal of Affective Disorders, 148(1), 28–36.
Vreeker, A., Boks, M. P. M., Abramovic, L., Verkooijen, S., Van Bergen, A. H., Hillegers, M. H. J.,
. . . Ophoff, R. A. (2016). High educational performance is a distinctive feature of bipolar
disorder: A study on cognition in bipolar disorder, schizophrenia patients, relatives and
controls. Psychological Medicine, 46, 807–818.
Wehr, T. A., Sack, D. A., & Rosenthal, N. E. (1987). Sleep reduction as a final common pathway
in the genesis of mania. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 210–214.
Wehr, T. A., Turner, E., Shimada, J., Lowe, C., Barker, C., & Leibenluft, E. (1998). Treatment of a
rapidly cycling bipolar patient by using extended bed rest and darkness to stabilize the
timing and duration of sleep. Biological Psychiatry, 43, 822–828.
Weiss, R. D., Griffin, M. L., Kolodziej, M. E., Greenfield, S. F., Najavits, L. M., Daley, D. C., &
Hennen, J. A. (2007). A randomized trial of integrated group therapy versus group drug
counseling for patients with bipolar disorder and substance dependence. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 164, 100–107.
Wender, P. H., Kety, S. S., Rosenthal, D., Schulsinger, F., Ortmann, J., & Lunde, I. (1986). Psy-
chiatric disorders in the biological and adoptive families of adopted individuals with
affective disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 923–929.
Whitton, A. E., Treadway, M. T., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2016). Reward processing dysfunction in
major depression, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 28,
7–12.
World Health Organization. (2011). The World Health report: Mental health. Geneva, Switzerland:
Author.
Xuan, R., Li, X., Qiao, Y., Guo, Q., Liu, X., Deng, W., . . . Zhang, L. (2020). Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychia-
try Research, 290, 113116.
Yan, L. J., Hammen, C., Cohen, A. N., Daley, S. E., & Henry, R. M. (2004). Expressed emotion
versus relationship quality variables in the prediction of recurrence in bipolar patients.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 83, 199–206.
Youngstrom, E. A., Findling, R. L., Youngstrom, J. K., & Calabrese, J. R. (2005). Toward an
evidence-based assessment of pediatric bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Child and Ado-
lescent Psychology, 34, 433–448.

-- 336 of 498 --

316
Contemporary basic and translational schizophrenia research challenges historical
therapeutic pessimism. The stronger the research, the clearer it is that people with
schizophrenia are not fated to this condition by strong genetic determinism, nor are
they rendered unaware or unfeeling in their experience of schizophrenia’s symp-
tomatology. An appreciation for this contemporary evidence makes it less surprising
when pharmacotherapy for schizophrenia disappoints, and in some cases, medica-
tion may not even be the most appropriate approach to treatment (Murray et al.,
2016). Along with these emerging basic and translational research implications, there
are also encouraging data on schizophrenia treatment itself. Research in this cat-
egory includes (1) traditional psychosocial treatments, well established for the care of
people with other conditions, being applied to treating schizophrenia; (2) advances
in newer psychosocial treatments that have come also to be appreciated as relevant
for the care of people diagnosed with schizophrenia; and (3) translational research
efforts aimed at individual symptoms and at basic psychological processes thought
to be crucial for schizophrenia. In this chapter, we sample from a range of basic,
translational, and intervention studies to support a more encouraging perspective on
schizophrenia treatment, not only for the benefit of those who study and treat people
with schizophrenia but also in the hope of catching the attention of other readers of
this volume who may not be aware of these developments.
We begin by describing the current schizophrenia diagnostic criteria and their
origins. We then review recent data on the epidemiology of schizophrenia, including
the number and types of people affected (i.e., their gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic
status), and on schizophrenia’s typical course, comorbidities, and prognosis. The
bulk of this chapter is then devoted to descriptions of schizophrenia’s main symp-
toms and the ways in which theory, methods, and measures from affective science,
cognitive neuroscience, and behavioral neuroscience have enabled us more precisely
C H A P T E R 1 1
Schizophrenia
Ann M. Kring
David A. Smith

-- 337 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	317
than ever before to pinpoint the nature of these main symptoms. This increased
explanatory precision has informed the next generation of assessment measures
and psychosocial treatments, which we also describe. In addition to covering these
assessment tools and interventions, where possible throughout this chapter, we
derive clinical implications from basic and translational psychopathology research.
Finally, we delineate general principles of change emerging from newer and promis-
ing treatments.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND CLASSIFICATION
Contemporary approaches to psychiatric diagnosis are sometimes regarded as neo-
Kraepelinian in recognition of the pioneering contributions of the 19th-century
German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin’s original symptom-based distinctions among
mental disorders (Jablensky, 2010). In contrast with this early work, the 20th century
witnessed decades of alternative approaches that were etiologically based, subjective
and inferential, unreliable, and frankly ignored, before more operationally defined
and objectively denotable symptom sets such as Kraepelin’s were reintroduced as
part of the third edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s (1980) Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III) and the 10th edition of the World
Health Organization’s (1992) International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10).
Apart from his general contributions to contemporary, worldwide diagnostic
standards, Kraepelin is also credited specifically with initiating the scientific study
of schizophrenia. He referred to what we today consider schizophrenia as dementia
praecox, which denotes what Kraepelin thought to be the disease’s characteristic early
onset and chronic deteriorating course. It was Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1911)
who later coined the term “schizophrenia,” which he chose to evoke a splitting of
the mind, in recognition of his more psychodynamic ideas about the nature of the
disorder.
One widely used manual that specifies diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia is
DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), which includes several symptoms
(e.g., hallucinations, blunted affect) and specifies duration criteria for the symptoms.
DSM-5 dispensed with schizophrenia subtypes that were part of prior versions of
DSM and remain part of ICD because of their limited reliability, validity, and utility.
Although our focus in this chapter is on schizophrenia, there are other disorders on
the psychotic disorder spectrum, including schizoaffective disorder, schizophreni-
form disorder, brief psychotic disorder, delusional disorder, and two of the personal-
ity disorders (schizotypal, schizoid).
DSM represents a consensus-driven approach to characterizing the symptoms
of schizophrenia. Among the more popular alternatives to the consensus-driven
approach are empirical ones based on factor analysis of symptom ratings. Fortunately,
there is some convergence between the two approaches, especially with respect to
DSM-5. Although the findings are not entirely consistent, the bulk of factor-analytic
studies also converge, like DSM-5, on some variant of a positive, negative, and dis-
organized speech/behavior structure (Kotov et al., 2020; Peralta & Cuesta, 2001).
As with the convergence between consensus and empirical approaches, a satisfy-
ing additional line of convergence comes, once again, from a historical perspective.

-- 338 of 498 --

318 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Kendler (2016) culled key schizophrenia symptoms from textbooks and review
articles published between 1899 and 1956. Thought disorder, emotional blunting,
and delusions were reported by every author reviewed. Notably, this consistency
emerged during the pre–neuroleptic era, further bolstering confidence in both the
contemporary consensus (DSM and ICD) and empirical evidence (factor analysis) for
these being among the most important of schizophrenia’s symptoms.
Although the characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia seem well established,
it must be noted that symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia does not ensure that
schizophrenia is characteristic of these symptoms. Indeed, these very same symp-
toms may present across other disorders and may even be more characteristic of
disorders other than schizophrenia. In particular, positive symptoms might charac-
terize personality disorders (e.g., paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal) and negative
symptoms might characterize mood disorders (e.g., major depression). While this
lack of symptom specificity creates nosological difficulties, for clinical purposes, it
creates opportunities for breakthroughs in the treatment of symptoms in the context
of other disorders to potentially inform the treatment of those same symptoms in the
context of schizophrenia.
Our adoption of a symptom level of analysis for this chapter, as opposed to
considering schizophrenia a unitary diagnostic entity, is a common and not alto-
gether new approach to managing the disorder’s heterogeneity (Neale, Oltmanns, &
Harvey, 1985; Persons, 1986). Among the various symptom configurations, one that
distinguishes positive, negative, and disorganized symptoms has proved useful in
terms of etiology and treatment, especially for positive and negative symptoms. It is
important to emphasize, however, that the positive versus negative locution is nei-
ther evaluative nor valanced. Positive symptoms are positive in the sense that they
are “additions”—excess experiences, phenomena, or functions not typical of people
who are not diagnosed with schizophrenia. Positive symptoms include delusions
and hallucinations. Negative symptoms, on the other hand, are “subtractions”—defi-
ciencies or absences of experience and function. Negative symptoms include asocial-
ity, avolition, anhedonia, blunted affect, and alogia. Disorganized symptoms include
disorganized speech and behavior. With this broad range of symptoms, it is clear
that schizophrenia can touch on everything that makes us human: the way we think,
what our senses perceive, what we feel, our motivation, and the way we behave.
Not surprisingly, schizophrenia is also associated with difficulties in social relation-
ships, goal-directed behavior, and communication. This breadth of impact, coupled
with schizophrenia’s relatively early onset and long-term outcomes, make clear that
by any standard, schizophrenia is among the most severe of the formally recognized
psychological disorders (Charlson et al., 2018).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is nearly 1%, and it affects men slightly more
often than women (Kirkbride et al., 2006; Walker, Kestler, Bollini, & Hochman, 2004).
Schizophrenia is more prevalent in developed than in developing nations (Saha,
Chant, Welham, & McGrath, 2005), but the incidence (i.e., number of new cases over
a particular time period) does not vary according to the economic status of the coun-
try (Saha, Welham, Chant, & McGrath, 2006). Taken together, these epidemiological

-- 339 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	319
findings suggest that the clinical course of schizophrenia is better in developing
nations than in developed ones. However, a close analysis of outcomes across sev-
eral nations indicates a great deal of variability that does not cleave to the devel-
oped versus developing nation perspective (Cohen, Patel, Thara, & Gureje, 2008). In
the United States, schizophrenia is diagnosed more frequently among some racial
groups, such as African Americans, than among others, though it appears that this
may reflect diagnostic bias among clinicians rather than an actual difference among
groups (Schwartz, Docherty, Najolia, & Cohen, 2019; Schwartz & Blankenship, 2014).
COURSE, ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES, AND COMORBIDITY
The typical schizophrenia onset is between ages 18 and 25, usually somewhat earlier
in men than in women. Some evidence suggests that an earlier age of onset is associ-
ated with more negative symptoms and a poorer prognosis (Tandon, Nasrallah, &
Keshavan, 2009). Perhaps owing to their later age of onset, women with schizophre-
nia tend to have an overall better prognosis than men, including better functioning
prior to the onset of the first episode, fewer hospitalizations, fewer negative symp-
toms, better response to treatment, and better social and occupational functioning
(Salem & Kring, 1998). People with schizophrenia typically have a number of more
severe acute episodes with less severe but still debilitating symptoms, including neg-
ative symptoms, between these episodes. Some estimates suggest that about 1 in 5
people with schizophrenia have an optimal course of illness, which means that they
are able to live independently, hold a job, and have meaningful relationships. Most
people with this disorder, however, have multiple episodes and continuing difficul-
ties in social and occupational functioning (Cancro, 1989).
Comorbid substance use disorders are common in schizophrenia, complicating
treatment efforts (Hartz et al., 2014). Anxiety disorders, including panic disorder,
obsessive– compulsive disorder, and social anxiety, are also commonly comorbid
with schizophrenia (Braga, Petrides, & Fifueira, 2004). Posttraumatic stress disor-
der (PTSD), in general, and childhood or adult trauma, in particular, are risk factors
for schizophrenia (Achim et al., 2011; Gibson, Alloy, & Ellman, 2016; Powers, Fani,
Cross, Ressler, & Bradley, 2016), especially so for positive symptoms (Bailey et al.,
2018). Childhood neglect, on the other hand, appears to be a risk factor for negative
symptoms (Bailey et al., 2018). Trauma, unfortunately, is all too common and a fairly
nonspecific risk factor for several psychological disorders, including schizophrenia
(de Vries et al., 2019); that is, experiencing trauma does not chart a direct course to
the onset of schizophrenia. Depression, too, is typical of people with schizophrenia,
though it can be difficult to distinguish between clinical depression and side effects
of medications commonly used to treat schizophrenia (Tandon et al., 2009). Perhaps
related to the high comorbidity with depression, people with schizophrenia are more
likely than people in the general population to die from suicide (Palmer, Pankratz, &
Bostwick, 2005), Sadly, for reasons that are not fully understood, people with schizo-
phrenia are also more likely to die from any cause (Laursen, Nordentoft, & Morten-
son, 2014). Results from a meta-analysis of over 300 people with schizophrenia found
that sleep difficulties, including sleep inefficiency, decreased total sleep time, and
increased sleep latency, are also common, even among people not being treated with
antipsychotic medications (Chouinard, Poulin, Stip, & Godbout, 2004).

-- 340 of 498 --

320 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Clinical Implications
Given the key gender differences in schizophrenia, consideration of gender is impor-
tant for both assessment and treatment. In addition, it is important to do a thorough
diagnostic assessment to identify any comorbid conditions that also require clinical
intervention, including anxiety disorders, PTSD, and both childhood trauma and
neglect. Of particular importance is consideration of depression and suicide risk
among people with schizophrenia. Substance use also warrants additional scrutiny,
not only for possible intervention but also because substance use can complicate
diagnosis by seeming to explain otherwise important indicators of underlying psy-
chosis. Finally, assessment and treatment of sleep difficulties may be beneficial (see
Vincent & Davidson, Chapter 14, this volume), especially because sleep difficulties
are problems in their own right, and because sleep therapies and sleep hygiene train-
ing entail minimal cost and risk, especially in relation to the costs associated with
psychosis and its treatment.
The fact that prognosis is unrelated to socioeconomic differences between coun-
tries raises the possibility that culture plays a strong role. Perhaps it is the culture
of symptom nonacceptance and a reciprocal relationship between symptoms and
control attempts (e.g., Barrowclough & Hooley, 2003; Vasconcelos e Sa, Wearden, &
Barrowclough, 2013) that drives both the aggressiveness of treatment and the poorer
outcomes in Western cultures. While from a Western perspective it is difficult to
imagine accepting schizophrenia to any degree, perhaps the message in these data
is that attempts to ameliorate symptoms can be undertaken from a clinical posture
that is more accepting of idiosyncrasies and eccentricities evidenced by the people
experiencing them. The essentialist impulse to deem anything unusual about peo-
ple to be related to their schizophrenia is nearly irresistible. It is sharply rejecting
and potentially alliance rupturing, however, to mount professional efforts to change
something that is neither part of the disorder nor troublesome to the person. Such
change efforts may be perceived as crossing the line from help into control, so it may
be that alliance building with people diagnosed with schizophrenia is encouraged
not only by negotiating what to change but also by negotiating what not to change.
This, in turn, might provide impetus for a broader societal conversation about accep-
tance of harmless, even if markedly unusual, human diversity.
Diagnostically, there are some important clinical considerations as well. DSM
requires the presence of at least two symptoms from its set of five domains. Because
only one of the DSM domains includes negative symptoms, a person evidencing
negative symptoms without positive symptoms would not qualify for a diagnosis
of schizophrenia. Conversely, a person with positive symptoms (say, delusions and
hallucinations) without negative symptoms, could be diagnosable with schizophre-
nia. Because delusions and hallucinations are highly correlated with each other,
DSM can be viewed as relatively biased in favor of a positive symptom presenta-
tion. Also, establishing the 6-month illness duration criterion can be a challenge
clinically, especially with people who may lack insight into their difficulties and
may thereby be poor historians of symptom onset. The negative symptoms them-
selves, because they are evidenced by the absence of ordinary functions, such as
emotional expressivity, can pose unique diagnostic challenges, making refined
assessment instruments and thorough training in this area very important. People

-- 341 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	321
with schizophrenia also may not appear to be experiencing distress, so the DSM
psychosocial impairment diagnostic criterion requires especially careful evaluation,
including an openness to understanding nontraditional indicators of distress and
ongoing reevaluation of distress as the therapeutic relationship becomes more estab-
lished and trusting.
Finally, racial bias requires constant vigilance, especially in the face of data sug-
gesting that apparent racial differences in schizophrenia may be driven more by cli-
nician diagnostic bias than by actual morbidity. Knowing where bias manifests (e.g.,
Eack, Bahorik, Newhill, Neighbors, & Davis, 2012; Iacovino, Jackson, & Oltmanns,
2014; Schwartz & Blankenship, 2014), whether implicitly or explicitly, is the first step
in eradicating it, so consciousness raising around pathologized racial and ethnic
differences through research, training, and personal reflection is probably neces-
sary to unconfound the schizophrenia diagnosis from its sociopolitical and histori-
cal contexts. There is no shame in feeling insufficiently prepared to navigate racial
and ethnic dimensions of schizophrenia diagnosis, but if diversity considerations in
schizophrenia differential diagnosis fall sufficiently outside one’s competence, it is
worth pursuing the necessary training, experience, consultation, and supervision,
or even making appropriate referrals, to ensure that clinical practice occurs within
the bounds of one’s competence (American Psychological Association, 2017). Doing
nothing is not professionally acceptable, as it perpetuates the continuation of such
biases and misdiagnosis. One of the troubling findings reported by Eack and col-
leagues (2012) is that the greater the mistrust of mental health professionals by Afri-
can Americans with schizophrenia, the greater the likelihood that these individuals
would be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Although speculative, one interpreta-
tion of this finding is that mental health professionals who sensed such mistrust may
have been inclined to attribute it to paranoia or suspiciousness rather than to their
own biases. We can and must do better.
CLINICAL DESCRIPTIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE OF SYMPTOMS
Our symptom-based description of schizophrenia is intended to manage the het-
erogeneity of the disorder for expository purposes and to better represent empirical
findings. Importantly, it is not intended as an approach to categorizing people diag-
nosed with schizophrenia. Symptom-based dimensional models represent the scien-
tific state of the art (e.g., Kotov et al., 2020), and creating new categories from differ-
ent configurations of symptoms no longer seems fruitful (Guloksuz & van Os, 2018).
Consistent with the purpose of the present volume, we see symptoms as occupying
a scientifically rigorous and clinically useful middle ground between aggregated
symptom dimensions and polythetic diagnostic categories.
Positive Symptoms
Positive symptoms tend to be the most familiar schizophrenic symptoms. Unlike neg-
ative symptoms, which manifest as absences, hallucinations and delusions are read-
ily apparent and salient experiences. They are also the most common schizophrenic
symptoms, with a prevalence approaching 90% in some samples (e.g., Demjaha et

-- 342 of 498 --

322 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
al., 2009). Nevertheless, it is worth noting that some evidence suggests that positive
symptoms may be less specific to schizophrenia than are negative symptoms, and
may be secondarily associated with a wide variety of other medical and psychiatric
conditions (e.g., hypo-/hyperglycemia, medication interactions/withdrawal, electro-
lyte/metabolic abnormalities, acute toxicities; Griswold, Del Regno, & Berger, 2015).
Hallucinations
“Hallucinations” are sensory perceptions in the absence of external sensory stimu-
lation. Common examples of hallucinations include hearing voices; seeing shapes,
colors, or people; smelling or tasting rancid food; and feeling insects, burning, or
numbness on parts of the body. The lifetime prevalence of auditory hallucinations
among people diagnosed with schizophrenia approaches 80%, while visual, tactile,
and olfactory hallucination prevalences are nearer to 30%, 20%, and 10%, respec-
tively (McCarthy-Jones et al., 2017). It is especially important to consider religious
and cultural factors in diagnosing hallucinations, as certain visions and other sen-
sory experiences may not be out of the ordinary within particular social groups.
Delusions
“Delusions” are fixed false beliefs that are not normative within one’s religious or
cultural community. Delusions are the most commonly occurring schizophrenia
symptom, evidenced in some 70% of cases across different cultures (Maher, 2001).
DSM distinguishes “bizarre” delusions, which are not possible even in principle—
such as being a deceased historical figure—from “non-bizarre” delusions, which are
possible in principle but are plainly false, such as the belief that one is being system-
atically thwarted by conspiring international authorities or that one’s thoughts are
being inserted, broadcast, or removed. Among the more common delusional themes
is delusions of persecution, which are the most common (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013); paranoia, which is also quite common; grandiosity; and ideas of
reference, according to which otherwise unrelated events are thought to be arranged
for or targeted specifically at the person experiencing the delusions.
Disorganization Symptoms
Disorganized symptoms include disorganized speech and disorganized behavior.
Disorganized speech refers to problems in organizing ideas and in speaking, so that
a listener can understand. Speech may be disorganized by what are called “loose
associations” or “derailment.” With this, a person may be more successful in com-
municating with a listener but has difficulty sticking to one topic. A nice example of
loose associations can be found in excerpts from the book The Soloist by Los Angeles
Times reporter Steve Lopez (2008). Lopez asks about Beethoven and gets the follow-
ing response:
“Cleveland doesn’t have the Beethoven statue. That’s a military-oriented city, occu-
pied, preoccupied, with all the military figures of American history, the great sol-
diers and generals, but you don’t see the musicians on parade, although you do

-- 343 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	323
have Severance Hall, Cleveland Music School Settlement, Ohio University Bobcats,
Buckeyes of Ohio State. All the great soldiers are there from the United States Mili-
tary, World War Two, Korean War, whereas in Los Angeles you have the LAPD, Los
Angeles County Jail, Los Angeles Times, Mr. Steve Lopez. That’s an army, right?”
(pp. 23–24)
In contrast to disorganized speech, disorganized behavior might include bouts
of agitation, dressing in unusual clothes, acting in a silly manner, wandering with
no particular destination, or collecting garbage. A person with this symptom seems
to lose the ability to organize their behavior and make it conform to community
standards. They might also have difficulty performing the tasks of everyday living.
In DSM-5, one manifestation of disorganized behavior is called “catatonia.” This
used to be a subtype of schizophrenia in prior DSM versions, but as noted earlier,
their limited validity rendered subtypes obsolete in DSM-5. People with catatonia
may gesture repeatedly, using peculiar and sometimes complex sequences of finger,
hand, and arm movements, which often seem to be purposeful. Some people mani-
fest an unusual increase in their overall level of activity, including much excitement,
flailing of the limbs, and great expenditure of energy similar to that seen in mania.
At the other end of the spectrum is immobility: People adopt unusual postures and
maintain them for very long periods of time. Catatonia is seldom seen today in peo-
ple with schizophrenia, perhaps because treatments work effectively on these dis-
turbed movements or postures.
Negative Symptoms
A 2006 National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) consensus statement on nega-
tive symptoms concluded that the evidence base supports five negative symptoms:
asociality, avolition, anhedonia, blunted affect, and alogia (Kirkpatrick, Fenton, Car-
penter, & Marder, 2006).
Asociality
“Asociality” involves decreased interest in forming close relationships with others
and/or reduced social activity. People with this symptom may not desire close rela-
tionships with family, friends, or romantic partners. Instead, they may wish to spend
much of their time alone. When around others, people with this symptom may inter-
act only superficially and briefly, and appear aloof or indifferent to these social inter-
actions. People with asociality may report frequently being alone, yet they do not
report feeling lonely. Asociality is distinct from social skills deficits or conditions
that limit the opportunity to interact with other people (e.g., living far away from
friends or family members).
Avolition
“Avolition” refers to diminished motivation and difficulty in initiating and persist-
ing in what are usually routine activities, such as work or school, hobbies, or social
activities. For example, a person with avolition may not be motivated to seek out

-- 344 of 498 --

324 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
work or to keep up with household chores or hobbies, and may instead spend much
of the time at home doing nothing. Like asociality, avolition involves both an expe-
rience component (i.e., motivation) and a behavioral component (i.e., goal-directed
behavior). Therefore, failure to be working is not an indicator of avolition in a non-
working person who is otherwise motivated to work.
Anhedonia
“Anhedonia” involves a reduction in the experience of pleasure. People with anhe-
donia may report diminished pleasure in different domains, such as social activities,
physical activities (e.g., food, sex, exercise), work or school, hobbies, and so forth.
As we discuss in more detail in a later section, research suggests that it is impor-
tant to distinguish consummatory or “in-the-moment” pleasure from anticipatory
pleasure (Kring & Elis, 2013). People with schizophrenia appear to have more dif-
ficulties with anticipatory than with consummatory pleasure; that is, when people
with schizophrenia are asked about expected future situations or activities that are
pleasurable to most people (e.g., good food, recreational activities), they report that
they anticipate less pleasure from these sorts of activities than do people without
schizophrenia (Gard, Kring, Germans Gard, Horan, & Green, 2007). However, when
presented with actual pleasant activities, such as amusing films or tasty beverages,
people with schizophrenia report experiencing as much pleasure as do people with-
out schizophrenia (Kring & Elis, 2013).
Blunted Affect
“Blunted affect” (also called “flat” or “restricted affect”) refers to a lack of outward
expression of emotion. A person with this symptom may stare vacantly, the muscles
of the face motionless, the eyes lifeless. When spoken to, the person may answer in
a flat and toneless voice and not look at their conversational partner. Importantly,
this symptom refers only to the outward expression of emotion and not to reported
experience of emotion, which is not impoverished at all (Kring & Elis, 2013).
Alogia
“Alogia” refers to a significant reduction in the amount of speech. Simply put, people
with this symptom do not talk much. People with alogia answer questions with one
or two words and elaborate on their answers with only the minimum of additional
detail.
Structure of Schizophrenia Symptoms
As described earlier, positive and negative symptoms emerge as distinct factors in
factor-analytic studies of schizophrenia symptoms (e.g., Smith, Mar, & Turoff, 1998).
The psychosis super spectrum of the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology
(Kotov et al., 2017) comprises similar thought disorder and detachment spectra
(Kotov et al., 2020). Despite latent factors underlying the specific symptoms, there are
reasons to preserve symptom-level distinctions. In the case of positive symptoms,

-- 345 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	325
DSM-5 retains the distinction between hallucinations and delusions because some
psychotic disorders involve only one or the other, and because the various treatment
approaches focus on them in somewhat different ways (Barch et al., 2013). Insofar as
negative symptoms are concerned, factor analyses suggest an even more complex
latent situation, with two distinct negative symptom factors emerging (Blanchard
& Cohen, 2006; Blanchard et al., 2017; Kring, Gur, Blanchard, Horan, & Reise, 2013;
Messinger et al., 2011; but see Strauss et al., 2018, for a more complex factor solution).
The first factor is diminished expressivity, and it includes blunted affect and alogia; the
second factor is diminished motivation and pleasure, and it includes avolition, asociality,
and anhedonia.
Clinical Implications
Different types of symptoms are related to a number of clinically significant factors.
The positive and disorganization symptoms tend to be associated with a less chronic
course, including more remissions and relapses than the more chronic course associ-
ated with negative symptoms (Owen, Sawa, & Mortensen, 2016). Positive and disor-
ganization symptoms also respond better to most antipsychotic medications, includ-
ing those that are otherwise associated with the treatment of negative symptoms
(e.g., clozapine; Huhn et al., 2019). Researchers examining the impact of positive and
disorganizations symptoms find that these symptoms are associated with greater
levels of caregiver burden (Barrowclough et al., 2003; Perlick et al., 2006; Wolthaus et
al., 2002). Positive symptoms also seem to decline with age, perhaps owing to reduc-
tions in dopamine that are also associated with aging (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013).
The negative symptoms tend to endure beyond acute episodes and have pro-
found effects on the lives of people with schizophrenia, as well as their family
members. Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies have shown that the presence
of many negative symptoms is a strong predictor of a poor clinical outcome (Fenton
& McGlashan, 1991; Ho, Nopoulos, Flaum, Arndt, & Andreasen, 1998; Milev, Ho,
Arndt, & Andreasen, 2005) and poor quality of life (Blanchard et al., 2017; Eack &
Newhill, 2007; Savill et al., 2016). Negative symptoms are also prognostic of func-
tional outcomes, including poor occupational attainment, financial dependence, and
impaired social adjustment (Siegel et al., 2006). Negative symptoms can also have a
major impact on family members. They are a significant source of caregiver burden
(Dyck, Short, & Vitaliano, 1999; Perlick et al., 2006; Provencher & Mueser, 1997) and
may also contribute to family conflict, which in its own right is related to poor prog-
nostic outcomes for people with schizophrenia (e.g., Hooley, 2007; Weisman, Nuech-
terlein, Goldstein, & Snyder, 2000). In a landmark study of people with schizophrenia
and their spouses, Hooley, Richters, Weintraub, and Neale (1987) found that spouses
believed that negative symptoms were more under the volitional control of the ill
spouse. By contrast, positive symptoms were believed to be part of the illness and
therefore under less individual control, even as spouses with more positive symp-
toms had lower overall functioning compared to spouses with negative symptoms.
Negative symptoms are also attributed to African American psychiatric inpatients
much more often than they are attributed to non-African American psychiatric inpa-
tients (Trierweiler et al., 2000).

-- 346 of 498 --

326 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
ASSESSING SYMPTOMS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
There are many methods for assessing symptoms in schizophrenia. In this section,
we briefly review two methods: clinical interviews and self-report measures. In the
following section we discuss laboratory methods for assessing negative symptoms
later, as a way to illustrate the benefits of translational research.
Clinical Interviews
Perhaps the most typical way to assess schizophrenia symptoms is the clinical inter-
view and rating scale. Clinical interviews are designed to aid diagnosis by assess-
ing the severity of specific symptoms. They typically focus on symptoms over a
particular time interval (e.g., last week, last month, last year), and symptom severity
is indicated on a rating scale that corresponds to the interview. One example of a
commonly used structured interview that coincides with the DSM is the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders (SCID-5; First, Williams, Karg, & Spitzer,
2015). The SCID includes modules covering all diagnoses in the DSM, includ-
ing a module for psychotic and associated symptoms. Most symptoms are rated
on a 3-point scale of severity, with instructions for algorithmically translating the
resulting configuration of symptom ratings into categorical diagnoses. DSM-5 also
includes a Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity assessment,
which uses a 0–4 rating scale to capture psychosis symptom severity (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2013). This measure assesses not only the severity of hallucina-
tions, delusions, disorganization, and negative symptoms but also domains that are
not symptoms of schizophrenia per se, specifically, impaired cognition, depression,
and mania.
Other clinical interview and rating scales, such as the Brief Psychiatric Rat-
ing Scale (BPRS; Lukoff, Nuechterlein, & Ventura, 1986; Overall & Gorham, 1962),
assess general psychiatric symptoms, including those observed in schizophrenia,
anxiety, and mood disorders. One of the mostly widely used clinical rating scales
for schizophrenia is the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS; Kay, Fisz-
bein, & Opler, 1987). Despite its widespread use, the PANSS has several problems.
First, it includes only a single item for hallucinations and a single item for delusions.
Single-item assessments are problematic from a measurement perspective, and they
also fail to cover the complexity of hallucinations (Visual? Auditory?) and delusions
(Reference? Paranoid?). Second, some of the items covering negative symptoms are
no longer considered negative symptoms (e.g., inattention). The Psychotic Symptom
Rating Scales (PSYRATS; Haddock, McCarron, Tarrier, & Faragher, 1999) provide
more comprehensive coverage of positive symptoms by also assessing conviction,
preoccupation, and distress that a person experiences with particular symptoms.
The Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms (CAINS; Kring et al.,
2013) includes several items for each of the five negative symptoms, and the inter-
viewer is instructed to consider multiple perspectives (e.g., experience, behavior) and
to resolve inconsistencies by using follow-up questions.
One challenge is that clinical rating scales can privilege interviewer observa-
tions over first-person reports. This appears to be particularly relevant for schizo-
phrenia, perhaps reflecting the dogma that people with schizophrenia have limited
.

-- 347 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	327
insight or awareness of their illness and cannot reliably report on their own experi-
ences (e.g., Amador et al., 1994; Selten, Gernaat, Nolen, Wiersma, & van den Bosch,
1998). Reconciling two discrepant reports is never an easy task, but such discrepan-
cies may reflect something other than lack of insight or limited self-awareness on the
part of the person with schizophrenia. For example, asking people with schizophre-
nia whether they generally experience pleasure (or even to describe what kinds of
things they find pleasurable) might elicit a different response than asking whether
they derive pleasure from consuming a favorite meal; that is, the context in which
questions about emotional experiences are asked can lead to different responses.
Moreover, and in some ways more importantly, the tendency to interpret mismatches
between first-person and other reports as error by the person with schizophrenia
conveys the message that first-person reports are not meaningful. Nothing could be
further from the truth.
Self‑Report Measures
Another way to assess symptoms is with self-report. Somewhat surprisingly, self-
report measures have not often been used in the assessment of schizophrenia. This
may be due to a general misperception that people with schizophrenia cannot reli-
ably and accurately complete such measures. However, research employing a vari-
ety of paradigms documents the ability of people with schizophrenia to provide
reliable and valid reports of domains such as anhedonia, emotion expression, and
motivation—all constructs related to negative symptoms (e.g., Barch, Yodkovik,
Sypher-Locke, & Hanewinkel, 2008; Horan, Green, Kring, & Nuechterlein, 2006;
Horan, Kring, & Blanchard, 2006).
That people with schizophrenia produce valid self-reports of emotion is less
remarkable when we understand that they do not approach such measures with
different underlying conceptualizations or knowledge structures of the constructs.
For example, a study using multidimensional scaling techniques demonstrated that
people with schizophrenia use the same two-dimensional structure (valence and
arousal) as people without schizophrenia when completing emotion ratings (Kring,
Barrett, & Gard, 2003). Self-report measures are also related to other measures, such
as physiology and behavior (Kring & Elis, 2013). In short, there is considerable evi-
dence that people with schizophrenia self-report their emotion and other internal
states and motivations related to their symptoms in reliable and valid fashion.
One widely used measure to assess positive symptoms is the Community
Assessment of Psychic Experiences (CAPE; Konings, Back, Hanssen van Os, &
Krabbendam, 2006), which covers positive and negative symptoms (also depression
symptoms) and is an expansion of the work of Peters and colleagues who developed
the Peters et al. Delusions Inventory (PDI; Peters, Joseph, & Garety, 1999). This mea-
sure can assess recent and lifetime experiences of symptoms and is also used as a
measure of risk for psychosis.
There are a few specific self-report measure of negative symptoms (Lincoln,
Dollfus, & Lyne, 2017), including a self-report measure based on the CAINS that
assesses the motivation and pleasure domain, and is known as the MAP-SR (Park et
al., 2012). This has been used in several studies, and people with schizophrenia can
complete this without problems (Lincoln et al., 2017).

-- 348 of 498 --

328 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Perhaps the most widely used negative symptom self-report measures are of
anhedonia. In particular, two measures developed in the 1970s by Loren and Jean
Chapman at the University of Wisconsin, the Physical Anhedonia Scale (Chapman &
Chapman, 1978) and the Social Anhedonia Scale (Eckblad, Chapman, Chapman, &
Mishlove, 1982), have been used in many studies. These studies indicate that people
with schizophrenia score higher than (1) people who do not have a psychological
disorder and (2) people with bipolar disorder, but (3) do not differ from people with
depression. However, whereas scores on these scales wax and wane with depres-
sion episodes, they remain elevated among people with schizophrenia, suggesting a
more trait-like anhedonic disturbance. Indeed, scores on these scales show stability
across not only time but also whether a person is taking medication (Horan, Kring,
et al., 2006). While the Chapman scales are useful self-report measures of anhedonia
that have been widely used in schizophrenia research, their content is somewhat
outdated, and more recent research suggests that it is important also to consider
distinct components of anhedonia that are not necessarily reflected on these scales
(Lincoln et al., 2017).
A more contemporary anhedonia measure, which takes into consideration the
time course of emotion in its conceptualization of anhedonia in schizophrenia, is
the Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale (TEPS; Gard, Germans Gard, Kring, &
John, 2006). This trait measure assesses consummatory physical pleasure (i.e., extent
to which a person gets pleasure from physical activities; e.g., food and the outdoors)
and anticipatory physical pleasure (i.e., extent to which a person experiences plea-
sure in anticipation of future physical activities). Meta-analyses of studies using the
TEPS have found that people with schizophrenia can reliably and validly complete
this measure, and that they score lower than people without schizophrenia on the
Anticipatory but not the Consummatory subscale (Frost & Strauss, 2016; Visser,
Chapman, Ruiz, Raugh, & Strauss, 2020).
Clinical Implications
The myriad ways in which schizophrenia symptoms may be assessed suggest a few
key treatment implications. First, the clinical interview itself may be viewed as a
form of “therapeutic assessment” (Finn, 2007); that is, simply by engaging a person
with schizophrenia in a careful and detailed discussion of experiences, emotions,
social relationships, and motivations, the clinician may be helping to identify treat-
ment targets or, in cognitive-behavioral therapy parlance, to develop the problem/
treatment goals list (Beck, Rector, Stolar, & Grant, 2009). Second, because there are
strengths and weaknesses to any assessment approach, routine use of both interview
and self-report measures (as well as laboratory measures, discussed in the next sec-
tion) may be the only way to ensure comprehensive coverage of domains that treat-
ment needs to target. Third, no matter what assessments are used, it will be impor-
tant to consider whether a specific person exhibits particular symptoms, as opposed
to reliance on a global rating or total score that sums across all symptoms or even
symptom domains (i.e., positive, disorganized, or negative). Although the incremen-
tal contribution of finer-grained assessments to the delivery of more effective treat-
ment remains an empirical matter, it would seem that consideration of particular
symptoms guides treatment decisions more effectively and efficiently than lumping
all the symptoms together.

-- 349 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	329
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH: THE EXAMPLE OF NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS
Although clinical interviews and rating scales effectively assess schizophrenia
symptoms and assist with diagnosis, they can be limited when it comes to develop-
ing targeted treatments. First, the behavioral sample on which these interviews are
based may not be representative because the ratings are typically made at a single
time point, such as during hospitalization, that may not fully capture the individual’s
general level of functioning. Second, the format of these interviews, which demand
a certain degree of clinical skill, may systematically fail to elicit the full context of
when symptoms appear and are distressing. Finally, most uses of the rating scales
require tabulation of a total score rather than specific subscale or symptom scores.
Knowing the total score is informative with respect to overall symptomatology, but
it does not provide any specific information about particular symptoms. Less sus-
ceptible to these limitations, laboratory measures that are the focus of translational
research can be a useful means for augmenting clinical interviews when assessing
schizophrenia symptoms.
The aim of translational research is to convert laboratory findings into clinically
useful knowledge, moving them from “bench to bedside.” Our clinical understand-
ing of the negative symptoms of schizophrenia is a good example of translational
research because it has been enhanced by researchers who adopt the methods and
theories developed in affective science, social psychology, personality psychology,
and neuroscience to study emotion and motivation, as well as social interactions
and relationships in schizophrenia (Barch, Gold, & Kring, 2017). With respect to
emotion, these methods include laboratory studies in which emotionally evocative
stimuli are presented to people with and without schizophrenia, while measures of
facial expression, reported experience, physiology, and brain activation are obtained.
With respect to motivation, these methods include laboratory presentation of cues
signaling reward, along with assessments of motivated or goal-directed behavior to
obtain those rewards (or avoid losses). In the social domain, laboratory-based inter-
personal interactions and social perception tasks create opportunities for assessing
social behavior and cognition.
Here, we briefly review examples of such translational research as it pertains to
blunted affect, anhedonia, and avolition. Apart from the direct applications of find-
ings in this literature, it is worth pointing out that many laboratory measures that
are part and parcel of translational research can also be used effectively in clinical
assessments, as well as in gauging the effectiveness of interventions targeting nega-
tive symptoms.
A remarkably consistent pattern of findings has emerged from translational
research studies over the past 30 years (see Kring & Elis, 2013, for review): In the
presence of emotionally evocative stimuli—whether they be films, pictures, foods,
odors, or sounds—people with schizophrenia are less outwardly expressive of posi-
tive and negative emotion than are people without schizophrenia. However, people
with schizophrenia report feeling emotions as strongly as, if not more strongly than,
people without schizophrenia.
Contradicting a clinical rating of anhedonia, people with schizophrenia report
experiencing as much positive emotion in the presence of emotionally pleasant
things, such as films, pictures, tastes, or just day-to-day life, as do people without
schizophrenia (Kring & Elis, 2013). Translational research has helped to resolve this

-- 350 of 498 --

330 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
contradiction. Specifically, neurobehavioral models that distinguish between com-
ponents of hedonic experience (Kring & Barch, 2014) point to an important distinc-
tion between pleasure experienced when directly engaged in an enjoyable activity
(i.e., “consummatory pleasure”) and pleasure experienced in anticipation of future
activities (i.e., “anticipatory pleasure”). Anticipatory pleasure can be further parsed
into two components: (1) predicting the future experience of pleasure and (2) the con-
current experience of pleasure in knowing that a future activity is going to occur—
that is, the pleasure experienced in anticipation of things to come. Behavioral and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) evidence support the contention that
compared to people without schizophrenia, people with schizophrenia have difficul-
ties with both components of anticipatory pleasure. The clinical implication of this
finding is important: If people with schizophrenia are less likely to anticipate that
future events will be pleasurable and to experience pleasure in anticipation of things
to come, they may be less likely to seek out experiences they might find equally plea-
surable (e.g., Frost & Strauss, 2016).
More recent translational research has turned to avolition. There is a growing
body of evidence at both the behavioral and neural levels that people with schizo-
phrenia have difficulty translating reward information (picking up on cues of reward,
maintaining information about forthcoming reward, parsing out costs and benefits
to action) into goal-directed or motivated reward-seeking behavior (for reviews, see
Fulford, Campellone, & Gard, 2018; Kring & Barch, 2014). Heerey and Gold (2007)
showed emotionally evocative pictures to people with and without schizophrenia
in two conditions, asking them to press a button quickly either to see it again (for
positive images) or not to see it again (for negative images). In the first, called the
“representational responding condition,” button pressing took place after the image
was removed from view for 3 seconds. In the second, called the “evoked responding
condition,” button pressing commenced during picture viewing. Interesting group
differences emerged in the representational condition, in which participants pre-
sumably needed to maintain a representation of the pictures to guide their button
pressing. Healthy individuals exhibited a pattern of button pressing that was dis-
tinguishable by valence (i.e., they pressed the button more frequently for emotional
compared to neutral pictures); participants with schizophrenia did not show such
differentiation, suggesting a deficit in motivated behavior that required maintaining
representation of the forthcoming reward (in this case, to see a picture again).
Clinical Implications
What are the treatment implications of the illustrated translational research find-
ings? When treating a person with schizophrenia who is not very outwardly expres-
sive, whether facially, vocally, or gesturally, it is important to recognize that the per-
son likely feels strong emotions. Inasmuch as levels of subjective distress contribute
to impairment of judgments that are necessary for psychiatric diagnosis, mistaking
lack of expression for a lack of distress needs to be avoided, perhaps through spe-
cial efforts to understand emotional experience, when making diagnostic decisions.
Second, people with schizophrenia can express emotion facially if instructed to do
so (e.g., Kohler et al., 2008; Putnam & Kring, 2007). Thus, interventions built around
training expressive behavior may be effective. Third, blunted affect might account for
myriad family and interpersonal difficulties, inasmuch as the social consequences of

-- 351 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	331
unexpressive behavior are likely great, disrupting interactions with both familiar
and unfamiliar people (e.g., Hooley et al., 1987; Krause, Steimer-Krause, & Hufnagel,
1992). Family interventions provide an excellent vehicle for transmitting these trans-
lational findings not only to family members but also to people with schizophrenia
themselves. This way, family members can come to appreciate and empathize even
with the more obscure negative symptoms, while people with schizophrenia can
acquire a vocabulary for expressing and understanding themselves. Thus, family
interventions might benefit from including discussions of these translational find-
ings to more fully help family members understand the nature of negative symp-
toms.
Fourth, assuming, based on a clinical interview or self-report measures of anhe-
donia, that people with schizophrenia experience no pleasure would be a mistake.
Clinical interviews and self-report measures in themselves would have to cause
consummatory pleasure to expose genuine variability in hedonic capacity. Fifth,
it is important to assess both anticipatory and consummatory pleasure, perhaps
borrowing directly from laboratory-dependent measures to do so. Finally, exist-
ing cognitive-behavioral interventions for depression, such as pleasure predicting
(Burns, 1980), may be useful for people with schizophrenia who have a deficit in
anticipatory pleasure.
TREATMENT
Treating any symptom of schizophrenia is notoriously difficult. The current treat-
ment recommendation for schizophrenia from the American Psychiatric Association
and the Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) is for medication plus psychosocial
intervention (American Psychiatric Association, 2020; Kreyenbuhl, Buchanan, Dick-
erson, & Dixon, 2010). Unfortunately, it is often difficult for people with schizophrenia
to receive psychosocial interventions. Without access to psychosocial interventions,
pharmacological treatment becomes the default approach, frequently operating in
isolation from other helpful approaches, so much so that it becomes a challenge for
people diagnosed with schizophrenia to avoid taking medications.
Indeed, the most commonly used treatment is medication, but it is more effec-
tive for (some) positive symptoms and disorganization symptoms than for negative
symptoms. Indeed, the evidence in support of medication treatments for negative
symptoms is underwhelming, with studies showing only minor benefit from phar-
macological treatment (e.g., Leucht et al., 2017; Murphy, Chung, Park, & McGorry,
2006). In what follows, we consider how currently available treatments do (or, in most
cases do not) effectively treat schizophrenia symptoms.
Medication Treatment
In the 1950s, the serendipitous discovery of the class of antipsychotic drugs known
as phenothiazines, especially the drug chlorpromazine (e.g., Thorazine), revolution-
ized the way schizophrenia was treated. Indeed, in less than 20 years, these drugs
became the primary form of treatment for schizophrenia. Other early antipsychot-
ics include the thioxanthenes (e.g., thiothixene/Navane) and the butyrophenones
(e.g., haloperidol/Haldol). Collectively, these drugs are referred to as first-generation

-- 352 of 498 --

332 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
antipsychotics because they came out of the first “wave” of significant, empirically
supported medication treatments for schizophrenia. These first-generation antipsy-
chotic drugs are most effective with the positive and disorganization symptoms,
but as many as 30% of people with schizophrenia do not respond favorably to the
first-generation antipsychotics. As well, about half the people who take any antipsy-
chotic drug quit after 1 year, and up to three-fourths quit before 2 years, because
of unpleasant side effects such as sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, restlessness,
and sexual dysfunction (e.g., Lieberman, et al., 2005). Other more serious side effects
include “extrapyramidal side effects” (e.g., tremors of the fingers, a shuffling gait,
and drooling), “dystonia” (rigid muscles), “akathisia” (inability to remain still), and
“tardive dyskinesia” (involuntary and unstoppable movements of the mouth area).
Because of these side effects, current clinical practice guidelines from the Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association (2020) call for treating people with the smallest possible
doses of drugs. Ideally, the smallest possible dosage would be no drugs at all when
side effects are not tolerable or when symptoms are not affected; in practice, however,
low dosages are nevertheless routinely prescribed. Notably, and unfortunately, the
first-generation antipsychotic drugs are not very effective in treating negative symp-
toms (e.g., Leucht et al., 2009).
In order to remedy the deficiencies of first-generation antipsychotics, a second
wave of research produced a group of drugs referred to as the second-generation
antipsychotics. Heralded at the time as drugs that would have fewer side effects and
be more effective than first-generation drugs, particularly for negative symptoms
(e.g., Kane, Honigfeld, Singer, Meltzer, & the Clozapine Study Group, 1988), these
medications have their own troubling profile of side effects, such as weight gain
(Huhn et al., 2019; Rummel-Kluge et al., 2010), which has been linked to the develop-
ment of type 2 diabetes (Leslie & Rosenheck, 2004). Unfortunately, between 12 and
20% of people do not respond to these medications, particularly clozapine (Siskind,
Siskind, & Kisely, 2017). Furthermore, there is no strong evidence that these drugs
are any more effective than the first-generation drugs. A meta-analysis of over 400
studies with over 50,000 people compared the efficacy and side-effect profiles of 32
different first- and second-generation medications (Huhn et al., 2019). Two key find-
ings emerged. First, all but six of the drugs did a better job of reducing symptoms
compared to placebo, and there was little difference between the drugs in terms of
how effective they were at reducing symptoms. Second, the greatest effect was on
positive and disorganization symptoms. As noted earlier, medications are not very
effective for negative symptoms, whether first- or second-generation (Fusar-Poli et
al., 2015). In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration, the body that
approves new medication treatments for all illnesses, has yet to approve any medica-
tion with an indication for negative symptoms.
Another challenge with second-generation medications is that nearly three-
fourths of people stop taking them due to side effects (Jones et al., 2006; Lieberman
et al., 2005).
Psychosocial Treatments
Several psychosocial interventions, including cognitive-behavioral therapy, family-
based treatments, and skills training, have a solid evidence base to support their
use as an adjunctive treatment to medications (Dixon et al., 2010; National Institute

-- 353 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	333
for Health and Care Excellence, 2014; Turner, van der Gaag, Karyotaki, & Cuijpers,
2014).
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
A growing body of evidence demonstrates that the maladaptive beliefs of some peo-
ple with schizophrenia can benefit from cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT; Garety,
Fowler, & Kuipers, 2000; Wykes, Steel, Everitt, & Tarrier, 2008). The use of CBT in
schizophrenia is often referred to as CBTp, where the p stands for “psychosis” to
make clear that the CBT has been adapted for people with psychosis, such as those
with schizophrenia.
People with schizophrenia can be encouraged to test out their delusional beliefs
in much the same way as can people without schizophrenia. Through collaborative
discussions (and in the context of other modes of treatment, including antipsychotic
drugs), some people with schizophrenia have been helped to attach a nonpsychotic
meaning to paranoid symptoms and thereby reduce their intensity and aversive
nature, similar to what is done for depression and panic disorder (Beck & Rector,
2005; Beck et al., 2009; Turkington, Kingdon, & Weiden, 2006).
But does CBTp help with the negative symptoms? CBTp formulations targeting
negative symptoms may include challenging belief structures tied to low expecta-
tions for success (avolition) and low expectations for pleasure (anticipatory pleasure
deficit in anhedonia) (Rector, Beck, & Stolar, 2005; Wykes et al., 2008). One study has
shown that CBTp can help with avolition, by challenging belief structures tied to
low expectations for success (Grant, Huh, Perivoliotis, Stolar, & Beck, 2012). A meta-
analysis of 34 studies of close to 2,000 people with schizophrenia, across eight dif-
ferent countries, found small to moderate effect sizes for CBTp in treating positive
symptoms, negative symptoms, mood, and general life functioning (Wykes et al.,
2008). A qualitative review of 21 studies found that CBTp was effective in reducing
negative symptoms either compared to an active treatment or treatment as usual
(Elis, Caponigro, & Kring, 2013).
CBT exists within an extremely active and creative research community that
not only values empirical research but also aggressively pursues innovative means
of effecting change. Recently, CBT has embraced mindfulness-based approaches
(Kabat-Zinn, 1990; Khoury, Lecomte, Gaudiano, & Paquin, 2013), acceptance and
commitment therapy (Bach & Hayes, 2002; Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999; Louise,
Fitzpatrick, Strauss, Rossell, & Thomas, 2018), emotion theory, and metacognitive
concepts (Flavell, 1979; Sauvé, Lavigne, Pochiet, Brodeur, & Lepage, 2020), among oth-
ers. Collectively, these are sometimes referred to as third-wave approaches because
they follow behavioral, then cognitive-behavioral approaches. CBT is also studied
in the context of nearly every other form of psychopathology, creating ample oppor-
tunity for cross-fertilization of theories and methods in order to address the myriad
problems experienced by people with schizophrenia (Freeman, Taylor, Molodynski,
& Waite, 2019), including specific symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions
(Freeman, 2016; van der Gaag, Valmaggia, & Smit, 2014).
A variant of CBT, cognitive-behavioral social skills training (CBSST), focuses on
reducing symptoms and improving functioning (Granholm, McQuaid, & Holden,
2016). Randomized controlled clinical trials have shown it to be effective (Gran-
holm et al., 2005; Granholm, Holden, Link, & McQuaid, 2014), and it has also shown

-- 354 of 498 --

334 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
promise among people early in the course of the disorder (Herman, Shireen, Brom-
ley, Yiu, & Granholm, 2018). This treatment was effective in reducing positive symp-
toms and avolition (other negative or disorganization symptoms were not assessed).
Another treatment that has shown promise for people early in the course of
schizophrenia is called NAVIGATE (Mueser et al., 2015). This is a broad-based
approach that includes medication, family psychoeducation, and individual therapy.
In a large randomized controlled clinical trial called the Recovery after an Initial
Schizophrenia Episode Early Treatment Program (RAISE-ETP), NAVIGATE was
more effective than standard community care in terms of improving quality of life
and reducing symptoms. Unfortunately, the investigators did not parse positive, dis-
organized, and negative symptoms for separate analyses; they just reported a symp-
tom total score (Kane et al., 2016).
Family Psychoeducation
Family psychoeducation approaches to schizophrenia treatment are based on data
pertaining to the role of families in relapse of psychopathology (Hooley, 2007;
Pharoah, Mari, Rathbone, & Wong, 2010). Although a wide variety of family psycho-
education programs have been developed, they are more similar than they are differ-
ent. In particular, they all entail work with both the family and the identified patient,
in a collaboration dedicated to improving family functioning and reducing stress.
Efforts at helping that are well intended but not helpful (e.g., criticism, emotional
overinvolvement) are replaced with ones that are more helpful. Importantly, family
members are not blamed for symptom exacerbations; rather, there is an emphasis on
the nature of schizophrenia, the sometimes nonintuitive needs of symptomatic fam-
ily members, how to access support and care systems, negotiated problem solving or
crisis management work, and collaborative monitoring of systems in order to permit
prompt interventions during acute problem periods, in order to avoid relapses and
more invasive interventions. A recent review of 20 studies with a total of 2,337 partic-
ipants suggested that brief psychoeducation can lower relapse rates, improve symp-
toms, increase medication compliance, and reduce anxiety and depression (Zhao,
Sampson, Xia, & Jayaram, 2015).
Social Skills Training
Social skills training is designed to teach people with schizophrenia how to man-
age successfully a wide variety of interpersonal situations, such as discussing their
medications with the psychiatrist, interviewing for jobs, and reading bus schedules
(Heinssen, Liberman, & Kopelowicz, 2000; Liberman, Eckman, Kopelowicz, & Sto-
lar, 2000). Social skills training typically involves role playing and other group exer-
cises to practice skills, both in a therapy group and in actual social situations. As
might be expected, social skills training has its largest impact on social skills, but
it also has significant impact on negative symptoms. In a meta-analysis, Kurtz and
Mueser (2008) report moderate effects (effect size [ES] = 0.40) across six studies (N =
363) of social skills training on negative symptoms. Interestingly, these effect sizes
exceed those for other psychiatric symptoms (ES = 0.15), though they are substan-
tially smaller than those found for actual social skills (ES = 1.20).

-- 355 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	335
Adapted Meditation
It is easy enough to advocate basing new and innovative treatments on the best
contemporary translational science. It is somewhat harder actually to do so. Nev-
ertheless, this work has already begun. A recent meta-analysis of meditation-based
treatments for negative symptoms found a small but reliable effect size for these
treatments helping to reduce negative symptoms compared to treatment-as-usual or
another control treatment (Sabe, Sentissi, & Kaiser, 2019).
To illustrate this type of treatment approach, an emotion-focused meditation
treatment targeting anticipatory pleasure and motivation difficulties in schizo-
phrenia (Johnson et al., 2009, 2011) was developed as an extension and adaptation
to schizophrenia of loving-kindness meditation (LKM). Similar to other meditation
practices, LKM involves quiet contemplation and attention to the here and now. Par-
ticipants follow a guided meditation that asks them to direct their attention to their
heart region and contemplate a person for whom they already feel warm, tender,
and compassionate feelings, or a situation in which they felt warm feelings. They
are then asked to extend these warm feelings to themselves, using such internally
spoken phrases as “May I be safe” or “May I be at peace,” to help generate these feel-
ings. As the practice continues, participants are asked to radiate these warm, tender,
and compassionate feelings to others: first to a few people they know well, then to all
their friends and family, and finally to all people with whom they have a connection.
In the emotion-focused meditation, two groups of nine participants with schizo-
phrenia attended 1-hour weekly sessions for 6 weeks, as well as a review session 6
weeks after the final session. The weekly group sessions incorporated three major
components: discussion, skills teaching, and practice. At the beginning of each ses-
sion, the participants were encouraged to discuss something they learned from
doing the meditation or a perceived benefit of the meditation. Problems, challenges,
or questions about the practice were then addressed by the group, with advice given
by the therapist to meet participants’ needs and reinforce positive aspects of the
practice. Next, a mindfulness activity such as mindful eating, walking, listening,
or body movement, was taught and practiced. Then, the group facilitator led par-
ticipants in 5- to 10-minute meditation practice during the session, gently remind-
ing participants to redirect their attention nonjudgmentally to the feeling of loving-
kindness and positive emotions when their attention wandered. Participants were
encouraged to practice at home and were given a CD with guided meditations.
Although this was a completely uncontrolled study and the findings are
extremely preliminary, the attendance of people with schizophrenia was over 90%,
and feedback suggested that participants enjoyed and benefited from the treatment.
The treatment was associated with a decrease in anhedonia and asociality, and an
increase in positive emotions at posttreatment and at 3-month follow-up assessments
(Johnson et al., 2011).
Principles of Change
Although we have discussed clinical implications at various points throughout this
chapter, it is also worth attempting to delineate some more general principles of
change. Foremost among these is the proposition that psychosocial and biological
interventions complement rather than contradict each other. Just as medications have

-- 356 of 498 --

336 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
psychosocial effects, so, too, do psychosocial interventions have biological effects. A
completely deterministic biological accounting for the etiology of schizophrenia will
not change this any more than a biological account of learning would eliminate the
need for formal education. Similarly, fundamentally psychosocial phenomena may
be affected by biological interventions. Unlike other disorders, such as depression,
the symptoms of schizophrenia—especially the negative symptoms—are far enough
from ordinary experience that it is tempting to assume there must be something
wrong neurobiologically with patients and that a biological intervention is therefore
necessary. Both assumptions are based on faulty logic that researchers and clinicians
must avoid.
It may also be the case that the effective treatments are aimed not at schizo-
phrenia per se but at circumscribed problems associated with schizophrenia. For
instance, social skills training has its greatest effects on social skills, anhedonia and
asociality appear to be affected by emotion-focused meditation, and anticipatory
pleasure seems to be improved by interventions specifically targeting this phenom-
enon. Changes may be most likely when basic symptom and translational research
processes are targeted for intervention.
Interest in psychosocial interventions has also been invigorated by a focus on
specific symptoms rather than on the overall schizophrenia diagnostic category.
Research into CBT for delusions, for example, has reversed the traditional wisdom
that engaging with the content of positive symptoms is not useful. On the contrary,
doing so brings a wide array of well-specified procedures, including worry control
and exposure therapies, into the armamentarium of psychosis treatment.
Finally, though not a therapy unto itself, the therapeutic alliance in schizophre-
nia treatment has been the subject of increasing empirical attention. In a recent nar-
rative review of this literature, Browne, Nagendra, Kurtz, Berry, and Penn (2019)
found stronger therapeutic alliances to be associated with better insight, medication
adherence, and improved functioning, among other findings. Their appeal for more
training and supervision in developing a positive alliance with people experiencing
psychosis seems especially apt given the social and interpersonal difficulties often
associated with schizophrenia, particularly its negative symptoms (Shattock, Berry,
Degnan, & Edge, 2018).
CONCLUSION
Decades of empirical research have led to a growing understanding of the phenom-
enology (symptoms, prevalence, course, associated clinical features, comborbidity)
and etiology of schizophrenia. From these findings, clinical implications have been
derived with the goal of improving treatments. This is indicated, as the limitations of
contemporary treatments are as heartbreaking as they are well known. Fortunately,
promising evidence has emerged from the implementation of traditional and newer
forms of psychosocial therapies, as well as from innovative interventions based on
translational research. Clearly, the search for effective treatments must continue. To
the extent that the search for next-generation schizophrenia treatments leverages
evolving basic, applied, and translational research, there is cause for optimism that
this tragic disorder will one day be tractable.

-- 357 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	337
REFERENCES
Achim, A. M., Maziade, M., Raymond, E., Olivier, D., Merette, C., & Roy, M.-A. (2011). How
prevalent are anxiety disorders in schizophrenia?: A meta-analysis and critical review
on a significant association. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(4), 811–821.
Amador, X. F., Flaum, M., Andreasen, N. C., Strauss, D. H., Yale, S. A., Clark, S. C., & Gorman,
J. M. (1994). Awareness of illness in schizophrenia and schizoaffective and mood disor-
ders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 826–836.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2020). The American Psychiatric Association practice
guideline for the treatment of patients with schizophrenia. Retrieved from www.psychia-
try.org/psychiatrists/practice/clinical-practice-guidelines.
American Psychological Association. (2017). APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and
Code of Conduct. American Psychologist, 57(12), 1–20.
Bach, P., & Hayes, S. C. (2002). The use of acceptance and commitment therapy to prevent the
rehospitalization of psychotic patients: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consult-
ing and Clinical Psychology, 70, 1129–1139.
Bailey, T., Alvarez-Jimenez, M., Garcia-Sanchez, A. M., Hulbert, C., Barlow, E., & Bendall, S.
(2018). Childhood trauma is associated with severity of hallucinations and delusions in
psychotic disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 44(5),
1111–1122.
Barch, D. M., Bustillo, J., Gaebel, W., Gur, R., Heckers, S., Malaspina, D., . . . Carpenter, W.
(2013). Logic and justification for dimensional assessment of symptoms and related clini-
cal phenomena in psychosis: Relevance to DSM-5. Schizophrenia Research, 150(1), 15–20.
Barch, D. M., Gold, J. M., & Kring, A. M. (2017). Paradigms for assessing hedonic processing
and motivation in humans: Relevance to understanding negative symptoms in psycho-
pathology. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 43, 701–705.
Barch, D. M., Yodkovik, N., Sypher-Locke, H., & Hanewinkel, M. (2008). Intrinsic motivation
in schizophrenia: Relationships to cognition, depression, anxiety, and personality. Jour-
nal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 776–787.
Barrowclough, C., & Hooley, J. M. (2003). Attributions and expressed emotion: A review. Clini-
cal Psychology Review, 23(6), 849–880.
Barrowclough, C., Tarrier, N., Humphreys, L., Ward, J., Gregg, L., & Andrews, B. (2003). Self-
esteem in schizophrenia: Relationships between self-evaluation, family attitudes, and
symptomatology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 92–99.
Beck, A. T., & Rector, N. A. (2005). Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: Theory and ther-
apy. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 577–606.
Beck, A. T., Rector, N. A., Stolar, N., & Grant, P. (2009). Schizophrenia: Cognitive theory, research,
and therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Blanchard, J. J., Bradshaw, K. R., Garcia, C. P., Nasrallah, H. A., Harvey, P. D., Casey, D., . . .
O’Gorman, C. (2017). Examining the reliability and validity of the Clinical Assessment
Interview for Negative Symptoms within the Management of Schizophrenia in Clinical
Practice (MOSAIC) multisite national study. Schizophrenia Research, 185, 137–143.
Blanchard, J. J., & Cohen, A. (2006). The structure of negative symptoms within schizophre-
nia: Implications for assessment. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 238–245.
Bleuler, E. (1911). Dementia Praecox oder Gruppe der Schizophrenien. Leipzig, Germany: Deuticke.
Braga, R. J., Petrides, G., & Fifueira, I. (2004). Anxiety disorders in schizophrenia. Comprehen-
sive Psychiatry, 45, 460–468.

-- 358 of 498 --

338 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Browne, J., Nagendra, A., Kurtz, M., Berry, K., & Penn, D. L. (2019). The relationship between
the therapeutic alliance and client variables in individual treatment for schizophrenia
spectrum disorders and early psychosis: Narrative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 71,
51–62.
Burns, D. D. (1980). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New York: Morrow.
Cancro, R. (1989). Schizophrenia. In T. B. Karasu (Ed.), Treatments of psychiatric disorders: A task
force report of the American Psychiatric Association. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association.
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1978). The Revised Physical Anhedonia Scale. Unpublished test,
University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI.
Charlson, F. J., Ferrari, A. J., Santomauro, D. F., Diminic, S., Stockings, E., Scott, J. G., . . . Whit-
eford, H. A. (2018). Global epidemiology and burden of schizophrenia: Findings from the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 44, 1195–1203.
Chouinard, S., Poulin, J., Stip, E., & Godbout, R. (2004). Sleep in untreated patients with schizo-
phrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30, 957–967.
Cohen, A., Patel, V., Thara, R., & Gureje, O. (2008). Questioning an axiom: Better prognosis for
schizophrenia in the developing world? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(2), 229–244.
de Vries, B., van Busschbach, J. T., van der Stouwe, E. C. D., Aleman, A., van Dijk, J. J. M., Lysa-
ker, P. H., . . . Pijnenborg, G. H. M. (2019). Prevalence rate and risk factors of victimiza-
tion in adult patients with a psychotic disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 45, 114–126.
Demjaha, A., Morgan, K., Morgan, C., Landau, S., Dean, K., Reichenberg, A., . . . Dazzan, P.
(2009). Combining dimensional and categorical representation of psychosis: The way
forward for DSM-V and ICD-11? Psychological Medicine, 39(12), 1943–1955.
Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., Goldberg, R. W., . . .
Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT). (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia
PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 36, 48–70.
Dyck, D. G., Short, R., & Vitaliano, P. P. (1999). Predictors of burden and infectious illness in
schizophrenia caregivers. Psychosomatic Medicine, 61, 411–419.
Eack, S. M., Bahorik, A. L., Newhill, A. L., Neighbors, H. W., & Davis, L. E. (2012). Interviewer-
perceived honesty as a mediator of racial disparities in the diagnosis of Schizophrenia.
Psychiatric Services, 63, 875–880.
Eack, S. M., & Newhill, C. E. (2007). Psychiatric symptoms and quality of life in schizophrenia:
A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 1225–1237.
Eckblad, M. L., Chapman, L. J., Chapman, J. P., & Mishlove, M. (1982). The Revised Social Anhe-
donia Scale. Unpublished test, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI.
Elis, O., Caponigro, J. M., & Kring, A. M. (2013). Psychosocial treatments for negative symp-
toms in schizophrenia: Current practices and future directions. Clinical Psychology
Review, 33(8), 914–928.
Fenton, W. S., & McGlashan, T. H. (1991). Natural history of schizophrenia subtypes: II. Positive
and negative symptoms and long-term course. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 978–986.
Finn, S. E. (2007). In our clients’ shoes: Theory and techniques of therapeutic assessment. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-5 Disorders, Clinician Version (SCID-5-CV). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive-
developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34(10), 906–911.
Freeman, D. (2016). Persecutory delusions: A cognitive perspective on understanding and
treatment. Lancet Psychiatry, 3(7), 685–692.

-- 359 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	339
Freeman, D., Taylor, K. M., Molodynski, A., & Waite, F. (2019). Treatable clinical intervention
targets for patients with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 211, 44–50.
Frost, K. H., & Strauss, G. P. (2016). A review of anticipatory pleasure in schizophrenia. Current
Behavioral Neuroscience Reports, 3, 232–247.
Fulford, D., Campellone, T., & Gard, D. E. (2018). Social motivation in schizophrenia: How
research on basic reward processes informs and limits our understanding. Clinical Psy-
chology Review, 63, 12–24.
Fusar-Poli, P., Papanastasiou, E., Stahl, D., Rocchetti, M., Carpenter, W., Shergill, S., & McGuire,
P. (2015). Treatments of negative symptoms in schizophrenia: Meta-analysis of 168 ran-
domized placebo-controlled trials. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 41(4), 892–899.
Gard, D. E., Germans Gard, M., Kring, A. M., & John, O. P. (2006). Anticipatory and consum-
matory components of the experience of pleasure: A scale development study. Journal of
Research in Personality, 40, 1086–1102.
Gard, D. E., Kring, A. M., Germans Gard, M., Horan, W. P., & Green, M. F. (2007). Anhedo-
nia in schizophrenia: Distinctions between anticipatory and consummatory pleasure.
Schizophrenia Research, 93, 253–260.
Garety, P. A., Fowler, D., & Kuipers, E. (2000). Cognitive behavioral therapy for medication-
resistant symptoms. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 73–86.
Gibson, L. E., Alloy, L. B., & Ellman, L. M. (2016). Trauma and the psychosis spectrum: A
review of symptom specificity and explanatory mechanisms. Clinical Psychology Review,
49, 92–105.
Granholm, E., Holden, J. L., Link, P., & McQuaid, J. R. (2014). Randomized clinical trial of
cognitive behavioral social skills training for schizophrenia: Improvement in function-
ing and experiential negative symptoms. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 82,
1173–1185.
Granholm, E. L., McQuaid, J. R., & Holden, J. L. (2016). Cognitive-behavioral social skills training
for schizophrenia: A practical treatment guide. New York: Guilford Press.
Granholm, E., McQuaid, J. R., McClure, F. S., Auslander, L. A., Perivoliotis, D., Paola Pedrelli,
M. S., . . . Jeste, D. V. (2005). A randomized, controlled trial for cognitive behavioral social
skills training for middle-aged and older outpatients with chronic schizophrenia. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 520–529.
Grant, P. M., Huh, G., Perivoliotis, D., Stolar, N., & Beck, A. T. (2012). Randomized trial to
evaluate the efficacy of cognitive therapy for low-functioning patients with schizophre-
nia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 121–127.
Griswold, K. S., Del Regno, P. A., & Berger, R. C. (2015). Recognition and differential diagnosis
of psychosis in primary care. American Family Physician, 91(12), 856–863.
Guloksuz, S., & van Os, J. (2018). The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia and the pain-
ful birth of the psychosis spectrum. Psychological Medicine, 48(2), 229–244.
Haddock, G., McCarron, J., Tarrier, N., & Faragher, E. (1999). Scales to measure dimensions of
hallucinations and delusions: The Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales (PSYRATS). Psycho-
logical Medicine, 29, 879–889.
Hartz, S. M., Pato, C. N., Medeiros, H., Cavazos-Rehg, P., Sobell, J. L., Knowles, J. A., . . .
Genomic Psychiatry Cohort Consortium. (2014). Comorbidity of severe psychotic disor-
ders with measures of substance use. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(3), 248–254.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An
experiential approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.
Heerey, E. A., & Gold, J. M. (2007). Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate dissociation
between affective experience and motivated behavior. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
116, 268–278.
Heinssen, R. K., Liberman, R. P., & Kopelowicz, A. (2000). Psychosocial skills training for
schizophrenia: Lessons from the laboratory. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 21–46.

-- 360 of 498 --

340 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Herman, Y., Shireen, H., Bromley, S., Yiu, N., & Granholm, E. (2018). Cognitive-behavioural
social skills training for first-episode psychosis: A feasibility study. Early Intervention in
Psychiatry, 12(5), 863–868.
Ho, B. C., Nopoulos, P., Flaum, M., Arndt, S., & Andreasen, N. C. (1998). Two-year outcome in
first-episode schizophrenia: Predictive value of symptoms for quality of life. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 1196–1201.
Hooley, J. M. (2007). Expressed emotion and relapse of psychopathology. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 3, 329–352.
Hooley, J. M., Richters, J. E., Weintraub, S., & Neale, J. M. (1987). Psychopathology and mari-
tal distress: The positive side of positive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96,
27–33.
Horan, W. P., Green, M. F., Kring, A. M., & Nuechterlein, K. H. (2006). Does anhedonia in
schizophrenia reflect faulty memory for subjectively experienced emotions? Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 115, 496–508.
Horan, W. P., Kring, A. M., & Blanchard, J. J. (2006). Anhedonia in schizophrenia: A review of
assessment strategies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 259–273.
Huhn, M., Nikolakopoulou, A., Schneider-Thoma, J., Krause, M., Samara, M., Peter, N., . . .
Leucht, S. (2019). Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 32 oral antipsychotics for the
acute treatment of adults with multi-episode schizophrenia: A systematic review and
network meta-analysis. Lancet, 394, 939–951.
Iacovino, J. M., Jackson, J. J., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). The relative impact of socioeconomic sta-
tus and childhood trauma on Black–White differences in paranoid personality disorder
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123(1), 225–230.
Jablensky, A. (2010). The diagnostic concept of schizophrenia: Its history, evolution, and future
prospects. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 12(3), 271–287.
Johnson, D. J., Penn, D. L., Fredrickson, B. L., Kring, A. M., Meyer, P. S., Catalino, L. I., & Brant-
ley, M. (2011). A pilot study of loving-kindness meditation for the negative symptoms of
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 129, 137–140.
Johnson, D. J., Penn, D. L., Fredrickson, B. L., Meyer, P. S., Kring, A. M., & Brantley, M. (2009).
Loving-kindness meditation to enhance recovery from negative symptoms of schizo-
phrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65, 499–509.
Jones, P. B., Barnes, T. R. E., Davies, L., Dunn, G., Lloyd, H., Hayhurst, K. P., . . . Lewis, S. W.
(2006). Randomized controlled trial of the effect on quality of life of second- vs first-
generation antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: Cost Utility of the Latest Antipsychotic
Drugs in Schizophrenia Study (CUtLASS 1). Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 1079–1087.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress,
pain and illness. New York: Delacorte.
Kane, J., Honigfeld, G., Singer, J., Meltzer, H., & the Clozapine Collaborative Study Group.
(1988). Clozapine for treatment resistant schizophrenics. Archives of General Psychiatry,
45, 789–796.
Kane, J. M., Robinson, D. G., Schooler, N. R., Mueser, K. T., Penn, D. L., Rosenheck, R. A., . . .
Heinssen, R. K. (2016). Comprehensive versus usual community care for first-episode
psychosis: 2-year outcomes from the NIMH RAISE early treatment program. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 362–372.
Kay, S., Fiszbein, A., & Opler, L. (1987). The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 261–276.
Kendler, K. S. (2016). Phenomenology of schizophrenia and the representativeness of modern
diagnostic criteria. JAMA Psychiatry, 73(10), 1082–1092.
Khoury, B., Lecomte, T., Gaudiano, B. A., & Paquin, K. (2013). Mindfulness interventions for
psychosis: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 150(1), 176–184.
Kirkbride, J. B., Fearon, P., Morgan, C., Dazzon, P., Morgan, K., Dazzan, P., . . . Jones, P. B. (2006).

-- 361 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	341
Heterogeneity in the incidence of schizophrenia and other psychotic illnesses: Results
from the 3-center Aesop study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 250–258.
Kirkpatrick, B., Fenton, W. S., Carpenter, W. T., & Marder, S. R. (2006). The NIMH-MATRICS
Consensus Statement on Negative Symptoms. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32(2), 214–219.
Kohler, C. G., Martin, E. A., Milonova, M., Wang, P., Verma, R., Brensinger, C. M., . . . Gur, R.
C. (2008). Dynamic evoked facial expressions of emotions in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Research, 105, 30–39.
Konings, M., Bak, M., Hanssen, M., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. (2006). Validity and reliabil-
ity of the CAPE: A self-report instrument for the measurement of psychotic experiences
in the general population. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 114(1), 55–61.
Kotov, R., Jonas, K. G., Carpenter, W. T., Dretsch, M. N., Eaton, N. R., Forbes, M. K., . . . Watson,
D. (2020). Validity and utility of Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP): I.
Psychosis superspectrum. World Psychiatry, 19(2), 151–172.
Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., Althoff, R. R., Bagby, R. M., . . . Zimmer-
man, M. (2017). The Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP): A dimensional
alternative to traditional nosologies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126(4), 454–477.
Krause, R., Steimer-Krause, E., & Hufnagel, H. (1992). Expression and experience of affects in
paranoid schizophrenia. European Review of Applied Psychology, 42, 131–138.
Kreyenbuhl, J., Buchanan, R. W., Dickerson, F. B., & Dixon, L. B. (2010). The Schizophrenia
Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT): Updated treatment recommendations 2009.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 94–103.
Kring, A. M., & Barch, D. M. (2014). The motivation and pleasure dimension of negative symp-
toms: Neural substrates and behavioral outputs. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 24,
725–736.
Kring, A. M., Barrett, L. F., & Gard, D. E. (2003). On the broad applicability of the affective
circumplex: Representations of affective knowledge in schizophrenia. Psychological Sci-
ence, 14, 207–214.
Kring, A. M., & Elis, O. (2013). Emotion deficits in people with schizophrenia. Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology, 9, 409–433.
Kring, A. M., Gur, R. E., Blanchard, J. J., Horan, W. P., & Reise, S. P. (2013). The Clinical Assess-
ment Interview for Negative Symptoms (CAINS): Final development and validation.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 165–172.
Kurtz, M. M., & Mueser, K. T. (2008). A meta-analysis of controlled research on social skills
training for schizophrenia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 491–504.
Laursen, T. M., Nordentoft, M., & Mortensen, P. B. (2014). Excess early mortality in schizophre-
nia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 10, 425–448.
Leslie, D. L., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2004). Incidence of newly diagnosed diabetes attributable to
atypical antipsychotic medications. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 1709–1711.
Leucht, S., Corves, C., Arbter, D., Engel, R. R., Li, C., & Davis, J. M. (2009). Second-generation
versus first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Lancet,
373, 31–41.
Leucht, S., Leucht, C., Huhn, M., Chaimani, A., Mavridis, D., Helfer, B., . . . Davis, J. M. (2017).
Sixty years of placebo-controlled antipsychotic drug trials in acute schizophrenia: Sys-
tematic review, Bayesian meta-analysis, and meta-regression of efficacy predictors.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 174(10), 927–942.
Liberman, R. P., Eckman, T. A., Kopelowicz, A., & Stolar, D. (2000). Friendship and intimacy
module. Available from Psychiatric Rehabilitation Consultants, PO Box 2867, Camarillo,
CA 93011.
Lieberman, J. A., Scott Stroup, T., McEvoy, J. P., Swartz, M. S., Rosenheck, R. A., Perkins, D.
O., . . . Hsiao, J. K. (2005). Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic
schizophrenia. New England Journal of Medicine, 353(12), 1209–1223.

-- 362 of 498 --

342 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Lincoln, T. M., Dollfus, S., & Lyne, J. (2017). Current developments and challenges in the
assessment of negative symptoms. Schizophrenia Research, 186, 8–18.
Lopez, S. (2008). The soloist: A lost dream, an unlikely friendship, and the redemptive power of music.
New York: Putnam.
Louise, S., Fitzpatrick, M., Strauss, C., Rossell, S. L., & Thomas, N. (2018). Mindfulness- and
acceptance-based interventions for psychosis: Our current understanding and a meta-
analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 192, 57–63.
Lukoff, D., Nuechterlein, K. H., & Ventura, J. (1986). Manual for the Expanded Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12, 594–602.
Maher, B. A. (2001). Delusions. In P. B. Sutker & H. E. Adams (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of
psychopathology (3rd ed., pp. 309–339). Hingham, MA: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
McCarthy-Jones, S., Smailes, D., Corvin, A., Gill, M., Morris, D. W., Dinan, T. G., . . . Dudley,
R. (2017). Occurrence and co-occurrence of hallucinations by modality in schizophrenia-
spectrum disorders. Psychiatry Research, 252, 154–160.
Messinger, J. W., Tremeau, F., Antonius, D., Mendelsohn, E., Prudent, V., Stanfore, A. D., &
Malaspina, C. (2011). Avolition and expressive deficits capture negative symptom phe-
nomoenology: Implications for DSM-5 and schizophrenia research. Clinical Psychology
Review, 31, 161–168.
Milev, P., Ho, B. C., Arndt, S., & Andreasen, N. C. (2005). Predictive values of neurocognition
and negative symptoms on functional outcome in schizophrenia: A longitudinal first-
episode study with 7-year follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 495–506.
Mueser, K. T., Penn, D. L., Addington, J., Brunette, M. F., Gingerich, S., Glynn, S. M., . . . Kane, J.
M. (2015). The NAVIGATE program for first-episode psychosis: Rationale, overview, and
description of psychosocial components. Psychiatric Services, 66, 680–690.
Murphy, B. P., Chung, Y.-C., Park, T.-W., & McGorry, P. D. (2006). Pharmacological treatment
of primary negative symptoms in schizophrenia: A systematic review. Schizophrenia
Research, 88, 5–25.
Murray, R. M., Quattrone, D., Natesan, S., van Os, J., Nordentoft, M., Howes, O., . . . Taylor,
D. (2016). Should psychiatrists be more cautious about the long-term prophylactic use of
antipsychotics? British Journal of Psychiatry, 209(5), 361–365.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2014). Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults:
Treatment and management (NICE Clinical Guideline 178). London: Author.
Neale, J. M., Oltmanns, T. F., & Harvey, P. D. (1985). The need to relate cognitive deficits to
specific behavioral referents of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 11(2), 286–291.
Overall, J. E., & Gorham, D. R. (1962). The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. Psychological Reports,
10, 799–812.
Owen, M. J., Sawa, A., & Mortensen, P. B. (2016). Schizophrenia. Lancet, 388, 86–97.
Palmer, B. A., Pankratz, V. S., & Bostwick, J. M. (2005). The lifetime risk of suicide in schizo-
phrenia: A reexamination. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 247–253.
Park, S. G., Llerena, K., McCarthy, J. M., Couture, S. M., Bennett, M. E., & Blanchard, J. J. (2012).
Screening for negative symptoms: Preliminary results from the self-report version of the
Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms. Schizophrenia Research, 135(1–3),
139–143.
Peralta, V., & Cuesta, M. J. (2001). How many and which are the psychopathological dimen-
sions in schizophrenia?: Issues influencing their ascertainment. Schizophrenia Research,
49, 269–285.
Perlick, D. A., Rosenheck, R. A., Kaczynski, R., Swartz, M. S., Canive, J. M., & Lieberman,
J. A. (2006). Components and correlates of family burden in schizophrenia. Psychiatric
Services, 57, 1117–1125.
Persons, J. B. (1986). The advantages of studying psychological phenomena rather than psy-
chiatric diagnoses. American Psychologist, 41, 1252–1260.

-- 363 of 498 --

Schizophrenia 	343
Peters, E. R., Joseph, S. A., & Garety, P. A. (1999). Measurement of delusional ideation in the
normal population: Introducing the PDI (Peters et al. Delusions Inventory). Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 25(3), 553–576.
Pharoah, F., Mari, J., Rathbone, J., & Wong, W. (2010). Family intervention for schizophrenia.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 12, CD000088.
Powers, A., Fani, N., Cross, D., Ressler, K. J., & Bradley, B. (2016). Childhood trauma, PTSD,
and psychosis: Findings from a highly traumatized, minority sample. Child Abuse and
Neglect, 58, 111–118.
Provencher, H. L., & Mueser, K. T. (1997). Positive and negative symptom behaviors and care-
giver burden in the relatives of persons with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 26,
71–80.
Putnam, K. M., & Kring, A. M. (2007). Accuracy and intensity of posed emotional expressions
in unmedicated schizophrenia patients: Vocal and facial channels. Psychiatry Research,
151, 67–76.
Rector, N. A., Beck, A. T., & Stolar, N. (2005). The negative symptoms of schizophrenia: A cog-
nitive perspetive. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 50, 247–257.
Rummel-Kluge, C., Komossa, K., Schwarz, S., Hunger, H., Schmid, F., Lobos, C. A., . . . Leucht,
S. (2010). Head-to-head comparisons of metabolic side effects of second generation anti-
psychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Schizophrenia Research, 123, 225–233.
Sabe, M., Sentissi, O., & Kaiser, S. (2019). Meditation-based mind–body therapies for nega-
tive symptoms of schizophrenia: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials and
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 212, 15–25.
Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., & McGrath, J. (2005). The systematic review of the prevalence
of schizophrenia. PLOS Medicine, 2, 413–433.
Saha, S., Welham, J., Chant, D., & McGrath, J. (2006). Incidence of schizophrenia does not vary
with economic status of the country: Evidence from a systematic review. Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 41, 338–340.
Salem, J. E., & Kring, A. M. (1998). The role of gender differences in the reduction of etiologic
heterogeneity in schizophrenia. Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 795–819.
Sauvé, G., Lavigne, K. M., Pochiet, G., Brodeur, M. B., & Lepage, M. (2020). Efficacy of psycho-
logical interventions targeting cognitive biases in schizophrenia: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 78, Article 101854.
Savill, M., Orfanos, S., Reininghaus, U., Wykes, T., Bentall, R., & Priebe, S. (2016). The relation-
ship between experiential deficits of negative symptoms and subjective quality of life in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 176(2), 387–391.
Schwartz, E. K., Docherty, N. M., Najolia, G. M., & Cohen, A. S. (2019). Exploring the racial
diagnostic bias of schizophrenia using behavioral and clinical-based measures. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 128, 263–271.
Schwartz, R. C., & Blankenship, D. M. (2014). Racial disparities in psychotic disorder diagno-
sis: A review of empirical literature. World Journal of Psychiatry, 4(4), 133–140.
Selten, J. P., Gernaat, H. B., Nolen, W. A., Wiersma, D., & van den Bosch, R. J. (1998). Experience
of negative symptoms: Comparison of schizophrenic patients to patients with a depres-
sive disorder and to normal subjects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 350–354.
Shattock, L., Berry, K., Degnan, A., & Edge, D. (2018). Therapeutic alliance in psychological
therapy for people with schizophrenia and related psychoses: A systematic review. Clini-
cal Psychology and Psychotherapy, 25(1), e60–e85.
Siegel, S. J., Irani, F., Brensinger, C. M., Kohler, C. G., Bilker, W. B., Ragland, J. D., . . . Gur, R. E.
(2006). Prognostic variables at intake and long-term level of function in schizophrenia.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 433–441.
Siskind, D., Siskind, V., & Kisely, S. (2017). Clozapine response rates among people with

-- 364 of 498 --

344 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
treatment-resistant schizophrenia: Data from a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 62(11), 772–777.
Smith, D. A., Mar, C. M., & Turoff, B. K. (1998). The structure of schizophrenic symptoms: A
meta-analytic confirmatory factor analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 31, 57–70.
Strauss, G. P., Nuñez, A., Ahmed, A. O., Barchard, K. A., Granholm, E., Kirkpatrick, B., . . .
Allen, D. N. (2018). The latent structure of negative symptoms in schizophrenia. JAMA
Psychiatry, 75(12), 1271–1279.
Tandon, R., Nasrallah, H. A., & Keshavan, M. A. (2009). Schizophrenia, just the facts: 4. Clini-
cal features and conceptualization. Schizophrenia Research, 110, 1–23.
Trierweiler, S. J., Neighbors, H. W., Thompson, E. E., Munday, C., Binion, V. J., & Gomez, J. P.
(2000). Clinician attributions associated with the diagnosis of schizophrenia in African
American and non-African American patients. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 68(1), 171–175.
Turkington, D., Kingdon, D., & Weiden, P. J. (2006). Cognitive behavior therapy for schizo-
phrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 365–373.
Turner, D. T., van der Gaag, M., Karyotaki, E., & Cuijpers, P. (2014). Psychological interven-
tions for psychosis: A meta-analysis of comparative outcome studies. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 171, 523–538.
van der Gaag, M., Valmaggia, L. R., & Smit, F. (2014). The effects of individually tailored
formulation-based cognitive behavioural therapy in auditory hallucinations and delu-
sions: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 156(1), 30–37.
Vasconcelos e Sa, D., Wearden, A., & Barrowclough, C. (2013). Expressed emotion, types of
behavioural control and controllability attributions in relatives of people with recent-
onset psychosis. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 48(9), 1377–1388.
Visser, K. F., Chapman, H. C., Ruiz, I., Raugh, I. M., & Strauss, G. P. (2020). A meta-analysis of
self-reported anticipatory and consummatory pleasure in the schizophrenia-spectrum.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 121, 68–81.
Walker, E., Kestler, L., Bollini, A., & Hochman, K. (2004). Schizophrenia: Etiology and course.
Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 401–430.
Weisman, A. G., Nuechterlein, K. H., Goldstein, M. J., & Snyder, K. S. (2000). Controllability
perceptions and reactions to symptoms of schizophrenia: A within-family comparison
of relatives with high and low expressed emotion. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
167–171.
Wolthaus, J., Dingemans, P., Schene, A., Linszen, D., Wiersma, D., van den Bosch, R., . . . Hij-
man, R. (2002). Caregiver burden in recent-onset schizophrenia and spectrum disorders:
The influence of symptoms and personality traits. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
190, 241–247.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders:
Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Wykes, T., Steel, C., Everitt, T., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy for schizo-
phrenia: Effect sizes, clinical models, and methodological rigor. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
34, 523–537.
Zhao, S., Sampson, S., Xia, J., & Jayaram, M. B. (2015). Psychoeducation (brief) for people with
serious mental illness. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD010823.