CASTONGUAY, OLTMANNS & LOTT — Psychopathology: From Science to Clinical Practice (2nd ed.)
Chapter 8: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Chapter 9: Personality Disorders
================================================================================

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	223
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The prevalence of these disorders is assessed periodically in epidemiological studies.
However, conclusions depend on the time period and the epidemiological survey to
which one attends. The determination of prevalence is at best a moving target, com-
plicated by the ephemeral aspects of drug/gambling availability, legality, and popu-
larity. Thus, when, where, and to whom these surveys were administered are criti-
cal to understanding the results. For example, the current opioid epidemic is rather
specific to North America and even certain states/provinces. Furthermore, the Sub-
stance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration’s (SAMHSA; 2019) yearly
National Survey on Drug Use and Health for 2018 showed opioid users decreased
1.1 million, while methamphetamine use increased. Also, during this same period,
the use of e-cigarettes declined among adults but rose among adolescents (Dai &
Leventhal, 2019), with the latter sure to decline given the introduction of restrictive
laws. Overall, addictive disorders can be viewed as the most common of all mental
disorders (see Table 8.1, which compares 12-month and lifetime prevalence of alcohol
use disorder with that for generalized anxiety disorder and depression). Sex also
matters, with rates for most addictions higher for males (see Table 8.1, which also
compares 12-month and lifetime prevalence of alcohol use disorder across sex). Also,
age is important for most drug use disorders, with the peak at 18–29 years with 12
month and lifetime prevalence rates of 26.7 and 37.0%, respectively. Finally, some
subsets of the population show higher prevalence rates than others. Native Ameri-
cans, for example, have relatively high 12-month and lifetime prevalence rates of
alcohol addiction of 19.2 and 43.4%, respectively (Grant et al., 2015). Regarding gam-
bling disorder, a lifetime prevalence of 1.0% is frequently quoted from a worldwide
prevalence range of 0.4–4.0%, and like most addictive disorders, the prevalence is
higher among young adults and males (Black & Shaw, 2019).
Surveys of college students have shown that drug use and resultant problems
are rampant, particularly for alcohol. Recent survey data (National Institute on Alco-
hol Abuse and Alcoholisma, 2019) are sobering: 1,519 deaths, 696,000 assaults, 97,000
TABLE 8.1. Past‑Year and Lifetime Prevalence Data for DSM‑5
Alcohol Use Disorders, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and Depression
12-month 	Lifetime
Alcohol use disordera 	13.9% 	29.1%
Males 	17.6% 	36.0%
Females 	10.4% 	22.7%
Peak (ages 18–29) 	26.7% 	37.0%
Native Americans 	19.2% 	43.4%
Generalized anxiety disorderb 	1.8% 	3.7%
Major depressive disorderc 	10.4% 	20.6%
Note. Based on nationally representative data reported by aGrant et al.
(2015), bRuscio et al. (2017), and cHasin et al. (2018).

-- 244 of 498 --

224 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
sexual assaults, 150,000 health problems, a 25% negative effect on academics, and
an increase in suicide attempts. Binge drinking is particularly problematic in this
population, with almost 10% of students reporting consumption of 10 or more drinks
in a row. Other drug use is also an issue; for example, 60% of students with prescrip-
tion drugs for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) divert their drugs to
others. As for cigarettes, the prevalence of adult smokers in the United States has
decreased dramatically since the 1950s, when smokers constituted over one-half of
all men and one-fourth of all women. Currently, approximately 10% are daily smok-
ers, although 21% vape nicotine. The addictive power of nicotine and other chemical
constituents in tobacco (there are over 4,000 chemical compounds in cigarettes, 50 of
which are known to cause cancer) is exemplified by the difficulty smokers experi-
ence in quitting despite dire circumstances. For example, over half of smokers in a
tobacco treatment program with cancer continued smoking (Cinciripini et al., 2019).
Marijuana (aka cannabis), the most commonly consumed drug after alcohol, has
been used by 45% of people in the United States over the age of 12. In terms of other
drugs (SAMHSA, 2019), data indicate the following use rates in the past 12 months:
psychotherapeutics (i.e., prescription stimulants, tranquilizers, and sedatives) (6.6%),
cocaine (2.3%), hallucinogens (1.5%), inhalants (0.8%), and heroin (0.1%). In terms
of gambling, the prevalence of gambling disorder in one study was 10.3% of active
gamblers, who in turn are 8.5% of the population (Rennert et al., 2014). It is essential
to remember that use and misuse are not necessarily the same thing—even water can
be an intoxicant when consumed in excessive quantities, supporting the adage that
“too much of anything can lead to the suppression of something.” Furthermore, the
popularity of a specific drug is often relative to time and place.
COURSE
Although dogmas such as “one drink, one drunk” often proliferate when consider-
ing the course of substance misuse, this simplicity tends to flourish in direct pro-
portion to our ignorance. Complexity is the rule. Which drug (or behavior), used
how and how much, with whom, under what conditions, and most significantly, by
whom, all impact the course of the addictive disorder. Hence, diagnostic issues are
not trivial. For substance use disorders, the class of drug misused must be consid-
ered. With cocaine and the opiates, for example, many months after an individual
has ceased use, strong cravings can be stimulated by situations previously associ-
ated with taking the drug. Thus, statistics indicate that as high as 80% of individuals
treated for cocaine addiction relapse within a year. And with gambling disorder,
not all types of gambling are equally harmful; electronic gambling machines (i.e.,
slots and video lottery terminals) appear to be associated with more severe problems
and a different course than other forms of gambling (MacLaren, Harrigan, & Dixon,
2012). The route of administration of the drug also needs to be considered. Smoking
or injecting cocaine is far more nefarious than snorting, thus impacting severity and
course. Also, with whom the drug is used can impact course. The individual who
misuses alcohol socially or succumbs to illegal drug use only among peers is likely
to have a less severe course than the solitary, “first thing in the morning” consumer.
Another example of variation in course within a drug class is illustrated by a large
national trajectory study of 18- to 26-year-olds for drinking, smoking, and marijuana

-- 245 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	225
use (Sher, Jackson, & Steinley, 2011). Consistent with other reports, four differential
trajectories were determined: chronic high use, late-onset use, developmentally lim-
ited use, and low use. Predictably, the chronic-high-use group displayed the stron-
gest risk characteristics (delinquency and sensation seeking), as well as co-usage of
other drugs. Thus, understanding course necessitates the understanding of individ-
ual etiology. However, among surveyed individuals with lifetime alcohol use disor-
ders, only 19.8% received any treatment. These alarming statistics are a major cause
for concern.
ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES
The high prevalence of substance use and gambling disorders resonates in a mul-
titude of negative direct and indirect ramifications. Numerous studies and public
campaigns have made the relationship among alcohol intoxication, driving, and acci-
dents well known. Less well known is the fact that alcohol is present in the perpetra-
tor, and to a lesser degree in the victim, in 30–50% of all murders, assaults, rapes,
and domestic violence cases (Gutwinski, Heinz, & Heinz, 2018). More generally, con-
tinued drug misuse and excessive gambling can both obviate and exacerbate coping
with daily problems in living, hence increasing the addictive behavior in an ever-
increasing spiral of destruction, with the endpoint of destructiveness too often being
suicide. Individuals with substance use disorders are at a six- to 10-fold increased
risk for suicidal behavior, particularly when the substance use disorder is comor-
bid with personality disorders and depression. Similar relations are known to exist
between gambling disorder and suicide (Martinotti et al., 2017; Petry & Kiluk, 2012).
Additionally, a drug such as alcohol is frequently used at the time of the suicidal act,
adding a degree of disinhibition to finalize an ongoing perturbation.
Death is a frequent concomitant of the opioid epidemic. At its height in 2017,
there were 47,600 deaths in the United States attributed to overdose. Overall, for that
year, drugs killed around 70,000 individuals in the United States, which is double
the deaths from car accidents and gun deaths. Fentanyl, a synthetic opioid that is
approximately 50 times stronger than heroin and often a contaminant in heroin, is
often responsible. As of 2016, synthetic opioids were present in 45.9% of all opioid-
related overdose deaths in the United States, eclipsing prescription opioids as the
most commonly involved drug in overdose fatalities (Jones, Einstein, & Compton,
2018).
Alcohol problems not only impact social functioning but they also have severe
health consequences. Although worldwide risk is 7.7 per 1,000 for babies to suffer
from fetal alcohol spectrum disorders, the rate for affected children in special pop-
ulations (e.g., special education, children in care, correctional, clinical, and Indig-
enous) is 10–40 times higher (Popova, Lange, Shield, Burd, & Rehm, 2019). For 2016,
alcohol use was ranked seventh for global burden of disease in terms of premature
death and disability, affecting a wide range of medical conditions that differ by age
and gender (Griswold et al., 2018). Interestingly, ancient societies were well aware of
the burden of excessive consumption: The ancient Egyptians were the first to order
abstinence.
The consequences of smoking are also well known to all, including addicted
smokers. Smoking is currently the most preventable cause of disease and death

-- 246 of 498 --

226 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
in North America. In spite of the graphic, “in-your-face” warning labels that are
required on cigarette packs in Canada, during cold Canadian winters, throngs of
intelligent individuals can be seen puffing away outdoors in huddled circles like
musk oxen during an arctic blizzard. Of course, smokers not only hurt their own
health and longevity, but they also compromise the health and longevity of others
in the form of secondhand smoke. The infant offspring of smokers have five times
more tobacco toxins in their urine than do controls. Children of smokers are also
more likely to suffer myriad negative health effects such as asthma, and to smoke
as adolescents (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2014). In fact, most
addictive disorders result in secondhand harms. Alcohol, for example, affects 1 in
5 adults because of someone else’s drinking (Nayak et al., 2019) with rates of sec-
ondhand harms even higher among college students (Thompson, Davis-MacNevin,
Teehan, Stewart, & Caring Campus Research Team, 2017).
Increased social problems and deteriorating health for the user and others is just
the beginning of a potential list of possible negative ramifications of misusing vari-
ous drugs. There is not an aspect of who we are that cannot be affected. For example,
a picture of a limp alcohol bottle is often used to illustrate sexual dysfunction as
an associated feature of heavy drinking. The same is true for smoking, most illegal
drugs, and many commonly prescribed medications, most notably the selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors. Even drugs thought to enhance sexual experience (e.g.,
some stimulants, ecstasy, cannabis) over time can result in a deterioration of sexual
functioning. Furthermore, heavy episodic use of drugs by young adults, interacting
with self-regulation difficulties and sensation seeking, can increase the prevalence
of risky sexual behavior. Sleep is another area often impacted by heavy drug use.
Stimulant misusers’ disrupted sleep patterns rival those of the bipolar patient in an
acute manic phase. Alcohol, which is often taken to promote sleep and is beneficial
for falling asleep, actually disturbs the many chemical processes that control sleep
and can result in sleep deprivation. Furthermore, heavy drinking can narrow air
passages, thus promoting and exacerbating sleep apnea. Even use of alcohol, ciga-
rettes, and cannabis by teens has respective odds ratios for insufficient sleep of 1.64,
1.45, and 1.52, respectively (McKnight-Eily et al., 2011). Sleep deprivation diminishes
most waking activities, with school and work performance being obvious activities
that suffer. Increasingly, employers are eliminating illegal drug users from the work-
force through mandatory drug testing. Additionally, statistics show that heavy users
of even legal drugs have increased absenteeism, health problems, and accidents on
the job.
Drugs present severe direct and indirect consequences. In regard to direct rami-
fications, both the type and the degree vary between drugs. For example, when com-
pared to alcohol, drugs such as opiates result in fewer negative health consequences
if one does not consider indirect effects. Indirect effects are another matter. First,
criminalization of some drugs results in de facto expulsion from normal society.
Second, these drugs pose an increased risk of overdose and death, due primarily
to the lack of quality control and the manner of consumption typically associated
with them. And, finally, individuals addicted to these drugs often resort to criminal
behavior to maintain their addiction. In the United States, drug offenses account
for 451,000 incarcerations (Sawyer & Wagner, 2019). There has been a preference for
viewing addiction as criminal behavior rather than a mental illness, a position that
is slowly changing.

-- 247 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	227
In accordance with the adage “Pharmacology is the art of selective poisoning,”
most drugs, when used heavily, have negative neurological sequelae. Such effects
are well known for alcohol, methamphetamine, and ecstasy. Recent concern is for
the use of cannabis and risk for psychoses. Evolving studies have shown there is a
relationship, although limited to high dosage and heavy use, in genetically vulner-
able adolescents (Di Forti et al., 2019). These drug-related effects add to the confusion
in determining the possible brain bases for addictive behaviors, since cause and con-
sequence of use obviously confuse the interpretation of any research finding with
individuals suffering from addiction.
In summary, in this section, we have reviewed a large number of associated
clinical features that frequently are seen in individuals with addictive disorders,
including physical health ramifications, social and interpersonal problems, sleep
difficulties, sexual problems, suicidality, and impairments in work and school func-
tioning. In clinical practice, these associated features must be assessed at baseline, in
addition to assessment of the addictive disorder symptoms, for treatment planning
with individual clients. These associated features should be monitored throughout
the course of treatment to ensure that clients are responding as their addictive disor-
der symptoms improve. Some of these associated features may require independent
treatment if they are not merely secondary consequences of the addictive behavior.
COMORBIDITY
Addictive disorders seldom occur in isolation. Rather, it is often the case that more
than one drug is abused (“homotypic comorbidity”) and/or the addictive disorder
co-occurs with another diagnosable mental disorder (“heterotypic comorbidity”).
For example, according to the National Epidemiologic Survey of Alcohol and Related
Conditions (NESARC; Grant, 2014), while controlling for sociodemographic factors,
alcohol use disorder shows significant heterotypic comorbidity with mood, anxiety,
bipolar, and antisocial personality disorders, for both 12-month and lifetime rates
(see Table 8.2). However, 12-month data may be more accurate with respect to actual
temporal co-occurrence, as the disorders are likely to be less contemporaneous over
a lifetime. In terms of homotypic co-occurrence, NESARC found that over the past
year, 29% of individuals with alcohol use disorders had misused other drugs. The
percentages for drug use disorders were as follows: 9.9%, cannabis; 2.4%, opioids;
TABLE 8.2. Comorbidity with Alcohol Use Disorders
12-month (OR) 	Lifetime (OR)
Drug use disorder 	3.3 	4.1
Mood disorder 	1.3 	1.5
Anxiety disorder 	1.1 	1.3
Bipolar I disorder 	1.4 	2.0
Antisocial personality disorder 	1.6 	1.9
Note. OR, odds ratio. Based on NESARC-III nationally representative data
reported by Grant et al. (2015), controlling for sociodemographic conditions.

-- 248 of 498 --

228 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
2.5%, cocaine; 1.3%, hallucinogens; and 1.2%, amphetamines (Falk, Hsiao-Ye, &
Hiller-Sturmhöfel, 2008).
“Polydrug use,” in which substances are used concomitantly, is also quite com-
mon. For example, 58% of heavy drinkers smoke (Hughes, Sathe, & Spagnola, 2009),
and the correlation between cocaine and alcohol dependence is .84 (Helzer & Pryz-
beck, 1988). These relationships are hardly random. While cocaine addicts often say
that they drink to “come down,” the combination of cocaine and alcohol produces
coca ethylene, which temporarily is more excitatory than either cocaine or alcohol
taken alone. So much for self-report! Certain situations, such as rave attendance, vir-
tually guarantee polydrug use. Furthermore, recent trends, such as using energy
drinks and stimulants (mostly alcohol) to enhance the high are common, particularly
among youth (Marczinski & Fillmore, 2014).
Traditionally, it has been assumed that the comorbidity of disorders emanates
when one disorder leads to a second or third disorder, and/or when there is a com-
mon underlying risk factor for the disorders. In the case of addictive disorders there
are four possibilities. Addictive disorders lead to other disorders; other disorders
lead to addictive disorders; addictive disorders and other disorders bidirectionally
increase risk; or addictive disorders and other disorders have common underlying
risk factors. In clinical practice, where addictive disorders are typically both under-
diagnosed and undertreated, there seems to be a preference for the model in which
other disorders increase vulnerability to addictive disorders. Even when this model
is true, however, it is possible that the addictive behavior can function to maintain
the “primary” disorder and, therefore, lack of diagnosis and treatment for the addic-
tive disorder can undermine the therapeutic endeavor. For example, a person starts
misusing a drug because of depression, but the ramifications of the drug use inevi-
tably result in dysphoria, which promotes the continuation of depression, creating
a vicious cycle in which one disorder maintains the other over time. Order of onset
data is one way that researchers have examined this issue. A 25-year longitudinal
birth cohort study in New Zealand determined that in both men and women, alcohol
problems preceded depression, after controlling for confounding factors (Ferguson,
Boden, & Harwood, 2009). In contrast, a literature review concluded that depres-
sion more often precedes alcohol problems among women, suggesting there may
be important gender differences in this chicken– egg question (Sabourin & Stewart,
2009).
Perhaps the most significant error in current practice is the pervasive blind-
ness to common underlying vulnerabilities that, very often, should be the focus of
treatment. One study by Conrod, Pihl, Steward, and Dongier (2000) demonstrates
this point. Women with substance use disorder from the general population (n = 298)
completed a large battery of psychological tests and symptom rating scales. A factor
analysis followed by a cluster analysis yielded four distinct clusters: anxiety sensi-
tivity, hopelessness, sensation seeking, impulsivity, and low personality risk. Strong
relationships were found between the cluster into which each woman fell, the type
of drug on which each was dependent, and their co-occurring mental disorder (see
Table 8.3). Recent work shows that the relation between these same personality pro-
files and specific forms of substance misuse is true even at later stages of addiction
(Mahu et al., 2019).
Behavioral profiles with extremes of externalizing and internalizing behaviors
have been linked to substance misuse, further supporting the notion of differential

-- 249 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	229
pathways. For example, sons of patients with alcohol use disorder, who are known
to be at four to nine times increased risk for developing the disorder themselves,
often display externalizing patterns. When compared to controls, they, as a group,
have been found to display autonomic hyperreactivity to stress and novelty, reduced
academic achievement, relative deficits on cognitive tests, and generally impaired
behavioral regulation (Pihl, 2010). How these profiles and other risk factors, such as
parents’ antisocial behavior or poor parenting, or mothers’ depression, or peer rela-
tionships, impact risk is the topic of etiology.
ETIOLOGY
From the previous discussion, it should be eminently clear that addictive disorders
represent differential disorders with a potentially large number of distinct etiological
pathways. This fact needs to be actively considered in any treatment. Additionally,
one needs to underscore the likely interaction between various pathways to abuse.
The knowledge of these pathways is essential for clinicians, since their interventions
should be based on what they think is wrong. The fact that most addicted individu-
als are never treated, and even when treated, that clinicians tend to focus their treat-
ment on a co-occurring disorder of which they are more knowledgeable, is due to a
lack of understanding regarding differential etiology. Alcohol is a prime example of
this and is therefore featured in the following sections. However, irrespective of the
type of addiction, etiological information exists on genetic, biochemical, behavioral,
and social levels.
TABLE 8.3. Overview of Conrod, Pihl, et al.’s (2000) Cluster Analysis of Women with Substance
Use Disorder
DSM-III-R diagnosis
Anxiety–
sensitivity 	Hopelessness
Sensation
seeking 	Impulsivity
Anxiolytic dependence 	3.0 	1.7 	0.6 	0.3
Opioid dependence 	1.3 	2.9 	1.1 	0.2
Alcohol dependence 	0.5 	1.2 	4.3 	2.7
Cocaine dependence 	1.5 	0.5 	1.2 	1.8
Recurrent depression 	1.8 	1.9 	0.9 	0.4
Major depressive episode 	1.1 	2.7 	0.8 	0.7
Simple phobia 	2.1 	2.6 	0.9 	0.9
Generalized anxiety disorder 	1.9 	1.5 	1.0 	0.3
Somatization disorder 	5.8 	1.6 	0.4 	0.1
Panic disorder/agoraphobia 	1.5 	2.1 	0.8 	0.7
Social phobia 	1.7 	2.6 	0.5 	0.9
Antisocial personality disorder 	1.4 	0.5 	0.5 	2.8
Note. Odds ratios are calculated for each subtype relative to the risk within the remaining sample. Boldface
values indicate significant effects tested using Pearson’s chi-square. Adapted from data in Conrod, Pihl, et al.
(2000).

-- 250 of 498 --

230 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Genes
The explosive growth in molecular genetics has heightened enthusiasm for discov-
ery of the specific genes implicated in the heritability findings of traditional fam-
ily, twin, and adoption studies for practically all mental disorders. In the area of
addictions, genetics work has covered all existing drugs and gambling. The sheer
complexity of determining suspect genes is illustrated by the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA)–sponsored association study of tobacco and alcohol use in 1.2
million participants (Liu et al., 2019). A broad range of behavior on which drug-using
individuals differ (e.g., age at initiation of use, amount consumed, related diseases,
life events), was ascertained and correlated in a genomewide investigation. Four
hundred six genome locations with 566 genetic variants were determined. The vari-
ants involved implicate the importance of many of the addictive behavior chemical
systems. Although the findings are viewed as a starting point for further study, one
is left with the feeling of searching for a needle in a heap of needles. Furthermore,
there is epigenetics, the study of heritable changes in gene expression, with the pos-
sibility of a myriad of phenotypic expressions. The best potential for epigenetic work
is with individuals already affected by an addictive disorder in ascertaining how
changes in gene functioning occurs as a result of excessive drug use or excessive
engagement in an addictive behavior and how that contributes to resistance to treat-
ment. Stimulant addiction has been shown to alter DNA methylation and noncoding
ribonucleic acids (RNAs) that affect brain reward regions (Kalda & Zharkovsky, 2015;
Massart et al., 2015). Although we know that genes are significant and derived heri-
tability estimates are substantial, the difficulty in isolating genes is an issue. What is
relevant is that possibly involved genes are known to function in cellular signaling
(both between and within cells), brain development, cell adhesion, and varying cell
functions. Exactly how these genes contribute to vulnerability, in whom, and for
what, remain complex, unanswered questions.
The Brain and Addiction
Various drugs and addictive behaviors have differential effects on brain functioning.
Furthermore, pharmacokinetics, such as dose and route of administration, greatly
affect responsivity. For example, injecting or smoking stimulants (e.g., cocaine) result
in a significantly more robust response than snorting them. Furthermore, individual
differences in the baseline functioning of these brain systems, related to genetic vul-
nerability, among other possibilities, is thought to greatly determine the level and
maintenance of response. Models organized according to theoretical system group-
ings provide some explanatory power. The cue for the reward–psychomotor activation
system (which primarily involves the mesocorticolimbic dopamine system), the anx-
iety/threat/inhibition system (which is mediated primarily by gamma-aminobutyric
acid [GABA] and involves an extended limbic network from the amygdala through
the orbitofrontal cortex), and the cognitive control system (which primarily involves
not only the prefrontal cortex but also includes pathways to and from the cerebellum
through the limbic system)—as well as their interactions—represent relevant mod-
els. Of course, these putative systems are highly complex, involving numerous neu-
rotransmitters and neuromodulators that individually and collectively also impact

-- 251 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	231
addiction. The cue for reward system is activated by stimulants, the threat system is
inhibited by anxiolytics, and the cognitive system can be both dampened and facili-
tated by various drugs. Numerous imaging studies have revealed that when partici-
pants are challenged with alcohol, amphetamine, cocaine, or gambling stimuli, the
cue for reward system is activated via dopamine release. This activation is associated
with feelings of euphoria, energy, and general positive affect. Hence, it is easy to see
why these drugs/behaviors are misused (at least initially) and why stimuli associ-
ated with this experience of reward are easily conditioned to elicit craving. Simi-
lar hedonic responses to cigarette smoking have been reported and are also related
to the release of dopamine, although the brain area involved is not precisely the
same as for other stimulants (Barrett, Boileau, Okker, Pihl, & Dagher, 2004). Notably,
individuals who are more at risk for developing problems with stimulants due to
family history or the presence of particular biological markers display a dopamine
response with greater amplitude than that of controls, and with repeated drug expo-
sure both conditioned and sensitized dopamine responses are developed (Leyton,
2007). These findings support the proposition of individual differential sensitivities
to drug effects and, hence, differential likelihoods to develop addictions.
Furthermore, these stimulant responders are distinct from controls and threat-
sensitive individuals in that they exhibit less amygdala activation in response to
fearful stimuli (Glahn, Lovallo, & Fox, 2007) and show general orbitofrontal activa-
tion instead (Heitzig, Nigg, Yau, Zubita, & Zucker, 2008). Indeed, a recent functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study showed how specific brain responses are
affected differentially by an intoxicating dose of alcohol in two high-risk personality
groups that were prospectively linked to addiction 3 years later (Abu Shakra et al.,
2018; see Figure 8.1). Anxiety-sensitive participants who transitioned to substance use
disorder within 3 years showed greater amygdala activation to negative faces in an
emotional processing task under placebo; these responses were reversed by alcohol,
suggesting sensitivity to alcohol as an anxiolytic. In contrast, sensation seekers (par-
ticularly males) who transitioned to substance use disorder showed alcohol dampen-
ing of responses to a social stress test in the orbital frontal cortex, which might por-
tend heightened lack of behavioral control and increased impulsivity. These results
illustrate differential pathways and risk parameters even for the same drug.
Apparent in the previous study was the distinct differential responsivity by
sex for sensation seekers. Addictive problems worldwide have generally been more
prevalent in males than females. There are also sex differences in the mechanisms of
reward and addiction (Becker & Chartoff, 2019) which are relevant to the tendency
for females to abuse anxiolytics and males alcohol and stimulants.
A less well-recognized yet particularly important point in developing motivation
for change in any kind of therapy is the recognition that drug use/misuse has ben-
efits for the individual. Clearly, two of the previous models are based on reinforcing
aspects of drug use. Drugs can lubricate social functioning, provide identification for
the adolescent, self-medicate dysphoric/anxious states, promote strong positive feel-
ings, and improve cognitive functioning. With respect to the latter, college students
with prescriptions for stimulant drugs, supposedly for the treatment of ADHD, are
highly likely to sell these drugs to others (Darredeau, Barrett, Jardin, & Pihl, 2007).
These drugs have pharmacological profiles similar to cocaine and therefore produce
indistinguishable effects. These stimulant drugs are often used as study aids among

-- 252 of 498 --

232 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
the university population (Chinneck et al., 2018). This raises the intriguing question
of whether this form of performance enhancement can be considered cheating.
An ongoing interactive circularity affects brain functioning and gene expres-
sion. We are increasingly learning that what we think about and how we cope with
various environmental events determines the activity of genes and brain function-
ing. There is a growing number of examples of how cognitive-behavioral interven-
tions and placebo drugs alter brain function, often producing brain images that illus-
trate those factors thought to be causative of the disorder. Importantly, this means
that risk, irrespective of genetic–brain susceptibility, can be altered– controlled by
a strong cognitive–inhibitory propensity. For example, individuals who display a
particular high-risk response when challenged with alcohol can have that biological
response muted by a prior learning experience (Brunelle & Pihl, 2007).
FIGURE 8.1. Prospective association between region of interest (ROI) activations to emo-
tionally challenging material and escalating alcohol and/or illicit drug use. a–d: Mean
parameter estimates (arbitrary units, a.u.) of amygdala (AMYG) activity in response
to negative (fearful, angry, disgusted, and sad) versus neutral faces (a–b) and medial
orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC) activity in response to acute social stress versus a control
condition (c–d) in high-anxiety–sensitivity subjects (HASS) and high-sensation-seeking
subjects (HSSS) who classified as transitioners (TRA) and nontransitioners (non-TRA) to
substance use problems within 3-years after the fMRI testing under alcohol (dark bars)
and placebo (light bars) conditions. **p ≤ .0125 (Bonferroni adjusted alpha); *p ≤ .02. Error
bars indicate standard error of the mean. From Abu Shakra et al. (2018). Reprinted with
permission from Elsevier.

-- 253 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	233
Cognitive Factors
These factors play a role both in the etiology and consequences of addiction. As
noted in the previous section on the brain and addiction, some misused substances
have positively reinforcing consequences, with use associated with positive feel-
ings, while others have negatively reinforcing consequences, such as anxiolytic or
analgesic effects, or reductions in social inhibitions. Social learning theory posits
that these positive and negative reinforcement effects of substance use are learned
through direct and indirect experiences. Expectancies about the outcomes of engag-
ing in substance use are then formed. Expectancies can be thought of as “if–then”
statements regarding the expected outcome of a behavior such as substance use (e.g.,
“If I were to drink alcohol, then I would feel very calm and relaxed”). Basic research
has repeatedly shown that expectancies can influence postdrug consumption behav-
ior over and above actual drug effects and that outcome expectancies exert power-
ful influences on subsequent addictive behavior (e.g., Stewart, Stewart, Yi, & Ellery,
2015). Outcome expectancies often develop before children have even had any direct
experiences with substances through observation of parents’ or peers’ substance use
and advertising and media influences.
Another important cognitive variable in the social learning model of substance
use disorders is self-efficacy expectancies (i.e., belief that one can cope successfully
without using substances, or that one has the ability to refuse the drug if offered).
For example, a woman who does not believe she has the skills to relax on her own,
without the use of substances, may be particularly prone to developing a substance
use disorder following conflict with her partner. Prospective research has shown
that lack of drink refusal self-efficacy in teens is predictive of problem drinking 1
year later (Connor, George, Gullo, Kelly, & Young, 2011). According to social learning
theory, self-efficacy expectancies and outcome expectancies may interact: When pos-
itive outcome expectancies are combined with low levels of self-efficacy, substance
use is particularly likely to occur. Thus, both outcome expectancies and self-efficacy
expectancies should be targeted in addiction treatment.
In addition to self-efficacy and outcome expectancies, which can be considered
explicit or controlled cognitive processes, are the influences of relatively more auto-
matic or implicit cognitive processes. For example, people with addictive disorders
have been shown to have their attention automatically drawn toward, or to have dif-
ficulty disengaging their attention from, cues relevant to their addiction (e.g., a bottle
of pills for a prescription drug misuser) (Field & Cox, 2008). As another example, due
to conditioning, relatively automatic memory associations can develop between the
addictive behavior cue and approach (e.g., gambling stimuli and approach behav-
ior; Boffo et al., 2018). Thus, exposure to cues can automatically trigger the addic-
tive behavior beyond the individual’s conscious awareness, explaining why many
people with addictive disorders subjectively experience lapses as having occurred
without a conscious decision to engage in the addictive behavior (Stacy & Wiers,
2010). Such automatic cognitive processes predict addictive behaviors and related
problems above and beyond measures of conscious, effortful cognitive processes
such as expectancies (Stewart et al., 2015).
Cognitions affected by heavy drug use often serve to promote resistance to
treatment and promote recidivism. Lower brain volume is a frequent concomitant of

-- 254 of 498 --

234 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
substance dependence. In a mega-analysis (i.e., a meta-analysis of individual patient
data), the same was found for many brain regions related to impulse control, par-
ticularly for alcohol (Mackey et al., 2019). Furthermore, genetic vulnerability interacts
with heavy use, resulting in the promulgation of severe mental disorders. Even mod-
erate cognitive effects (e.g., drug-induced decrements in recall memory, perceptual
reasoning, working memory, and inhibition; see Figure 8.2) add to the vicious circle
of addiction (Morin et al., 2019).
FIGURE 8.2. Between-subject and within-subject (concurrent and lagged) relationships
between cannabis use frequency and cognitive performance (working memory errors,
perceptual reasoning performance, delayed memory recall performance, and inhibitory
control errors) in adolescents. Lagged effects were calculated starting in eighth grade. For
working memory, performance was measured by counting the number of times a previ-
ously chosen stimulus was selected on a given trial (i.e., spatial working memory errors);
lower scores indicate better performance. For perceptual reasoning and delayed memory
recall, performance was calculated as a score, with higher scores indicating better per-
formance. For inhibitory control, performance was measured by counting the number of
commission errors across both conditions of the task; lower scores indicate better perfor-
mance. From Morin et al. (2019). Reprinted with permission from American Psychiatric
Association Publishing.

-- 255 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	235
Stress
The roles of stress in contributing to the onset and maintenance of addictive disor-
ders have received considerable research attention over the years. Animal models
have shown that early stress can lead to enduring changes in neurotransmitter sys-
tems (e.g., dopamine) within limbic brain structures that contribute to a propensity
to self-administer large amounts of drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, and alco-
hol. One mouse study indicated that early stress led to higher operant responding for
alcohol in adulthood, an effect mediated by alterations in dopamine and glutamate
neurotransmission (Campbell, Szumlinksi, & Kippin, 2009).
Stress can also trigger relapse to substance misuse in individuals who have
recovered from a substance use disorder. Interestingly, stress activates dopamine
release in a manner akin to the dopamine release observed in response to drug
administration (Leyton, 2007). This stress-induced dopamine release can act as a
conditioned cue, triggering drug craving, drug seeking, and ultimately drug relapse.
Psychological treatments should focus on helping the client develop alternative skills
for coping with stress and teaching techniques to deal with stress-induced urges to
use, in order to prevent relapse. In terms of implications for pharmacotherapies, cau-
tion is required as drugs targeting the stress response work, but in turn are addictive
themselves.
Social–Cultural–Familial Factors
The cultural variation in drug use and response is profound, even among groups
with the same genetic heritage. For example, as opposed to the typical finding of
increased aggressiveness when intoxicated, there are cultures in which people in fact
show significantly less aggression when under the influence (MacAndrew & Edger-
ton, 1969). In areas of the world where cocaine and heroin are grown, misuse is min-
iscule in comparison to North American and European societies. Clearly, our mass
consumption, individualistic, hedonistic, and competitive culture plays a significant
role in addictive behaviors. Whereas genetics–biological studies typically begin with
families with histories of substance use disorder, within society are more at-risk
subcultures, or those that are relatively immune to the disorder, despite equivalent
biological vulnerability. Populations at higher risk for addictive disorders than the
general population include adolescents, the ghettoized poor, the disenfranchised,
males, and the less educated. Religiosity, on the other hand, has consistently been
shown to reduce risk significantly. One’s family and peers represent small societies
with concomitant beliefs and attitudes. This is important given that parental and
peer modeling are powerful inducements in initiating and maintaining addictive
behaviors. A recent meta-analysis shows that members of romantic couples signifi-
cantly influence one another’s drinking behavior (Muyingo et al., 2020). It seems this
may occur at least partly because couple members influence each other’s reasons for
drinking which in turn influence the individual’s use patterns (Kehayes, Mackin-
non, Sherry, Leonard, & Stewart, 2019). Numerous studies have indicated significant
roles of parental, peer, and romantic partner factors with respect to alcohol, ciga-
rette, and even illicit drug use. In a recent review, Tael-Öeren, Naughton, and Sutton
(2019) concluded that the less restrictive the parenting, the more likely was children’s

-- 256 of 498 --

236 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
alcohol use onset, degree of use, and intoxication. Yet another familial aspect of drug
taking also deserves consideration: the propensity to treat all problems with drugs.
This societal tendency de facto teaches avoidance without coping. Chemical agents
offer an immediate remedy for the slightest twinge in one’s psyche. Overall, family
plays a crucial role in substance misuse. For this reason, therapy with adolescents
with addictive disorders often requires family involvement to deal with not only the
issues and angst of the adolescent but also family attitudes and practices. Similarly,
couples and network approaches to addiction are often indicated given the previ-
ously noted social influences on many addictive behaviors.
Interactions
It would be inadequate to assume that any of the earlier sections on etiology is sin-
gularly explanatory. Cause is a multifactorial, multilevel, interactional process. For
example, certain personality profiles increase the likelihood of addiction. In a large
twin study, Big Five characteristics of high Neuroticism, low Agreeableness, and low
Conscientiousness predicted addiction to nicotine, cannabis, and gambling (Dash et
al., 2019). Gene expression is altered by environmental events, and vice versa. Antiso-
cial behavior—a common precursor to substance misuse—can result from just such a
scenario. Caspi and colleagues (2002) showed that a polymorphism of a gene related
to antisocial behavior had an effect if the individual was maltreated as a child. In this
case, the specific genotype putatively altered sensitivity to environmental events,
ultimately resulting in the phenotypic expression of antisocial behavior. Drugs can
have a similar effect. Adolescent rats in a situation producing binge drinking as
adults displayed epigenetic protein changes in the amygdala (40% fewer neuronal
connections) and, subsequently, behaviorally expressed anxiety (Kyzar, Zhang, &
Pandey, 2019).
Gene– environment effects can also be influenced by social and historical con-
texts. The heritability of smoking increased from zero for men born before 1910 to
60% for those born after 1940, as smoking became less of a normative behavior. This
example shows that heritability estimates are subject to change over time (Board-
man, Blalock, & Pampel, 2010). Then there are the learned associations that develop
by virtue of drug taking. For instance, Volkow and colleagues (2006) showed, in a
positron emission tomography (PET) study, that when those with a cocaine addiction
watch a video of cocaine being used, they release significantly more dopamine than
when watching a video about nature. Prosaically put, “You can take the drug from
the addict but the craving lives on.”
TREATMENT
Just as there are myriad etiological factors and multiple pathways to the develop-
ment of addictive disorders, there are also numerous approaches to treating these
disorders. For some with severe physiological dependence on a substance, treatment
may begin withdrawal management–medical care to reduce uncomfortable or even
dangerous withdrawal symptoms as a client reduces or ceases use of the addictive
substance. For example, benzodiazepines may be used to manage insomnia, agita-
tion, or anxiety, or to reduce the risk of dangerous seizures with alcohol withdrawal

-- 257 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	237
(World Health Organization [WHO], 2009). However, withdrawal management is
not used for all drugs (e.g., not required for those with opioid use disorder who are
commencing methadone treatment; see below). Since relapse rates for withdrawal
management are extremely high, it should be considered a first step rather than a
stand-alone treatment (Bruneau et al., 2018; WHO, 2009). Various other medications
are available to target the different brain systems involved in addiction described
earlier. And given the importance of social factors in addiction etiology, as well as
the powerful roles of cognition and learning, a variety of cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy (CBT) techniques have been advanced to assist those with addictive disorders.
Family, couple, and network therapies have been developed and evaluated in the
treatment of this set of disorders given the etiological and maintaining roles of fam-
ily and peer network factors discussed earlier. We examine each of these approaches
and evidence for their efficacy across a variety of addictive disorders. We conclude
by considering some general principles of change in the treatment of individuals
with addictive disorders.
Although we do have effective treatments that help many people with addic-
tive disorders, available treatments could be much more effective. Unfortunately, as
noted earlier, many people with substance use and gambling disorders fail to seek
treatment. Recent data suggest that only about 10% of Americans who need treatment
for a substance use disorder ever receive it (Lipari, Park-Lee, & Van Horn, 2016). Simi-
larly, only 7–12% of those with a lifetime gambling disorder ever seek formal treat-
ment or attend Gamblers Anonymous (GA; Slutske, 2006). And when those with an
addictive disorder do seek treatment, positive treatment gains are not always lasting.
Rates of relapse are alarmingly high for substance use disorders (40–60% in the first
year after treatment; NIDA, 2009) and even higher with gambling disorder (Collier,
2008; Smith et al., 2015). We discuss efforts to remedy this situation, such as relapse
prevention approaches to help those with addictive disorders maintain their treat-
ment gains in the longer term. And we consider efforts to better match treatments
(whether biomedical or psychosocial) to the underlying pathways to addictive dis-
orders, in attempts to improve outcomes. Since one barrier to treatment engagement
can be individuals’ failure to recognize they have a problem and need to change, we
begin with an approach designed to get people with addictive disorders to commit
to the work required to overcome an addiction.
Motivational Interviewing
The first step in recovery from an addictive disorder is for affected individuals to rec-
ognize that they do have a problem with the substance/behavior and need assistance
to overcome the problem. People with addictive disorders, however, arrive at treat-
ment at different “stages of change” or states of readiness to tackle their addictive
behavior (Amodeo et al., 2011). They may arrive at treatment in the precontemplation
(e.g., attending treatment session due to partner’s threat of leaving) or contemplation
stage (e.g., just beginning to consider that they have a problem with substances or
gambling) rather than the preparation or action stages required for successful treat-
ment (Amodeo et al., 2011). A therapist cannot help people who are not yet ready to
change their addictive behavior; in fact, one of the main barriers identified by addic-
tions treatment staff to effectively implementing skills-based treatments such as CBT
(described below) is client “resistance” (Amodeo et al., 2011). In fact, research has

-- 258 of 498 --

238 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
shown that if clients’ readiness to change their addictive behavior is low, the treat-
ment outcome is less than optimal (Gonzalez, Schmitz, & DeLaune, 2006).
Poor engagement with treatment among clients with addictive disorders, as evi-
denced by signs such as failure to complete homework, medication noncompliance,
or missed therapy sessions, has traditionally been viewed by therapists as evidence
of “resistance” (Westra & Dozois, 2006). However, others have suggested that these
behaviors may be signs of ambivalence about change (Miller & Rose, 2015). On the
one hand, those with addictive disorders are attracted to addictive behaviors for
their many reinforcing properties (e.g., stimulants’ or gambling’s activating effects
in the brain reward system; anxiolytic drugs’ dampening of the threat system). On
the other hand, they are aware of the severe negative consequences of continued
engagement in the addictive behavior, such as financial and relationship troubles,
health issues, and problems with employers. Some argue that this ambivalence must
be resolved before the client can commit to a more active treatment, such as the bio-
logical or psychological treatments we discuss next in this chapter.
A specific psychological technique called “motivational interviewing” (Miller
& Rose, 2015) has been developed to help those with addictive disorders improve
their motivation to change and move toward a stage in which they are ready to put
in the effort required to change their addictive behavior. Motivational interviewing
is directed at exploring and resolving ambivalence about change in order to increase
clients’ engagement with the treatment process, enhance compliance, and ultimately
improve response rates. In motivational interviewing, the therapist encourages cli-
ents to explore their own feelings and thoughts about the possibility of changing
their addictive behaviors (Westra & Dozois, 2006). For example, the therapist uses
techniques to steer clients toward talking less about continuing their addictive
behavior and more about change (called “sustain talk” and “change talk”).
Motivational interviewing can be used as a stand-alone intervention or as a
“prelude” (i.e., brief preparatory intervention) prior to other treatments such as CBT
or biological treatments (see below). When used as a stand-alone intervention, the
notion is that many clients actually have the tools to make changes in their addic-
tive behavior, and all they need to be able to make the necessary changes is to
resolve their ambivalence. When used as a prelude, once the ambivalence is resolved
through motivational interviewing, other treatments are used to provide the client
with the skills to make those changes (Arkowitz & Westra, 2004; Bux & Irwin, 2006).
When brief courses of motivational interviewing are used as preludes, very prom-
ising outcomes can be achieved, including improved treatment attendance (Burke,
Arkowitz, & Menchola, 2003). Motivational interviewing appears more effective
when used as a prelude to CBT than when used as a stand-alone treatment (Burke et
al., 2003). In short, motivational interviewing is a valuable technique in the treatment
of addictive disorders, including gambling disorders (Yakovenko, Quigley, Hemmel-
garn, Hodgins, & Ronksley, 2015), particularly when used as a prelude to other, more
active, skills-based interventions (O’Connor & Stewart, 2010). One such set of skills-
based interventions is CBT.
Cognitive‑Behavioral Therapy
In this section, we discuss CBT broadly as incorporating behavioral, cognitive, so-
called “third-wave” interventions involving mindful awareness and acceptance, and

-- 259 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	239
computerized cognitive retraining. CBT is a commonly used, time-limited, and effi-
cacious form of psychotherapy that is based on classical conditioning, operant learn-
ing, and social learning theories. In addition to the empirical support for CBT, there
is also high client satisfaction with CBT for addictive disorders (Donovan, Kadden,
DiClemente, & Carroll, 2002).
As noted earlier, social learning theory (Bandura, 1977) emphasizes the roles
of outcome expectancies and self-efficacy expectancies in contributing to addictive
behaviors. Given the importance of outcome expectancies, one CBT technique to treat
addictive disorders is “expectancy challenge”—helping the client gather evidence
against, and critically evaluate the veracity and utility of, these expected positive
consequences of engaging in alcohol/drug use or gambling. A meta-analysis showed
that expectancy challenge reduces not only positive alcohol outcome expectancies
but also alcohol use and the frequency of heavy drinking, at least in the short-term
(Scott-Sheldon, Terry, Carey, Garey, & Carey, 2012). Self-efficacy expectancies are
enhanced through techniques such as training in drink/drug refusal skills, which
can specifically increase individuals’ belief in their ability to refuse the substance
if it is offered (Connor et al., 2011). More generally, in CBT, self-efficacy is enhanced
through coping skills training (discussed next) because greater knowledge and expe-
rience with adaptive coping skills can increase clients’ belief in their ability to cope
without engaging in the addictive behavior.
Coping skills training, a core component of CBT for addictive disorders, is
designed to remediate any skills deficits and to enhance clients’ sense of self-
efficacy. Clients are taught specific cognitive and behavioral techniques they can
employ when faced with triggers and associated classically conditioned cravings
to use the substance in their daily lives. These triggers can be intrapersonal (e.g.,
positive–negative mood states, stress) or interpersonal (e.g., romantic conflict). To
counter interpersonal triggers, clients may be taught assertiveness and drink/drug
refusal skills. To counter intrapersonal triggers, clients are taught skills such as urge
management, stress reduction, distress tolerance, and increasing pleasant activities
(Bornovalova, Gratz, Daughters, Hunt, & Lejuez, 2012; Monti, Kadden, Rohsenow,
Cooney, & Abrams, 2002).
CBT approaches also focus on countering the powerful reinforcing effects of
addictive behavior. In contingency management, which is grounded in operant con-
ditioning theory, abstinence is rewarded with a non-drug reinforcer (e.g., vouchers
that can be traded for rewards of value). Meta-analyses suggest that contingency
management is an effective treatment with moderate-sized effects; however, it does
tend to work better for some substances (e.g., cocaine, opioids) than others (e.g.,
tobacco) (Dutra et al., 2008; Prendergast, Podus, Finney, Greenwell, & Roll, 2006).
Another common component in CBT for addictive disorders is cue exposure
(Monti et al., 2002). According to classical conditioning theory, certain cues such as
specific internal states (e.g., stress) or people/places/things become strongly associ-
ated with the addictive behavior. Exposure to these cues can come to trigger a con-
ditioned craving to use the substance. Cue exposure involves repeatedly exposing
clients to cues that typically trigger their substance use, and not allowing clients
to engage in substance use in response to the resultant urges. Clients are taught
to cope with these conditioned urges without the use of substances. The repeated
exposure should reduce the strength of the urges elicited in response to future cues.
While systematic reviews conclude that we lack consistent positive evidence of the

-- 260 of 498 --

240 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
effectiveness of cue exposure in the treatment of substance use disorders generally
(e.g., Conklin & Tiffany, 2002), a recent meta-analysis comparing cue exposure to
other active treatments for alcohol use disorder did suggest superiority of cue expo-
sure on total drinking and latency to relapse. Results also suggested that cue expo-
sure has the best effects when combined with skills training for managing urges
(Mellentin et al., 2017).
More recent developments in CBT for addictive disorders include components
involving mindful awareness and acceptance. For example, clients are taught skills
in “urge surfing”—noticing and accepting urges to engage in the addictive behavior,
without fighting or giving in to the urges, and learning to let them pass (Witkiewitz,
Marlatt, & Walker, 2005). One trial compared urge surfing to urge suppression for
managing cigarette cravings during exposure to smoking cues. Both strategies were
associated with reductions in amount of smoking and increases in self-efficacy for
coping with smoking urges from pre- to posttreatment, but only urge surfing was
associated with improvements in negative affect (Rogojanski, Vettese, & Antony,
2011). Recent meta-analyses show that such mindfulness-based approaches are
highly effective in reducing frequency and quantity of substance misuse, craving,
substance-related problems and stress severity, and in increasing abstinence rates
(Korecki, Schwebel, Votaw, & Witkiewitz, 2020; Li, Howard, Garland, McGovern, &
Lazar, 2017).
The treatment goal in CBT is selected by the client in collaboration with the
therapist, be it abstinence or controlled use (Sobell & Sobell, 1993). Both treatment
goals appear to be equally effective, at least in the treatment of problem drinking
(Walters, 2000). However, neither can be considered a cure given the high relapse
rates noted earlier.
Given these high relapse rates, CBT for addictive disorders typically includes
techniques focused on “relapse prevention” (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985). “Lapses”—
times when the individual striving for abstinence uses the drug or gambles, or when
the person striving for controlled use engages in heavy substance use or excessive
gambling—are dealt with as occurrences from which the person can recover (Hen-
dershot, Witkiewitz, George, & Marlatt, 2011). People undergoing CBT for an addic-
tive disorder are encouraged to see the lapse as a learning experience rather than
as the beginning of an inevitable road to relapse (Hodgins, Currie, el-Guebaly, &
Diskin, 2007; Witkiewitz et al., 2005).
Another recent development in CBT for addictive disorders stems from dual-
process models of addiction (Stacy & Wiers, 2010), which contend that in addition to
focusing on altering controlled cognitive processes such as expectancies, we need to
retrain automatic associations and automatic attentional biases that independently
drive addictive behaviors. For example, an individual who has a cannabis use dis-
order and automatically associates cannabis with approach behavior can be taught,
through repeated computerized cognitive retraining, to instead automatically asso-
ciate cannabis with avoidance (Sherman, Baker, Squeglia, & McRae-Clark, 2018).
Or a person with a gambling disorder could be taught to attend away from, rather
than toward, gambling cues. While cognitive retraining is potentially effective as
an adjunctive treatment for addictive disorders (Gladwin, Wiers, & Wiers, 2016), a
recent systematic review suggests that there is more evidence for therapeutic benefits
of approach bias modification than for attentional bias modification in alcohol use
disorder (Batschelet, Stein, Tschuemperlin, Soravia, & Moggi, 2020).

-- 261 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	241
Social Context Interventions
Given the important role of sociocultural factors in addictive disorders, another
trend in treatment of addictions involves recognition of how clients’ broader social
community, including friends’ and family members’ behaviors and communication
styles, contributes to the development and maintenance of their addictive behav-
iors. Instead, clients’ social contexts can be used to advantage in motivating and
promoting change in their addictive behaviors (Stewart & Conrod, 2005). In family
therapy with adolescent substance misusers, family attitudes and practices relative
to substance use are a treatment target (Kaminer & Slesnick, 2006). As another exam-
ple, communication difficulties that contribute to problematic beliefs that maintain
addictive behaviors are a therapy target in a couple therapy approach for alcohol
use disorder based on behavioral principles (Fals-Stewart, O’Farrell, Birchler, Cor-
dova, & Kelley, 2005) and in a couple therapy approach for gambling disorder based
on family therapy principles (Lee & Awosoga, 2015). Family members may also be
taught helpful ways to assist clients with treatment compliance (e.g., taking their
medications to treat their addictive disorder; Fals-Stewart et al., 2005). Similarly,
in the community reinforcement approach (Meyers, Villanueva, & Smith, 2005), a
spouse, friend, or relative who is not a substance misuser is recruited to participate
in relationship therapy to help substance-misusing clients improve their relation-
ship skills. In addition, new recreational and social activities are used to help the
client replace substance use with socially reinforcing activities (Meyers et al., 2005).
Similarly, network therapy involves clients’ family members and close friends in the
treatment process (Galanter, 2015).
Social context is also a very important component of the most popular model
for the treatment of substance abuse, namely, the 12-step approach first developed
by AA, and now extended to other addictive disorders (e.g., Narcotics Anonymous
[NA], GA; see Schuler et al., 2016). Specifically, the social support provided through
group meetings may be one important key to the efficacy of this approach (Barlow,
Durand, Stewart, & Lalumiere, 2012). According to Kelly, Magill, and Stout (2009),
AA’s efficacy may also stem from the ability of the group process to improve clients’
coping skills, motivation to change, and self-efficacy. However, the reliance of the
12-step approach on spirituality and its adoption of a disease model of addiction
can be stumbling blocks for many. Thus, while AA and other 12-step treatments
such as NA and GA can be very helpful for many (Donovan, Ingalsbe, Benbow, &
Daley, 2013), other treatments are needed for the large numbers of clients who do not
respond to this approach (Barlow et al., 2012).
Treatment Matching in Psychotherapy
Given the marked heterogeneity in substance-misusing clients and the unique path-
ways to addictive disorders highlighted at the outset of this chapter, recent efforts
have been made to match treatments to the particular needs of individual clients.
One such “treatment matching” approach focused on matching on substance-
abusing clients’ personality traits and reasons for substance use (Conrod, Stewart,
et al., 2000). The personality profiles targeted in this approach were the four we dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter as motivating substance use, but for different reasons:
anxiety sensitivity, hopelessness, impulsivity, and sensation seeking. Motivational

-- 262 of 498 --

242 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
enhancement and CBT techniques were used to create specific brief treatments for
each type of substance misuser. Sensation seekers were taught skills to help them
meet their needs for excitement in less risky ways than via substance misuse, whereas
anxiety-sensitive substance misusers were taught cognitive and behavioral skills
that manage anxiety better than substance misuse. Twenty years ago, in the first
study to test this approach, adult women substance abusers recruited from the com-
munity were randomly assigned to receive one of the following three interventions:
(1) a motivation-matched intervention involving personality-specific motivational
and coping skills training (e.g., an anxiety-sensitive person, receiving an interven-
tion specifically designed for anxiety-sensitive substance abusers); (2) a motivation-
mismatched intervention targeting a theoretically different personality profile (e.g.,
an anxiety-sensitive substance abuser receiving an intervention designed for a sen-
sation seeker); or (3) a motivational control intervention in which clients watched
a film about substance misuse, then had a supportive discussion with a therapist.
At 6-month follow-up, only the matched intervention was superior to the motiva-
tional control in reducing the frequency and severity of problematic substance use
(Conrod, Stewart, et al., 2000). This approach also has been shown to be effective
in reducing alcohol use and misuse in young people (Conrod, Stewart, Comeau,
& Maclean, 2006) and to delay the onset of cannabis use (Mahu, Doucet, O’Leary-
Barrett, & Conrod, 2015) when delivered in a group context in schools. Moreover,
this approach shows promise in treating symptoms of several mental health dis-
orders that are commonly comorbid with substance use disorders (Castellanos &
Conrod, 2006) and in treating gambling disorder (M. Stewart et al., 2016). These
results indicate potential for treatment-matching approaches that match clients to
interventions at the level of personality and motivational risk factors for addictive
behaviors (Barlow et al., 2012).
Biological Treatments
In addition to the myriad psychosocial treatments for addictive disorders discussed
so far, numerous biological approaches are also available. Some of the available med-
ications block the pleasurable effects of the drug, while others create an aversive
reaction when the drug is ingested. We look next at a few commonly used medica-
tions in the treatment of various forms of addictive disorder.
Aversive Treatment
One method for treating people with substance use disorders is for the clinician
to administer a drug that makes ingestion of the misused substance very unpleas-
ant. This leads to aversive learning and avoidance of the abused substance by the
client. The best-known example of this type of medication is disulfiram, which
has been available for over 60 years in treating alcohol use disorder (Krampe &
Ehrenreich, 2010). Disulfiram prevents the breakdown of a by-product of alcohol—
acetaldehyde—if the client with alcohol use disorder should consume alcohol. The
resulting buildup of acetaldehyde causes the patient to experience nausea, vomiting,
and elevated respiration and heart rate (Pedersen, Askgaard, Jorgensen, Oppedal, &
Tonnesen, 2018). Supervised treatment with disulfiram has some effect on short-term

-- 263 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	243
abstinence and assists with relapse prevention (Jorgensen, Pedersen, & Tonnesen,
2011). Compliance issues are a major concern, however (see Barlow et al., 2012). Some
of the psychosocial approaches discussed earlier, such as motivational interviewing
or behavioral couple therapy, can help clients increase their internal or external moti-
vations to remain compliant with their medication regimen.
Antagonist Treatments
Earlier we discussed how many addictive behaviors produce pleasurable effects (e.g.,
euphoria) through their effects on the brain, for example, via the dopamine reward
system. One class of medication for the treatment of some addictive disorders, called
“antagonists,” exerts its therapeutic actions by blocking or canceling out these plea-
surable effects (Barlow et al., 2012). A well-known example is the opiate antagonist
naltrexone, which has been investigated in the treatment of both alcohol use and
gambling disorders. It prevents alcohol’s positive reinforcing effects by blocking the
release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens (Stewart, Collins, Blackburn, Ellery,
& Klein, 2005). Research shows that naltrexone blocks alcohol-induced pleasurable
stimulation in human participants (Peterson, Conrod, Vassileva, Gianoulakis, &
Pihl, 2006). A double-blind, placebo-controlled study showed that naltrexone may
also be effective in treating gambling disorder (Kim, Grant, Adson, & Shin, 2001).
Overall, antagonist drugs such as naltrexone help some individuals with addictive
disorders, but they are best used as an adjunct to effective psychotherapeutic tech-
niques (Barlow et al., 2012).
Agonist Substitution
Another method for treating substance use disorders with medication is to offer the
patient a medication that has a similar chemical makeup to the misused drug but is
safer in terms of its overall negative consequences. This is known as “agonist sub-
stitution.” Two well-known examples are nicotine replacement therapy in the treat-
ment of cigarette smoking and methadone maintenance therapy in the treatment of
opiate use disorder. Agonist substitution can be considered a form of “harm reduc-
tion” treatment (Logan & Marlatt, 2010; Stancliff et al., 2012) because it involves trad-
ing a more harmful behavior for a much less harmful alternative.
With nicotine replacement therapy, the addictive drug in the tobacco smoke (nic-
otine) is provided to the client in the form of gum or a patch. This can be considered a
harm reduction treatment because, although nicotine itself can have harmful effects
(e.g., increased blood pressure), the nicotine gum and patch lack the carcinogens
contained in cigarette smoke. Doses are decreased over time to reduce nicotine with-
drawal. Both nicotine replacement therapy gum and patches have been shown to be
successful in helping people quit smoking (Hatsukami et al., 2000; Tiffany, Cox, &
Elash, 2000). However, it should be used in combination with a comprehensive psy-
chosocial treatment program because a substantial proportion of smokers relapse to
smoking after they discontinue nicotine replacement therapy. When combined with
physical exercise, nicotine replacement therapy may be beneficial in helping people
not only quit smoking but also prevent weight gain following smoking cessation
(Prappavessis et al., 2007).

-- 264 of 498 --

244 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
A more controversial form of harm reduction treatment for addiction to tobacco
smoking is the use of e-cigarettes or “vaping.” While some research suggests that
e-cigarettes can be helpful as a harm reduction strategy for supporting smoking
relapse prevention (Notley, Ward, Dawkins, & Holland, 2018), others argue that while
vaping may be less harmful than tobacco smoking, it still has substantial risks (Al-
Hamdani, 2014). These dangers include high addiction potential, raising blood pres-
sure, which can increase risk for heart attack, serious consequences for lung function
(e.g., e-cigarette- or vaping-associated lung injury), and serving as an attractive new
route into nicotine use for young people.
Methadone, an opioid receptor agonist with a relatively long half-life (Eap,
Buclin, & Baumann, 2002), is helpful in the treatment of opioid use disorder because
high doses alleviate opiate cravings and withdrawal symptoms. Moreover, when
people take methadone, cross-tolerance to other opiates develops. Therefore, cli-
ents cannot experience euphoria if they administer the misused opiate while tak-
ing methadone, since methadone already occupies the receptors (Epstein, Renner,
Ciraulo, Knapp, & Jaffe, 2005; McKim, 2006). Methadone thus provides negative
reinforcement for remaining abstinent (by alleviating aversive opioid withdrawal
symptoms) and prevents positive reinforcement (by preventing euphoria if the cli-
ent uses other opiates while taking the medication). When methadone is combined
with psychotherapy, not only do many clients reduce their use of opioids such as
heroin, but they also reduce other harmful effects. For example, methadone is asso-
ciated with decreased criminality (as patients are not engaging in as much crime
to procure drugs) and decreased risk for HIV/AIDS and hepatitis (through reduced
exposure to unsafe injection practices; Millson et al., 2007). On the negative side,
many methadone clients continue to misuse other drugs (Fulton, Barrett, Stewart, &
MacIsaac, 2012; Mahu et al., 2019), and some remain addicted to methadone for the
rest of their lives. But most professionals agree that this is a positive harm reduc-
tion outcome, since methadone has far fewer negative consequences than heroin or
fentanyl.
While methadone is a widely used medical treatment for opioid use disorder
(Krambeer, von McKnelly, Gabrielli, & Penick, 2001), recent guidelines recommend
buprenorphine–naloxone above methadone (Bruneau et al., 2018). Like methadone,
buprenorphine is an opioid agonist that helps treat withdrawal and cravings. Nal-
oxone is an opioid antagonist that is added to the buprenorphine to prevent people
from injecting their medication. Buprenorphine–naloxone is safer than methadone in
terms of overdose risk. Moreover, take-home dosing can happen more quickly with
buprenorphine–naloxone than with methadone, as the latter requires a substantial
period of daily witnessed ingestion at the clinic or pharmacy before clients are per-
mitted to take their medication home (Bruneau et al., 2018). Thus, buprenorphine–
naloxone gives the client autonomy in their treatment more quickly.
Other Medications
Another medication for the treatment of alcohol use disorder that does not readily
fall into any of the categories discussed earlier is acamprosate. It exerts its therapeu-
tic effects via impact on the GABA and glutamate neurotransmitter systems (Gor-
dis, 2000) by modulating negative reinforcement (withdrawal). A meta-analysis of

-- 265 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	245
placebo-controlled trials showed acamprosate to be superior to placebo in both alco-
hol abstinence rates and cumulative days abstinent (Dranitsaris, Selby, & Negrete,
2009).
Additionally, the recent epigenetic discoveries discussed earlier open the door
to better targeting medications for addictions to genes and biochemical pathways
and their synaptic circuit consequences that underlie relapse and craving. It might
also be possible to target medications toward lasting epigenetic mechanisms that
underlie lifelong changes in addiction vulnerability. While there are encouraging
findings in animal models (Egervani, Ciccocioppo, Jentsch, & Hurd, 2017; Massart
et al., 2015; Walker & Nestler, 2018), many problems need to be resolved before they
would be useful for treatment in humans (Nestler & Luscher, 2019).
Treatment Matching in Pharmacotherapy
While various pharmacotherapies are effective in the treatment of addictive disor-
ders, meta-analyses reveal only modest effects for these various approaches (Mann
& Hermann, 2010). For example, in the treatment of alcohol use disorder, both nal-
trexone and acamprosate are effective relative to placebo, but both have relatively
modest effects (Dranitsaris et al., 2009). This may be because these drugs are tested in
heterogeneous samples, in which the assumption that “one [treatment] size fits all” is
simply untenable (Mann & Hermann, 2010). European researchers tested the possi-
bility that naltrexone, which blocks the positively reinforcing effects of alcohol, may
work best for a subtype of alcohol use disorder patient that shows greater reactivity
to pictures of alcohol cues. In a randomized controlled trial called Project PREDICT—
comparing naltrexone to acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol use disorder (Mann
et al., 2009)—using fMRI, researchers identified clients with elevated pretreatment
cue reactivity to alcohol versus neutral control images in the ventral striatum. As
hypothesized, these highly alcohol cue-reactive clients showed superior treatment
response to naltrexone versus acamprosate in terms of time to first severe relapse
(Mann et al., 2014). This suggests that assessing individual differences in brain-based
cue reactivity responses may help clinicians in identifying clients most likely to ben-
efit from naltrexone.
CONCLUSION
To conclude this chapter, we now consider seven principles of change that emerge
from our literature review. These are intended to serve as a guide to helping clini-
cians of different orientations focus on important issues in the treatment of clients
with addictive disorders.
First, it is essential to motivate the client to desire to undertake the challenges
necessary to overcome the addictive disorder. A client who attends an assessment
session because their spouse has been nagging them to go but sees no need to change
their gambling habits will need to develop a stronger motivation for change to over-
come their gambling disorder. Motivational enhancement can be helpful for clients
undergoing pharmacotherapy for an addiction by motivating them to stick to the
prescription regimen (Miller & Rollnick, 2002).

-- 266 of 498 --

246 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Second is the importance of challenging expectancies (decreasing positive out-
come expectancies and increasing self-efficacy expectancies; Marlatt & Gordon,
1985). For example, teenage problem drinkers need to develop strong drink refusal
self-efficacy expectancies to equip them for dealing with peer pressure to use alco-
hol. Third, the successful treatment of addictive disorders involves helping clients
develop more adaptive coping skills for dealing with their own individual triggers
to engage in the addictive behavior (Monti et al., 2002). For some, this may involve
stress management training, while for others the focus may be on increasing alterna-
tive pleasant activities. Fourth, urges should be a target of intervention (Sinha, 2007),
either through the use of cue exposure in the case of alcohol (Monti et al., 2002) or
through newer acceptance-based and mindfulness techniques such as “urge surf-
ing” (Witkiewitz et al., 2005).
Fifth, there should be recognition of and planning for the high rates of relapse
that are so characteristic of the addictive disorders. Specifically, traditional and newer
mindfulness-based relapse prevention strategies (Witkiewitz et al., 2005) should be a
component of treatment planning to ensure that the inevitable lapse does not prog-
ress into a full-scale relapse. Sixth, it is crucial to consider the client’s broader social
context within the treatment (Stewart & Conrod, 2005) in terms of both providing
social support for change and reducing modeling influences. Such social-contextual
factors can be directly incorporated into the treatment by involving family members
or supportive peers in the therapy (e.g., as in family therapy, couple therapy, network
therapy, or 12-step facilitation) or via recommending that clients in individual treat-
ment garner social support in the recovery process. Social support can be helpful
even in pharmacotherapy for addictive disorders (e.g., having the spouse involved
in positively assisting with medication compliance via behavioral couple therapy;
Fals-Stewart et al., 2005).
The seventh and final principle of change in the treatment of addictive disorders
involves the importance of matching the intervention to the underlying pathway to
addiction involved. For example, an anxiety-prone individual who is misusing sub-
stances to manage anxiety has very different treatment needs than a sensation seeker
who is misusing substances for the excitement and enjoyable high. We believe that
this principle applies as much to pharmacotherapy selection as to the selection of
techniques in psychosocial treatments such as CBT. Just as appropriate matching of
client subtypes to treatments (e.g., Conrod, Stewart, et al., 2000; M. Stewart et al., 2016)
has been shown to improve efficacy of psychosocial interventions, efficacious phar-
macotherapies for those with addictive disorders are likely to be advanced substan-
tially by a more “personalized medicine” approach in which the specific pathway to
addiction is considered in medication selection for a given patient (Mann et al., 2014).
REFERENCES
Abu Shakra, M., Leyton, M., Moghnieh, H., Pruessner, J., Dagher, A., & Pihl, R. (2018). Neu-
robiological correlates and predictors of two distinct personality trait pathways to esca-
lated alcohol use. EBioMedicine, 27, 86–93.
Al-Hamdani, M. (2014). A short note on e-cigarette issues: Harm reduction, re-normalization,
and big tobacco. Journal of Public Health Policy, 35, 132–134.

-- 267 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	247
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Amodeo, M., Lundgren, L., Cohen, A., Rose, D., Chassler, D., Beltrame, C., & D’Ippoliot, M.
(2011). Barriers to implementing evidence-based practices in addiction treatment pro-
grams: Comparing staff reports on motivational interviewing, adolescent community
reinforcement approach, assertive community treatment, and cognitive behavioral ther-
apy. Evaluation and Program Planning, 34, 382–389.
Arkowitz, H., & Westra, H. A. (2004). Motivational interviewing as an adjunct to cognitive
behavioral therapy for depression and anxiety. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 18,
337–350.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Barlow, D. H., Durand, V. M., Stewart, S. H., & Lalumiere, M. (2012). Abnormal psychology: An
integrative approach (4th ed.). Toronto: Nelson.
Barrett, S., Boileau, I., Okker, J., Pihl, R. O., & Dagher, A. (2004). The hedonic response to ciga-
rette smoking is proportional to dopamine release in the human striatum as measured
by positron emission tomography and [11C]raclopride. Synapse, 54, 65–71.
Batschelet, H. M., Stein, M., Tschuemperlin, R. M., Soravia, L. M., & Moggi, F. (2020). Alcohol-
specific computerized interventions to alter cognitive biases: A systematic review of
effects on experimental tasks, drinking behavior, and neuronal activation. Frontiers in
Psychiatry, 10, 871.
Becker, J. B., & Chartoff, E. (2019). Sex differences in neural mechanisms mediating reward
and addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology, 44, 166–183.
Black, D. W., & Shaw, M. (2019). The epidemiology of gambling disorder. In A. Heinz, N.
Romanczuk-Seiferth, & M. N. Potenza (Eds.), Gambling disorder (pp. 29–48). New York:
Springer.
Boardman, J. D., Blalock, C. L., & Pampel, F. C. (2010). Trends in the genetic influences on
smoking. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 51, 108–123.
Boffo, M., Smits, R., Salmon, J. O., Cowie, M. E., de Jong, D. T. H. A., Salemink, E., . . . . Wiers,
R. W. (2018). Luck, come here!: Automatic approach tendencies toward gambling cues in
moderate- to high-risk gamblers. Addiction, 113, 289–298.
Bornovalova, M. A., Gratz, K. L., Daughters, S. B., Hunt, E. D., & Lejuez, C. W. (2012). Initial
RCT of a distress tolerance treatment for individuals with substance use disorders. Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 122, 70–76.
Bruneau, J., Ahamad, K., Goyer, M.-E., Poulin, G., Selby, P., Fischer, B., . . . Wood, E. (2018).
Management of opioid use disorders: A national practice guideline. Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 190, E247–E257.
Brunelle, C., & Pihl, R. O. (2007). Effects of conditioned reward and non-reward cues on the
heart rate response to alcohol intoxication in male social drinkers. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 31, 383–389.
Burke, B. L., Arkowitz, H., & Menchola, M. (2003). The efficacy of motivational interviewing:
A meta-analysis of controlled clinical traits. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
71, 843–861.
Bux, D. A., & Irwin, T. W. (2006). Combining motivational interviewing and cognitive behav-
ioral skills training for the treatment of crystal methamphetamine abuse/dependence.
Journal of Gay and Lesbian Psychotherapy, 10, 143–152.
Campbell, J. C., Szumlinski, K. K., & Kippin, T. E. (2009). Contribution of early environmental
stress to alcoholism vulnerability. Alcohol, 43, 547–554.
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I., . . . Poulton, R. (2002). Role of geno-
type in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297, 851–854.
Castellanos, N., & Conrod, P. J. (2006). Brief interventions targeting personality risk factors

-- 268 of 498 --

248 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
for adolescent substance misuse reduce depression, panic, and risk-taking behaviors.
Journal of Mental Health, 15, 645–658.
Chinneck, A., Thompson, K., Mahu, I. T., Davis-MacNevin, O., Dobson, K., & Stewart, S. H.
(2018). Personality and prescription drug use and misuse among first year undergradu-
ates. Addictive Behaviors, 87, 122–130.
Cinciripini, P. M., Karam-Hage, M., Kypriotakis, G., Robinson, J. D., Rabius, V., Beneventi,
D., . . . Blalock, J. A. (2019). Association of a comprehensive smoking cessation program
with smoking abstinence among patients with cancer. JAMA Network Open, 2, Article
e1912251.
Collier, R. (2008). Gambling treatment options: A roll of the dice. Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 179, 127–128.
Conklin, C. A., & Tiffany, S. T. (2002). Applying extension research and theory to cue exposure
addictive treatments. Addiction, 97, 155–167.
Connor, J. P., George, S. M., Gullo, M. J., Kelly, A. B., & Young, R. M. (2011). A prospective
study of alcohol expectancies and self-efficacy as predictors of young adolescent alcohol
misuse. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 46, 161–169.
Conrod, P., Pihl, R. O., Stewart, S., & Dongier, M. (2000). Validation of a system of classifying
female substance abusers on the basis of personality and motivational risk factors for
substance abuse. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 14, 243–256.
Conrod, P. J., Stewart, S. H., Comeau, M. N., & Maclean, M. (2006). Efficacy of cognitive behav-
ioral interventions targeting personality risk factors for youth alcohol misuse. Journal of
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 35, 550–563.
Conrod, P. J., Stewart, S. H., Pihl, R. O., Côté, S., Fontaine, V., & Dongier, M. (2000). Efficacy
of brief coping skills interventions that match different personality profiles of female
substance abusers. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 14, 231–242.
Dai, H., & Leventhal, A. M. (2019). Prevalence of e-cigarette use among adults in the United
States, 2014–2018. Journal of the American Medical Association, 322(18), 1824–1827.
Darredeau, C., Barrett, S., Jardin, B., & Pihl, R. O. (2007). Patterns and predictors of medication
compliance, diversion, and misuse in adult prescribed methylphenidate users. Human
Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental, 22, 529–536.
Dash, G. F., Slutske, W. S., Martin, N. G., Statham, D. J., Agrawal, A., & Lynskey, M. T. (2019).
Big Five personality traits and alcohol, nicotine, cannabis, and gambling disorder comor-
bidity. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 33(4), 420–429.
Di Forti, M., Quattrone, D., Freeman, T. P., Tripoli, G., Gayer-Anderson, C., Quigley, H., . . .
van der Ven, E. (2019). The contribution of cannabis use to variation in the incidence
of psychotic disorder across Europe (EU-GEI): A multicentre case– control study. Lancet
Psychiatry, 6(5), 427–436.
Donovan, D. M., Ingalsbe, M. H., Benbow, J., & Daley, D. C. (2013). 12-step interventions and
mutual support programs for substance use disorders: An overview. Social Work and Pub-
lic Health, 28, 313–332.
Donovan, D. M., Kadden, R. M., DiClemente, C. C., & Carroll, K. M. (2002). Client satisfac-
tion with three therapies in the treatment of alcohol dependence: Results from Project
MATCH. American Journal on Addiction, 11, 291–307.
Dranitsaris, G., Selby, P., & Negrete, J. C. (2009). Meta-analyses of placebo-controlled tri-
als of acamprosate for the treatment of alcohol dependence: Impact of the combined
pharmacotherapies and behavior interventions study. Journal of Addiction Medicine, 3,
74–82.
Dutra, L., Stathopoulou, G., Basden, S. C., Leyro, T. M., Powers, M. B., & Otto, M. W. (2008). A
meta-analytic review of psychosocial interventions for substance use disorders. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 179–187.
Eap, C. B., Buclin, T., & Baumann, P. (2002). Interindividual variability of clinical

-- 269 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	249
pharmacokinetics of methadone: Implications for the treatment of opioid dependence.
Clinical Pharmacokinetics, 41, 1153–1193.
Egervani, G., Ciccocioppo, R., Jentsch, J. D., & Hurd, Y. L. (2017). Shaping vulnerability to
addiction: The contributions of behavior, neural circuits, and molecular mechanisms.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 85, 117–125.
Epstein, S., Renner, J. A., Ciraulo, D. A., Knapp, C. M., & Jaffe, J. H. (2005). Opioids. In H.
R. Kranzler & D. A. Ciraulo (Eds.), Clinical manual of addiction psychopharmacology
(pp. 55–110). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Falk, D., Hsiao-Ye, Y., & Hiller-Sturmhöfel, S. (2008). An epidemiological analysis of co-
occurring alcohol and drug use and disorders: Findings from the National Epidemio-
logic Survey of Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC). Alcoholism Research and
Health, 31, 100–110.
Fals-Stewart, W., O’Farrell, T. J., Birchler, G. R., Cordova, J., & Kelley, M. L. (2005). Behavioral
couples therapy for alcoholism and drug abuse: Where we’ve been, where we are, and
where we’re going. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 229–246.
Ferguson, D., Boden, J., & Harwood, J. (2009). Tests of causal links between alcohol abuse or
dependence and major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 260–266.
Field, M., & Cox, W. M. (2008). Attentional bias in addictive behaviors: A review of its develop-
ment, causes, and consequences. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 97, 1–20.
Fulton, H. G., Barrett, S. P., Stewart, S. H., & MacIsaac, C. (2012). Prescription opioid misuse:
Characteristics of earliest and most recent memory of hydromorphone use. Journal of
Addiction Medicine, 6, 137–144.
Galanter, M. (2015). Network therapy. In M. Galanter, H. D. Kleber, & K. T. Brady (Eds.), The
American Psychiatric Publishing textbook of substance abuse treatment (5th ed., pp. 441–461).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Gladwin, T. E., Wiers, C. E., & Wiers, R. W. (2016). Cognitive neuroscience of cognitive retrain-
ing for addiction medicine: From mediating mechanisms to questions of efficacy. Prog-
ress in Brain Research, 224, 323–344.
Glahn, D., Lovallo, W., & Fox, P. (2007). Reduced amygdala activation in young adults at high
risk of alcoholism: Studies from the Oklahoma Family Health Patterns Project. Biological
Psychiatry, 61, 1306–1309.
Gonzalez, V. M., Schmitz, J. M., & DeLaune, K. A. (2006). The role of homework in cognitive-
behavioral therapy for cocaine dependence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
74, 633–637.
Gordis, E. (2000). Research refines alcohol treatment options. Alcohol Research and Health, 24,
53–61.
Grant, B. F. (2014). Source and accuracy statement: National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions-III (NESARC-III). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism.
Grant, B. F., Goldstein, R. B., Saha, T. D., Chou, S. P., Jung, J., Zhang, H., . . . Hasin, D. S. (2015).
Epidemiology of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder results from the National Epidemiologic
Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions III. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 757–766.
Griswold, M. G., Fullman, N., Hawley, C., Arian, N., Zimsen, S. R. M., Tymeson, H. D., . . .
Gakidou, E. (2018). Alcohol use and burden for 195 countries and territories, 1990–2016:
A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet, 392, 1015–1035.
Gutwinski, S., Heinz, A. J., & Heinz, A. (2018). Alcohol-related aggression and violence. In A.
R. Beech, A. J. Carter, R. E. Mann, & P. Rotshtein (Eds.), The Wiley Blackwell handbook of
forensic neuroscience (Vols. 1–2, pp. 455–480). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hasin, D. S., Sarvet, A. L., Meyers, J. L., Saha, T. D., Ruan, W. J., Stohl, M., & Grant, B. F. (2018).
Epidemiology of adult DSM-5 major depressive disorder and its specifiers in the United
States. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 336–346.

-- 270 of 498 --

250 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Hatsukami, D. K., Grillo, M., Boyle, R., Allen, S., Jensen, J., Bliss, R., & Brown, S. (2000). Treat-
ment of spit tobacco users with transdermal nicotine system and mint snuff. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 241–249.
Heitzig, M., Nigg, J., Yau, W., Zubita, J., & Zucker, R. (2008). Affective circuitry and risk for
alcoholism in late adolescence: Differences in fronto-striatal responses between vul-
nerable and resilient children of alcoholic parents. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 32, 414–426.
Helzer, J., & Pryzbeck, T. (1988). The occurrence of alcoholism with other psychiatric disorders
in the general population and its impact on treatment. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 49,
219–224.
Hendershot, C., Witkiewitz, K., George, W. H., & Marlatt, G. A. (2011). Relapse prevention for
addictive behaviors. Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 6, Article 17.
Hodgins, D. C., Currie, S. R., el-Guebaly, N., & Diskin, K. M. (2007). Does providing extended
relapse prevention bibliotherapy to problem gamblers improve outcome? Journal of Gam-
bling Studies, 23, 41–54.
Hughes, A., Sathe, N., & Spagnola, K. (2009). State estimates of substance use from the 2006–
2007 National Surveys on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH Series H-35, HHS Pub. No. SMA
09-4362). Rockville, MD: Office of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration.
Jones, C. M., Einstein, E. B., & Compton, W. M. (2018). Changes in synthetic opioid involve-
ment in drug overdose deaths in the United States, 2010–2016. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 319, 1819–1821.
Jorgensen, C., Pedersen, B., & Tonnesen, H. (2011). The efficacy of disulfiram for the treatment
of alcohol use disorders. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 35, 1749–1758.
Kalda, A., & Zharkovsky, A. (2015). Epigenetic mechanisms of psychostimulant-induced
addiction. International Review of Neurobiology, 120, 85–105.
Kaminer, Y., & Slesnick, N. (2006). Evidence-based cognitive-behavioral and family therapies
for adolescent alcohol and other substance use disorders. In M. Galanter (Ed.), Alcohol
problems in adolescents and young adults: Epidemiology, neurobiology, prevention, and treatment
(pp. 383–405). New York: Springer.
Kehayes, I.-L., Mackinnon, S. P., Sherry, S. B., Leonard, K. E., & Stewart, S. H. (2019). Drink-
ing motives and drinking behaviors in romantic couples: A longitudinal actor–partner
interdependence model. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 33, 208–220.
Kelly, J. F., Magill, M., & Stout, R. L. (2009). How do people recover from alcohol dependence?:
A systematic review of the research on mechanisms of behavior change in Alcoholics
Anonymous. Addiction Research and Theory, 17, 236–259.
Kim, S. W., Grant, J. E., Adson, D. E., & Shin, Y. C. (2001). Double blind naltrexone and placebo
comparison study in the treatment of pathological gambling. Biological Psychiatry, 49,
914–921.
Korecki, J. R., Schwebel, F. J., Votaw, V. R., & Witkiewitz, K. (2020). Mindfulness-based pro-
grams for substance use disorders: A systematic review of manualized treatments. Sub-
stance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 15, 51.
Krambeer, L. L., von McKnelly, W., Jr., Gabrielli, W. R., Jr., & Penick, E. C. (2001). Methadone
therapy for opioid dependence. American Family Physician, 15, 2404–2410.
Krampe, H., & Ehrenreich, H. (2010). Supervised disulfiram as adjunct to psychotherapy in
alcoholism treatment. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 16, 2076–2090.
Kyzar, E. J., Zhang, H., & Pandey, S. C. (2019). Adolescent alcohol exposure epigenetically sup-
presses amygdala and enhances RNA expression to confer adult anxiety susceptibility.
Biological Psychiatry, 85, 904–914.
Lee, B. K., & Awosoga, O. (2015). Congruence couple therapy for pathological gambling: A
pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Gambling Studies, 31, 1047–1068.

-- 271 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	251
Leyton, M. (2007). Conditioned and sensitized responses to stimulant drugs in humans. Prog-
ress in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 31, 1601–1613.
Li, W., Howard, M. O., Garland, E. L., McGovern, P., & Lazar, M. (2017). Mindfulness treat-
ment for substance use: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Substance
Abuse Treatment, 75, 62–96.
Lipari, R. N., Park-Lee, E., & Van Horn, S. (2016). America’s need for and receipt of substance use
treatment in 2015: The CBHSQ report. Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health Statis-
tics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Liu, M., Jiang, Y., Wedow, R., Li, Y., Brazel, D. M., Chen, F., . . . Vrieze, S. (2019). Association
studies of up to 1.2 million individuals yield new insights into the genetic etiology of
tobacco and alcohol use. Nature Genetics, 51, 237–244.
Logan, D. E., & Marlatt, G. A. (2010). Harm reduction therapy: A practice-friendly review of
research. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 66, 201–214.
MacAndrew, C., & Edgerton, R. (1969). Drunken comportment: A social explanation. Chicago:
Aldine.
Mackey, S., Allgaier, N., Chaarani, B., Spechler, P., Orr, C., Bunn, J., . . . Garavan, H. (2019).
Mega-analysis of gray matter volume in substance dependence: General and substance-
specific regional effects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 119–128.
MacLaren, V. V., Harrigan, K. A., & Dixon, M. (2012). Gambling motives and symptoms of
problem gambling in frequent slots players. Journal of Gambling Issues, 27, 1–13.
Mahu, I. T., Conrod, P. J., Barrett, S. P., Sako, A., Swansburg, J., Laurence, M., . . . Stewart,
S. H. (2019). Specificity of personality relationships to particular forms of concurrent
substance use among opiate agonist therapy clients. Addictive Behaviors, 98, Article
106056.
Mahu, I. T., Doucet, C., O’Leary-Barrett, M., & Conrod, P. J. (2015). Can cannabis use be pre-
vented by targeting personality risk in schools?: Twenty-four-month outcome of the
Adventure trial on cannabis use: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. Addiction, 110,
1625–1633.
Mann, K., & Hermann, D. (2010). Individualized treatment in alcohol dependent patients.
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 260(Suppl. 2), S116–S120.
Mann, K., Kiefer, F., Smolka, M., Gann, H., Wellek, S., Heinz, A., & the PREDICT Study
Research Team. (2009). Searching for responders to acamprosate and naltrexone in alco-
holism treatment: Rationale and design of the Predict Study. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 33, 674–683.
Mann, K., Vollstadt-Klein, S., Reinhard, I., Lemenager, T., Fauth-Bunher, M., Hermann, D., . . .
Smolka, M. N. (2014). Predicting naltrexone response in alcohol-dependent patients: The
contribution of functional magnetic resonance imaging. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experi-
mental Research, 38, 2754–2762.
Marczinski, C. A., & Fillmore, M. T. (2014). Energy drinks mixed with alcohol: What are the
risks? Nutrition Reviews, 72, 98–107.
Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (Eds.). (1985). Relapse prevention. New York: Guilford Press.
Martinotti, G., Sarchione, F., Fiori, F., Corbo, M., Poloni, N., Rarricone, I., . . . Giannatonio, M.
(2017). Gambling disorder and suicide: An overview of the associated comorbidity and
clinical characteristics. International Journal of High-Risk Behavior and Addiction, 6, Article
e30827.
Massart, R., Barnea, R., Dikshtein, Y., Suderman, M., Meir, O., Hallett, M., . . . Yadid, G. (2015).
Role of DNA methylation in the nucleus accumbens in incubation of cocaine craving.
Journal of Neuroscience, 35, 8042–8058.
McKim, W. A. (2006). Drugs and behavior: An introduction to behavioral pharmacology (6th ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice-Hall.
McKnight-Eily, L. R., Eaton, D. K., Lowry, R., Croft, J. B., Presley-Cantrell, L., & Perry, G. S.

-- 272 of 498 --

252 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
(2011). Relationships between hours of sleep and health risk behaviors in US adolescent
students. Preventive Medicine, 53, 271–273.
Mellentin, A., Skot, L., Neilsen, B., Schippers, G. M., Nielsen, A. S., Stenager, E., & Juhl, C.
(2017). Cue exposure therapy for the treatment of alcohol use disorders: A meta-analytic
review. Clinical Psychology Review, 57, 195–207.
Meyers, R., Villanueva, M., & Smith, J. E. (2005). The community reinforcement approach: His-
tory and empirical justification. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 247–260.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., & Rose, G. S. (2015). Motivational interviewing and decisional balance: Contrast-
ing responses to client ambivalence. Behavioral and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 43, 129–141.
Millson, P., Challacombe, L., Villeneuve, P. J., Strike, C. J., Fischer, B., Myers, T., . . . Hopkins,
S. (2007). Reduction in the injection-related HIV risk after 6 months in a low-threshold
methadone treatment program. AIDS Education and Prevention, 19, 124–136.
Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., & Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating
alcohol dependence: A coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Morin, J. F. G., Afzali, M. H., Bourque, J., Stewart, S. H., Séguin, J. R., O’Leary-Barrett, M., &
Conrod, P. J. (2019). A population-based analysis of the relationship between substance
use and adolescent cognitive development. American Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 98–106.
Muyingo, L., Smith, M. M., Sherry, S. B., McEachern, E., Leonard, K. E., & Stewart, S. H. (2020).
Relationships on the rocks: A meta-analysis of romantic partner effects on alcohol use.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 34(6), 629–640.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2019). College drinking factsheet. Rock-
land, MD: Author.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2009). Principles of drug addiction treatment: A research-based
guide (3rd ed.). Rockland, MD: Author.
Nayak, M. B., Patterson, D., Wilsnack, S. C., Karriker-Jaffe, K. J., & Greenfield, T. K. (2019).
Alcohol’s secondhand harms in the United States: New data on prevalence and risk fac-
tors. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 80, 273–281.
Nestler, E. J., & Luscher, C. (2019). The molecular basis of drug addiction: Linking epigenetic
to synaptic and circuit mechanisms. Neuron, 102, 48–59.
Notley, C., Ward, E., Dawkins, L., & Holland, R. (2018). The unique contribution of e-cigarettes
for tobacco harm reduction in supporting smoking relapse prevention. Harm Reduction
Journal, 15, 31.
O’Connor, R. M., & Stewart, S. H. (2010). Substance use disorders. In D. McKay, J. S. Abramow-
itz, & S. Taylor (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral therapy for refractory cases: Turning failure into
success (pp. 211–229). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Pedersen, B., Askgaard, G., Jorgensen, C., Oppedal, K., & Tonnesen, H. (2018). Disulfiram for
alcohol use disorder. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 9, CD010487.
Peterson, J. B., Conrod, P. J., Vassileva, J., Gianoulakis, C., & Pihl, R. O. (2006). Differential
effects of naltrexone on cardiac, subjective, and behavioral reactions to acute ethanol
intoxication. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 31, 386–393.
Petry, N. M., & Kiluk, B. D. (2012). Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in treatment-seeking
pathological gamblers. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 190, 462–469.
Pihl, R. O. (2010). Mental disorders are brain disorders: You think? Canadian Psychologist, 51,
40–49.
Popova, S., Lange, S., Shield, K., Burd, L., & Rehm, J. (2019). Prevalence of fetal alcohol spec-
trum disorder among special subpopulations: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Addiction, 114, 1150–1172.
Prappavessis, H., Cameron, L., Baldi, J. C., Robinson, S., Borrie, K., Harper, T., & Grove, J.

-- 273 of 498 --

Substance‑Related and Addictive Disorders 	253
R. (2007). The effects of exercise and nicotine replacement therapy on smoking rates in
women. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 1416–1432.
Prendergast, M., Podus, D., Finney, J., Greenwell, L., & Roll, J. (2006). Contingency manage-
ment for treatment of substance use disorders: A meta-analysis. Addiction, 101, 1546–1560.
Rennert, L., Denis, C., Peer, K., Lynch, K. G., Gelernter, J., & Kranzler, H. R. (2014). DSM-5
gambling disorder: Prevalence and characteristics in a substance use disorder sample.
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 22, 50–56.
Rogojanski, J., Vettese, L. C., & Antony, M. M. (2011). Coping with cigarette cravings: Compari-
son of suppression versus mindfulness-based strategies. Mindfulness, 2, 14–26.
Ruscio, A. M., Hallion, L. S., Lim, C., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Al-Hamzawi, A., Alonso, J., . . .
Scott, K. M. (2017). Cross-sectional comparison of the epidemiology of DSM-5 general-
ized anxiety disorder across the globe. JAMA Psychiatry, 74, 465–475.
Sabourin, B. C., & Stewart, S. H. (2009). Patterns of depression–substance use disorder comor-
bidity in women seeking addictions treatment. In J. Gallivan & S. Cooper (Eds.), Path-
ways, bridges, and havens: Psychosocial determinants of women’s health (pp. 160–177). Sydney,
Nova Scotia, Canada: Cape Breton University Press.
Sawyer, W., & Wagner, P. (2019). Mass incarceration: The whole pie 2019. Retrieved from www.
prisonpolicy.org/factsheets/pie2019_allimages.pdf.
Schuler, A., Ferentzy, P., Turner, N. E., Skinner, W., McIsaac, K. E., Ziegler, C. P., & Matheson,
F. I. (2016). Gamblers Anonymous as a recovery pathway: A scoping review. Journal of
Gambling Studies, 32, 1261–1278.
Scott-Sheldon, L. A. J., Terry, D. L., Carey, K. B., Garey, L., & Carey, M. P. (2012). Efficacy of
expectancy challenge to reduce college student drinking: A meta-analytic review. Psy-
chology of Addictive Behaviors, 26, 393–405.
Sher, K. J., Jackson, K. M., & Steinley, D. A. (2011). Alcohol use trajectories and the ubiquitous
cat’s cradle: Cause for concern? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 322–335.
Sherman, B. J., Baker, N. L., Squeglia, L. M., & McRae-Clark, A. L. (2018). Approach bias modi-
fication for cannabis use disorder: A proof-of-principle study. Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment, 87, 16–22.
Sinha, R. (2007). Imaging stress- and cue-induced drug and alcohol craving: Association with
relapse and clinical implications. Drug and Alcohol Review, 26, 25–31.
Slutske, W. (2006). Natural recovery and treatment seeking in pathological gambling: Results
of two US national surveys. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 297–302.
Smith, D. P., Battersby, M. W., Pols, R. G., Harvey, P. W., Oakes, J. E., & Baigent, M. F. (2015).
Predictors of relapse in problem gambling: A prospective cohort study. Journal of Gam-
bling Studies, 31, 299–313.
Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (1993). Problem drinkers: Guided self-change. New York: Guilford
Press.
Stacy, A. W., & Wiers, R. W. (2010). Implicit cognition and addiction: A tool for explaining
paradoxical behavior. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 551–575.
Stancliff, S., Joseph, H., Furst, T., Fong, C., Comer, S. D., & Roux, P. (2012). Opioid maintenance
treatment as a harm reduction tool for opioid dependent individuals in NYC: The need
to expand access to buprenorphine in marginalized populations. Journal of Addictive Dis-
orders, 31, 278–287.
Stewart, M. A., Davis-MacNevin, P. L., Hodgins, D. C., Barrett, S. P., Swansburg, J., & Stewart,
S. H. (2016). Motivation matched approach to the treatment of problem gambling: A case
series pilot study. Journal of Gambling Issues, 33, 124–147.
Stewart, M. A., Stewart, S. H., Yi, S., & Ellery, M. (2015). Predicting gambling behavior and
problems from implicit and explicit positive gambling outcome expectancies. Interna-
tional Gambling Studies, 15, 124–140.

-- 274 of 498 --

254 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Stewart, S. H., Collins, P., Blackburn, J. R., Ellery, M., & Klein, R. N. (2005). Heart rate increase
to alcohol administration and video lottery terminal (VLT) play. Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors, 19, 94–98.
Stewart, S. H., & Conrod, P. J. (2005). State of the art in cognitive-behavioral interventions for
substance use disorders: Introduction to the special issue. Journal of Cognitive Psycho-
therapy, 19, 195–198.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2019). Key substance use and
mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug
Use and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP19-5068, NSDUH Series H-54). Rockville, MD:
Author.
Tael-Öeren, M., Naughton, F., & Sutton, S. (2019). The relationship between parental attitudes
and children’s alcohol use: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Addiction, 114, 1527–
1546.
Thompson, K. D., Davis-MacNevin, P., Teehan, M., Stewart, S. H., & the Caring Campus
Research Team. (2017). The association between second-hand harms from alcohol and
mental health outcomes among postsecondary students. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and
Drugs, 78, 70–78.
Tiffany, S. T., Cox, L. S., & Elash, C. A. (2000). Effects of transdermal nicotine patches on
abstinence-induced and cue-elicited craving in cigarette smokers. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 68, 233–240.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). The health consequences of smoking—50
years of progress: A report of the Surgeon General. Washington, DC: Author.
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J., Telang, F., Fowler, J. S., Logan, J., Childress, A.-R., . . . Wong, C.
(2006). Cocaine cues and dopamine in dorsal striatum: Mechanism of craving in cocaine
addiction. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 6583–6588.
Walker, D. M., & Nestler, E. J. (2018). Neuroepigenetics and addiction. Handbook of Clinical
Neurology, 148, 747–765.
Walters, G. D. (2000). Behavioral self-control training for problem drinkers: A meta-analysis of
randomized control studies. Behavior Therapy, 31, 135–149.
Westra, H. A., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2006). Preparing clients for cognitive behavioral therapy: A
randomized pilot study of motivational interviewing for anxiety. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 30, 481–498.
Witkiewitz, K., Marlatt, G. A., & Walker, D. (2005). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for
alcohol and substance use disorders. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 211–228.
World Health Organization. (2009). Clinical guidelines for withdrawal management and treatment
of drug dependence in closed settings. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Yakovenko, I., Quigley, L., Hemmelgarn, B. R., Hodgins, D., & Ronksley, P. (2015). The effi-
cacy of motivational interviewing for disordered gambling: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 43, 72–82.

-- 275 of 498 --

255
Successful interactions with other people are governed by a variety of psychological
mechanisms and adaptive patterns that, taken together, constitute our personali-
ties. “Personality” refers to enduring patterns of thinking, feeling, perception, and
behavior that define persons and distinguish them from other people. Included in
these patterns are preferred ways of expressing or not expressing emotion, as well
as patterns of thinking about ourselves and other people. In healthy individuals,
there is a balance between self and other functions, and difficulties may ensue when
these are not in balance. When repetitive maladaptive patterns bring the person into
repeated conflict with others, when they prevent the person from forming attach-
ments or maintaining close relationships with others, and when they interfere with
establishing and pursuing reasonable personal goals, an individual’s personality
may be considered disordered. Personality disorders (PDs) represent a wide spec-
trum of maladaptive styles of perceiving, relating to, and feeling and thinking about
the world.
Our goal in this chapter is to provide a review of general knowledge on PDs
and to highlight important considerations in the treatment of individuals with PDs.
First, we discuss common features of PDs and outline how such features may oper-
ate differently across the disorders. We then address classification issues related to
PDs, including how PDs relate to normal personality traits and what factors may
affect conceptualization and diagnosis of these disorders. We also review epidemio-
logical and general causal factors related to PDs. Finally, we conclude with a per-
spective on topics for basic and applied research that is still needed to enhance our
C H A P T E R 9
Personality Disorders
Abigail Powers Lott
Jeffrey J. Magnavita
Jacques P. Barber
Thomas F. Oltmanns

-- 276 of 498 --

256 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
understanding of and ability to treat individuals with PDs. We consider treatment
implications throughout the chapter. Because it is impossible exhaustively to cover
the diverse treatment implications for all PDs in a single chapter, we focus particu-
larly on general principles of therapeutic change that cut across all theoretical ori-
entations and can be applied differentially in the treatment of any individual with
personality pathology.
TYPICAL SYMPTOMS AND ASSOCIATED FEATURES
The dividing line between trait disturbances, or subsyndromal presentations, that
might not meet diagnostic threshold and personality pathology is difficult to iden-
tify (O’Connor, 2002). We all have our quirks and idiosyncrasies, and there are many
different ways to manage relationships with other people. For example, it is often
helpful to be skeptical of the things other people do and say. When does a tendency
to be suspicious of other people’s motives cross the line into being a characteristic
of paranoid PD and, beyond that, when does the problem actually meet criteria for
delusional disorder? Self-confidence is another admirable quality, but it can lead to
problems if it escalates into full-blown grandiosity. The capacities necessary to main-
tain a realistic and stable sense of self include multiple domain areas, such as percep-
tion, cognition, and affective regulation (Hopwood, Wright, Ansell, & Pincus, 2013).
In many ways, the distinctions among healthy traits, eccentricity, and personality
pathology are contextual and depend on the person’s ability to adapt to the demands
of different situations. Part of that ability to adapt relies on a stable self-identity, one
that can remain relatively intact regardless of the changing demands of the environ-
ment (Westen & Heim, 2003). Variety and flexibility in interpersonal behavior are
also undoubtedly helpful (Hollenstein, Lichtwarck-Aschoff, & Potworowski, 2013).
The capacity to handle stress and regulate one’s emotions in the face of difficult
experiences is important (Aldao & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2012). These are all areas in
which people with personality dysfunction may show impairment; they repeatedly
make their own social problems worse (often unwittingly) by persistently respond-
ing in ways that do not suit the social challenges that they face.
Most forms of mental disorder, such as anxiety disorders and mood disorders,
are “ego-dystonic”; that is, people with these disorders are distressed by their symp-
toms and uncomfortable with their experiences. PDs, however, are usually “ego-
syntonic” (Hirchfeld, 1993). Often individuals with PDs have developed a familiarity
with their patterns of dysfunction, which are not associated with distress or anxiety.
Instead, they feel like familiar modes of behaving and relating, as if they are accepted
as part of the self (Carlson, Vazire, & Oltmanns, 2013). Some clinicians would argue
that these individuals do not have insight into the nature of their own problems,
that they have a difficult time understanding the perspective of others and are not
capable of “mentalization” (or the ability to understand the mental state of self or
others; Fonagy & Bateman, 2008) in more severe presentations. In many cases, those
with PDs generate distress in those with whom they have close relationships, such
as family, peers, and coworkers.
The specific symptoms that define PDs represent maladaptive variations in
several of the important domains of personality. These include motives, perceptual

-- 277 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	257
processes, affective– cognitive schemas regarding self and others, attachment pat-
terns, and temperament. We have organized our description of typical symptoms
around these issues, which run through the broad mixture of specific symptoms that
define different types of personality pathology.
Social Motivation
The concept of a “motive” refers to a person’s desires and goals (Emmons, 1997).
Motives (either conscious or unconscious) describe the way people would like things
to be, and they help to explain why people behave in a particular fashion. For exam-
ple, a man might have neglected to return a telephone call because he wanted to be
alone (rather than because he forgot that someone had called). Two useful constructs
in understanding human personality are “affiliation”—the desire for close relation-
ships and getting along with other people—and “power”—the desire to “get ahead”
and for impact, prestige, or dominance (Paulhus & Trapnell, 2008). Individual differ-
ences with regard to these social motives have an important influence on a person’s
general health and adjustment.
Many of the symptoms of personality pathology can be described in terms of
maladaptive variations with regard to needs for affiliation and power (Gurtman,
1993). One particularly important issue is the absence of motivation for affiliation.
The need for intimacy and closeness is based on our evolutionarily adapted need
to maintain attachment to our caregivers. Humans are relational at their core, and
social relationships are an important and valuable part of health and longevity (Yang
et al., 2016). However, while most people enjoy spending time with other people and
want to develop intimate relationships with friends and family members, some peo-
ple do not. Some patients with PD prefer isolation or are so anxious that they are
not able to act on their longings. Severely diminished or absent motivation for social
relationships is another pervasive theme that serves to define certain kinds of PD.
Exaggerated motivation for power (and achievement) also contributes to the pic-
ture that describes some PDs. For example, some people are preoccupied with a need
for admiration and the praise of others, called “narcissism.” They think of themselves
as privileged people and insist on special treatment. In other cases, excessive devo-
tion to work and professional accomplishment can lead some individuals to ignore
friends and family members, as well as the pursuit of leisure activities. This lack of
balance can have a seriously disruptive effect on the person’s social adjustment.
Cognitions and Perceptions of Self and Others
Our social world also depends on mental processes that determine knowledge of
ourselves and other people (Wilson, 2009). Distortions of these mechanisms are asso-
ciated with PDs (Westen & Heim, 2003). One central issue involves our image of our-
selves. When we are able to maintain a realistic and stable image of ourselves, we can
plan, negotiate, and evaluate our relationships with other people (Hopwood, Morey,
et al., 2013). Knowing (and having confidence in) our own values and opinions is
a necessary prerequisite for making independent decisions without the assistance
or reassurance of others. Self-image is also intimately connected to mood states. If
we vacillate between unrealistically positive and negative views of ourselves, our

-- 278 of 498 --

258 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
moods will swing dramatically. We may also need constant reassurance from others
and be too dependent on their opinions as a means of maintaining our own self-
esteem. We have to be able to evaluate our own importance. Of course, it is useful
to think of ourselves in positive terms (and many maintain a positive “halo”), but
extreme grandiosity can be disruptive. Perhaps even more damaging is a pattern in
which people see themselves as socially inept or inferior to other people.
Another issue involves our image of others. When we misperceive the intentions,
motives, or abilities of other people, our relationships can be severely disturbed.
Paranoid beliefs are one example. Some people believe without good reason that
others are exploiting, deceiving, or otherwise trying to harm them (Carroll, 2009).
Unreasonable fears of being abandoned, criticized, or rejected are also examples of
distorted perception of others’ intentions. Working effectively in a group of people
also requires realistic appraisal of the talents and abilities of others. In order to coop-
erate with other people, we must be able to appreciate their competence. Those with
PDs often run into problems because they misperceive other people in varied ways
(as being threatening or uncaring, or incompetent). These perceptual distortions are
often derived from internal schemas that might include beliefs encoded from ear-
lier developmental experiences, such as “The world is unsafe” or “I am bad”; these
beliefs and self–other representations are then used as pattern recognition tools for
current relationships (Summers & Barber, 2009).
Many elements of social interaction depend on being able to appraise the nature
of our relationships with other people and then to make accurate judgments about
appropriate and inappropriate behaviors. The many aspects involved include the
ability to interpret facial emotion, to hear the nuance of tone and prosody of speech,
and generally to pick up on the emotional tenor being communicated. This capacity
to manage the elements of self–other relationships and regulate the need for inti-
macy and autonomy is a critical function of an adaptive personality system (Mag-
navita, 2004). Those with PDs often have persistent problems in regulating social
distance (either becoming too intimate or maintaining too much distance from oth-
ers). Another important element of interpersonal perception is the ability to “empa-
thize” with others—to anticipate and decipher their emotional reactions and use that
knowledge to guide our own behavior (Main, Walle, Kho, & Halpern, 2017). Deficits
in the ability to understand the emotions of other people represent another of the
core features of many PDs.
Temperament and Personality Traits
If motivation helps to explain why people behave in certain ways, temperament and
personality traits describe how they behave. “Temperament” refers to a person’s
most basic, neurobiologically endowed, characteristic styles of relating to the world,
especially those styles that are evident during the first year of life (Caspi & Roberts,
1999). Experts disagree about the basic dimensions of temperament and personal-
ity. Some theories are relatively simple, using only three or four dimensions. Others
are more complicated and consider as many as 30 or 40 traits. One theory that has
come to be widely accepted is known as the five-factor model (FFM) of personal-
ity (Trull & Widiger, 2008). The basic traits (also known as “domains”) included in
this model are Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agreeableness,

-- 279 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	259
and Conscientiousness. We return to consider these domains and specific “facets”
of personality when we discuss dimensional perspectives on classification later in
this chapter. Taken as a whole, the FFM provides a comprehensive description of any
person’s behavior.
Disturbance in Interpersonal Functioning
The concept of social dysfunction plays an important role in the definition of PDs, as
well as in their assessment (Bender, Morey, & Skodol, 2011). Subjective distress and
social impairment provide a large part of the justification for defining these prob-
lems as mental disorders. If the maladaptive personality characteristics described in
the diagnostic manual interfere with a person’s ability to get along with other people
and perform social roles, they become more than just a collection of eccentric traits or
peculiar habits. They can then be viewed as a form of harmful dysfunction.
Personality pathology is characterized by impaired social and occupational
functioning, an important component to PDs that is considered more stable than the
symptoms themselves (Skodol, 2018). PDs are associated with increased interpersonal
conflict and impaired social functioning across clinical (Skodol et al., 2002; Zanarini,
Frankenburg, Hennen, Reich, & Silk, 2006) and community samples (T. Oltmanns,
Melley, & Turkheimer, 2002; Tomko, Trull, Wood, & Sher, 2014). PDs also play an
important role in many cases of marital discord (see Sbarra, Manvelian, Salinger, &
Whisman, Chapter 12, this volume). One troubling aspect of marital conflict associ-
ated with PDs is partner aggression, particularly among individuals with borderline
and antisocial PD. This tendency toward verbal or physical aggression with partners
may be a result of the presence of trait-level impulsivity or angry hostility in these
disorders (Birkley & Eckhardt, 2015; Lavner, Lamkin, & Miller, 2017).
Disturbances in Health and Physical Functioning
In addition to interpersonal and social difficulties, personality pathology is related
to problems in several other dimensions of functioning. Among such problems are
health and general medical issues for both younger and older adults. Patients with
PDs consume more mental and physical health care resources than do people with-
out PDs (Jackson & Burgess, 2002; Powers & Oltmanns, 2012). PDs are also associated
with a greater likelihood of having a number of serious medical conditions, includ-
ing cardiovascular disease, stroke, arthritis, and obesity (Dixon-Gordon, Whalen,
Layden, & Chapman, 2015; El-Gabalawy, Katz, & Sareen, 2010; Powers & Oltmanns,
2013). The presence of PD is also associated with greater risk for early mortality (Kuo
et al., 2019), although those associations may be attenuated to some extent by the
presence of comorbid mental disorders (Tyrer, Tyrer, & Yang, 2019). Increased risk for
mortality in PDs is consistent with previous suggestions that personality variables
play an important role in relation to various long-term aspects of physical health
(Graham et al., 2017).
Another serious consequence related to having a PD is suicide, one of the world’s
leading causes of death (Tyrer, Reed, & Crawford, 2015). Although evidence varies,
some studies suggest that specific personality traits, including negative affectivity,
hostility, and impulsivity, are important predictors of suicidal behavior (Nock et al.,

-- 280 of 498 --

260 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
2009). Comorbidity between PDs and other mental disorders, such as major depres-
sion or substance use disorders, also increases one’s risk for suicidal acts. In fact,
individuals with comorbid PD and substance use disorders are at particularly high
risk for suicide (Kuo et al., 2019). The presence of PD is also associated with increased
risk of suicide attempts among individuals with major depressive disorder, even
when past suicidal behavior is controlled (Bolton, Pagura, Enns, Grant, & Sareen,
2010). Borderline PD has a particularly strong relationship with suicidal behavior
and acts, and treatment protocols often focus on this explicitly in relation to border-
line pathology.
Sexual dysfunction and sleep problems, two other symptoms that commonly
cause distress for individuals with various forms of psychopathology, have received
much less attention from researchers who study PDs. Evidence of the relationship
between sexual dysfunction and PDs is almost nonexistent (see Zemishlany & Weiz-
man, 2008, for a review). As we discussed previously, however, individuals with PDs
frequently have dysfunctional interpersonal relationships, and that dysfunction is
most evident in close, intimate relationships. Furthermore, certain PDs have symp-
toms specifically tied to intimacy problems, ranging from fear of abandonment and
extreme clinginess to complete disinterest in sexual relationships. Therefore, the
extent of sexual dysfunction may vary by disorder. Some evidence has been pub-
lished regarding a link between borderline PD and sleep disturbance (J. Oltmanns,
Weinstein, & Oltmanns, 2014; Selby, 2013). More research is needed in these areas
before definitive conclusions can be drawn.
Clinical Implications of Typical Symptoms and Associated Features
Heterogeneity of symptoms across different forms of personality pathology can have
important consequences for the conceptualization and treatment of PDs. For exam-
ple, absence of motivation for social relationships is a well-known theme for patients
with schizoid or paranoid PD. Individuals with avoidant PD are different. They have
a strong internal desire for connections with other people but are frequently unable
to overcome their rejection sensitivity and seek out social relationships. It may seem
that they are less motivated to engage with other people, but the reasons for their
isolation are different from those that affect an individual with schizoid PD. Because
avoidant patients desire interpersonal connections, treatment focused on reducing
anxiety and increasing social contact is more beneficial for them than for patients
with schizoid features.
It may be easier to consider separate symptoms or features in terms of a broader
constellation of pathology when planning treatment. For example, motivation for
power is related to one’s self-image, image of others, and the way that individual
then relates in interpersonal or intimate interactions. An individual with obsessive–
compulsive PD may be conceptualized in terms of an excessive need for power; this
may be motivated by a desire for the control and order that comes from professional
accomplishments and cannot as easily be found in emotional or interpersonal expe-
riences. This focus on professional success then comes at the cost of development
in other areas, such as family relationships. Furthermore, the need for power might
negatively impact work relationships and undermine productivity or job stability.
By understanding motivating factors and interpersonal consequences, and how

-- 281 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	261
they relate to specific personality dysfunction, a practicing clinician may be better
able to determine an appropriate treatment plan. Relatedly, the strong interpersonal
dysfunction associated with personality pathology makes it especially important to
assess the nature of family relationships and social support of patients with PDs.
Therapists will likely need to help patients with PD understand how healthy rela-
tionships work and find ways to enhance positive support in their lives.
Because all PDs can be associated with specific sets of distorted beliefs called
“schemas” (Beck, Freeman, & Davies, 2004), addressing these misperceptions is
likely to be an important aspect of the therapist’s role throughout the course of treat-
ment. Reality testing is a commonly used technique patients with PDs across all
orientations and treatment approaches. Practicing clinicians must decide how con-
frontational to become when challenging misperceptions (Summers & Barber, 2009).
This style may depend partly on theoretical orientation, but individual differences
in the patient with PD and the unique personality dysfunction are also important
to consider when determining a treatment approach. We discuss this in more detail
later in the chapter.
In relation to all the symptoms and features of PDs, it is also important to keep
emotional regulation and capacity for emotional experience in mind. Certain PDs,
such as borderline PD, are specifically characterized by difficulty with emotion reg-
ulation. This can include a tendency toward dissociation, particularly under high
levels of stress. Emotional awareness and stability are important factors across the
spectrum of personality pathology, and it is beneficial to help patients learn to regu-
late their own emotions in healthy ways. Although the specific approach may vary
across orientation, a general therapeutic goal should be to help patients with PD to
identify what triggers an extreme emotional reaction in a specific situation. By track-
ing down those triggers, patients gain awareness and are more able to choose how to
approach the situation in new ways.
It is essential throughout treatment to assess specifically for suicidal ideation and
parasuicidal behavior, both before treatment begins and during its course, because
personality pathology is associated with increased risk for suicidal acts. Because
habitual use of parasuicidal behavior in borderline PD can be a form of emotion reg-
ulation, the immediate elimination of parasuicidal acts without the addition of more
adaptive emotion regulation strategies can be problematic and lead to greater risk
(Andrewes, Hulbert, Cotton, Betts, & Chanen, 2018). Therefore, in combination with
the identification of triggers for strong emotional reactions that might lead to para-
suicidal behavior in therapy, there should be a focus on increasing adaptive emotion
regulation strategies that can eventually serve as a substitute for parasuicidal behav-
iors. This is particularly helpful when patterns of reinforcement for parasuicidal and
suicidal behavior can also be identified and addressed.
Finally, physical and mental health problems often complicate the treatment of
one another, and a thorough initial assessment of physical health conditions should
be taken before treatment begins. Patients with PDs often do not adhere to medi-
cal recommendations. Helping a patient understand the importance of taking medi-
cation regularly, follow physician orders regarding a chronic medical condition, or
engage in healthy lifestyle choices may be a necessary part of treatment that a prac-
ticing clinician might not otherwise use. Similarly, addressing sleep difficulties and
providing basic education in sleep hygiene techniques may also prove beneficial to

-- 282 of 498 --

262 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
some patients with personality dysfunction (see Vincent & Davidson, Chapter 14,
this volume, for a review of treatment options for sleeplessness).
CLASSIFICATION
The past 30 years have witnessed an extensive, complex, and frequently passion-
ate debate regarding the most scientifically valid and clinically useful approach to
the classification of personality pathology. One central issue in this discussion has
centered on the utility of categorical diagnoses versus dimensional approaches. The
DSM-5 includes two different approaches to the classification of PDs. The main body
of the manual describes the traditional categorical approach (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Each of 10 specific types of PD is defined by a set of character-
istic symptoms. People who meet the general criteria for a PD and who also exhibit
enough symptoms to pass the diagnostic threshold for a specific type of disorder
would qualify for a diagnosis. Those who do not meet this somewhat arbitrary
threshold do not have a disorder, according to this perspective.
Section III of DSM-5 also includes an alternative model for PDs (AMPD; Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2013), which reflects a dramatic shift from the categori-
cal system to a description of maladaptive personality traits using a set of 25 dimen-
sional scales that fall under five broad domains. This model is included in Section III
in an effort to promote further exploration and research into the alternative model.
The recently released 11th revision of the International Classification of Diseases for
Mortality and Morbidity Statistics (ICD-11; World Health Organization [WHO], 2018)
now includes a dimensional classification system for PDs that is similar to the AMPD
but has some key differences. The acceptance of this dimensional model into ICD-
11 reflects a significant paradigm shift in how PD is conceptualized (Krueger, 2016;
Tyrer, 2014), which in the long term will likely impact the way personality pathology
is addressed in assessment and treatment. The AMPD and ICD-11 models of PDs are
discussed in more detail below.
DSM‑5 PD Categories
The DSM-5 categorical system for PDs includes 10 types that are organized into three
clusters on the basis of broadly defined characteristics. In order to qualify for a PD
diagnosis, a person must fit the general definition of PD (which applies to all 10
subtypes) and must also meet the specific criteria for a particular type of PD. The
specific criteria comprise a list of characteristic features and behaviors that define
the disorder. The general definition of PD emphasizes the duration of the pattern
and the social impairment associated with the traits in question: There must be a pat-
tern of behavior that is long-lasting, consistent across a number of contexts, and a deviation
from normative behaviors in an individual’s culture. The pattern must be evident in two
or more of the following domains: cognition (e.g., ways of thinking about the self and
other people), emotional responses, interpersonal functioning, or impulse control.
This pattern of maladaptive experience and behavior must also be inflexible and
pervasive across a broad range of personal and social situations, the source of clini-
cally significant distress or impairment, and stable and of long duration (onset often

-- 283 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	263
traced back to adolescence or early adulthood). In the following pages, we give brief
descriptions of the 10 DSM-5 PD subtypes. The first three types are paranoid, schiz-
oid, and schizotypal PDs. The behavior of people who fit these subtypes is typically
odd, eccentric, or asocial. All three types (within Cluster A) share similarity with the
symptoms of schizophrenia. One implicit assumption is that these types of PD may
represent behavioral traits or interpersonal styles on the same spectrum as schizo-
phrenia, and they are sometimes referred to as “schizophrenia spectrum disorders”
(Camisa et al., 2005).
Paranoid PD
Paranoid PD is characterized by the pervasive tendency to be inappropriately suspi-
cious of other people’s motives and behaviors. People who fit the description for this
disorder are constantly on guard and hypervigilant. They expect other people to try
to harm them, and they take extraordinary precautions to avoid being exploited or
injured. People who are paranoid are inflexible in the way that they view the motives
of other people, making it difficult for them to develop relationships or choose situ-
ations in which they can trust other people.
Paranoid PD should be distinguished from psychotic disorders such as schizo-
phrenia and delusional disorder. The pervasive suspicions of people with paranoid
PD do not always reach delusional proportions. In other words, their fears are gener-
ally reality based but represent an exaggeration, as opposed to a delusion based on
extreme distortion.
Schizoid PD
Schizoid PD is defined in terms of a pervasive pattern of indifference to other people,
coupled with a diminished range of emotional experience and expression. These
people tend to be loners; they prefer social isolation to interactions with friends or
family. Other people see them as being cold and aloof. By their own report, they do
not experience strong subjective emotions such as sadness, anger, or happiness. They
may appear “old” or “eccentric.”
Schizotypal PD
Schizotypal PD centers on peculiar patterns of behavior rather than the emotional
restriction and social withdrawal associated with schizoid PD. Many of these idio-
syncratic behaviors take the form of perceptual and cognitive disturbance. People
with this disorder may report bizarre or autistic fantasies and unusual perceptual
experiences. Their speech may be slightly difficult to follow because they use words
in an odd or eccentric way, or express themselves in a vague or disjointed manner.
Their affective expressions may be constricted in range, as in schizoid PD, or they
may be silly and inappropriate.
In spite of their odd or unusual behaviors, people with schizotypal PD are not
necessarily psychotic or out of touch with reality. Their bizarre fantasies are gener-
ally not delusional, and their unusual perceptual experiences are not sufficiently real
or compelling to be considered hallucinations.

-- 284 of 498 --

264 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
The next group (Cluster B) includes antisocial, borderline, histrionic, and nar-
cissistic PDs. These forms of personality pathology are characterized by dramatic,
emotional, or erratic behavior, and are associated with marked difficulty in sustain-
ing interpersonal relationships.
Antisocial PD
Antisocial PD is defined in terms of a persistent pattern of irresponsible and anti-
social behavior that begins during childhood or adolescence and continues into
the adult years. Features of the disorder are indicative of a widespread pattern of
repeated failure to respect the rights of others. Once the person has become an
adult, these difficulties include persistent failure to perform responsibilities associ-
ated with occupational and family roles. Conflict with others when one perceives
they have been slighted is also common. These individuals can show irritability and
aggression toward their spouses and children, as well as people outside the home.
They can be impulsive, reckless, and irresponsible, showing little regard for the con-
sequences of their actions. They can also present as charming and misleading.
Borderline PD
Borderline PD is a diffuse category whose essential feature is a pervasive pattern of
instability in mood, self-identity, and interpersonal relationships. Individuals with
borderline PD are often intolerant of being alone. They can form intense, unstable
relationships with others and are often seen as manipulative. Their “manipulative”
behavior is frequently viewed by others as a strategy to maintain an attachment to
others that they consider to be vital to their survival. Their mood may shift rapidly
and inexplicably from depression to anger to anxiety over a pattern of several hours.
Intense anger is common and may be accompanied by temper tantrums, physical
assault, or suicidal threats and parasuicidal behavior. Individuals with borderline
PD often demonstrate identity disturbance and have great difficulty maintaining an
integrated image of self that simultaneously incorporates positive and negative fea-
tures. Therefore, they alternate between thinking of themselves and others in unre-
alistically positive terms and unrealistically negative terms at different moments in
time. When they are focused on their own negative features, they have a deflated
view of themselves and may become seriously depressed. They frequently express
uncertainty about issues such as personal values, sexual preferences, and career
alternatives. Chronic feelings of emptiness and boredom may also be present.
Histrionic PD
Histrionic PD is characterized by a pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and
attention-seeking behavior. Individuals with histrionic PD thrive on being the center
of attention. They are often seen as self-centered, vain, and demanding, and they
constantly seek approval from others. When interacting with other people, their
behavior is often inappropriately sexually seductive or provocative. Their emotions
tend to be shallow and may vacillate erratically. Their reactions in situations may
frequently seem exaggerated beyond what others would expect. Unlike individuals

-- 285 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	265
with borderline PD, people with histrionic PD have an essentially intact sense of
their own identity and a better capacity for stable relationships.
Narcissistic PD
Narcissistic PD is conceptualized primarily by a pervasive pattern of grandiosity,
need for admiration, and a limited capacity to respond with empathy to others. Nar-
cissistic individuals often have a greatly exaggerated sense of their own importance.
They tend to be preoccupied with their own achievements and abilities. Because they
lack a well-developed sense of others and are overly concerned with themselves,
they often ignore the feelings of others and are seen as being arrogant or haughty.
The last group of PD types (Cluster C) includes avoidant, dependent, and
obsessive– compulsive PDs. The common element in all three disorders is presum-
ably anxiety or fearfulness. This description fits most easily with the avoidant and
dependent types. In contrast, obsessive– compulsive PD is more accurately described
in terms of perfectionism, preoccupation with rules, and lack of emotional warmth
rather than in terms of anxiety.
Avoidant PD
Avoidant PD is characterized by a pervasive pattern of social discomfort, fear of neg-
ative evaluation, and timidity. People with this disorder tend to be socially isolated
when outside their own family circle because they are afraid of criticism. Unlike
people with schizoid PD, they want to be liked by others but are extremely shy—
easily hurt by even minimal signs of disapproval from other people. This rejection
sensitivity makes them avoid social and occupational activities that require signifi-
cant contact with other people.
Avoidant PD is often indistinguishable from social anxiety disorder. In fact,
some experts have argued that they may represent two different ways of defining
the same condition or different levels of severity (Hummelen, Wilberg, Pedersen,
& Karterud, 2007; Reich, 2009). People with avoidant PD are also presumably more
socially withdrawn and have very few close relationships because they are so shy.
People with social anxiety disorder may have a lot of friends, but they are afraid of
performing in front of them. This distinction is relatively clear when social anxiety
is defined narrowly in terms of a particular kind of situation, such as public speak-
ing. It is much more difficult to make if the social phobia becomes more generalized.
Dependent PD
Dependent PD centers on a pervasive pattern of submissive and clinging behavior.
People with this disorder are afraid of separating from other people on whom they
are dependent for advice and reassurance. Often unable to make everyday decisions
on their own, they feel anxious and helpless when they are alone. Like people with
avoidant PD, they are easily hurt by criticism, extremely sensitive to disapproval,
and lacking in self-confidence. One difference between avoidant and dependent PD
involves the point in a relationship at which people experience the most difficulty.

-- 286 of 498 --

266 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
People who are avoidant have trouble initiating a relationship (because they are fear-
ful). People who are dependent have trouble being alone or separating from people
with whom they already have a close relationship.
Obsessive–Compulsive PD
Obsessive– compulsive PD is defined by a pervasive pattern of orderliness, perfec-
tionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, open-
ness, and efficiency. The central features of this disorder may involve a marked need
for control and lack of tolerance for uncertainty (Gibbs, South, & Oltmanns, 2003).
Individuals with this disorder set ambitious standards for their own performance
that frequently are so high as to be unattainable. Many would be described as “work-
aholics.” In other words, they are so devoted to work that they ignore friends, family
members, and leisure activities. They are so preoccupied with details and rules that
they lose sight of the main point of an activity or project. Intellectual endeavors are
favored over feelings and emotional experience. These individuals are excessively
conscientious, moralistic, and judgmental, and tend to be intolerant of emotional
behavior in other people.
Problems with the Categorical Definition of PDs
The categorical approach to classification treats PDs as discrete categories, and it
assumes that there are sharp boundaries between normal and abnormal personali-
ties. In reality, however, many people with serious personality problems do not fit
the official subtypes. According to the DSM-5 categorical definitions, a person must
exhibit at least a certain number of symptoms in order to meet the diagnostic criteria
for each disorder. These thresholds were established in a more or less arbitrary way;
they have not been validated empirically. Another issue that has been raised with the
categorical description of PDs is the overlap among categories. According to some
studies, at least 50% of patients who meet the diagnostic criteria for one PD also meet
the criteria for another disorder (Coid, Yang, Tyrer, Roberts, & Ullrich, 2006; Trull,
Jahng, Tomko, Wood, & Sher, 2010), It is unclear whether this is due to overlapping
categories across PDs or the fact that individuals simply have multiple PDs. It should
be noted that findings regarding the high levels of comorbidity across PDs is mixed,
and the degree of overlap is certainly lower in community samples than in clinical
samples (T. Oltmanns, Rodrigues, Weinstein, & Gleason, 2014).
In large part because of the issue of comorbidity, many experts favor a dimen-
sional classification system for PDs that would be based on a view of personality
pathology grounded in extensive research on the basic elements of personality (Clark,
2007; Widiger & Trull, 2007). Such a dimensional system would also have a stronger
theoretical basis than the arbitrary nosology for PDs that is represented in the cat-
egorical system in DSM-5 (Krueger, Eaton, Derringer, et al., 2011). A dimensional
system could provide a more complete description of each person, and it would be
more useful with patients who fall on the boundaries between different types of
PD. Considerable evidence suggests that a dimensional approach may also be easier
to use than the traditional categorical approach (Markon, Krueger, & Watson, 2005;
Waugh et al., 2017; Widiger, 2019).

-- 287 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	267
The AMPD in DSM‑5
The alternative dimensional model proposed in DSM-5 has focused on the FFM as
the basic structure for a comprehensive description of personality problems (Widi-
ger & Trull, 2007). This approach requires the clinician to consider information on
each of five pathological domains that pair with the domains of normal personality:
Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. This
makes sense, since many PDs are defined in terms of maladaptive variations on the
kinds of traits described in the FFM (Widiger & Simonsen, 2005). Problems may arise
in association with extreme variations in either direction (high or low). Dramatically
elevated levels of anger—hostility, impulsiveness, and excitement seeking—are par-
ticularly important, but so are extremely low levels of trust, compliance, and tender-
mindedness. For instance, although some forms of PD are associated with high lev-
els of anxiousness and vulnerability, people with antisocial PD frequently exhibit
unusually low levels of anxiety and concern about danger.
According to the AMPD, the diagnosis of PDs is based on a two-part process.
First, the clinician is asked to make a judgment regarding the level of impairment in
personality functioning as defined by problems with the person’s view of self and
others (identity and self-direction), as well as difficulties with maintaining interper-
sonal relationships (empathy and intimacy). Problems identified in these areas serve
as general markers for the presence of a PD; it is the key decision point in decid-
ing whether to assign a diagnosis. This judgment replaces the categorical model’s
general criteria for PDs, which are often ignored and have been criticized for being
vague and unreliable. In fact, many experts have argued that the most important
consideration regarding assessment of personality pathology is overall level of sever-
ity rather than specific types of PDs (see Tyrer et al., 2011, for a review of the rationale
of the reclassification of PDs). The dimensional system for rating level of personality
functioning is relatively straightforward, based on indications of mild, moderate, or
severe levels, and there is some evidence to indicate that it can be efficient and effec-
tive in that role (Cruitt, Boudreaux, King, Oltmanns, & Oltmanns, 2019; Dowgwillo,
Roche, & Pincus, 2018).
The second step in the AMPD specifies the nature or form of the disorder using
ratings of pathological personality traits. What kind of personality problem does
the person exhibit? The organization of these traits generally follows the FFM, but
the broad domains are labeled in a way that emphasizes the maladaptive nature of
characteristics associated with PDs (Krueger, Eaton, Clark, et al., 2011). The AMPD
includes consideration of 25 core traits. The primary domains in the DSM-5 dimen-
sional approach to defining PDs are negative affect, detachment, antagonism, disin-
hibition, and psychoticism (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
• Negative affect includes the facets of emotion lability, anxiousness, separation
insecurity, submissiveness, hostility, perseveration, depressivity, suspicious-
ness, and restricted affectivity.
• Detachment includes the facets of withdrawal, intimacy avoidance, anhedonia,
depressivity, restricted affectivity, and suspiciousness.
• Antagonism includes the facets manipulativeness, deceitfulness, grandiosity,
attention seeking, callousness, and hostility.

-- 288 of 498 --

268 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
• Disinhibition includes the facets irresponsibility, impulsivity, distractibility,
risk taking, and rigid perfectionism.
• Psychoticism includes the facets unusual beliefs and experiences, eccentricity,
and cognitive and perceptual dysregulation.
The AMPD retains six of the 10 specific types of PDs from the categorical model:
antisocial, avoidant, borderline, narcissistic, obsessive– compulsive, and schizotypal
PD. For each type of PD, the person must show moderate or greater impairment in
self or interpersonal functioning (Criterion A). Traits, then, replace symptoms for the
six retained PDs in the categorical system, and there are algorithms that help diag-
nose these PD types based on the dimensional trait ratings, using a 0- to 4-point scale.
By including some of the types, the dimensional system retains a level of continuity
with the categorical system that mental health professionals already know. The types
may provide a useful shorthand in communicating with other professionals and in
conceptualizing certain kinds of problems because they bring to mind familiar or
prototypical combinations of several maladaptive traits. But each of the six types
are now described in terms of expected trait indicators rather than the traditional
PD symptoms. For example, in order to meet criteria for borderline PD using the
AMPD, the person must be rated by the clinician as showing evidence of four out of
seven pathological personality traits. These include four facets of negative affectivity
(emotional lability, anxiousness, separation insecurity, or depressivity) two facets of
disinhibition (impulsivity or risk taking), or one facet of antagonism (hostility).
Empirical evidence thus far suggests that the trait model adequately captures
traditional PD constructs, such that when directly comparing AMPD and categori-
cal PD diagnoses, the trait model accounts for a significant amount of variance in
explaining categorical diagnoses (see review by Miller, Sleep, & Lynam, 2018). The
AMPD trait model has shown good convergent validity for five of the six PDs (with
the exception of obsessive– compulsive PD) (see Zimmerman, Kerber, Rek, Hop-
wood, & Krueger, 2019, for a review). Evidence regarding discriminant validity is
less impressive (Watters, Bagby, & Sellbom, 2019).
Other forms of PD are identified in the dimensional system using a new diag-
nosis called “personality disorder trait specified” (PDTS). In order to qualify for
this diagnosis, the person must exhibit significant impairment in self or interper-
sonal functioning, as well as one or more pathological personality traits. This sys-
tem replaces four of the categorical types with simplified trait ratings. Paranoid PD,
for example, would be described by a high rating on suspiciousness, histrionic PD
would be described by a high rating on attention seeking, and dependent PD would
be described by a high rating on submissiveness. One important benefit is that peo-
ple who exhibit a few symptoms that would be below the diagnostic threshold in the
categorical system are easily described with one set of ratings in the AMPD.
Notice that the trait descriptors actually help explain the overlap or comorbidity
that has been observed for many of the PD types. One example involves borderline
and antisocial PD. Many people qualify for a diagnosis of both disorders using the
categorical system (Freestone, Howard, Coid, & Ullrich, 2013). This is because the
borderline and antisocial types share several maladaptive traits involving antago-
nism (e.g., hostility) and disinhibition (impulsivity). However, they are most clearly
distinguished by the fact that people with borderline PD are also high on traits

-- 289 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	269
involving negative affectivity (e.g., emotional lability, anxiousness, and depressiv-
ity). The relative simplicity by which the trait-based approach identifies similarities
and differences between PDs offers an advantage over the categorical approach.
Another attractive feature is that the AMPD recognizes explicitly the continu-
ous nature of personality pathology. Rather than assume that a person either does
or does not have a PD, dimensional models place their emphasis on measuring the
extent or degree to which the person exhibits a certain personality characteristic.
This advantage is intuitively appealing, but it might also be somewhat misleading
when we consider the way such a system must be used in clinical practice. Therapists
will ultimately need to make certain important decisions that are fundamentally
categorical in nature, such as whether a person needs treatment, and whether that
treatment should be reimbursed financially. The DSM-5 Committee opted for the
new focus on the level of personality functioning as a mechanism for making deci-
sions about the presence of disorder (i.e., the 0- to 4-point scale). It remains to be seen
whether this aspect of the proposal will ultimately pass subsequent tests that focus
on its reliability and validity.
The PDs and Related Traits Model in ICD‑11
Unlike the DSM-5 model described earlier, the ICD-11 PDs and related traits model
does not include diagnostic categories. Instead, it is built on the use of a general
PD severity rating, a five-domain dimensional trait model, and a “borderline pat-
tern qualifier” (WHO, 2018). The PD severity rating is very similar to that described
earlier for DSM-5. The trait model closely aligned with the DSM-5 AMPD, as both
include negative affectivity, detachment, dissocial, and disinhibition. The main dif-
ference between the DSM-5 AMPD and ICD-11 model is that ICD-11 does not include
a domain of psychoticism and instead includes anankastic domain, which fits more
with compulsivity (J. Oltmanns & Widiger, 2018, 2019a). “Anankastic” refers to a pre-
occupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control,
and is marked by inflexibility in these behaviors, mapping onto aspects of obsessive–
compulsive PD. In ICD-11, schizotypal PD is a variant of schizophrenia and therefore
falls into the psychotic spectrum rather than in the context of personality pathology.
Additionally, unlike the DSM-5 AMPD, the ICD-11 model does not include specific
facets within the domains, although some would argue that including facet level
components is critical (J. Oltmanns & Widiger, 2019b).
The only PD that is still included in the ICD-11 PDs model is borderline PD.
More specifically, there is a borderline pattern qualifier that essentially includes the
same nine symptom criteria for borderline PD as included in DSM-5 and requires
that at least five are met for the borderline pattern qualifier to be used to describe
a patient. ICD-11 maintained borderline PD because this disorder is the most com-
monly seen in outpatient and inpatient psychiatric services, and it is the only PD that
has an empirically supported treatment specifically designed for it (e.g., dialectical
behavior therapy [DBT]: Linehan, 1993; transference-focused psychotherapy [TFP]:
Clarkin et al., 2001; mentalization-based therapy [MBT]: Bateman & Fonagy, 2004).
Another inclusion in the ICD-11 PDs and related traits model is that an indi-
vidual can be assigned “personality difficulty” if the PD diagnosis is not met but
relevant challenges still exist for the individual related to personality problems.

-- 290 of 498 --

270 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Personality difficulty can be distinguished from PD based on the level of severity in
functioning or pervasiveness, such that for individuals labeled with personality dif-
ficulty, the problems across emotions, cognitions, and behaviors are intermittent and
difficulty in functioning is substantially less impairing (WHO, 2018).
One criticism that has been raised for the dimensional models of PD is that clini-
cians may ignore personality status and assume that a mental disorder should take
precedence, especially if the PD is mild (Tyrer, Mulder, Kim, & Crawford, 2019). This
is especially true now that the diagnostic axes (previously part of DSM-IV) have been
eliminated and PDs are no longer considered on a separate Axis from other mental
disorders. Because we know that PDs can be a major factor in maintaining symptoms
of other disorders, such as depression or anxiety, and can make treatment more chal-
lenging (Berk et al., 2018; Gorwood et al., 2010), it remains critical that personality
pathology be systematically and rigorously assessed and diagnosed across clinical
settings.
Clinical Implications of Classification
The previous section on classification demonstrates even further the extent of het-
erogeneity across various forms of personality pathology, as well as the variability
that can occur within a given PD. The frequent presence of comorbid mental disor-
ders, such as depression and substance use disorders, adds to this complexity. This
diversity makes it essential that personality pathology is assessed and considered
as part of the larger case formulation. In general, if a patient presents with several
mental disorders, then this should be a sign to the clinician that the potential for
personality dysfunction is contributing to these clinical symptoms.
The constellation of clinical syndromes and relational disturbances with which
a patient comes into therapy can have serious implications for treatment, and practic-
ing clinicians should know that personality dysfunction can hinder treatment prog-
ress (Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007; Magnavita, 2004). For example, the treatment
approach a clinician selects for a depressed patient with comorbid avoidant PD is
likely to be different from the approach with a patient who has a narcissistic PD
or does not have comorbid personality pathology at all. Accurately diagnosing the
presence of personality pathology allows for more comprehensive case conceptu-
alization, which then informs treatment planning. Even within a given PD, treat-
ment may need to be tailored to fit the unique interpersonal problems of each patient
(Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007), further highlighting the potential benefits of a trait
model of personality pathology that may better capture the individual differences of
two patients that may meet criteria for the same disorder. The clinical relevance of
a trait model is also suggest by the paucity of empirical guidance on which one can
rely with respect to specific categories of PD. While Barber and Muenz (1996) showed
that interpersonal psychotherapy was more effective with depressed patients with
avoidant PD, and that cognitive therapy was more effective for depressed patients
with obsessive– compulsive PD, there is limited research on treatment matching for
individuals with PDs. In fact, as mentioned earlier, there remains limited evidence
for PD treatment more generally (with the exception of borderline PD; Bateman,
Gunderson, & Mulder, 2015). Regardless of treatment approach or orientation, clini-
cians working with patients with comorbid mental disorders may want to do some

-- 291 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	271
focused work on pathological personality patterns, in addition to the evidence-based
treatment used for disorders such as depression and anxiety. For example, experi-
enced cognitive-behavioral and psychodynamic therapists have described how dif-
ferently they implement empirically based principles of change when working with
depressed or socially anxious clients, depending on whether clients also have bor-
derline personality disorder (Castonguay, Constantino, & Beutler, 2019). Length of
treatment must also be considered, as treatment generally takes longer when comor-
bid personality pathology is present (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006).
There are many limitations to the classification system for PDs, and a PD “diag-
nosis” is unlikely to provide all the information that a clinician needs. There may
be times when a patient’s symptoms fall short of a diagnosis of PD, but a subthresh-
old presentation still has important implications for treatment. If a client engages
in impulsive, dangerous behavior and has difficulty managing emotional reactions,
these features must be kept in mind, even if the person’s personality patterns and
symptoms do not reach the diagnostic threshold for borderline PD. It is also pos-
sible that personality dysfunction may be difficult to detect in the beginning stages
of treatment. Individuals with avoidant, dependent, or obsessive– compulsive PDs,
which are characterized by constricted emotions, often seek treatment because of
depression or anxiety. Because they do not generally engage in the attention-getting
behaviors (e.g., angry outbursts), their personality dysfunction can be overlooked.
A thorough history of how patients are functioning in all aspects of their lives can
be valuable in ensuring that these kinds of issues do not go unnoticed. Ongoing
assessment and refinement of case conceptualization are necessary throughout the
course of treatment, since a patient’s level of functioning and overall relational abil-
ity may change. An individual who appears to function rather well may, as treatment
unfolds, present as being more fragile or unstable than the original presentation sug-
gested. Conversely, some patients who initially present as disturbed may quickly
restabilize with treatment.
The severity of personality dysfunction must also be kept in mind when deter-
mining the best treatment approach. Determining whether outpatient care is suf-
ficient for a client with severe personality dysfunction is critical. Does the practicing
clinician have the resources to provide treatment to this patient? Or is more intensive
inpatient care needed? One major component of this consideration is with regard to
safety, both in terms of suicidal or parasuicidal behavior and aggression. Thorough
evaluation of risky behavior, parasuicidal acts (including frequency, duration, and
methods), and active suicidal/homicidal thoughts is critical.
In line with the ICD-11 PDs model and the DSM-5 AMPD, practicing clinicians
may find it helpful to consider personality pathology in terms of presenting person-
ality trait characteristics. Dramatically elevated levels of anger–hostility and excite-
ment seeking or extremely low levels of trust, compliance, and tender-mindedness
would contribute differently to the therapeutic relationship and treatment progress.
Although some forms of PDs are associated with high levels of anxiousness and
vulnerability, people with antisocial PD frequently exhibit unusually low levels of
anxiety and concern about danger. This low level of anxiety is not necessarily cap-
tured by symptoms for antisocial PD and could be missed by a clinician unfamil-
iar with antisocial pathology (Harris & Rice, 2006). With this in mind, the use of a
structured measure to identify maladaptive variants of personality traits could be

-- 292 of 498 --

272 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
an extremely useful tool for clinicians when conceptualizing a patient with PD and
planning treatment (Waugh et al., 2017; Widiger, Lynam, Miller, & Oltmanns, 2012).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
PDs are considered to be among the most common forms of psychopathology when
considered as a general category (i.e., any of the 10 DSM-5 PDs).
Prevalence in Community Samples
In the general adult population, the overall lifetime prevalence for having at least
one PD (any type) is approximately 12% (Volkert, Gablonski, & Rabung, 2018). While
this figure tends to be relatively consistent from one study to the next, prevalence
rates for specific types of PD vary quite a bit. The highest prevalence rates, usu-
ally found to be associated with obsessive– compulsive, antisocial, and avoidant PDs,
may affect 3 or 4% of adults.
Gender Differences
The overall prevalence of PDs is approximately equal in men and women (Lenzen-
weger, Lane, Loranger, & Kessler, 2007). There are, however, consistent gender dif-
ferences with regard to at least one specific disorder: Antisocial PD is unquestion-
ably much more common among men than among women, with prevalence rates
of approximately 5% reported for men and 1% for women (Coid et al., 2006). Thus,
antisocial PD is actually an alarmingly common problem among adult males in the
United States. Epidemiological evidence regarding gender differences for the other
types of PD is much more ambiguous. In DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association,
2013), borderline and dependent PD are described as being diagnosed more fre-
quently in women than in men, but the evidence is not strong (Oldham, Skodol, &
Bender, 2009).
It is not clear whether differential prevalence rates exist (with the exception of
antisocial PD), but there is some evidence to suggest that PD symptoms may differ-
entially affect men and women across many domains of functioning. For example,
some borderline symptoms, such as affective instability, unstable relationships, and
stress-related paranoia, may be more relevant to borderline pathology in women,
whereas impulsivity or aggression may be more relevant to borderline pathology
in men (Boggs et al., 2005). However, there is evidence in clinical samples that such
gender differences in symptoms are not actually present (Mancke, Bertsch, & Her-
pertz, 2015; Silberschmidt, Lee, Zanarini, & Schulz, 2015). Other mental disorders
are represented differently in male and female patients with borderline PD. In a
national epidemiological sample, Grant and colleagues (2008) found that border-
line males showed higher rates of comorbid substance use disorders, while females
showed higher rates of comorbid depression and anxiety, in particular posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). It is important to note that these gender differences mirror
the broader gender differences found in mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders.

-- 293 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	273
Age‑Related Factors
The DSM-5 general definition specifies that a PD usually begins by adolescence or
early adulthood, and the assumption is that these characteristics are stable over time.
Based on evidence provided by several follow-up studies with young adults, we now
know that this assumption regarding stability is exaggerated (Samuel et al., 2011);
this is covered in more detail in the section below. While many patients with PD do
improve over time, longitudinal studies have not been conducted in later life. No one
has studied a community sample of middle-aged or older adults for a sufficiently
long period of time to determine whether new cases appear (T. Oltmanns & Balsis,
2011); therefore, we do not know whether some PD symptoms may emerge later in
life, with or without a foundation in related personality traits. It may be that for
some, personality dysfunction may emerge under certain conditions and in certain
contexts. For example, for some individuals, going to prison results in the emergence
of what is considered an antisocial PD, which may be the result of adaptation to
the extreme demands of prison. There are also anecdotal reports about individuals
who go from being unknown to being famous and developing narcissistic PD. When
considering these and other examples, it is often useful to think of this phenomenon
as the expression of a complex system called “personality systematics” (Magnavita,
2004).
Another related issue involves the fact that the onset of a PD is difficult to iden-
tify. It is certainly true that the onset of more florid symptoms, such as hallucinations
or washing rituals, or prominent drinking problems, might be easier to pinpoint
in time. But many forms of psychopathology have symptoms that emerge gradu-
ally, and many disorders are preceded by an extended prodromal period that is dif-
ficult to identify. In the absence of a substantial literature regarding age of onset
and PDs, we turn to the literature on personality traits. These studies show some
evidence of change, which most often is gradual (Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer,
2006). If we think of PDs as correlates of these personality traits, we have to consider
the possibility or the likelihood that the presentation of PDs may change similarly.
Furthermore, when we think in terms of latent traits or propensities to behave in a
certain way that becomes manifest (and perhaps troublesome) within a particular
social context (which can change across the life course), it seems reasonable to argue
that sudden onset is unusual or unexpected. That is different than saying, however,
that late onset is impossible.
Regarding differences in prevalence across age groups, although the evidence
is not overwhelming, several studies indicate that Cluster A and Cluster C PDs may
be more prevalent in older people than in younger people (T. Oltmanns et al., 2014;
Ullrich & Coid, 2009). In contrast, borderline and antisocial PDs are less prevalent in
older people than in younger people (Samuel et al., 2011). This pattern is interesting,
but considerable caution must be exercised in drawing conclusions about patterns
of change on the basis of this evidence, since it is all cross-sectional. Cross-sectional
studies necessarily compare people from different age groups who are living in dif-
ferent contexts. Differences in the extent of social isolation or dependence might
reflect variation in life circumstances for younger and older adults rather than true
developmental changes in the prevalence of specific personality problems (T. Olt-
manns & Balsis, 2011).

-- 294 of 498 --

274 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
It is also relevant to acknowledge that while some argue against the diagnosis
of PDs in children, others believe that choosing to ignore their existence does a dis-
service by allowing these children to suffer needlessly (Freeman & Reinecke, 2007).
If a PD diagnosis is considered in children, they should be diagnosed with a PD only
after a thorough assessment has been completed. It is probably best when consider-
ing the diagnosis of a PD in children or adolescence to use a systemic framework that
examines the child’s or adolescent’s personality within the context of family, com-
munity, and cultural systems, and to view the personality as an adaptation to these
relational and cultural forces (Magnavita, 2007).
Race and Ethnicity
There is very limited epidemiological research on ethnic or racial differences among
individuals with PDs. One large-scale study (Lenzenweger et al., 2007) reported no
significant racial differences among the PDs. In other epidemiological studies, race/
ethnicity is often simply controlled in analyses. With the few empirical studies that
have found differences, findings are mixed. As part of the Collaborative Longitudi-
nal Personality Disorders Study, Chavira and colleagues (2003) examined the rela-
tionship between ethnicity and four PDs (i.e., avoidant, schizotypal, borderline, and
obsessive– compulsive). The results showed higher rates of schizotypal PD among
Blacks and higher rates of borderline PD among Hispanics compared to Whites.
Other research supports the association between schizotypal PD and Black women
(Pulay et al., 2009). Alternatively, a more recent meta-analysis of studies of the asso-
ciation between PDs and race/ethnicity demonstrated that Blacks are significantly
less likely to be diagnosed with a PD than Whites, although whether there is actu-
ally less prevalence of personality pathology among these individuals, or whether
PDs are less likely to be diagnosed cannot be determined from available evidence
(McGilloway, Hall, Lee, & Bhui, 2010). No differences between Asian or Hispanic
groups and White groups were found. It is important to note that there is evidence of
racial diagnostic bias in schizophrenia, such that Blacks are more likely to be diag-
nosed with schizophrenia that Whites (Schwartz, Docherty, Najolia, & Cohen, 2019);
thus, racial differences in schizotypal PD could be impacted by such biases as well.
Additionally, minorities living in low-income, urban areas are at particularly high
risk for exposure to chronic interpersonal trauma across the lifespan (Gillespie et al.,
2009; Roberts, Gilman, Breslau, Breslau, & Koenen, 2011) that may enhance risk for
the development of PDs in the context of trauma. Clearly, without more research, we
cannot draw any specific conclusions about the role of ethnicity in understanding
PDs. As with any form of psychopathology, however, it is critical to keep cultural
factors in mind when conceptualizing a case, planning treatment, and implementing
an intervention.
Clinical Implications of Gender, Age, and Cultural Factors
Personality pathology is common across both clinical and community populations.
It is therefore critical to assess for PDs during the initial assessment process, while
keeping in mind potential gender, age, and race or ethnicity differences. PD symp-
toms may manifest differently in men and women, and they may also have different

-- 295 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	275
comorbid pathology (Grant et al., 2008); differences in comorbid pathology can affect
how treatment may proceed or what interventions one chooses as a clinician. With
regard to age, the clinical presentation of certain disorders may also change over
the lifespan and could further impact treatment decisions or focus. Changes in the
presentation of personality dysfunction may be subtle and difficult to detect, mak-
ing it especially important for practicing clinicians to be aware of how psychopa-
thology is likely to look in the age groups they treat. More generally, practicing cli-
nicians should always consider the sociocultural context of the patient, including
race and ethnicity, education level, and socioeconomic status, and how those factors
may affect a patient’s ability to participate fully in treatment. Black Americans, for
example, often show mistrust for the U.S. health care system based on past personal
experiences with racial discrimination in those settings or historical knowledge of
negative behaviors toward Blacks in the health care system. Mental health stigma
is also particularly strong in the Black community and if Blacks do seek treatment,
they may be ashamed of their condition or hide treatment information from family
or friends (Brown et al., 2010; Sirey et al., 2001). It may be necessary as a clinician to
address these kinds of concerns during therapy. Understanding such concerns can
help in the development of a strong therapeutic relationship and promote motivation
to continue treatment.
COURSE AND OUTCOME
Lifespan perspectives on psychopathology have played a crucial role in shaping the
classification of many forms of psychopathology. Established views of major mental
disorders, such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, are based on careful descrip-
tions that include close attention to the course of the disorders over extended peri-
ods of time. Kraepelin’s (1919) early recognition of the distinction between dementia
praecox and manic– depressive psychosis hinged largely on the different patterns
these disorders follow over time rather than on the presence of specific symptoms
during periods of acute disturbance. Therefore, it is important to consider the avail-
able evidence regarding the course of PDs from childhood to adulthood and later
life.
Childhood Antecedents
Temporal stability is one of the most important assumptions about PDs. A few lon-
gitudinal studies have made substantial contributions to our understanding of con-
tinuity of personality pathology, and they have focused largely on the period of the
lifespan ranging from childhood through adolescence and young adulthood (Paris,
2003; Skodol, 2008). For example, the Children in the Community Study study fol-
lowed a large, community-based sample of children (average age at baseline = 14)
over three decades, assessing personality pathology at five separate periods, until
participants were on average 38 years old (Cohen, 2008). Several papers from this
innovative study have demonstrated that various types of PD are associated with the
subsequent development of social impairment, as well as the onset of other forms of
psychopathology (Cohen, Crawford, Johnson, & Kasen, 2005).

-- 296 of 498 --

276 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Stability (from Adolescence to Young Adulthood)
Results from these longitudinal studies also suggest that categorical diagnoses and
particular symptoms of PDs are not as stable as previously believed and may depend
on the method of assessment (Cohen, 2008; Samuel et al., 2011; Skodol, Gunderson, et
al., 2005). In fact, recent evidence suggests that borderline PD symptoms vary as much
as depression among teens and young adults (ages 14–20), further supporting that bor-
derline PD is not necessarily “set” early on (Conway, Hipwell, & Stepp, 2017). On the
other hand, functional impairment associated with personality pathology has been
found to be extensive and relatively more stable in comparison to PD symptoms (e.g.,
Blum et al., 2008; Skodol, Pagano, et al., 2005). Viewed from a dimensional perspective,
the maladaptive traits that represent the core features of the disorders may remain rel-
atively stable between adolescence and young adulthood (Crawford, Cohen, & Brook,
2001). The relative stability of maladaptive personality traits versus diagnoses has
been supported in other studies as well (Skodol, Shea, Yen, White, & Gunderson, 2010).
Change across the Lifespan
The tentative evidence reported from longitudinal studies suggests that certain fea-
tures of personality pathology may change or “burn out” over the lifespan (Zanarini
et al., 2007). In examining patients with borderline PD over a period of 10 years fol-
lowing treatment, major improvements were most often seen in self-mutilation and
suicidal behaviors. Problems managing anger and dysphoria, and interpersonal
difficulties related to fears of abandonment and dependency were the most stable
symptoms of borderline PD. Although symptom remission was common following
treatment (93% showed 2-year symptom remission), social and vocational function-
ing remained a problem for 50% of patients; the symptoms that persist may con-
tinue to cause problems even if the level of symptoms and overall safety risk may be
reduced (Gunderson et al., 2011; Zanarini, Frankenburg, Reich, & Fitzmaurice, 2010).
Negative outcomes are still related to borderline pathology, even at subthreshold
levels (Blum et al., 2008; J. Oltmanns, Weinstein, & Oltmanns, 2014).
Across various PD types more generally, categorical diagnoses show poor sta-
bility over a 10-year course (Durbin & Klein, 2006). Patients’ symptom profiles fluc-
tuate as they rise above or pass below the exact threshold for making a diagnosis.
PD symptoms appear to be more dynamic and depend on contextual factors in the
individual’s environment. On the other hand, personality traits (both normal and
pathological) show more stability over time (Hopwood & Bleidorn, 2018; Hopwood,
Morey, et al., 2013). Thus, when considering changes in the adjustment of patients
over time, it is important to consider maladaptive personality traits in addition to
whether or not the person meets the absolute threshold for a DSM-5 diagnosis.
Clinical Implications of Course and Outcome
Case formulation of an individual and treatment planning should include a compre-
hensive assessment of the history of a client’s maladaptive traits and a determination
of how patterns of behavior may have changed or adapted across various contexts
and developmental stages. For example, a client may express a tendency toward a

-- 297 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	277
number of negative affect and antagonism facets (e.g., hostility, suspiciousness, and
manipulativeness) in the presence of an intimate partner relationship or dating but
deny such tendencies when single. Therefore, certain symptoms of borderline PD
may appear present and active at certain life stages more than others and cause more
harm in certain contexts, although the maladaptive traits may still be present. A
more nuanced understanding of the stability and change in a client’s maladaptive
traits, behaviors, and symptoms over time can enable therapist and client to work
together to identify particular contexts that represent vulnerabilities and the skills
that need to be addressed in treatment. This can also aid with ensuring that adequate
skills are present to promote relapse prevention.
Because social, vocational, and functional impairment often remains despite
reductions in PD symptoms, it is imperative to focus on these aspects of functioning
throughout treatment and build in skills that address social and vocational function-
ing to the treatment itself. Relatedly, awareness of the types of symptoms that appear
most stable over time (e.g., anger and interpersonal difficulties in borderline PD) can
allow for a directive focus on those symptoms in treatment. Therapists should be
aware that PD symptoms may shift or change over the life course and over treatment,
and that even if an individual has subthreshold PD symptoms, therapy could be war-
ranted to address the underlying maladaptive traits that may cause future difficulties
or maintain functional impairment across social, vocational, and other domains.
ETIOLOGY
Evidence regarding causal factors involved in the development and maintenance of
PDs points to a complicated set of interactions involving genetic factors and envi-
ronmental events (Kendler et al., 2008). Most studies of these issues have focused on
specific types of PDs rather than the entire spectrum of personality pathology.
Genetic Factors
The most extensive research on genetic factors in PDs has been on schizotypal PD
because of its associations with schizophrenia and psychotic spectrum disorders;
schizotypal PD symptoms have similarities with prodromal schizophrenic symp-
toms (Ettinger, Meyhöfer, Steffens, Wagner, & Koutsouleris, 2014; Parnas, Licht, &
Bovet, 2005). Twin studies have examined genetic contributions to schizotypal PD
from a dimensional perspective in which schizotypal personality traits are measured
with questionnaires. Evidence points to a significant genetic contribution (Linney et
al., 2003). Family studies point to the same conclusion; the first-degree relatives of
schizophrenic patients are considerably more likely than people in the general popu-
lation to exhibit features of schizotypal PD (Kendler et al., 1993).
Genetic research has also been conducted on borderline and antisocial PD.
Twin studies have suggested that both are moderately heritable (Distel et al., 2008;
Reichborn-Kjennerud et al., 2015). Empirical evidence further indicates that fun-
damental personality traits that define borderline PD, such as neuroticism and
impulsivity, are clearly influenced by genetic factors (Niv, Tuvblad, Raine, Wang, &
Baker, 2012; Zheng, Plomin, & von Stumm, 2016). Research on antisocial behaviors

-- 298 of 498 --

278 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
has demonstrated that their development is determined by an interaction between
genetic factors and adverse environmental circumstances (Rhee & Waldman, 2002).
As pointed out by Wright, Pahlen, and Krueger (2017), this is true across all the PDs,
since personality pathology is considered in terms of maladaptive personality traits.
Environmental Adversity
Many researchers are interested in the role of environmental adversity in the devel-
opment of PDs. What kinds of events might be involved in this process? Obvious
candidates include childhood abuse and neglect (Cicchetti, 2016). Longitudinal data
on adolescents have shown that children exposed to abuse or neglect are four times
more likely that those who have not been mistreated to develop symptoms of PDs
as young adults (Johnson, Cohen, Brown, Smailes, & Bernstein, 1999; Johnson et al.,
2001). Other research in community and clinical samples have also shown a link
between childhood maltreatment and risk for personality pathology, particularly
Cluster A and Cluster B PDs (Afifi et al., 2011; Powers, Thomas, Ressler, & Bradley,
2011). Importantly, childhood trauma exposure differentially impacts low socioeco-
nomic status and minority individuals, potentially increasing risk for certain PDs,
such as paranoid PD (Iacovino, Jackson, & Oltmanns, 2014).
The type of abuse or neglect experienced may impact what type of PD develops.
For example, in a research study, Lobbestael, Arntz, and Bernstein (2010), using a
sample of 409 outpatient, inpatient, and forensic patients, found that sexual abuse is
associated with paranoid, schizoid, borderline, and avoidant PD symptoms, physical
abuse is associated with antisocial PD symptoms, emotional abuse is associated with
paranoid, schizotypal, borderline, avoidant, dependent, and obsessive– compulsive
PD symptoms, and emotional neglect is associated with histrionic and borderline
PD symptoms. A study by Cohen and colleagues (2014) with adults recruited from
inpatient and outpatient settings examined only borderline PD, antisocial PD, and
Clusters A and C as outcome variables, and found that physical abuse is associated
with antisocial PD, emotional abuse is associated with Cluster C PD symptoms, and
emotional neglect is associated with Cluster A PD symptoms. Unfortunately, there
has not been enough research to identify clear risk pathways; therefore, it is critical to
more broadly understand the risks associated with childhood maltreatment and not
make assumptions about what type of maltreatment might lead to what diagnosis
based only on the few studies available.
The link between childhood abuse and neglect and borderline PD has been par-
ticularly well studied (Chanen & Kaess, 2012). Studies of patients with borderline PD
do point toward the influence of widespread problematic relationships with their
parents and an invalidating home environment. Adolescent girls with borderline PD
report pervasive lack of supervision; frequent witnessing of domestic violence; and
being subjected to inappropriate behavior by their parents and other adults, includ-
ing verbal, physical, and sexual abuse (Helgeland & Torgersen, 2004; Pally, 2002). The
extent and severity of abuse vary widely across individuals. Many patients describe
multiple forms of abuse by more than one person. These data (both retrospective
and longitudinal) support the argument that maladaptive patterns of parenting and
family relationships increase the probability that a person will develop certain types
of PD.

-- 299 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	279
Clinical Implications of Genetic and Environmental Causes
While there is relatively little research on etiological factors related to PDs, the treat-
ment considerations that emerge may be particularly critical to understand regard-
less of the treatment method being used. We discuss a few here.
Because of the strong link between childhood trauma and PDs, thorough evalua-
tion of lifetime trauma exposure, with a particular focus on childhood maltreatment,
is encouraged when treating patients with PDs. The type of childhood maltreatment
experienced is very relevant clinically and may inform case conceptualization and
treatment planning. Especially if the patient has experienced trauma, there may be
comorbid symptoms of PTSD that need attention during the course of treatment.
Because the trauma may also have been invalidated by others in the past or patients
may have never previously shared the trauma with others, it may be necessary to help
them face the severity of the trauma experienced in a safe and supportive therapeutic
environment. Psychoeducation regarding common symptoms related to trauma expo-
sure can be very helpful in patients’ understanding of their difficulties in functioning
and presenting symptoms. Family history of psychiatric conditions should also be
assessed, especially considering genetic factors for antisocial and schizotypal PDs.
For practicing clinicians who work with children, it is also critical to be aware
of the developmental precursors to personality dysfunction. Behavioral and conduct
disorder, when not transient, often lead to the development of PD in adolescence and
adulthood (Cohen et al., 2005). Children with chronic developmental problems need
to have increased attention, with preventive treatment aimed toward helping them
avoid chronic personality dysfunction.
Understanding the nature of developmental relationships in patients with PD
may also be particularly informative because those relationships likely contributed
to current dysfunctional images of self and others (Magnavita, 2000). This can be
valuable regardless of theoretical orientation and does not have to take away from
a general emphasis on “the present,” which is characteristic of some of the current
PD treatments, such as DBT. Descriptions of current relationships with family and
friends also provide clinicians with an idea of what social support is present for the
patient and what environmental factors may impede treatment progress. There is no
clear etiological pathway to developing PD, but it is beneficial to keep in mind the
general contribution of family and traumatic experiences.
TREATMENT
Treatment of PDs is invariably difficult. It has been particularly challenging for
investigators to provide clear, evidence-based principles grounded in solid empiri-
cal evidence because PDs are heterogeneous. Treatment procedures for people with
PDs are especially difficult to design and evaluate for three principal reasons. First,
as previously mentioned, people with these disorders frequently do not have insight
into the nature of their problems. Thus, they are unlikely to seek treatment, and if
they do, they frequently terminate treatment prematurely. Second, pure forms of PDs
are relatively rare. Most people with PDs who are in treatment also exhibit comorbid
forms of other mental disorders, such as depression or drug addiction. Third, people

-- 300 of 498 --

280 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
with PDs have difficulty establishing and maintaining meaningful, stable interper-
sonal relationships of the sort required for psychotherapy.
Despite the previously mentioned challenges of treating individuals with PDs,
the field of PD treatment is advancing, and a number of evidence-based approaches
have been developed for PDs (Bateman et al., 2015; Cristea et al., 2017; Magnavita,
2010). As mentioned previously, three therapeutic approaches have been specifically
developed for the treatment of borderline PD: DBT (Linehan, 1993); MBT (Bateman
& Fonagy, 2004); and TFP (Clarkin et al., 2001). A recent meta-analysis suggests that
all three approaches are effective at reducing borderline PD symptoms and improv-
ing outcomes (Cristea et al., 2017). DBT has more recently been shown to be effec-
tive transdiagnostically, and since it is beneficial in improving emotion regulation, it
could be incorporated in the treatment of other PDs as well (Neacsiu, Eberle, Kramer,
Wiesmann, & Linehan, 2014). Both cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and short-
term dynamic psychotherapy (Bateman et al., 2015; Messer & Abbass, 2010; Town,
Abbass, & Hardy, 2011) have been shown to be effective, especially for certain anx-
ious and dramatic forms of PD. CBT approaches may also be useful in the treatment
of the maladaptive trait antagonism (Maples-Keller, Yasinski, Coghlan, & Powers,
2019). Psychodynamic group therapy delivered in a partial hospital setting is an
underutilized yet cost-effective treatment option for PDs as well (Piper, 2008). Each
of these approaches may offer useful strategies and techniques for working with a
spectrum of individuals with PDs.
Treatment also may involve the use of antipsychotic or antidepressant medica-
tion, most often for patients with schizotypal or borderline PD. A few controlled
studies indicate that pharmacological treatment can be beneficial (Ingenhoven,
Lafay, Rinne, Passchier, & Duivenvoorden, 2010). More research is needed to deter-
mine the differential benefits of these treatment methods and what factors clinicians
should consider when planning treatment.
Beyond specific treatment options, many general therapeutic principles of
change are essential to effective intervention regardless of the therapist’s theoretical
orientation (Castonguay & Beutler, 2006). Two groups of researchers have reviewed
the research literature and identified a number of common principles that may be
particularly important to keep in mind in the treatment of individuals with PDs.
Some of the principles include a strong therapeutic relationship; honest communica-
tion about the limits of therapy and difficulty of change; emphasis on goal-oriented,
structured therapy sessions; and a general focus on increasing adaptive ways of
thinking and behaving, and decreasing maladaptive thinking–behavior patterns
(Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006; Linehan, Davison, Lynch, & Sanderson, 2005).
Clinical Implications
Development of a Collaborative Relationship
Probably the most vexing part of working with individuals with personality pathol-
ogy is that they typically experience widespread difficulties in social and inter-
personal relationships. The standard way that clinicians develop a collaborative
relationship is not likely to be effective. Nevertheless, the importance of a strong
therapeutic alliance is clear. The therapeutic relationship can be used as a model for
how healthy relationships might work.

-- 301 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	281
The clinician will likely need to attend to the therapeutic alliance regularly, with
particular attention to therapeutic ruptures, an inevitable part of the treatment pro-
cess that affects the therapeutic relationship over time (Muran & Safran, 2002). Some
research suggests that an explicit focus on the nature of the therapeutic relationship
in therapy can have a positive effect on outcome (Clarkin et al., 2001), although there
is still limited evidence on what client-specific factors must be kept in mind when
using such an approach. The focus of the therapeutic relationship may differ by type
of PD (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006) or nature of the presenting problems (Sum-
mers & Barber, 2009). For example, a strong, positive alliance may greatly benefit
individuals with PDs, who often alienate others and have difficulty with developing
close relationships, such as a person with paranoid PD. Alternatively, individuals
with borderline PD may easily develop a strong attachment to their therapist but
have difficulty managing the relationship. In these cases, attention might best be
focused on establishing relational boundaries, demonstrating appropriate distance
in the relationship, and modeling the integration of positive and negative aspects of
an interpersonal relationship.
Critchfield and Benjamin (2006) describe a number of principles that can help the
development and maintenance of a positive therapeutic relationship with patients
with PD, including expression of empathy, positive regard, and patience in sessions,
as well as adoption of a flexible stance toward treatment (while maintaining appro-
priate boundaries). Therapeutic flexibility may be particularly important when treat-
ing patients with PD because PDs involve such a heterogeneous group of conditions
and are related to so many kinds of relationship difficulties. No single style or thera-
peutic approach fits every patient with a PD, but these principles reach across all
theoretical orientations. It is imperative for clinicians to assess the needs and capaci-
ties of each individual and modify the treatment as needed, while using therapeutic
interventions that are both grounded in case conceptualization and based on empiri-
cally supported treatments and the clinician’s own expertise and training.
One crucial component to treatment of PD is disclosure of diagnosis and psy-
choeducation regarding diagnosis. Although there has been stigma in providing
individuals with a diagnosis, particularly in the context of borderline PD, there is
ample evidence to suggest that disclosure early on is a valuable component of suc-
cessful treatment (Lequesne & Hersh, 2004; Zanarini & Frankenburg, 2008). It is also
important to limit unacceptable behavior in therapy and model appropriate expres-
sion of thoughts or emotions (Seibel & Dowd, 2001). Practicing clinicians may find
that patients with borderline pathology push the limits of therapy more than people
with any other PD, so this point is particularly relevant in the treatment of these indi-
viduals. Finally, explicitly addressing patients’ expectations for success, discussing
the limits of therapy, and conveying understanding about the difficulty of change
helps to ensure that patients do not hold unrealistic expectations that the therapist
can never meet. In brief, there is a need in some cases to provide ongoing education
about therapy (e.g., Linehan, 1993).
Emphasis on Working toward Explicit Mutually Agreed‑Upon Goals
Psychotherapists should consider an active stance in helping patients organize their
complaints and distress into clear and understandable goals, which become bench-
marks toward which to work. Many individuals with personality dysfunction are

-- 302 of 498 --

282 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
unaware of the nature and the impact of their dysfunctional patterns and therefore
do not generally seek treatment for these problems. They may enter treatment with
relational disturbances or a clinical syndrome such as depression, or they may be in
treatment because the courts or family members referred them. The therapist must
accept patients as they are and formulate goals consistent with their wishes. As treat-
ment unfolds, the psychotherapist can begin to shift by expanding or narrowing the
focus of treatment when the patient appears to be ready for such change. Regardless
of therapeutic orientation, detailed analyses of the precipitating factors and conse-
quences of problematic behaviors are an important first step in gaining a thorough
picture of the patient’s difficulty and what will need to be addressed in the context
of therapy (Linehan, 1993). Related to this, education about the patterns discovered
and how treatment can help is necessary. For example, a patient with dependent PD
should understand how the dependent patterns interfere with goal attainment and
ultimate satisfaction, and how facing unpleasant affective states allows growth to
proceed.
While determining treatment goals may seem to be relatively straightforward,
the implementation of PD treatment is often thrown off course. Remember that indi-
viduals with PDs are characteristically rigid and inflexible in their patterns of think-
ing and behaving, and they often feel comfortable with these patterns. It is common,
and often needed, for therapists to spend a great deal of therapy time discussing a
patient’s desire for change, reviewing treatment goals and the reason those goals
were determined, and assessing level of distress or dysfunction with current behav-
ior. This process can look very different, depending on the PD patient. Therapists
may have a particularly difficult time with therapy impasses or unfocused treatment
when working with patients with borderline PD (Fonagy & Bateman, 2008; Kernberg,
Yeomans, Clarkin, & Levy, 2008; Linehan, 1993). Structure and consistency are essen-
tial in the treatment of patients with borderline PD, however, because their lives are
almost always filled with chaos outside of therapy. Avoidant patients, on the other
hand, may remain distant during sessions or even avoid therapy as a way to avoid
facing their fears; if a clear pattern emerges, this behavior could then be addressed in
an empathetic way by the therapist.
To ensure progress toward treatment goals, it is critical that clinicians take an
active therapeutic stance (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006; Linehan, 1993). Because
of their tendency perceptually to misperceive or distort the intentions of others,
patients with PD generally do not do well with an overly detached, passive thera-
peutic stance. A balance must be sought between controlling the process and letting
it stagnate, which will result in premature termination. Furthermore, active monitor-
ing of a patient’s response to treatment is essential. If the patient is not responding,
psychotherapist and patient should collaborate about changing treatment goals.
Focus on Increasing Adaptive Thinking/Behaving and Decreasing
Maladaptive Thinking/Behavior
One of the criteria for a diagnosis of PD is the presence of maladaptive patterns of
thinking or behaving in cognition, emotional responses, interpersonal functioning,
and/or impulse control. Whether or not these tie explicitly to treatment goals, part
of the therapist’s role is to facilitate more adaptive ways of thinking about the self

-- 303 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	283
and others, manage emotional reactions, and tolerate distress. At the same time, it
is essential to avoid reinforcing negative behaviors. Some of this can be done in the
context of the therapeutic relationship, but it is also important for the therapist to
relate newly learned behaviors to the patient’s everyday life (Linehan, 1993; Swales
& Dunkley, 2020). While most treatments for psychopathology share the focus of
altering affect, cognition, and behavior in one way or another, affect may be a par-
ticularly critical focus in PD treatment (Critchfield & Benjamin, 2006; Summers &
Barber, 2009).
CONCLUSION
PDs are among the most common and debilitating of conditions presented in clinical
practice and medical offices. Their negative impact is far-reaching, affecting many
aspects of individuals’ lives, with a particularly detrimental impact on interpersonal
relationships. Pathological personality traits often begin in childhood or adoles-
cence, and those early traits are associated with an increased risk for the subsequent
development of PD and other mental disorders (Cohen, Chen, Crawford, Brook, &
Gordon, 2007). PDs are commonly comorbid with other psychopathology, such as
major depression or substance use disorders. They can also have a negative impact
on the course of such disorders and make treatment adherence difficult (Fournier et
al., 2008).
While the devastating impact of PDs on general functioning and well-being is
clear, there are a number of limitations in the current basic research. First, much of
the work described earlier focuses on a single PD (i.e., borderline PD) or a group of
PDs, and does not provide data on the full range of personality pathology. Combining
what we know about general personality traits and PDs, and exploring interactions
among personality traits (e.g., high Neuroticism, low Conscientiousness, and low
Agreeableness) may be one way to advance our basic knowledge of PDs. The way PDs
are measured also varies across studies, making it difficult to make specific conclu-
sions about etiological or sociocultural factors in relation to PDs, or to determine the
particular impact of a given PD feature. Furthermore, many of the longitudinal stud-
ies up to now have been restricted to small clinical samples with only younger adults,
and there is evidence that the presentation of personality pathology may change as
individuals age (Gleason, Weinstein, Balsis, & Oltmanns, 2014; Oltmanns et al., 2014).
There is also growing evidence of risk for negative physical health outcomes associ-
ated with PDs, particularly among older adults (e.g., Powers & Oltmanns, 2012, 2013).
This is an unusual time for PD researchers and clinicians, as clearly demon-
strated by the fact that DSM-5 includes two alternative systems for classifying PDs.
Furthermore, while the categorical system for PDs remains the primary focus in
DSM-5, ICD-11 has now adopted a dimensional trait model for determining PD.
Dimensional classification systems have the advantage of being better able to account
for similarities and differences in people with various combinations of personality
traits and do not require the assumption of arbitrary boundaries between normal
and abnormal personality. Although this is different from the categorical method
currently used by clinicians, it may be equally or even more useful when trying to
conceptualize patients and determine treatment.

-- 304 of 498 --

284 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
PDs are heterogenous, challenging conditions to diagnose and treat. There is
still a great deal we need to learn about the etiology, course, and consequences of
PDs. There is also a long way to go in validating empirically supported treatments
for patients with PDs. However, the importance of understanding and treating per-
sonality pathology in clinical practice cannot be overemphasized. PDs are extremely
costly to our health care system, and evidence shows that when PDs are treated,
there are significant reductions in health care utilization for up to 3 years follow-
ing completion of treatment (Davies & Campling, 2003). The variability among indi-
viduals with PDs makes it much too difficult to expect that one theoretical model
or therapeutic technique can satisfy that diversity. By using general principles of
change and common themes that run across orientations as our guide, we can better
understand what makes treatment effective for each unique individual. As we think
about next steps for the field, it will be imperative to move beyond the barriers of
a single theoretical orientation and investigate the therapeutic elements associated
with treatment efficacy and how effectiveness varies with different patients.
REFERENCES
Afifi, T. O., Mather, A., Boman, J., Fleisher, W., Enns, M. W., MacMillan, H., & Sareen, J. (2011).
Childhood adversity and personality disorders: Results from a nationally representative
population-based study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45(6), 814–822.
Aldao, A., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2012). The influence of context on the implementation of
adaptive emotion regulation strategies. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(7–8), 493–501.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Andrewes, H. E., Hulbert, C., Cotton, S. M., Betts, J., & Chanen, A. M. (2018). Patterns of non-
suicidal self-injury and their relationship with suicide attempts in youth with borderline
personality disorder. Archives of Suicide Research, 22(3), 465–478.
Barber, J. P., & Muenz, L. R. (1996). The role of avoidance and obsessiveness in matching
patients to cognitive and interpersonal psychotherapy: Empirical findings from the
Treatment for Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Consulting and Clin-
ical Psychology, 64, 951–958.
Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2004). Mentalization-based treatment of BPD. Journal of Personal-
ity Disorders, 18(1), 36–51.
Bateman, A. W., Gunderson, J., & Mulder, R. (2015). Treatment of personality disorder. Lancet,
385, 735–743.
Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., & Davies, D. D. (2004). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Bender, D. S., Morey, L. C., & Skodol, A. E. (2011). Toward a model for assessing level of person-
ality functioning in DSM-5: Part I. A review of theory and methods. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 93, 332–346.
Berk, M., Boyce, P., Hamilton, A., Morris, G., Outhred, T., Das, P., . . . Parker, G. (2018). Person-
ality: Distraction or driver in the diagnosis of depression. Personality and Mental Health,
12(2), 126–130.
Birkley, E. L., & Eckhardt, C. I. (2015). Anger, hostility, internalizing negative emotions, and
intimate partner violence perpetration: A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 37, 40–56.
Blum, N., John, D., Pfohl, B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B., Allen, J., . . . Black, D. W. (2008). Systems
training for emotional predictability and problem solving (STEPPS) for outpatients with

-- 305 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	285
borderline personality disorder: A randomized controlled trial and 1-year follow-up.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 468–478.
Boggs, C., Morey, L., Skodol, A., Shea, M., Sanislow, C., Grilo, C., . . . Gunderson, J. G. (2005).
Differential impairment as an indicator of sex bias in the DSM-IV criteria for four per-
sonality disorders. Psychological Assessment, 17, 492–496.
Bolton, J., Pagura, J., Enns, M., Grant, B., & Sareen, J. (2010). A population-based longitudinal
study of risk factors for suicide attempts in major depressive disorder. Journal of Psychia-
try Research, 44(13), 817–826.
Brown, C., Conner, K. O., Copeland, V. C., Grote, N., Beach, S., Battista, D., & Reynolds, C. F.,
III. (2010). Depression stigma, race, and treatment seeking behavior and attitudes. Journal
of Community Psychology, 38(3), 350–368.
Camisa, K. M., Bockbrader, M. A., Lysaker, P., Rae, L. L., Brenner, C. A., & O’Donnell, B. F.
(2005). Personality traits in schizophrenia and related personality disorders. Psychiatry
Research, 133(1), 23–33.
Carlson, E. N., Vazire, S., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2013). Self-other knowledge asymmetries in per-
sonality pathology. Journal of Personality, 81(2), 155–170.
Carroll, A. (2009). Are you looking at me?: Understanding and managing paranoid personal-
ity disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 15(1), 40–48.
Caspi, A., & Roberts, B. (1999). Personality change and continuity across the life course. In L.
A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 300–326).
New York: Guilford Press.
Castonguay, L., & Beutler, L. (2006). Principles of therapeutic change that work. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Castonguay, L. G., Constantino, M. J., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2019). Principles of change: How
psychotherapists implement research in practice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chanen, A. M., & Kaess, M. (2012). Developmental pathways to borderline personality disor-
der. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14(1), 45–53.
Chavira, D., Grilo, C., Shea, M. T., Yen, S., Gunderson, J., & Morey, L., . . . McGlashan, T. H.
(2003). Ethnicity and four personality disorders. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 44, 483–491.
Cicchetti, D. (2016). Socioemotional, personality, and biological development: Illustrations
from a multilevel developmental psychopathology perspective on child maltreatment.
Annual Review of Psychology, 67, 187–211.
Clark, L. A. (2007). Assessment and diagnosis of personality disorder: Perennial issues and an
emerging reconceptualization. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 227–257.
Clarkin, J. F., Foelsch, P. A., Levy, K. N., Hill, J. W., Delaney, J. C., & Kernberg, O. F. (2001).
The development of psychodynamic treatment for patients with borderline personality
disorder: A preliminary study of behavior change. Journal of Personality Disorders, 15,
487–495.
Cohen, L. J., Tanis, T., Bhattacharjee, R., Nesci, C., Halmi, W., & Galynker, I. (2014). Are there
differential relationships between different types of childhood maltreatment and differ-
ent types of adult personality pathology? Psychiatry Research, 215(1), 192–201.
Cohen, P. (2008). Child development and personality disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 31(3), 477–493.
Cohen, P., Chen, H., Crawford, T. N., Brook, J. S., & Gordon, K. (2007). Personality disorders
in early adolescence and the development of later substance use disorders in the general
population. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 88, S71–S84.
Cohen, P., Crawford, T. N., Johnson, J. G., & Kasen, S. (2005). The Children in the Community
Study of developmental course of personality disorder. Journal of Personality, 19, 466–486.
Coid, J., Yang, M., Tyrer, P., Roberts, A., & Ullrich, S. (2006). Prevalence and correlates of per-
sonality disorder among adults aged 16 to 74 in Great Britain. British Journal of Psychiatry,
188, 423–431.

-- 306 of 498 --

286 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Conway, C. C., Hipwell, A. E., & Stepp, S. D. (2017). Seven-year course of borderline personal-
ity disorder features: Borderline pathology is as unstable as depression during adoles-
cence. Clinical Psychological Science, 5(4), 742–749.
Crawford, T., Cohen, P., & Brook, J. (2001). Dramatic– erratic personality disorder symptoms:
Continuity from early adolescence into adulthood. Journal of Personality Disorders, 15,
319–335.
Cristea, I. A., Gentili, C., Cotet, C. D., Palomba, D., Barbui, C., & Cuijpers, P. (2017). Efficacy
of psychotherapies for borderline personality disorder: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 74(4), 319–328.
Critchfield, K. L., & Benjamin, L. S. (2006). Principles for psychosocial treatment of person-
ality disorder: An integration of participant, relationship, and treatment domains. In
L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 253–271).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Crits-Christoph, P., & Barber, J. P. (2007). Psychological treatments for personality disorders.
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that works (3rd ed., pp. 641–
658). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cruitt, P. J., Boudreaux, M. J., King, H. R., Oltmanns, J. R., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2019). Examining
criterion A: DSM-5 level of personality functioning as assessed through life story inter-
views. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 10(3), 224–234.
Davies, S., & Campling, P. (2003). Therapeutic community treatment of personality disorder:
Service use and mortality over 3 years’ follow-up. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, s24–s27.
Distel, M. A., Trull, T. J., Derom, C. A., Thiery, E. W., Grimmer, M. A., Martin, N. G., . . .
Boomsma, D. I. (2008). Heritability of borderline personality disorder features is similar
across three countries. Psychological Medicine, 38(9), 1219–1229.
Dixon-Gordon, K. L., Whalen, D. J., Layden, B. K., & Chapman, A. L. (2015). A systematic
review of personality disorders and health outcomes. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie
Canadienne, 56(2), 168–190.
Dowgwillo, E. A., Roche, M. J., & Pincus, A. L. (2018). Examining the interpersonal nature
of criterion a of the DSM-5 section III alternative model for personality disorders using
bootstrapped confidence intervals for the interpersonal circumplex. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 100(6), 581–592.
Durbin, C. E., & Klein, D. N. (2006). Ten-year stability of personality disorders among outpa-
tients with mood disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115(1), 75–84.
El-Gabalawy, R., Katz, L., & Sareen, J. (2010). Comorbidity and associated severity of border-
line personality disorder and physical health conditions in a nationally representative
sample. Psychosomatic Medicine, 72, 641–647.
Emmons, R. (1997). Motives and goals. In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & R. Stephan (Eds.), Handbook
of personality psychology (pp. 485–512). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ettinger, U., Meyhöfer, I., Steffens, M., Wagner, M., & Koutsouleris, N. (2014). Genetics, cogni-
tion, and neurobiology of schizotypal personality: A review of the overlap with schizo-
phrenia. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 5, 18.
Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A. (2008). The development of borderline personality disorder—a men-
talizing model. Journal of Personality Disorders, 22, 4–21.
Fournier, J. C., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Gallop, R., Amsterdam, J. D., & Hollon, S. D.
(2008). Antidepressant medications v. cognitive therapy in people with depression with
or without personality disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 124–129.
Freeman, A., & Reinecke, M. A. (Eds.). (2007). Personality disorders in children and adolescents.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Freestone, M., Howard, R., Coid, J. W., & Ullrich, S. (2013). Adult antisocial syndrome co-
morbid with borderline personality disorder is associated with severe conduct disorder,
substance dependence and violent antisociality. Personality and Mental Health, 7(1), 11–21.

-- 307 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	287
Gibbs, N., South, S., & Oltmanns, T. (2003). Attentional coping style in obsessive– compulsive
personality disorder: A test of the intolerance of uncertainty hypothesis. Personality and
Individual Differences, 34, 41–57.
Gillespie, C. F., Bradley, B., Mercer, K., Smith, A. K., Conneely, K., Gapen, M., . . . Ressler, K. J.
(2009). Trauma exposure and stress-related disorders in inner city primary care patients.
General Hospital Psychiatry, 31(6), 505–514.
Gleason, M. E., Weinstein, Y., Balsis, S., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). The enduring impact of mal-
adaptive personality traits on relationship quality and health in later life. Journal of Per-
sonality, 82(6), 493–501.
Gorwood, P., Rouillon, F., Even, C., Falissard, B., Corruble, E., & Moran, P. (2010). Treatment
response in major depression: Effects of personality dysfunction and prior depression.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 196(2), 139–142.
Graham, E. K., Rutsohn, J. P., Turiano, N. A., Bendayan, R., Batterham, P. J., Gerstorf, D., . . .
Bastarache, E. D. (2017). Personality predicts mortality risk: An integrative data analysis
of 15 international longitudinal studies. Journal of Research in Personality, 70, 174–186.
Grant, B., Chou, S., Goldstein, R., Huang, B., Stinson, F., Saha, T., . . . Ruan, W. J. (2008). Preva-
lence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV borderline personality disorder:
Results from the Wave 2 National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related Con-
ditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 533–545.
Gunderson, J. G., Stout, R. L., McGlashan, T. H., Shea, M. T., Morey, L. C., Grio, C. M., . . .
Skodol, A. E. (2011). Ten-year course of borderline personality disorder: Psychopathology
and function from the Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 68(8), 827–837.
Gurtman, M. B. (1993). Constructing personality tests to meet a structural criterion: Applica-
tion of the interpersonal circumplex. Journal of Personality, 61, 237–263.
Harris, G. T., & Rice, M. E. (2006). Treatment of psychopathy: A review of empirical findings.
In C. J. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 555–572). New York: Guilford Press.
Helgeland, M., & Torgersen, S. (2004). Developmental antecedents of borderline personality
disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 45, 138–147.
Hirchfeld, R. M. (1993). Personality disorders: Definition and diagnosis. Journal of Personality
Disorder, Suppl. 1, 9–17.
Hollenstein, T., Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A., & Potworowski, G. (2013). A model of socioemotional
flexibility at three time scales. Emotion Review, 5(4), 397–405.
Hopwood, C. J., & Bleidorn, W. (2018). Stability and change in personality and personality
disorders. Current Opinion in Psychology, 21, 6–10.
Hopwood, C. J., Morey, L. C., Donnellan, M. B., Samuel, D. B., Grilo, C. M., McGlashan, T. H.,
. . . Skodol, A. E. (2013). Ten-year rank-order stability of personality traits and disorders
in a clinical sample. Journal of Personality, 81(3), 335–344.
Hopwood, C. J., Wright, A. G., Ansell, E. B., & Pincus, A. L. (2013). The interpersonal core of
personality pathology. Journal of Personality Disorders, 27(3), 270–295.
Hummelen, B., Wilberg, T., Pedersen, G., & Karterud, S. (2007). The relationship between
avoidant personality disorder and social phobia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 48, 348–356.
Iacovino, J. M., Jackson, J. J., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). The relative impact of socioeconomic sta-
tus and childhood trauma on Black–White differences in paranoid personality disorder
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123(1), 225–230.
Ingenhoven, T., Lafay, P., Rinne, T., Passchier, J., & Duivenvoorden, H. (2010). Effectiveness of
pharmacotherapy for severe personality disorders: Meta-analyses of randomized con-
trolled trials. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 14–25.
Jackson, H. J., & Burgess, P. M. (2002). Personality disorder in the community: Results from
the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing: Part II. Relationships
between personality disorder, Axis I mental disorders and physical conditions with

-- 308 of 498 --

288 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
disability and health consultations. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 37(6),
251–260.
Johnson, J., Cohen, P., Brown, J., Smailes, E., & Bernstein, D. (1999). Childhood maltreatment
increases risk for personality disorders during early adulthood. Archives of General Psy-
chiatry, 56, 600–606.
Johnson, J., Cohen, P., Smailes, E., Skodol, A., Brown, J., & Oldham, J. (2001). Childhood verbal
abuse and risk for personality disorders in adolescence and early adulthood. Comprehen-
sive Psychiatry, 42, 16–23.
Kendler, K., Aggen, S., Czajkowski, N., Roysamb, E., Tambs, K., . . . Reichborn-Kjennerud, T.
(2008). The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors for DSM-IV personality
disorders: A multivariate twin study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65, 1438–1446.
Kendler, K., McGuire, M., Gruenberg, A., O’Hare, A., Spellman, M., & Walsh, D. (1993). The
Roscommon Family Study, III: Schizophrenia-related personality disorders in relatives.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50(10), 781–788.
Kernberg, O., Yeomans, F., Clarkin, J., & Levy, K. (2008). Transference focused psychotherapy:
Overview and update. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 89, 601–620.
Kraepelin, E. (1919). Dementia praecox and paraphrenia. London: Livingstone.
Krueger, R. F. (2016). The future is now: Personality disorder and the ICD-11. Personality and
Mental Health, 10, 118–119.
Krueger, R., Eaton, N., Clark, L., Watson, D., Markon, K., Derringer, J., . . . Livesley, J. (2011).
Deriving an empirical structure of personality pathology for DSM-5. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 25, 170–191.
Krueger, R. F., Eaton, N. R., Derringer, J., Markon, K. E., Watson, D., & Skodol, A. E. (2011).
Personality in DSM-5: Helping delineate personality disorder content and framing the
metastructure. Journal of Personality Assessment, 93, 325–331.
Kuo, C. J., Chen, W. Y., Tsai, S. Y., Chen, P. H., Ko, K. T., & Chen, C. C. (2019). Excessive mortal-
ity and causes of death among patients with personality disorder with comorbid psychi-
atric disorders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 54(1), 121–130.
Lavner, J. A., Lamkin, J., & Miller, J. D. (2017). Trait impulsivity and newlyweds’ marital tra-
jectories. Journal of Personality Disorders, 31(1), 133–144.
Lenzenweger, M. F., Lane, M. C., Loranger, A. W., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). DSM-IV personality
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 62, 553–564.
Lequesne, E. R., & Hersh, R. G. (2004). Disclosure of a diagnosis of borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 10(3), 170–176.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York:
Guilford Press.
Linehan, M. M., Davison, G., Lynch, T., & Sanderson, C. (2005). Technique factors in treating
personality disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beulter (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change
that work (pp. 239–252). New York: Oxford University Press.
Linney, Y. M., Murray, R. M., Peters, E. R., MacDonald, A. M., Rijsdijk, F., & Sham, P. C. (2003).
A quantitative genetic analysis of schizotypal personality traits. Psychological Medicine,
33, 803–816.
Lobbestael, J., Arntz, A., & Bernstein, D. P. (2010). Disentangling the relationship between dif-
ferent types of childhood maltreatment and personality disorders. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 24(3), 285–295.
Magnavita, J. J. (2000). Relational therapy for personality disorders. New York: Wiley.
Magnavita, J. J. (Ed.). (2004). Handbook of personality disorders: Theory and practice. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Magnavita, J. J. (2007). A systemic family perspective on child and adolescent personality
disorders. In A. Freeman & M. A. Reinecke (Eds.), Personality disorders in childhood and
adolescence (pp. 131–181). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

-- 309 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	289
Magnavita, J. J. (Ed.). (2010). Evidence-based treatment of personality dysfunction. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Main, A., Walle, E. A., Kho, C., & Halpern, J. (2017). The interpersonal functions of empathy:
A relational perspective. Emotion Review, 9(4), 358–366.
Mancke, F., Bertsch, K., & Herpertz, S. C. (2015). Gender differences in aggression of border-
line personality disorder. Borderline Personality Disorder and Emotion Dysregulation, 2(1),
Article 7.
Maples-Keller, J., Yasinski, C., Coghlan, C., & Powers, A. (2019). Treatment of antagonism:
Cognitive behavioral therapy. In J. Miller & D. R. Lynam (Eds.), The handbook of antago-
nism: Conceptualizations, assessment, consequences, and treatment of the low end of agreeable-
ness (pp. 351–364). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Markon, K., Krueger, R., & Watson, D. (2005). Delineating the structure of normal and abnor-
mal personality disorder: An integrative hierarchical approach. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 88, 139–157.
McGilloway, A., Hall, R., Lee, T., & Bhui, K. (2010). A systematic review of personality dis-
order, race and ethnicity: Prevalence, aetiology and treatment. BMC Psychiatry, 10, 33.
Messer, S. B., & Abbass, A. A. (2010). Evidence-based psychodynamic therapy with personal-
ity disorders. In J. J. Magnavita (Ed.), Evidence-based treatment of personality dysfunction:
Principles, methods, and processes (pp. 79–111). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Miller, J. D., Sleep, C., & Lynam, D. R. (2018). DSM-5 alternative model of personality disorder:
Testing the trait perspective captured in Criterion B. Current Opinion in Psychology, 21,
50–54.
Muran, J. C., & Safran, J. D. (2002). A relational approach to psychotherapy: Resolving rup-
tures in the therapeutic alliance. In F. W. Kaslow (Ed.), Comprehensive handbook of psycho-
therapy (pp. 253–281). New York: Wiley.
Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. W., Kramer, R., Wiesmann, T., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). Dialectical
behavior therapy skills for transdiagnostic emotion dysregulation: A pilot randomized
controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 59, 40–51.
Niv, S., Tuvblad, C., Raine, A., Wang, P., & Baker, L. A. (2012). Heritability and longitudinal
stability of impulsivity in adolescence. Behavior Genetics, 42(3), 378–392.
Nock, M., Hwang, I., Sampson, N., Kessler, R., Angermeyer, M., Beautrais, A., . . . Williams,
D. R. (2009). Cross-national analysis of the associations among mental disorders and sui-
cidal behavior: Findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLOS Medicine,
6(8), e1000123.
O’Connor, B. P. (2002). The search for dimensional structure differences between normality
and abnormality: A statistical review of published data on personality and psychopa-
thology. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(4), 962–982.
Oldham, J. M., Skodol, A. E., & Bender, D. S. (2009). Future directions: Toward DSM-V. In J.
M. Oldham, A. E. Skodol, & D. S. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders (pp. 381–
392). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Oltmanns, J. R., Weinstein, Y., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2014). Borderline personality pathology and
insomnia symptoms in community-dwelling older adults. Personality and Mental Health,
8(3), 178–187.
Oltmanns, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2018). A self-report measure for the ICD-11 dimensional
trait model proposal: The Personality Inventory for ICD-11. Psychological Assessment, 30,
154–169.
Oltmanns, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2019a). Evaluating the assessment of the ICD-11 personality
disorder diagnostic system. Psychological Assessment, 31(5), 674–684.
Oltmanns, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2019b). The Five-Factor Personality Inventory for ICD-11: A
facet-level assessment of the ICD-11 trait model. Psychological Assessment, 31(5), 674–684.

-- 310 of 498 --

290 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Oltmanns, T. F., & Balsis, S. (2011). Personality pathology in later life: Questions about the
measurement, course, and impact of disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7,
321–349.
Oltmanns, T. F., Melley, A., & Turkheimer, E. (2002). Impaired social function and symptoms
of personality disorders assessed by peer and self-report in a nonclinical sample. Journal
of Personality Disorders, 16, 437–452.
Oltmanns, T. F., Rodrigues, M. M., Weinstein, Y., & Gleason, M. E. (2014). Prevalence of per-
sonality disorders at midlife in a community sample: Disorders and symptoms reflected
in interview, self, and informant reports. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assess-
ment, 36(2), 177–188.
Pally, R. (2002). The neurobiology of borderline personality disorder: The synergy of “nature
and nurture.” Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 8(3), 133–142.
Paris, J. (2003). Personality disorders over time: Precursors, course and outcome. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 17, 479–488.
Parnas, J., Licht, D., & Bovet, P. (2005). Cluster A personality disorders: A review. In M. Maj,
H. S. Akiskal, J. E. Mezzich, & A. Okasha (Eds.), Personality disorders (Vol. 8, pp. 1–124).
Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Paulhus, D. L., & Trapnell, P. D. (2008). Self-presentation of personality: An agency– communion
framework. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality:
Theory and research (3rd ed., pp. 492–517). New York: Guilford Press.
Piper, W. E. (2008). Underutilization of short-term group therapy: Enigmatic or understand-
able? Psychotherapy Research, 18, 127–138.
Powers, A., & Oltmanns, T. (2012). Personality disorders and physical health: A longitudinal
assessment of physical functioning, healthcare utilization, and health-related behaviors
in adults. Journal of Personality Disorders, 26, 524–538.
Powers, A., & Oltmanns, T. (2013). Borderline personality pathology and chronic health prob-
lems in later adulthood: The mediating role of obesity. Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 4(2), 152–159.
Powers, A., Thomas, K. M., Ressler, K. J., & Bradley, B. (2011). The differential effects of child
abuse and posttraumatic stress disorder on schizotypal personality disorder. Compre-
hensive Psychiatry, 52(4), 438–445.
Pulay, A., Stinson, F., Dawson, D., Goldstein, R., Chou, P., Huang, B., . . . Grant, B. F. (2009).
Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV schizotypal personal-
ity disorder: Results from the Wave 2 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 11(2), 53–67.
Reich, J. (2009). Avoidant personality disorder and its relationship to social phobia. Current
Psychiatry Reports, 11, 89–93.
Reichborn-Kjennerud, T., Czajkowski, N., Ystrøm, E., Ørstavik, R., Aggen, S. H., Tambs, K., . . .
Knudsen, G. P. (2015). A longitudinal twin study of borderline and antisocial personal-
ity disorder traits in early to middle adulthood. Psychological Medicine, 45(14), 3121–3131.
Rhee, S., & Waldman, I. (2002). Genetic and environmental influences on antisocial behavior:
A meta-analysis of twin and adoption studies. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 490–529.
Roberts, A. L., Gilman, S. E., Breslau, J., Breslau, N., & Koenen, K. C. (2011). Race/ethnic dif-
ferences in exposure to traumatic events, development of post-traumatic stress disorder,
and treatment-seeking for post-traumatic stress disorder in the United States. Psychologi-
cal Medicine, 41, 71–83.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level change in per-
sonality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 132(1), 1–25.
Samuel, D., Hopwood, C., Ansell, E., Morey, L., Sanislow, C., Markowitz, J. C., . . . Grilo, C. M.

-- 311 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	291
(2011). Comparing the temporal stability of self-report and interview assessed personal-
ity disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 670–680.
Schwartz, E. K., Docherty, N. M., Najolia, G. M., & Cohen, A. S. (2019). Exploring the racial
diagnostic bias of schizophrenia using behavioral and clinical-based measures. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 128(3), 263–271.
Seibel, C. A., & Dowd, E. T. (2001). Personality characteristics associated with psychological
reactance. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(7), 963–969.
Selby, E. A. (2013). Chronic sleep disturbances and borderline personality disorder symptoms.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81(5), 941–947.
Silberschmidt, A., Lee, S., Zanarini, M., & Schulz, S. C. (2015). Gender differences in borderline
personality disorder: Results from a multinational, clinical trial sample. Journal of Person-
ality Disorders, 29(6), 828–838.
Sirey, J., Bruce, M., Alexopoulos, G., Perlick, D. A., Friedman, S., & Meyers, B. (2001). Stigma as
a barrier to recovery: Perceived stigma and patient-rated severity of illness as predictors
of antidepressant drug adherence. Psychiatric Services, 52, 1615–1620.
Skodol, A. E. (2008). Longitudinal course and outcome of personality disorders. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 31, 495–503.
Skodol, A. E. (2018). Impact of personality pathology on psychosocial functioning. Current
Opinion in Psychology, 21, 33–38.
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., McGlashan, T. H., Dyck, I. R., Stout, R. L., Bender, D. S., . . .
Oldham, J. M. (2002). Functional impairment in patients with schizotypal, borderline,
avoidant, or obsessive– compulsive personality disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
159, 276–283.
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., Shea, M. T., McGlashan, T. H., Morey, L. C., Sanislow, C. A., . . .
Stout, R. L. (2005). The Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study (CLPS):
Overview and implications. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19(5), 487–504.
Skodol, A. E., Pagano, M. E., Bender, D. S., Shea, M., Gunderson, J. G., Yen, S., . . . McGlashan,
T. H. (2005). Stability of functional impairment in patients with schizotypal, borderline,
avoidant, or obsessive– compulsive personality disorder over two years. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 443–451.
Skodol, A. E., Shea, M. T., Yen, S., White, C. N., & Gunderson, J. G. (2010). Personality disorders
and mood disorders: perspectives on diagnosis and classification from studies of lon-
gitudinal course and familial associations. Journal of Personality Disorders, 24(1), 83–108.
Summers, R. J., & Barber, J. P. (2009). Dynamic psychotherapy: A guide to evidence-based practice.
New York: Guilford Press.
Swales, M., & Dunkley, C. (2020). Principles of skills assessment in dialectical behavior ther-
apy. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 27(1), 18–29.
Tomko, R. L., Trull, T. J., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J. (2014). Characteristics of borderline person-
ality disorder in a community sample: Comorbidity, treatment utilization, and general
functioning. Journal of Personality Disorders, 28(5), 734–750.
Town, J. M., Abbass, A., & Hardy, G. (2011). Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy for per-
sonality disorders: A critical review of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 25(6), 723–740.
Trull, T. J., Jahng, S., Tomko, R. L., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J. (2010). Revised NESARC person-
ality disorder diagnoses: Gender, prevalence, and comorbidity with substance depen-
dence disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 24, 412–426.
Trull, T. J., & Widiger, T. A. (2008). Geology 102: More thoughts on a shift to a dimensional
model of personality disorders. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(2), 949–967.
Tyrer, P. (2014). Time to choose—DSM-5, ICD-11, or both? Archives of Psychiatry and Psycho-
therapy, 16, 5–8.

-- 312 of 498 --

292 	P s y c h o P a t h o l o g y
Tyrer, P., Crawford, M., Mulder, R., Blashfield, R., Farnam, A., Fossati, A., . . . Swales, M. (2011).
A classification based on evidence is the first step to clinical utility. Personality and Mental
Health, 5(4), 304–307.
Tyrer, P., Mulder, R., Kim, Y. R., & Crawford, M. J. (2019). The development of the ICD-11 clas-
sification of personality disorders: An amalgam of science, pragmatism, and politics.
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 481–502.
Tyrer, P., Reed, G. M., & Crawford, M. J. (2015). Classification, assessment, prevalence, and
effect of personality disorder. Lancet, 385, 717–726.
Tyrer, P., Tyrer, H., & Yang, M. (2019). Premature mortality of people with personality disor-
der in the Nottingham Study of Neurotic Disorder. Personality and Mental Health. [Epub
ahead of print]
Ullrich, S., & Coid, J. (2009). The age distribution of self-reported personality disorder traits in
a household population. Journal of Personality Disorders, 23(2), 187–200.
Volkert, J., Gablonski, T. C., & Rabung, S. (2018). Prevalence of personality disorders in the
general adult population in Western countries: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 213(6), 709–715.
Watters, C. A., Bagby, R. M., & Sellbom, M. (2019). Meta-analysis to derive an empirically
based set of personality facet criteria for the alternative DSM-5 model for personality
disorders. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 10(2), 97–104.
Waugh, M. H., Hopwood, C. J., Krueger, R. F., Morey, L. C., Pincus, A. L., & Wright, A. G. (2017).
Psychological assessment with the DSM-5 Alternative Model for Personality Disorders:
Tradition and innovation. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 48(2), 79–89.
Westen, D., & Heim, A. K. (2003). Disturbances of self and identity in personality disorders. In
M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 643–664). New York:
Guilford Press.
Widiger, T. A. (2019). Considering the research: Commentary on “The trait–type dialectic:
Construct validity, clinical utility, and the diagnostic process.” Personality Disorders: The-
ory, Research, and Treatment, 10(3), 215–219.
Widiger, T. A., Lynam, D. R., Miller, J. D., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2012). Measures to assess mal-
adaptive variants of the five-factor model. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94(5), 450–455.
Widiger, T. A., & Simonsen, E. (2005). Alternative dimensional models of personality disorder:
Finding a common ground. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19, 110–130.
Widiger, T. A., & Trull, T. J. (2007). Plate tectonics in the classification of personality disorder:
Shifting to a dimensional model. American Psychologist, 62, 71–83.
Wilson, T. (2009). Know thyself. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 384–389.
World Health Organization. (2018). International classification of diseases for mortality and morbid-
ity statistics (11th rev.). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Wright, Z. E., Pahlen, S., & Krueger, R. F. (2017). Genetic and environmental influences on
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) maladaptive personality
traits and their connections with normative personality traits. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 126(4), 416–428.
Yang, Y. C., Boen, C., Gerken, K., Li, T., Schorpp, K., & Harris, K. M. (2016). Social relationships
and physiological determinants of longevity across the human life span. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 113(3), 578–583.
Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R. (2008). A preliminary, randomized trial of psychoedu-
cation for women with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders,
22(3), 284–290.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Hennen, J., Reich, D. B., & Silk, K. R. (2006). Prediction of
the 10-year course of borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163,
827–832.

-- 313 of 498 --

Personality Disorders 	293
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., & Fitzmaurice, G. (2010). Time to attainment
of recovery from borderline personality disorder and stability of recovery: A 10-year
prospective follow-up study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(6), 663–667.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F., Reich, D., Silk, K., Hudson, J., & McSweeney, L. (2007). The
subsyndromal phenomenology of borderline personality disorder: A 10-year follow-up
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 929–935.
Zemishlany, Z., & Weizman, A. (2008). The impact of mental illness on sexual dysfunction.
Advances in Psychosomatic Medicine, 29, 89–106.
Zheng, Y., Plomin, R., & von Stumm, S. (2016). Heritability of intraindividual mean and vari-
ability of positive and negative affect: Genetic analysis of daily affect ratings over a
month. Psychological Science, 27(12), 1611–1619.
Zimmermann, J., Kerber, A., Rek, K., Hopwood, C. J., & Krueger, R. F. (2019). A brief but com-
prehensive review of research on the alternative DSM-5 model for personality disorders.
Current Psychiatry Reports, 21(9), 1–19.

-- 314 of 498 --

294
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severely disabling and recurrent condition. While its
genetic etiology has been recognized, it has also been shown to be responsive to psy-
chosocial treatment. In this chapter, we review the phenomenology and etiology, as
well as empirically supported pharmacological and psychological treatments of BD.
PHENOMENOLOGY
BD is complex on many fronts: Symptoms vary from the extreme highs of mania
to the lows of depression, and comorbid conditions are the norm rather than the
exception. Here we provide brief definitions of the different forms of the disorder
and describe the associated clinical features, epidemiology, and common comorbid
conditions.
Typical Symptoms and Course
BDs are defined on the basis of manic symptoms of varying severity and duration.
Manic episodes are defined by a set of mood and arousal-related symptoms that are
serious enough to lead to functional impairment; hypomanic episodes are defined by
parallel symptom criteria without the marked impairment of a full manic episode.
Motor activity is tightly tethered to symptoms, increasing with manic symptoms and
decreasing with depressive symptoms (Merikangas et al., 2019).
C H A P T E R 1 0
