MORRISON — The First Interview (5th ed.)
Chapter 13: Signs and Symptoms in Areas of Clinical Interest
================================================================================

Signs and Symptoms in Areas
of Clinical Interest
The areas of clinical interest are simply a way of thinking about historical
and mental status information. The eight groups I’ll discuss here include
most of the signs and symptoms a mental health professional can expect
to encounter. The areas of clinical interest should help you focus your
inquiry on the information you will need to devise a differential diagno-
sis.
Your job is to obtain the facts necessary to assess the importance of
any of these areas you encounter to the overall evaluation. Remember
that each of them comprises a number of clinical diagnoses that have
symptoms in common. In order to decide which diagnosis fits best, you
must inquire about symptoms of each of the disorders you have in mind.
As an example of how this process works, consider a patient who
has complained of feeling depressed, blue, or “bummed out.” You would
expect to find some of these additional symptoms of a mood disorder:
crying spells, hopelessness, change in appetite and sleep patterns, feeling
worse at certain times of the day, low energy, poor concentration, pessi-
mistic outlook, and suicidal ideas or behaviors. Most patients won’t have
all of these symptoms, but even a couple of them would suggest that your
patient could suffer from some kind of a depressive condition. In that
case, you should learn whether the symptoms and course of the illness
will support one of the mood disorder diagnoses. In other words, first
get the data. Later, when all the facts are in, you can decide which of the
diagnoses best fits the facts.
In discussing each area of clinical interest, I will present these fea-
tures:

-- 176 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	161
1. Tip-offs, or the “red flag” symptoms that should alert you to
explore further.
2. The main diagnoses. This section covers the most important dis-
orders covered by that area of clinical interest, plus the principal
differential diagnoses. I’ve marked with an asterisk (*) those that
I’ve included in the Appendix B description of diagnoses.
3. Historical information. Here, I briefly explain the importance of
each bit of historical data you should ask about.
4. Typical features from the MSE. The current mental status is usu-
ally not as helpful as history in sorting out the differential diagno-
sis, so I have just listed the typical symptoms.
At times it is hard to know where history ends and the mental status
begins. For that reason, you might find that some features mentioned
under one section seem to belong in another. For example, a patient
might report some moods that are not observed during the interview.
In Appendix D, you’ll find a semistructured interview that covers the
major mental health diagnoses. It gives readers who want it a way to ensure
that they’ve touched all the bases in their interview. I do want to warn you,
however, to be careful about interviewing for a particular diagnosis. The
purpose of the initial interview is to determine what’s wrong, not merely to
find evidence that will reaffirm your preconceptions— or what another cli-
nician has already claimed. In other words, don’t bait a hook to catch a par-
ticular kind of fish; rather, you should cast a net to see what you bring up.
psYchosis
Psychosis means simply that the patient is out of touch with reality, as
judged by the presence of hallucinations, delusions, or markedly loosened
thought associations. This condition may be either transient or chronic,
although with today’s treatment methods it is unusual for a person to
remain psychotic for extended periods.
Tip‑Offs
Symptoms that would make you consider psychosis as an area of clinical
interest include the following:
Affect that is flat or inappropriate
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Delusions

-- 177 of 385 --

162 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Fantasies or illogical ideas
Hallucinations (of any of the senses)
Insight or judgment that is disturbed
Muteness
Perceptual distortions or misinterpretations
Social withdrawal
Speech that is incoherent or hard to follow
Main Diagnoses
A patient who presents with psychosis is likely to have one of three prin-
cipal diagnoses: an organic psychosis (that is, one due to a medical ill-
ness or to substance use), schizophrenia, or some sort of mood episode—a
major depressive episode with psychosis (which could signal either major
depressive disorder or bipolar I disorder) or severe mania (bipolar I).
Of those, you’ll encounter mood episodes and schizophrenia most fre-
quently. However, here is a more complete list:
Schizophrenia*
Major depressive episode*
Manic episode*
Neurocognitive disorders, such as delirium* due to a variety of causes
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder* (e.g., due to alcohol)
Brief psychotic disorder
Schizophreniform disorder*
Schizoaffective disorder*
Delusional disorder*
Historical Information
Age at onset. Schizophrenia tends to begin early (late teens or 20s);
delusional disorder starts in middle to late life.
Alcohol or drugs. Many psychotic patients use substances. Check the
chronology. If the psychosis began first, schizophrenia with secondary
substance misuse is more likely. If substance use began first, the psychosis
could be a secondary diagnosis; schizophrenia is less likely.
Depression. If there is a past or present severe depression, consider
the diagnosis of a mood disorder with psychosis.

-- 178 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	163
Environmental stress. Severe stress that precedes the onset of psycho-
sis suggests a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder.
Family history. Schizophrenia and mood disorders tend to run in fam-
ilies; having a relative with either condition increases the likelihood of
that diagnosis for the patient.
Length of illness. The longer a psychosis has lasted, the more likely
schizophrenia is to be the final diagnosis.
Loss of drive, volition, interest. These symptoms are typical of the later
phases of schizophrenia.
Onset. Sudden onset (a few days to a few weeks) suggests a cogni-
tive or mood disorder with psychosis. The longer and more gradual the
onset—up to several years in some cases—the more likely this psychosis is
to be schizophrenia.
Physical illness. Cognitive psychoses are associated with a number
of health risk factors: endocrine or metabolic disorders, tumors, toxic
substance exposure, trauma, and a variety of neurological and medical
diseases.
Previous episode with recovery. Mood disorders tend to be episodic ill-
nesses; these patients are more likely to recover completely than are those
with schizophrenia.
Schizoid or schizotypal premorbid personality. Long- standing character
traits such as aloofness, emotional withdrawal, few friends, or odd beliefs
or behaviors sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
Unemployment or reduced job level. If unemployment or underemploy-
ment has been present for years, and especially if the reduced job level con-
tinues after recovery from an acute episode, schizophrenia is more likely
than if the patient worked at a high-grade, demanding job until just recently.
Note on first-rank symptoms. A much- discussed set of hallucinations
and delusions is that of Kurt Schneider’s first-rank symptoms, any one of
which he believed was diagnostic of schizophrenia. Although subsequent
research has shown that patients with other disorders may also report
these symptoms, you will encounter the concept of first-rank symptoms
often enough to warrant a brief listing:
Audible thoughts
Delusional perception, in which a normal observation has abnor-
mal significance for a patient; for example, when a patient was
served a grilled cheese sandwich for lunch, he “knew” that his aunt
was about to die
Delusions of influence

-- 179 of 385 --

164 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Delusions of thought control
More than one voice talking about the patient
Voices commenting on the patient’s actions
Somatic hallucinations (body sensations produced by outside influ-
ence)
Thought broadcasting
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Hallucinations (cont.)
Abnormalities of motion 	Auditory
Reduced activity 	Voices?
Pacing 	If so, whose?
Posturing 	Audible thoughts?
Rigidity 	Visual
Negativism 	Tactile
Grimacing 	Taste
Stereotypies 	Smell
Clothing eccentric or
disheveled
Delusions
Death
Hyperalertness 	Erotomania
Neglect of hygiene 	Grandeur
Mood 	Guilt
Flat or silly 	Ill health or bodily change
Perplexity about identity 	Jealousy
Flow of thought 	Passivity
Speech restricted in amount 	Persecution
Mute 	Poverty
Incoherent 	Reference
Loosened associations 	Language usually not impaired
Illogical ideas 	Cognition generally preserved
Preoccupied with fantasies 	Insight often absent
Content of thought 	Judgment may be impaired in
the acute phase	Hallucinations: When? Where?
mood disTurBance: depression
Depression means a mood that is variously described as “blue,” “low,” or
“melancholy”—as well as “depressed.” This low mood must be persistent,
usually lasting at least a week or two. It is often described as a marked
change from the patient’s normal mood. Some people will tell you that
they don’t feel depressed; they just don’t experience pleasure (this state is

-- 180 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	165
called anhedonia). The information needed for the history of the present
illness addresses both cause of depression (see later) and severity.
Tip‑Offs
You should investigate depression if your patient presents with any of
these symptoms:
Activity level that is either markedly decreased or increased (agitated)
Anxiety symptoms
Appetite changes
Concentration poor
Death wishes
Depressed mood
Interest decreased for usual activities (including sex)
Sleeplessness or excessive sleepiness
Suicidal ideas
Tearfulness
Use of drugs or alcohol
Weight loss or gain
Worthlessness
Main Diagnoses
Many of the same physical diseases that produce psychosis can also lead
to depression. However, the principal problem with diagnosis is differen-
tiating primary depression (or depression that is chronologically the first
disorder to appear) from secondary depression (or depression that begins
after and is caused by another mental or personality disorder). Principal
diagnoses to consider are these:
Major depressive episode* (as part of either major depressive disor-
der or bipolar I or bipolar II disorder)
Melancholia*
Dysthymia (now called persistent depressive disorder in DSM-5)*
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Seasonal pattern in mood disorder
Secondary depression

-- 181 of 385 --

166 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Historical Information
Alcohol and drugs. Substance use is a principal finding preceding the
onset of secondary depression.
Anhedonia. The patient cannot feel pleasure. In some patients, this
feeling may occur as an alternative to the mood of depression.
Atypical features. Stress-related depression may have symptoms of
excessive sleep (hypersomnia), increased appetite, and weight gain;
patients may feel better in the mornings and when they are with people
they like. These features are called atypical because depressed patients
more usually have insomnia, feel better in the evenings, complain of
decreased appetite and weight, and don’t feel better with pleasant society.
Change from usual self. Patients who have severe bipolar depressed
episodes or unipolar depression often report that the way they feel is a
“complete change from the way I used to feel.”
Environmental stress. Any severe environmental stressor can be asso-
ciated with depressed mood. A depression that remits as soon as the
stressor lifts is sometimes called reactive. Non- stress-related depressions
are sometimes referred to as endogenous (springing from within); people
sometimes describe them as “coming out of nowhere.” Reactive depres-
sions are usually less severe than those of the endogenous type, and are
less likely to require treatment.
Episodic illness. Has there been a previous episode of depression? Did
the patient recover completely? “Yes” answers suggest bipolar depressed
episodes, unipolar depression, or a mood disorder with seasonal pattern
(see below). A chronic, low-intensity depression that has been present for
years is typical of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia).
Family history of mood disorder. This is a classical finding in severe
mood disorder, which is often at least partly inherited.
Indecisiveness. Inability to make up one’s mind, even regarding minor
details, is emblematic of severe depression.
Isolation. Withdrawal from friends or family suggests a severe depres-
sion such as melancholia.
Mania ever. The distinction between a bipolar depressed episode and
major depressive disorder is easily made with the finding of previous epi-
sodes of mania.
Neglect of hobbies, activities. Loss of interest in usual activities accom-
panies severe depression.
Premenstrual pattern. Women whose depressive symptoms occur mainly
before their periods begin may have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.

-- 182 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	167
Recent loss (bereavement). This is another common environmental
stressor that can precede depression.
Seasonal pattern. Some patients report regular onset of depression at
a particular season of the year (typically fall or winter), with full remission
later (typically springtime). Such patients may be diagnosed as having a
mood disorder with seasonal pattern.
Sex interest decreased. Loss of libido is a classical symptom of moder-
ate to severe depression.
Suicide ideas, attempts. For any depression, ask about psychological
and physical seriousness of previous attempts. Are there current ideas
about suicide? Does the patient have a plan, and the means, to act upon
these ideas?
Trouble thinking or concentrating. These symptoms are usually found
in moderate to severe depression.
Vegetative symptoms. Classical for severe depression with melancholia
are terminal insomnia (the patient awakens early and cannot return to
sleep), decreased appetite, weight loss, and low energy or fatigue. Patients
tend to feel better in evenings than mornings, and don’t improve much
when with people whose company they normally enjoy.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Content of thought (cont.)
Tearful 	“Better off dead”
Decreased attention to
appearance
Death wishes
Suicide ideas, plans
Decreased interest in usual
activities
Mood- congruent delusions
Guilt
Slowed actions 	Sin
Agitation 	Worthlessness
Mood 	Ill health
Sad face 	Poverty
Anxiety 	Language not usually affected
Flow of thought 	Cognition
Slowing 	Usually intact
Content of thought 	May have “pseudodementia”
Guilt feelings 	Insight and judgment
Ruminations 	May deny feeling depressed
Hopelessness 	May deny possibility of
improvement	Worthlessness
Loss of pleasure

-- 183 of 385 --

168 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
mood disTurBance: mania
Manic patients describe their moods as “high,” “hyper,” “exalted,”
“excited,” or “euphoric”; sometimes they are mainly irritable. Although
the condition of mania has been recognized for more than 100 years,
these patients are often misdiagnosed as having schizophrenia. Cognitive
disorders can sometimes present with symptoms of mania.
Tip‑Offs
Consider mania when you are confronted with any of the following symp-
toms:
Activity level increased
Distractibility
Grandiose sense of self-worth
Judgment deteriorating
Mood euphoric or irritable
Planning many activities
Sleep decreased (reduced need for sleep)
Speech rapid, loud, hard to interrupt
Substance use recently begun or increased
Thoughts moving rapidly from one idea to another
Main Diagnoses
Most manic patients also have episodes of (often severe) depression.
Cyclothymia, a milder condition in which high moods that are not psy-
chotic alternate with depressed ones, is the other principal possibility to
consider. Differential diagnoses includes the following:
Mania* (bipolar I disorder, manic episode)
Bipolar II disorder
Cyclothymia
Organic mood disorder
Historical Information
Alcohol misuse. Sometimes this can be an attempt to lessen the
uncomfortable feelings of being speeded up.
Concentration decreased. Manic patients often start projects that they
do not complete.

-- 184 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	169
Episodic illness. A previous episode of mania or depression with com-
plete recovery usually clinches the diagnosis. If so, look especially for
rapid cycling (four or more switches between highs and lows in the course
of a year). These episodes, which may be as brief as a few days, have impli-
cations for the type of treatment that may be effective.
Insomnia. This is often experienced as decreased need for sleep.
Judgment poor. This appears as a history of spending sprees, legal
troubles, or sexual indiscretions.
Libido increased. Manic exuberance can lead to promiscuity, preg-
nancy, and the risk of sexually transmitted disease.
Personality change. At the extreme, a normally quiet, unassuming
person abruptly becomes boisterous, argumentative, or ill-tempered.
Physical conditions. Disinhibition similar to mania can be encoun-
tered after head trauma and in various conditions such as brain tumors
and endocrine disorders.
Relationships disrupted. Friends and family have difficulty coping with
markedly changed behavior.
Sociability increased. Manic patients may excessively enjoy parties and
other social gatherings.
Work-related problems. Loss of concentration and preoccupation with
grandiose plans contribute to decreased performance on the job or in
school.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Flow of thought (cont.)
Excited, agitated 	Wordplay, jokes
Hyperactive 	Distractible
Increased energy 	Content of thought
Loud speech 	Self- confident
Flamboyant or bizarre dress 	Increased religiosity
May be threatening or
assaultive
Full of schemes and plans
Grandiosity that may be
delusional	Mood
Euphoric 	Language usually not affected
Irritable 	Cognition usually intact
Rapidly changing moods 	Insight and judgment
Flow of thought 	Lack of insight into the fact of
being ill	Racing thoughts
Flight of ideas 	Poor judgment (refuses
hospitalization, treatment)	Pressured speech

-- 185 of 385 --

170 	The FirsT inTerview
SubStance uSe DiSorDerS
Substance misuse is defined by the culture in which it occurs. In most
segments of our culture (some religions, such as the Mormons, for exam-
ple, are significant exceptions), the majority of adults use substances—if
only caffeine. Whether we consider a person to be misusing a substance
depends not simply on the amount or frequency of use, but also on the
consequences of this behavior. These consequences may be behavioral,
cognitive, legal, financial, and physical. Many of them also affect society
as a whole.
Tip‑Offs
The following symptoms should lead you to consider a diagnosis of a sub-
stance use disorder:
Alcohol use greater than one or two drinks per day
Arrests or other legal problems
Financial problems: the patient spends money needed for other pur-
poses
Health problems: blackouts, cirrhosis, abdominal pain, vomiting
Illegal substance use
Job loss, tardiness, demotions
Memory impairment (blackouts from drinking or drug use)
Social problems: fights, loss of friends
Main Diagnoses
In DSM-5, these disorders are called [substance] use disorders and [sub-
stance/medication]-induced [mood, psychotic, etc.] disorders. Substance-
induced neurocognitive disorders, the brain syndromes that many people
who heavily use substances also have at one time or another, will be con-
sidered in the “Difficulty Thinking (Cognitive Problems)” section.
The classes of substances that are recognized as subject to misuse
are given below. Many substance users will use more than one of these
classes.
Alcohol
Amphetamines
Cannabis
Cocaine

-- 186 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	171
Hallucinogens (including phencyclidine [PCP])
Inhalants
Nicotine
Opioids
Sedatives, hypnotics, anxiolytics
Substance use can occur as a solitary diagnosis, but it is often associ-
ated with another major mental health diagnosis or personality disorder.
Those you should especially look for include the following:
Mood disorders (depression and mania)
Schizophrenia
Somatization disorder (somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5)
Antisocial personality disorder
Historical Information
Abuse. Formerly used to denote those who had problems resulting
from use but were not actually dependent, this term should now be under-
stood simply to mean use of any substance, including prescription medi-
cations, that’s greater than is good for the individual.
Activities used to obtain supply. These include drug sales, theft, rob-
bery, and prostitution.
Age at onset. How old was the patient when substance use began? For
alcohol use, women may have a much later age of onset than men.
Chronology. If there is an associated mental disorder, which came
first? For example, if alcoholism chronologically precedes depression, the
depression is regarded as secondary.
Dependence. Dependence means, in essence, that behavior changes
because of the person’s use of the substance. The following symptoms are
the sorts of behavioral alterations that DSM-5 uses to define a substance
use disorder. (The first two don’t usually apply to cannabis or the hallu-
cinogens.)
1. Tolerance (the patient needs more of the substance to produce
the same effect or obtains less effect with the same dose).
2. Withdrawal (the patient experiences withdrawal symptoms
typical for the substance or takes more of it to avoid with-
drawal).
3. More of the substance is used than the patient intends.
4. The patient tries without success to control substance use.

-- 187 of 385 --

172 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
5. The patient spends much time obtaining or using the sub-
stance or recovering from its effects.
6. Substance use causes the patient to give up important work/
educational, social, or recreational activities.
7. Despite awareness that it has caused physical or psychological
problems, the patient continues to use the substance.
8. The patient repeatedly uses substances even when it is physi-
cally dangerous to do so (such as driving while intoxicated).
9. Because of repeated use, the patient fails to carry out major
obligations at home or work/school (repeated absences,
neglect of children or house, poor work performance).
10. The patient keeps using the substance despite knowing that
it has caused or worsened social or interpersonal problems
(fights, arguments).
11. Finally, the patient craves the substance. Of course, this
intense desire is not itself a behavior, but rather the driving
force behind the above-listed behavioral symptoms.
Emotional/behavioral 	disorders. 	Especially 	frequent 	complications
include psychosis, mood syndromes, anxiety syndromes, delusional disor-
der, and delirium on withdrawal.
Frequency of use. How often has each substance been used? Has the
pattern changed with the current episode?
Health problems. Has deteriorating health been suggested by evidence
such as cirrhosis, stomach disorders, wasting, tuberculosis, or respiratory
problems?
Legal problems. Has the patient been arrested or jailed for possession,
sales, or for criminal activities to finance supply? A history of criminal
activity occasioned by the need to obtain money for drugs must be distin-
guished from antisocial personality disorder (which may be the correct
diagnosis if illegal activities have been undertaken when the patient was
clean and sober).
Needle sharing. If intravenous usage is reported, has the patient ever
used dirty needles? Had hepatitis? How recently has there been a test for
HIV?
Pattern of use. Has there been continuous, episodic, or binge usage?
If more than one drug is involved, what is the pattern for each?
Personality change. How has drug use affected the way the patient
relates to others? Has there been a general loss of motivation (especially
likely with long-term use of cannabis or hallucinogens)?

-- 188 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	173
Relationship problems. These include divorces, separations, and fight-
ing. Some couples stay together only because of a common interest in
drug use.
Route of administration. Any of the following means can be used: swal-
lowing, snorting, smoking, subcutaneous, intravenous, rectal, vaginal.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance 	Language
Red-faced 	Fluency reduced (mumbling,
slurred speech)	Tremor
Disheveled 	Cognitive
Mood 	May show cognitive signs if
there is a concomitant
neurocognitive disorder
Depressed
Anxious
Belligerent 	Insight and judgment
Flow of thought 	May reject the diagnosis
Often talkative 	Patients often refuse treatment
or sign out against advice	Content of thought
Maudlin
Demanding
Hallucinations
More often visual
May be auditory
social and personaliTY proBlems
Personality traits are patterns of behavior or thought that persist through-
out adult life. To be diagnosable as personality disorders, traits must be
pronounced enough to cause the patient functional impairment (work/
educational, social, or emotional) or personal distress.
Tip‑Offs
You should consider social and personality problems whenever your
patient has any of the following characteristics:
Anxiety
Behaviors that seem odd or bizarre
Dramatic presentation
Drug or alcohol misuse

-- 189 of 385 --

174 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Interpersonal conflict
Job problems
Legal difficulties
Marital conflicts
Personality disorders must be distinguished from ordinary problems
of living that are not mental disorders. The latter can include borderline
intellectual functioning, academic problems, marital and other family
problems, job problems, and uncomplicated bereavement.
Main Diagnoses
Although many personality disorders have been proposed over the years,
only the 10 given below currently enjoy official diagnostic blessing. Adult
patients who do not fully meet criteria for one of these diagnoses but have
long- standing impairments of self (that is, identity or self- direction) and
impairments of an interpersonal nature (empathy or intimacy) may be
diagnosed as having unspecified personality disorder.
Antisocial*
Avoidant*
Borderline*
Dependent
Histrionic
Narcissistic*
Obsessive–compulsive (personality disorder)*
Paranoid
Schizoid
Schizotypal*
Important differential diagnoses for any personality disorder, includ-
ing those other than the officially recognized 10 listed above, include
these mental disorders:
Bipolar I disorder*
Major depressive disorder*
Dysthymia (persistent depressive disorder)*
Schizophrenia*
Delusional disorder*

-- 190 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	175
Substance use disorders
Obsessive–compulsive disorder*
Personality change due to another medical condition
Historical Information
Many traits have been linked to personality disorders. For purposes of
description, I have used several common headings. This list makes no
pretense of completeness; it does present traits that clinicians consider
important in defining currently recognized personality disorders. This is
some of the information you should pursue in the quest of a personality
disorder diagnosis.
Callousness. Forces sexual activity on others; takes advantage of oth-
ers for personal gain; humiliates others publicly; uses harsh discipline;
takes pleasure in suffering of others.
Carries grudges.
Childhood delinquency. Truancy; starts fights; fights with weapons;
runs away; is cruel to animals or people; destroys property; sets fires.
Compliance is excessive. Volunteers for unpleasant tasks so as to be
liked by others; agrees with people to avoid rejection.
Concern for others is lacking. Self- centered; unable to recognize how
others feel.
Criticism is rejected. Resents useful suggestions; easily hurt by others.
Dishonesty. History of frequent lying; history of stealing, robbery, or
conning others.
Impulsivity. Wanders without a fixed abode; sexual indiscretions;
shoplifts; reckless disregard for personal safety.
Indecisiveness. Avoids making decisions or depends on others to
make them; vague about goals.
Indifferent to praise.
Inflexibility. Reluctant to do things that differ from routine; perfec-
tionism that interferes with task completion; preoccupation with rules,
lists, order; misses the forest for the trees; resists letting others have their
way; rigid about morality, ethics.
Insecurity. Feels uncomfortable when alone; won’t get involved unless
sure of being liked; fearful of self- embarrassment in social situations;

-- 191 of 385 --

176 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
exaggerates risks of doing something outside the routine; afraid of being
abandoned; feels helpless or uncomfortable, so avoids being alone.
Irresponsibility. Defaults on financial obligations such as family sup-
port or debts; unable to hold a job; fails to do a reasonable share of the
work; “forgets” obligations; puts things off.
Mood instability. Mood fluctuates more rapidly or more widely than is
usually considered normal for the circumstances. May be quick to show
anger; “hair-trigger temper.”
Physical aggression. Fighting or assaults.
Saves objects of no value.
Sex drive is low.
Sociability is low. Is a loner (prefers solitary activities); uncomfortable
in social situations or with strangers; avoids close relationships.
Stinginess. Shows lack of generosity with money or time.
Suicidal ideas or behavior; nonsuicidal self-harm.
Suspiciousness. Reluctance to confide in others; easily slighted;
reads hidden meaning into innocent remarks or situations; expects to be
exploited or harmed by others; questions loyalty of friends or fidelity of
spouse/partner.
Trusts others excessively. Chronically chooses associates or situations
that lead to disappointment.
Unstable interpersonal relationships.
Workaholism.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Mood
Lacks sense of humor 	Hostile or defensive
Hypervigilant 	Temper; inappropriate,
intense anger	Argumentative
Appears tense 	Exaggeratedly emotional
speech, behavior	Reluctant to confide
Sexual seductiveness that is
inappropriate
Denies experiencing strong
emotions
Overly concerned with
appearance,
attractiveness
Feels empty or bored
Lacks remorse for hurting
others

-- 192 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	177
Mood (cont.) 	Content of thought (cont.)
Shallow, shifting emotions 	Frequently requests
reassurance or approval;
fishes for compliments
Apathy
Restricted or inappropriate
affect 	Fears being embarrassed
Cool, aloof, or silly 	Judgmental of self and/or
others	Flow of thought
Vague speech 	Unreasonably devalues
authority figures	Odd speech (vague, digressive,
impoverished) 	Language: no abnormalities
are typical	Content of thought
Expects to be exploited 	Cognition: no abnormalities
are typical	Questions loyalty of friends
Suspects hidden meanings 	Insight and judgment
Fantasies of success, power 	Exaggerates
accomplishments	Ideas of reference (e.g., “as
if” strangers talk about
patient)
Lacks remorse for behavior
Feels others make
unreasonable demands	Odd beliefs, superstitions or
magical thinking, illusions 	Overvalues own work;
self-important; feels
problems are unique;
sense of entitlement
Uncertainty about identity
(self-image, sexual
orientation, long-term
goals, values)
diFFiculTY Thinking (cogniTive proBlems)
A wide variety of physical and chemical insults can interfere with think-
ing. These causes include the following:
Brain tumors
Head trauma
Hypertension
Infections
Metabolic disorders
Postoperative complications
Seizure disorders
Toxic substances or withdrawal from psychoactive substances
Vitamin deficiency

-- 193 of 385 --

178 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Tip‑Offs
Any of the following should stimulate further investigation of cognitive
problems:
Bizarre behavior
Confusion
Decreased judgment
Delusions
Hallucinations
Memory defects
Mood fluctuations
History of ingesting toxins
Main Diagnoses
Physical or chemical brain dysfunction produces abnormalities of behav-
ior or thinking that can be either temporary or permanent. The types of
problems include these:
Amnestic syndrome
Anxiety disorders
Delirium*
Delusional syndrome
Dementia (DSM-5 calls it major neurocognitive disorder)*
Dissociative disorders
Intoxication and withdrawal
Psychosis of intoxication or withdrawal
Mood syndrome
Personality change due to another medical condition
The important differential diagnoses include the starred diagnoses/syn-
dromes in the previous group, plus these:
Depression*
Schizophrenia*
Substance use disorders*
Note that delirium and dementia may coexist.

-- 194 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	179
Historical Information
Age at onset. Dementia is most commonly encountered in elderly per-
sons; delirium is common in children and in older people. Either can
occur across the age spectrum.
Course. May be stable, fluctuating, deteriorating, or improving. If
the damage is structural (such as following massive brain trauma), there
tends to be some permanent dysfunction, even though improvement may
occur. Patients with dementia (such as due to Alzheimer’s disease) tend to
deteriorate progressively.
Depressive disorder. It is especially important to know about a history
of depression and current depressive features, because pseudodementia,
one of the possible presentations of severe depression, is a completely
treatable mood disorder that isn’t a neurocognitive disorder at all.
Difficulty providing self-care. Often this is what drives family members
to bring demented patients for care.
Fluctuating symptoms and mental status. Such fluctuations are espe-
cially characteristic of delirium.
Head trauma. Trauma can produce a subdural hematoma, which
causes symptoms days to weeks later. Bleeding inside the skull can also
cause an epidural hematoma, producing symptoms within hours or days.
Also be alert for loss of memory that can result from concussion.
Impulsivity. Demented patients lose the ability to judge what is accept-
able behavior; consequently, they act on impulses they previously would
have suppressed. As a reaction to either fear or confusion, delirious or
demented patients may run away. Demented patients may spend money
heedlessly, though this behavior occurs without the grandiose quality it
has in mania.
Laboratory testing. This should be consistent with the suspected cause
of any cognitive syndrome.
Memory loss. Defective memory is characteristic of the dementias.
Recent memory is affected most often, though long-term memory can
also be involved in severe dementia. Some patients consciously try to com-
pensate for defects in memory by confabulating—making up stories.
Onset. The development of symptoms may be rapid or insidious,
depending on the cause and nature of the disorder. Rapid onset is charac-
teristic of disorders caused by strokes, infections, or trauma; defects from
vitamin deficiencies and brain tumors may develop gradually.
Personality change. Many symptoms of cognitive syndromes involve a
change from the patient’s previous personality. These include outbursts of
rage or combativeness, social withdrawal, coarsening of behavior (crude

-- 195 of 385 --

180 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
jokes), and neglect of grooming or hygiene. One patient with Alzheim-
er’s dementia who had always welcomed racial diversity shouted racist
comments. Excessive neatness (sometimes called organic orderliness) can
develop.
Psychotic symptoms. Delusions, usually persecutory, can occur in
dementia (patients with Alzheimer’s often believe that people steal from
them). Delusions may be indistinguishable from those of schizophrenia.
Hallucinations commonly occur in delirium, but they are usually visual.
Sleep–wake cycle changes. Delirious patients are typically drowsy,
although some have trouble falling asleep; vivid dreams or nightmares
occur.
Suicide attempts. The presence of suicidal behavior should cause you
to consider the diagnosis of major depression, although attempts (and
completions) can occur in the dementias.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Language
Disheveled 	Comprehension decreases
with advancing dementia	Tremor
Restlessness 	Fluency is often preserved,
even with moderate
dementia
Picking at bedclothes, clothing
Mood
Affect bland or shallow 	Naming: aphasias
Anger 	Cognition
Anxiety 	Drowsy, hard to stay awake
Apathy 	Disorientation
Depression 	Not knowing the date may
be an early symptom of
delirium
Euphoria
Fear
Irritability 	Disorientation to place,
person are later
symptoms (especially
dementia)
Flow of thought
Slurred speech
Perseveration
Rambling, incoherent 	Impaired abstract thinking
(similarities)	Loosening of associations
Content of thought 	Low attention span (easily
distractible) is found
especially in delirium
Suspiciousness
Current suicidal ideas
Illusions 	Impaired memory
Psychotic features 	Insight and judgment
Delusions 	Impaired judgment
Hallucinations (especially visual)

-- 196 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	181
anxieTY, avoidance Behavior, and arousal
Conditions in this area of clinical interest have in common anxiety symp-
toms that can result in attempts to avoid the stimulus.
Tip‑Offs
Symptoms that would cause you to explore this area include any expres-
sion of anxiety or fear, as well as somatic symptoms that suggest breathing
or heartbeat problems when there is no known basis for concern.
Anxiety
Chest complaints (pain, heaviness, trouble breathing, palpitations)
Compulsive behavior
Fear of objects, situations, dying, impending doom, going crazy
Nervousness
Obsessional ideas
Panic
Trauma (history of severe emotional or physical experience)
Worries
Main Diagnoses
The principal disorders covered by this area of clinical interest include:
Panic disorder*
Generalized anxiety disorder*
Specific phobia*
Agoraphobia*
Obsessive–compulsive disorder*
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)*
Although anxiety symptoms are found in nearly every mental disorder,
the important differential diagnoses include the following:
Depression (various specific diagnoses)*
Substance-induced disorders
Schizophrenia*
Somatization disorder (somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5)*

-- 197 of 385 --

182 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Historical Information
Age at onset. Most of these conditions begin when the patient is rela-
tively young. Animal phobias begin in childhood; situational phobias usu-
ally begin in the 30s.
Agoraphobia. May occur with or without panic disorder. Occurs in
situations from which escape is difficult or embarrassing, such as being
away from home, in a crowd, in a car, or on a bridge.
Alcohol or drug use. This could be either a cause or an effect of anxiety
symptoms.
Anticipatory anxiety. Common in phobias, this sensation of dread is
experienced for minutes to hours before the arrival of a feared stimulus
(such as speaking in public).
Caffeine intake. Excessive coffee (or tea) drinking can cause anxiety
symptoms.
Circumstances of panic attacks. How many attacks have there been,
and in what period of time? Were they unexpected? (Attacks in panic
disorder tend to arise spontaneously.)
Compulsions. The most common compulsions are handwashing,
checking, counting, and routines that must be followed (such as at bed-
time). They may occur as rituals (rules) or as “antidotes” or responses to
obsessions.
Depressive symptoms. Determine whether these came before the anxi-
ety syndrome, (suggesting primary depression) or after (suggesting that
the depression is secondary).
Duration of panic attacks. Individual panic attacks last only a few min-
utes, but they may recur over a period of weeks, months, or years.
Frequency of panic attacks. They usually occur several times a week.
Lifestyle constriction. As a result of anxiety, does the patient stay at
home or avoid specific situations or objects? This may be true for specific
phobia, obsessive–compulsive disorder, PTSD, agoraphobia, and panic
disorder.
Mental content of panic attacks. Patients may fear that they are going
to die, lose control, or lose their minds.
Obsessions. Most common are ideas of (1) harming or killing and (2)
swearing (blaspheming). These ideas persist despite the patient’s recogni-
tion that the ideas are senseless and alien.

-- 198 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	183
Physical symptoms of anxiety. Most of the same physical sensations
occur in panic attacks and in anxiety and related disorders:
Breathlessness 	Heart palpitations
Chest pain 	Lump in throat
Chills or flushes 	Muscle tension
Dizziness 	Nausea
Dry mouth 	Restlessness
Fatigability 	Sweating
Frequent urination 	Tremor
Prescription medication use. Clinicians often prescribe, and patients
with anxiety often resort to, drugs in an attempt to keep symptoms in
check.
Social anxiety disorder. This typically involves fear of performing,
speaking, or eating in public; of using a public toilet; or of trying to write
when someone is watching.
Specific phobias. The most common are fears of air travel, animals,
blood, closed-in places, heights, and injury.
Stressors. A severely traumatic physical or emotional experience is a
required precipitant for PTSD.
Worry. Unwarranted or excessive concern about multiple real-life cir-
cumstances is characteristic of generalized anxiety disorder. Examples
would include losing the house to the bank just months before the mort-
gage is paid off, and being fired when one is the favorite of the company
president.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Insight and judgment
Hypervigilance (scanning the
environment)
Insight usually retained that
the fear or behavior is
unreasonable	Mood
Depression 	Tries to resist
Anxiety
Content of thought
Obsessional ideas
Killing
Blasphemy

-- 199 of 385 --

184 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
phYsical complainTs
Physical illness (anatomically demonstrable heart attacks, asthma, ulcers,
allergies, and the like) must always be a prime concern of any clinician
whose patient voices somatic complaints. But many patients come to men-
tal health care complaining of physical symptoms for which inadequate
basis in physiology, chemistry, or anatomy can be found. Such symptoms
have historically been called hypochondriacal or psychosomatic. Often, by the
time such a patient finally seeks help from a mental health clinician, there
has already been a full range of medical tests and evaluations. Because
certain demographic and symptom features are held in common, I have
included anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa in this group.
Tip‑Offs
Consider this area of clinical interest if your patient presents any of the
following problems:
Appetite disturbance
Depression that is chronic
History that is complicated
Multiple complaints
Physical symptoms unexplained by known illness (especially neuro-
logical symptoms such as pain, convulsions, sensory loss)
Sexual or physical abuse in childhood
Substance misuse in a woman
Treatment failures that are repeated
Vague history
Weakness that is chronic
Weight changes (up or down)
Main Diagnoses
The principal diagnoses in this area include the following:
Anorexia nervosa*
Body dysmorphic disorder
Bulimia nervosa
Hypochondriasis (illness anxiety disorder in DSM-5)

-- 200 of 385 --

Signs and Symptoms 	185
Pain disorder or chronic pain syndrome (somatic symptom disorder
with predominant pain in DSM-5)
Somatization disorder (somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5)*
Other disorders that should be considered in patients who complain of
physical symptoms are these:
Depression*
Panic disorder*
Physical illness
Substance-related disorders*
Historical Information
Age at onset. Most of the mental disorders in this group begin early
(childhood or adolescence). Hypochondriasis usually begins in the 20s,
and pain disorder in the 30s or 40s.
Childhood physical or sexual abuse. You should always ask about abuse,
which is common in patients with somatization disorder.
Chronic pain. In pain disorder, there is no known basis for pain, or the
pain is out of keeping with a known physical cause.
Doctor shopping. A relentless search for a cure frequently accompa-
nies the DSM-IV somatoform disorders (DSM-5 somatic symptom and
related disorders). It may lead to repeated, fruitless medical evaluations.
Environmental stress. Social problems (marital, job, interpersonal)
may impel patients to seek mental health treatment for what they perceive
as physical problems.
Fear of medical illness that the patient doesn’t have. The nondelusional
idea that the person is ill persists despite (often repeated) reassurances to
the contrary. This is the cardinal symptom of hypochondriasis (DSM-5
illness anxiety disorder).
Operations. Patients with somatoform disorders (somatic symptom
and related disorders) often have a history of multiple surgical proce-
dures.
Medical illness in childhood. Did the patient receive attention for being
ill as a child? In some cases this factor may underlie the somatization.
Physical defect (imagined or exaggerated). The essential symptom in
body dysmorphic disorder, this idea is not usually of delusional intensity.

-- 201 of 385 --

186 	THE FIRST InTERvIEW
Patients with anorexia nervosa typically regard themselves as appearing
overweight, even when they are obviously emaciated.
Secondary gain. This occurs when a person receives attention or
support for being ill; it is classical for somatization disorder and other
somatic symptom disorders.
Suicidal ideas, behavior. These patients often threaten or attempt sui-
cide; occasionally, they succeed.
Substance use. Misuse of alcohol or drugs frequently complicates the
disorders in this group.
Mental Status Examination
Appearance and behavior 	Content of thought
Dramatic presentation 	Centers on physical
(sometimes imagined)
mental illness
Flashy dress
Ingratiating manner
Exaggerated mannerisms 	Language: no abnormalities are
typical	Marked wasting
Mood 	Cognition: no abnormalities are
typical	Indifference toward symptom
(la belle indifférence) 	Insight and judgment
Anxiety 	Overinterprets physical
symptoms	Depression
Flow of thought: no
abnormalities are typical

-- 202 of 385 --

187
c h a p T e r 	1 4
