COUN 5773 — Theology and Counseling
Week 5 Reading: Counseling as a Christian Calling (Chapter 8)
Ray S. Anderson
March 3, 2026


157

moment" (chap. 3) in which I grasped for more than the soil could offer and so reach out for some personal goal and life fulfillment beyond the world that ended with the last row of com?
I experienced my conversion over a period of some time, I remember. From a background of nominal Christian faith with occasional church attendance, I moved intentionally and passionately into a personally expressed faith in Christ marked by renewed life in the church and its ministry.
Triggering this conversion was an encounter with a fellow farmer, a young man who had a vital Christian faith and with whom I developed a friendship. His sense of immediacy with
God and his directness and freedom of expressing his faith attracted me. When we discussed questions and issues related to life, our work, and Christian faith, my own responses were vague and noncommittal.
On one occasion my friend put the question directly to me.
"Ray, are you saying that you are really a believer and not merely an observer?" My answer was yes, and we shook hands as though we had closed some real estate transaction. That, I believe, was my own entrance into an agogic, or growth, situation, which released in me a faith in God that not only integrated my life in a spiritual sense, but later led me, with my family, to leave the farm and pursue theological training and pastoral ministry.
In this chapter we want to look more closely at the concept of a calling of God. First we will discuss counseling as a Christian calling, then we will analyze the motives and intentions of the
Christian counselor who seeks to understand this profession as a calling of God. Finally we will examine what it means to be
"occupied" with this calling and what distinctives a Christian who counsels can experience and add to the therapeutic practice.
Counseling as a Christian Calling
After my agogic situation, people talked to me about a "call of
God" in my life. I must confess that I did not experience it as some kind of divine voice or mandate that came suddenly out of thin air. Looking back, I can now recognize several factors that led to this radical change in my life.

Certainly the encounter with my friend was a transformative and authentic growth moment, for it released a motive power in me to profess personal faith in God. This friend's role in my life fulfilled all that we have discussed in chapter 3 about the agogical moment. He met me in what Jacob Firet called "equihuman" address, using his shared humanity as a basis for a trusting and meaningful relation between us. My friend was, in fact, an intermediary who did not assert the prerogative as mentor or the power as authority over me.
The relation summoned out of me some kind of counterpart to my friend's own person. This would not have happened if he had not himself been a believing person with an integrated life and faith. It was the vital, engaging, directly personal, and fully human presence that he brought into the relationship that invited me to meet him at the same level.
But it was also more than that. The experience of a new circle of Christian fellowship and support, coupled with the experience of teaching high school-age young people in the local church, continued this growth process. Over the period of a year or more there were released in me a motive and a desire to invest my life in the lives of others. I saw change and growth take place in the lives of others with whom I had significant relationships. I was initiating growth encounters with others and thereby enlarging and sustaining growth and change for me.
·In making the decision to leave the farm and to sever the connection that my life had with the soil, I fully expected to suffer, not regret, but a kind of melancholy. It would be, I thought, a kind of death that would leave part of me unattached.
In a sense, I felt that I was leaving my father as well as the soil behind. It was a pleasant shock to discover, even after only a few months, that my new "calling" to study for the Christian ministry had not left an empty space, nor did I long for what had been or what might have been. My career change was not, I think, a kind of denial, but rather a quiet and deeply rooted transplanting of my life from one soil to another.
My father had not attached my hand to the soil on that day long ago, although that was how I had interpreted it. Rather, he had attached my heart to my hand. My inner self had become bound to my outer life, so that whatever task I put my hand to was done with a sense of finality and completeness that brought

joy, rather than a feeling of fatalism, which spelled melancholy and despair.
These reflections on my experience and sense of calling as a
Christian counselor are not meant to suggest a pathway to follow, but an approach to the concept of a calling of God "from below," so to speak. In the first three chapters of this book I outlined an approach to counseling that began with the structure of personhood as a guide to therapeutic growth and the role of the counselor as growth partner. We can now look more closely at how a Christian would fulfill his or her calling in the role of a counselor. In this chapter we will focus on the special relation between the practice of counseling and God's calling in life.
Every Christian is called into relationship with Christ, and each
Christian's life constitutes a fulfillment of that calling. My thesis is that for Christians who counsel, counseling can be a means of fulfilling that divine calling.
How Do I Know My Calling?
When one's inner life becomes attached to one's outer life, it is the beginning of a concept of a calling of God. God does not simply issue a call that interrupts and intercepts life from without. Instead he enters into the sphere of life and encounters us in such a way that we are summoned to respond to him in
"like kind." That is, he gives himself without regard to reward or "payoff' in order to make the giving valuable. God values love and self-giving. It would be naive and unhelpful to think of
God's calling coming to us "out of the blue." Some do speak of having a dramatic sense of God's intervention, which they interpret as a unique "calling" to some task. These special interventions, however, can also be authentic forms of discovering one's own calling.
As a rule, the calling of God should not be sought only in the dramatic and extraordinary. Nor should it be associated with some kind of "identity crisis" or used to solve a lack of identity and purpose in life. The people whom Jesus "called" to be disciples already seemed to have a well-established personal identity and purpose. Their "hearts were already attached to their hands," as the metaphor I have used puts it.
Jesus did not feel ambivalent about his own identity when he
"found [himself] in human form" (Phil. 2:8). He did not need to be rewarded or to gain something from his act of leaving eternal

glory to become human. He gloried in being human as the single task of his life and as the fulfillment of his divine sonship.
His calling as the Messiah grew out of his sense of personal identity. He responded out of his own being to the God who continued to say from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased" (Matt. 3:17). His response to the needs of those around him awakened his power of love and his instincts for righteousness and holiness.
I thought that the attachment of my hand to the soil determined my life; so I thought I depended on the soil to stimulate my heart and fulfill my life. But this was not correct. Actually, in further understanding the experience, I saw I had become
"unattached" to the soil when I "attached" my heart to my hand.
The soil and the task of farming the land were not an external
"stimulus" that produced a sense of purpose and meaning within me as a "response." Otherwise, Christian calling could have become only a kind of "fate" or duty to which I was bound as a way of fulfilling my Christian life. The criterion for my
"effective calling" would then have been bound up with the results or with my success in this calling. Maybe that is why farmers tend to speak of "crop failures" rather than "farming failures."
Once I saw that my heart had become attached to my hand, I sensed that my calling would be fulfilled wherever I put my hand. The soil became a metaphor, much like Jesus' use of the phrase, "No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:62). Jesus is speaking of the attachment of the hand to the plow, not the plow to the soil. This
"singleness of heart" without ambivalence is the personal and integrative context in which one perceives a calling of God.
What Is a Christian Calling?
Seeing the call of God in life as located in the congruence between the inner and outer life helps us to understand what it means to take up life as a "Christian calling." This can also be a healthy corrective to concepts of Christian calling that tend to make us dependent on results for confirmation of the call or, even more serious and devastating, tend to shift the sense of calling from one's inner motivation to the demands of the
"ministry" of one's life.
This is particularly an occupational hazard for parish minis-

ters, though I suspect that it also can become a problem for
Christian counselors and therapists. Some enter the profession of ministry because of a "call of God." The form of this call becomes identified with a particular "vocation," or calling, such as being a pastor of a church. The call of God is understood to have a priority over all of life, even over family and friends, and especially over the maintenance and fulfilling of the self. "God first, others second, and myself last" goes the Bible school warning to those who go into "full-time Christian service."
It would be hard to exaggerate the psychological, spiritual, and even physical devastation that this misunderstanding has caused many Christians who sincerely attempt to live out this
"calling of God." First they assume that God "assigns" a person to a task, promising a reward to the faithful servant at the end.
This task then becomes a "calling" when the demands of the ministry itself in terms of insatiable human needs take over.
Now the calling itself in terms of the duty to serve others replaces God as the source of the call. At the same time, their identity so merges with the task that a "personage" replaces the
"person," to use Paul Toumier's words. And because they expect a reward to compensate for the sacrifice, they concoct rewards out of success at any cost. Or, failing that or because of that, they are finally driven to reward themselves through surreptitious sensuality or some other delicious deviation.1
A calling becomes Christian when our life with Christ becomes identical with our hand and heart. Or, to put it another way, being Christian is a calling that is fulfilled in and through that which becomes one's destiny here on earth. Our destiny is related to that which consumes our life. Paul says, "I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me; and the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me" (Gal.
2:20). The Christian calling does not lead us away from our life and destiny here on this earth, but is a gracious calling to live with the knowledge that our life is a fulfillment of "Christ in,, us.
How Do I Fulfill My Calling?
Once a person is overly attached to the ministry situation, a fatal "cause and effect," or "stimulus-response" mechanism can develop. Theologically the concept of a calling by which one

lives out life can be understood as a structure of freedom and response, not stimulus-response. The freedom and response relation can take place only within a relationship that is fully personal. That is, only a personal being can encounter another being in such a way that a response is elicited that is derived out of freedom and not out of necessity.
"The love of Christ controls us," Paul says (2 Cor. 5:14). The somewhat ambiguous genitive construction in the Greek leaves open the possibility that it is both Christ's love for us as well as our love for Christ that is the controlling, or compelling, force. A sense of calling is centered in the perception of the self as positively oriented toward others and God. Calling does not arise out of a need that the other fulfills, or out of a need that the other places on me as a demand.
If we continue to think of a sense of divine calling as a basis for undertaking the profession of counseling as a Christian therapist, we must not allow counseling itself to become the calling. We are not "called to counsel," but called to be
Christian in our counseling. The calling remains a dynamic of freedom and response in our relationship to God. Above all, this calling is congruent with the growth and development of our personal identity as a process. Being Christian is thus "being called" to live one's life to the fullest, being open to change, and experiencing God's presence and blessing in the place, time, and work that occupy life.
The Motivation for a Christian Calling
We cannot examine the nature of calling as a perspective on counseling as a Christian vocation without looking more closely at the motivation underlying our sense of calling. We have learned to our dismay that our motives are not always consistent with our intentions. One source of ambivalence is surely due to the unreliability of our motives as expressed through our commitments.
Jacob Firet, discussing pastors, warns against confusing motivation and motives. Motivation as a source for behavior is not very clear, he says, citing Gordon Allport: "As for motivation
..• psychologists are in a state of turmoil and disagreement.'' 2
Firet also suggests that the concept of motivation is more inclusive than what we usually have in mind when we speak of

"personal motives." A person's motives may be considered as the consciously held reasons for doing or not doing something.
Motivation, by contrast. is the driving force behind a given behavior, a force that may at times be quite different from the motives expressed by the person. 3 In this way of looking at the issue, motives are the reasons we give to ourselves and others for our decisions and actions, while motivation is a deeper drive that may be hidden from us.
Candidates for pastoral ministry are usually asked to state their reasons, or motives, for seeking to enter pastoral ministry.
The orthodox answer is some form of a testimony to a perceived sense of God's calling. What may be far more significant are the underlying motivations, which may, in fact. be hidden from a candidate's conscious mind. When these underlying motivations become evident. the character or quality of our actions may be called into question. My expressed motive may be to serve
Christ through a form of professional pastoral ministry, and I may have a strongly held sense of divine calling. As it turns out.
my actual motivation may be to find self-gratification in the honor and prestige attached to the ministry. When this real motivation becomes evident to others, they will view my ministry as self-serving and unworthy of Christ. Paul was charged with such unworthy motivation, and he defended himself strongly to the Christians at Thessalonica, appealing to their knowledge of his actions and intentions when he was laboring among them (cf. 1 Thess. 2:1-16).
It is obvious that candidates for counseling as a Christian ministry might run into the same problem with discerning their own motives and motivation. From a psychological perspective, motives and motivations are complex and, at best. only inferred out of certain styles and patterns of behavior.
John Macmurray makes what I believe is a more helpful distinction between motives and intentions. "Though every action must have a motive," he writes, "it is not determined by its motive. It is determined, as this specific action, by the operation of intentions." 4 In each action of a personal agent. he suggests, we must presuppose a "system of motives whose differentiations refer to the Other. . . . The agent can accordingly act either for or against the Other." In other words, persons in relation always have motives that are differentiated in terms of the others with whom one is in relation. These

motives can be either positive or negative as viewed with respect to the other, but in and of themselves simply as motives, they do not determine the relation as personal. There must be an underlying intention that is rooted in the structure of personhood and the relation itself.s
For example, parents may have a complex system of motives
(motivations) that enters into the intentional act of parenting.
Likewise, children may respond out of a complex system that entails motivations, fear, needs, rewards, and stimulus-response dynamics, etc. But the intentionality that forms and sustains the structure of the relation itself can be grounded in the act of love, which is a deeper construct and dynamic in the relation than motives and motivations. A parent may discipline a child when the parent's motives are mixed and confused. The parent's anger, frustration, and feelings of powerlessness may be inappropriately expressed as rage against a child when the parent's intention is actually to discipline the child for its own good.
Where intentions have become imbedded in consistent acts of love, security, and care between parent and child, these destructive and inappropriate motives may be healed. Object relations psychology would say that the parent must be "good enough" and not perfect. Being "good enough" is sustaining intentionality based on love with enough consistency that lapses do not destroy the objective identity of the child as good and loved. 6
This is not to say that motivations or motives are only incidental to the dynamics of the relationship. Underlying motivations may be so powerful as to render the relationship virtually dysfunctional or even pathological despite the intentionality of love. I point out the distinction to show that a sense of calling may be grounded in something other than mere psychological motivations.
This level of intentionality cannot be ascertained from a strictly psychological approach. A projective type of psychological test may uncover, by inference, underlying motivations that aid in diagnostic evaluation. But the structure of intentionality by which one acts out of a sense of duty or "calling" is more related to the dynamics of growth we have described than a psychological, stimulus-response dynamic. What makes intentions different from motivations is that we can expect others to state clearly their intentions and to be held accountable to them.

Unwillingness to state our intentions would be itself a sign of a motivation that is less than open and honest. By saying that I am a Christian who counsels, I am stating an intention to counsel in a way that is Christian.
The love that moved Christ to "die for all'' (2 Cor. 5:15) is what "constrained," or gripped, Paul. The apostle uses the
Greek word synechei to express this sense of being grasped by the power of another's love and the source of one's own actions.
Jesus uses the same verb in Luke 12:50 to describe his own
"constraint" to complete his course of action by going to
Jerusalem even though it meant suffering and certain death.
This sense of "being constrained" suggests to us a better concept than motivation for understanding the dynamics of a sense of calling. Synechia, or constraint, does not arise from within the person as a psychological or intrapersonal disposition. It is another power, the power of the One who has come over him, that constrains Jesus. The "sense" of this inner response to the compelling power of another's love can be recognized through motives and motivations as an inference.
But more than that is not possible. 7 It is possible, however, to counsel under the "constraint" of serving the other with
Christlike love and care.
We can be forgiven for failing to live up to this intention if such failure is acknowledged. Failure to fulfill such intentions does not constitute ambivalence when the failure is confessed and shared. Ambivalence results from failure to state intentions and, instead, to allow our calling to be driven by motivation alone.
"Constraint" calls us to live as Christians and devote ourselves to duty that unifies rather than divides the self. Duty is freely choosing to devote ourselves to others under the constraint of serving Christ. We never merely devote ourselves to duty, but to the "one who called me" and continues to uphold me in love. "The man of duty," wrote Dietrich Bonhoeffer, "will end up by having to fulfill his obligation even to the devil."&
On this basis there must be more than a sense of "duty" directed toward ultimate love, toward God. This devotion is single-minded and prepared to take up whatever duty "comes to hand" to give it expression. Because love of God is bound up with love of neighbor, and because all devotion (except what
God experiences within his triune relation) is mediated through

duty, the other person becomes the middle term in the relation of devotion to God. Knowing that our life and work satisfy God's calling us to be Christians is a kind of wisdom that actually gives us the strength to fulfill our calling.
This "wisdom" that comes from God and that God gives to all generously and without reproach comes to those who receive it in faith.
But let him ask in faith, with no doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind. For that person must not suppose that a double-minded [di-psychos] man, unstable in all his ways, will receive anything from the Lord
Oames 1:6-8).
No finer exposition of this text has been done than that of S0ren
Kierkegaard in his classic work Purity of Heart is to Will One
Thing. The double-minded person, says Kierkegaard, cannot will the good because that person cannot will one thing. We do not will the good for the sake of reward or to avoid punishment or even that the good should triumph in our lives. If we did so,
Kierkegaard says, we would be "constrained" by the results of our actions rather than by the good itself.9 Kierkegaard helps us to see that we must overcome our inner ambivalence before we can integrate the heart and the hand. Or we could say that the way to overcome this ambivalence is to unite the heart and the hand so that devotion attaches itself to duty to directing itself to
God, who is the Good, and the source of one's devotion. 10 We must root out this inner ambivalence by pursuing the intention back to its roots, exposing the double-mindedness that lurks behind all ambivalence-or the "wish," as Kierkegaard puts it.11
We cannot help but remember the words of Jesus, who encouraged his disciples not to lay up treasures here on earth, but to lay up treasures in heaven, "for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also" (Matt. 6:19-21). "Let not your hearts be troubled; believe in God, believe also in me. Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in me; or else believe me for the sake of the works themselves" Oohn 14:1, 11).
In encouraging his disciples thus, Jesus was reminding them of his own single-mindedness. He pointed them to devotion, and if they could not grasp that, to see his devotion in his work-in that which became his duty. His heart was attached to his hand, and his heart was one with the Father.

This single-mindedness gives us freedom to live and act in such a way that the calling of God becomes identical with the action itself, rather than with the results of the action. There is an inner freedom and certainty of life in action that liberates the self from even the ethical constraints of"duty." For, as we have said, duty itself can become demonic apart from its source in devotion to God.
The sense of fulfilling one's life as a divine calling is not an esoteric or mystical feeling. It is not limited to those who take up the "full-time ministry" of serving as an ordained pastor or missionary. This sense of calling is the single-mindedness with which Christians can take up the task of counseling or psychotherapy with a kind of "non-attachment" to the results, where devotion can be attached to duty, but duty not become the master of devotion.
Several things have now become clear in our discussion of the practice of counseling as a Christian calling:
• A sense of calling is related to the congruence between our inner life and our outer life, where the "heart is attached to the hand";
• God's specific calling is discovered through the vocation or task that fulfills and satisfies our heart and occupies our hand;
• Christian calling involves being under constraint to embody the love and reality of Christ through one's life and work;
• We fulfill our calling through the devotion that binds love for Christ to the task at hand, to make devotion our duty, in freedom and grace;
• In stating openly our intention of fulfilling our Christian calling through our ministry of counseling, we clarify our motivations and expose them to correction and healing.
The Occupation of Christian Counseling
What does it mean that a Christian takes up counseling or therapy as an "occupation"? Is there a distinctively Christian style of counseling? I would answer yes, but not as a distinctive model of therapy. Rather, the distinction lies in how we approach the task as a Christian calling. Or, we could say, the

distinctiveness is the quality of the experience that the Christi.an brings to the task of healing the client.
This statement seems to claim that Christi.ans might do
"better therapy," or that Christi.an counselors have some kind of therapeutic advantage. This is not my intention. The person and presence of every counselor make a difference in the therapy session. The counselor is not a neutral figure or a nonentity.
Many clients have more positive experiences with a female therapist then a male therapist, or vice versa. From the counselor's standpoint, I wish to speak of what this "style" or distinction can mean. The counseling style will also have implications for the client in therapy, though not necessarily in
"doing better therapy."
When we counsel with the sense of fulfilling a Christi.an calling, we can be fully "occupied" with this task in a healthy and whole sense. This is what provides the style and makes the difference in counseling. With the assistance of four questions taken from Kierkegaard's essay Purity of Heart is to Will One
Thing, I will explain this distinctive approach more fully.12
These questions will provide an outline for further reflection on the occupation of Christi.an counseling.
1. What is your occupation in life? "Occupation" in this sense means our calling, not our profession. We may choose a profession to fulfill our occupation or calling. Every person has an occupation, though not everyone has a profession. I aim here to look at counseling as an occupation that a Christi.an chooses as a means to fulfill his or her Christi.an calling. This can be done at both the professional and nonprofessional levels. It can also be done part-ti.me or full-ti.me. The question "what is your occupation?" goes right to the heart of the matter with respect to how one's calling as a Christi.an is being fulfilled in the world.
There was a ti.me when farming was my profession. It
"occupied" me as a task in such a way that my heart and my hand were attached without regard to the results. I felt no less meaning in the task when the crops failed than when they were bountiful. A failure brought consequences that had both tangible and intangible effects, but it did not rob the task of its sense of fulfillment.
I changed my profession, but not my occupation, when I became a student and later a pastor and now a teacher. To be

sure, we ordinarily describe our occupation in terms of a profession or task, and that is a perfectly reasonable way to do it
But as Christians we can have a profession that is also a
"preoccupation," in which heart and hand are joined. I suppose all of us have times when we are not really happy with our present task and wish for something more. But we must be careful that the "wish" does not become a disease, as Kierkegaard reminds us. Nor should the task be attended with a sense of duty only, for that, too, can become self-destructive and even demonic, as Bonhoeffer reminds us.
The practice of counseling or psychotherapy can be the occupation of a Christian, and it can be considered as a Christian calling. But the question to one who is undertaking this as a profession is what his or her experience is as a Christian in this occupation. This leads to the second question.
2. In your occupation, what is your attitude of mind? Or, how do you carry out your occupation? Kierkegaard follows up this question by asking, "Have you made up your mind that your occupation is your real calling so that you do not have to make explanation hinge on the result, maintaining that it was not your real calling if the results are not favorable, if your efforts do not suceed?" 13
I often find that graduating students suffer considerable anxiety about knowing the "right place" to begin. The risk of failing or of not achieving one's own goals (wishes?) can be paralyzing. Even more serious is the mental attitude with which such a person often takes his first job. "It doesn't really suit me and has no real future, but it is a beginning," he can be tempted to think.
When this happens, there is ambivalence and double-mindedness from the very beginning. The person is not able to devote himself or herself to the task because of a concern for results. Often the person wonders whether the profession is actually consistent with a Christian calling. The person may wonder whether psychotherapy can be "willed as the Good," to use Kierkegaard's phrase.
In this case there is a failure of integration at the very core of the venture, and the person launches out with a bad conscience.
The person may give the excuse of having a problem with determining God's will, as though if one could determine the

job as "God's will," this would make up for inner uncertainty.
The will of God cannot be used as a criterion for the good in such a way that our own intention, decision, and actions are set aside. We find the will of God through our intending the good through actions that in the end are willed by God as good.
I have discussed this concept elsewhere, but I need to repeat here that God's will is the goal of a decision or action.I• The will of God is really the "aim," which can be changed when the target moves. The will of God is not identified absolutely with a plan, a method, or even a vocation. These may change-and must be changed on occasion so that the will of God continues to be in view as the goal. To ask whether it is the will of God that I be a therapist, teacher, or pastor is not really the right way to phrase the question. I know it is God's will that what "occupies" my life and energies aims at producing a good measured in terms of God's love and desire for people, and for my own life given in devotion to him. I cannot resolve inner ambivalence to my task by resorting to a spiritual device that makes this God's decision rather than mine.
Many people may be concerned about counseling means and methods. Such people may compensate by looking for spiritually "valid" and "rewarding" results from counseling. They may seek to convert the non-Christians they counsel, rationalizing that the end justifies the means. This recalls our discussion about intentions as the clarification of motivations. We should always be capable of expressing our intentions openly at the outset of counseling. Christians who counsel do not need results to justify their calling to provide care.
This idea leads to the third question.
3. What means do you use to carry out your occupation? If the means are less legitimate than the end, then again there will be ambivalence and double-mindedness. From the standpoint of willing the Good as one thing, Kierkegaard suggests that the means and the end are the same thing. "There is only one end:
the genuine Good; and only one means: This, to be willing only to use those means which genuinely are good-but the genuine
Good is precisely the end."1s
We may use the analogy of firing a rifle at a target. Reaching the goal is like hitting the target, but using means is like taking aim. In this case the aim is a more reliable indication of the

marksman's goal than the spot that the bullet strikes. For instance, the shot may have hit in the right place by accident!
The marksman may be blameless if the shell does not fire, but no irregularities of the aim are permitted. On this point,
Kierkegaard comments, "Eternity is not curious and impatient as to what the outcome in this world of time will be. It is just because of this that the means are without exception as important as the end."16
Therefore we must examine the distinctive style of a Christian counselor according to the means, and not merely with regard to the end. If a counselor holds a Christian view of the person, the goal of therapy extends beyond the means of therapy. Therapy, of course, has its own specific goals, for which certain techniques or methods are appropriately used to produce therapeutic gain. But even the goals achieved by therapy are really means to the ultimate goal-the freedom of the self to love God and one's neighbor as oneself.
To make the point more clearly, we can remind ourselves of the growth process that should attend every genuine human encounter. I am insincere if I pursue a relationship without really making it my aim to enhance the other's life. If I have merely used friendship or a counseling relation as a means to manipulate the other to give me some advantage or to do what I want done, I have violated the integrity of the relationship. My motivation will undermine that integrity. It should be a stated intention that this will not be the easel
Some therapeutic means may achieve certain results, thus demonstrating the technical skill of the therapist, but these same means may fail to help the client reach the goal of integrative growth. That is, some goals achieved in therapy do not even aim at the larger, growth goal of integrating self with others and God.
Here, too, the intentions of the counselor need to be expressed quite clearly. In certain cases the long-range growth goals may be identified but not made a specific outcome of the therapeutic gain sought. I can openly express to a person who seeks counseling that my intention is to provide orientation toward these long-range growth goals, which may include specific aspects of spiritual life and formation. This places specific therapeutic outcomes on a trajectory of growth without making therapy the means to this end.
At this point the question of means must be considered. For if

the means by which therapeutic aid is given do not relate at all to the goal that lies beyond the specific therapeutic procedure, the means become justified by results rather than by the intention to provide growth toward these goals. Again, it may be said, "The surgery was a success, but the patient died!" Yet, in this concern for the experience of the client as a person who seeks the Good, not merely good health, we are already moving to the fourth question.
4. What is your attitude toward others? Do we actually love our clients as ourselves and so fulfill the second great commandment? Kierkegaard focuses the question quite appropriately when he asks, "Have you no special privilege, no special talent, none of life's special favors ... vanity has led you to take, so that you could console yourself by means of it, and that makes you dare not tell the uninitiated the source of your consolation?" 17
Do we as counselors use therapy to conceal our own suffering? Do we console ourselves that we are not afflicted with such pain and in need of such grace? "You help to set the simple straight," says Kierkegaard, "but treacherously you have a further consolation for yourself; your talent is so outstanding, that it could never happen that when you awakened tomorrow you were the stupidist person in all the land."1s
The object of Kierkegaard's ridicule and acute questioning was often the parsons, who represented to him the most scandalous of people because they lived in state-supported security but still charged fees for performing religious rituals.
But Kierkegaard was also questioning himself, for he doubted that he yet had the singleness of heart to will the one thing.
"Blessed are the poor in spirit," Jesus said (Matt. 5:3). Jesus most likely was not referring to the poor or the chaste, but to those who have no need of adding to the wealth of their own spirit by cleverly exploiting the spirit of others.
Counseling and the practice of psychotherapy usually are a means of making one's livelihood by facilitating the mental health of others on a fee basis. Here, too, the means become identical with the end. Our attitude toward other persons will determine what our aim is and how that aim is incorporated into the means.
There is something distinctive about counseling as a Christian calling. But that distinctiveness is not to be found in the method

or model of therapy. Rather, it is to be found in the aim of the therapist and how that aim informs the means of therapy. A therapist who is also a Christian aims at being as guileless in spirit as he or she is competent in therapeutic technique. When our occupation is being a Christian, counseling as either a professional or nonprofessional will be as good a soil as any other into which to thrust our hand, provided that it is attached to the heart.

--- NOTES AND REFERENCES ---

Notes
1. For a further discussion of this problem, see my essay "Clergy
Burnout as a Symptom of Theological Anemia," Theological Student's
Fellowship Bulletin (March 1984).
2. Gordon Allport, "Psychological Models for Guidance," in R. L.
Mosher, R. F. Carle, and C. D. Kehas, Guidance, 2lff: Cited in Jacob
Firet, Dynamics in Counseling (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986), 240.
3. Ibid., 241.
4. John Macmurray, Persons in Relation (London: Faber and Faber,
1961), 110.
5. Ibid., 111-12.
6. The concept of "good-enough" was coined by Donald W.
Winnicott to describe the infant's relation to its environment (The
Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment [New York:
International Universities Press, 19651). Cameron Lee at the Fuller
Seminary Graduate School of Psychology has extended this concept in his essay "The Good-Enough Family," Journal of Psychology and
Theology 13, no. 3 (1985): 182-89.
7. Firet, Dynamics in Pastoring, 242.
8. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Ethics (New York: Macmillan, 1955), 67.
9. S9.1renKierkegaard, Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing (New
York: Harper & Row, 1956), 55-56.
10. I want the readers to be aware of the fact that this essay on willing the good is written by Kierkegaard as an "edifying Discourse." This prayer is found in the essay: "Father in Heaven! What is a man without
Theel What is all that he knows, vast accumulation though it be, but a chipped fragment if he does not know Theel What is all his striving, could it even encompass a world, but a half-finished work if he does not know Thee: Thee the One, who art one thing and who art all! So may
Thou give to the intellect wisdom to comprehend that one thing; to the heart, sincerity to receive this understanding; to the will, purity that wills only one thing. In prosperity may Thou grant perseverance to will one thing; amid distractions, collectedness to will one thing; in suffering, patience to will one thing" (Purity of Heart, 31).

11. Kierkegaard describes the ambivalence of the self poetically and profoundly: "There are wishes that die in being born; there are wishes that are forgotten like our yesterdays; there are wishes that one outgrows, and later can scarcely recall; there are wishes that one learns to give up, and how good it was to have given them up; there are wishes from which one dies away, which one hides away, just as a departed one is hidden away in glorified memory. Those are the wishes to which an active person is exposed. They may be more or less dangerous diseases. Their cure may be accomplished by the extinction of the individual wish.
"Yet there is also a wish that dies slowly, a wish that remains with the real sufferer even in the pain of his loss, and that only dies when he dies. For wishes concern particular objects, and a great number of objects, but the wish applies essentially to the whole of life ....
"Oh, weary not your soul with that which is passing and with momentary relief. Grieve not your spirit with forms of comfort which this world affords. Do not in suicidal fashion murder the wish; but rather win the highest by hope, by faith, by love-as the mightiest of all are able to do: commit yourself to the Good!" (Purity of Heart is to Will
One Thing, 150-51).
12. Ibid., 179-219.
13. Ibid., 199.
14. See Ray S. Anderson, Minding God's Business (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1986), 87ff., 97ff.
15. Kierkegaard, Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing, 202.
16. Ibid., 203.
17. Ibid., 207.
18. Ibid.
